













































October 6, 1987 Hansard Evening


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 October 6, 1987 

 

 

3151 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 

 

Item 1 (continued) 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. 

Chairperson, I have a question to the Minister of Health, and it 

has to do with his budget document. Page 47, item no. 19, 

indicates that there is a payment to the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation. In this case, Mr. Minister, could you 

give me, in as much detail as you possibly can, exactly what are 

we paying the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation for and what is the purpose of this item? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation) money, the property management 

corporation money is for, almost exclusively, office space or the 

space that’s occupied by the Department of Health buildings or 

offices throughout the province. A very small portion of that is 

for mail services, courier services, that kind of thing that are 

provided by property management corporation throughout 

government. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — So we are paying money over to the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation for the rental 

of space from private companies or from government office 

buildings. Is that correct, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — That’s essentially correct; that’s right. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — And on page 48, item number 24, I note once 

again grants to hospitals. There’s an item called repayment of 

principal and interest on capital loans from the Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation. Once again we have an 

item here for $4,575,600. Can you advise the House and the 

people of Saskatchewan what exactly you are paying for to the 

property management corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The property management corporation 

has been introduced as the vehicle through which the hospitals 

of the province will finance their construction projects. So, in 

other words, it’s almost like a banker role. The property 

management corporation plays that role with the hospitals, and 

so these payments that are to the property management 

corporation are the payments for the, you know, the annual 

payment toward the construction costs for the year in question. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, can you give us a copy of what 

facilities are going to be constructed this year in order that we 

may know what this $4.5 million is being used to pay? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The $4 million, just to clarify and I 

think it’s important that you . . . What you will need in order to 

find out where that $4 million is, is a list of  

projects which are complete for which these are the payments, 

sort of the amortization payments, the annual payments, which I 

am willing to provide to you so you will see where the $4 

million is gone and for which projects. Is that what you’re 

looking for? Okay, I’ll undertake to provide that to you. I’m not 

sure when, but we’ll get it to you as soon as we can. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I’d appreciate if we could have 

it within the next couple of days. I don’t think it would be that 

difficult to get it. And then I take it then that we’re not really 

paying for initial construction costs. You led me to believe that 

we were, that we’re paying for payments over a period of time 

so that these loans or debentures or whatever can be repaid. 

 

On page 49, once again we have another grant to special care 

facilities for the repayment of principal and interest on capital 

loans from the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation. The figure here is $409,500 — page 49. Could you 

tell the House what this particular payment to the Saskatchewan 

property Management Corporation is for, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Exactly the same principle what’s in 

this case relating to special care facilities. And to anticipate 

your next question, I can provide a similar list to which these 

dollars apply. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I gather that the people of 

Saskatchewan were paying out these kinds of payments last 

year, only last year this particular budget allocation was located 

under Supply and Services. Am I correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Just to explain how the system worked 

prior to the advent of the property management corporation, if I 

understand your question, I think that’s what you want. 

 

In the past, prior to this property management corporation 

coming into place, capital construction of these kinds of 

facilities, hospitals or special care home facilities would have 

been straight grants in the Department of Health in large lumps 

during the period of time of the construction. That was the case. 

The way it now works for these, plus with the property 

management corporation, and as you will know it applies in 

health facilities, it applies in education facilities and some 

others, the financing is done through that corporation. The 

payments that you see in the Health budget as it relates to health 

facilities, both special care homes and hospitals, is paid on this 

basis — on an amortized basis — so that you have an annual 

payment spread out over a period of time. I don’t know if that 

explains it, but I think it does. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Just what I 

was trying to point out here is that last year this particular item 

was included in the Supply and Services estimates. This year 

you have included this item under the Department of Health, 

and then you argue that Health has received a budgetary 

increase over last year. 

 

If that were, in fact, the case, Mr. Minister, we would have had 

to have had these three particular items included in  

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3152 

 

the estimates for Health in the year 1986-87, and you didn't do 

that, Mr. Minister. So when you argue that there'’ been a $36 

million increase, that's not true, Mr. Minister. Not true at all, 

because these three items that total some $16 million were not 

included in last year’s budgetary estimates; they were included 

in this year’s budgetary estimates. So really what we have here 

is some more jiggery-pokery with the books. 

 

Now I want you now to turn to page 126. Page 126 is for the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, and here, 

Mr. Minister, it outlines the 1987-88 capital expenditures by 

sector, and one of these sectors is Health. The budgetary item 

this year for Health is $66,527,000. The year before, Mr. 

Minister, in the year 1986-87, your department claims to have 

spent, or your government claims to have spent $75,440,000. 

There’s been a cut in this capital expenditure segment from last 

year versus this year, and I’m wondering if you can explain to 

me why the reduction. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — You’re referring now to blue book, page 

126, Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation? Okay, 

just for clarification. 

 

What the reflection there is the differentiation between last year 

and this year. It’s a simple thing to explain in a sense that 

there’s . . . This will always relate to the requirement of the cash 

flow, especially under the new system. This will relate to the 

cash flow requirement for capital construction under the 

property management corporation system. That’s what we 

expect this year to spend and that’s what will be the 

requirement according to the capital projects which are under 

way in the province now. I don’t know what more I can say on 

that except that just tell you that the cash flow will vary from 

year to year. It won’t be the same each year. 

 

(1915) 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, we have heard from a 

great number of communities about your promises prior to the 

1986 election where you promised a nursing home here or 

hospital there. They thought they had some sort of arrangement 

with the Department of Health. And lo and behold, after the 

provincial election, after you find out that you’ve overestimated 

your deficit for the year 1986-87 by some $800 million, that 

they no longer will have funds from the Department of Health 

to go ahead with some of their capital projects, even when 

communities have gone out and raised the money that was 

necessary in order to come up with their share. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you say in your budget book that in 

1986-87, you spent $75,400,000. Was that figure actually spent, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’ll give you a . . . Last year we spent 

70,947,845 of what was estimated. And just let me give you 

some examples of how this works. And I think you know them, 

but I’ll just reiterate this. It will depend on the stages of 

construction that any given project is at in terms of the cash 

flow and when it’s required, and whether it’s in this year or last 

year or whatever. 

 

A couple of examples: Regina hospitals, which say, I’ll  

use in the aggregate, but for the most part this will deal with the 

General Hospital because that’s where the greatest construction 

program is. Last year the estimated expenditure at Regina 

hospitals was 11.5 million. The actual expenditure was 

15,841,180 and this year’s estimate is 7.215 million. And that 

will vary, as I’ve said, with the stages of construction and how 

the construction rolls along. 

 

An example, in your own city of Saskatoon, the estimated last 

year was — this is for the Saskatoon Cancer Clinic — estimated 

last year was 2.5 million. The actual was 6,667,113. This year, 

given the way in which the project is, we expect that it will be 

4,416,157 — fairly precise numbers. Wascana Rehab is a 

similar cash flow kind of a change. Last year it was estimated to 

be 6 million 7. In fact, it was 3 million 779. This year it’s 

expected that it will be 12,821 million. So they vary to a great 

degree, depending . . . in the same project. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — So, Mr. Minister, will you send over that 

document so that we can see that that amount, in fact, was 

spent? Will you agree to do that? 

 

Mr. Minister, I recall in the spring of 1985 when your 

government brought down its budget, if I call recall, Mr. 

Andrew called it the most intelligent budget ever, a budget in 

which he raised . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order, please. I would remind the 

hon. member to not mention members’ names directly but by 

their position please. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — My apologies, Mr. Chairperson. I agree, I’m 

not supposed to use a person’s last name. 

 

But anyway, in the spring of 1985, the minister of Finance, the 

member from Kindersley, brought down a budget and he called 

it the most intelligent budget ever. It was a budget where he 

raised a lot of taxes. We all recall the flat tax. We all recall the 

used-car tax and a number of other taxes. 

 

But also in that budget there was a commitment, Mr. 

Chairperson, to the introduction of a health capital fund. A 

capital fund of some $300 million that was going to be given to 

the people of Saskatchewan over a five-year period. This was 

one of the four corner-stones, the Partnership for Progress, if 

you will. 

 

Now I recall, Mr. Minister, that there was a great deal of hoopla 

and fanfare and there was even a little paper put together, 

Partnership for Progress, working together to build a stronger 

tomorrow. And it talked about health care and how much 

money we were going to spend on health care. 

 

When that health capital fund was announced that year, there 

was to be a five-year fund of some $300 million. Can you tell 

us, Mr. Minister, what has happened to that health capital fund 

of some $300 million, and what did we spend the money on, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I apologize to the House 

for taking some time to put this together but I want the answer 

to be as clear as I can make it. The question as I  

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3153 

 

recall from some time was to do with the announcement of what 

we’ve called the Partnership for Progress sort of program which 

went forward and was projected an expenditure of $300 million 

for a five-year program of health care facilities. 

 

I would just say to the hon. member, I’ll just give you some 

numbers here. Now in ’85-86, the first year of that, there was 

. . . these are actual numbers in ’85-86 as it relates to the 

hospital construction side, 34,758,378. In ’86-87, 69,700,000. 

In ’87-88, the year which we are reviewing here, is an estimated 

number, but I would say to the House, fairly accurate, 

69,188,114, that’s in the hospital sector. 

 

In the long-term care sector, the number averages about 5 

million per year. And I will undertake to provide the member 

with actuals on that, and the people tell me they don’t have the 

actuals for the years, but it’s about 5 million a year, which put 

in those three years, about $15 million. And I want to 

emphasize that on the long-term care side, that’s an estimate by 

me now, which is fairly accurate, and we’ll have that number 

for you. 

 

So the total of that is, in the first three years of that program, is, 

I believe, about 174 million — about $174 million, the number 

that I gave you as it relates to the hospital sector, and add to that 

15 million, $189 million . . . about $190 million in those first 

three years. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, in your health capital fund 

budgeted for 1985-86, there was a budget allocation of $36.9 

million. But when you check your own Public Accounts, your 

own Public Accounts for the health capital fund, Mr. Minister, 

only $6.6 million was spent. Not $34 million on hospitals, not 

$5 million on nursing homes, but $6.6 million. That was in your 

own Public Accounts. I would ask you just to check your 

figures and check with your officials again to make sure that the 

information that you are giving to the people of this province is 

accurate. 

 

(1930) 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — If the member would turn . . . Have you 

got a copy of the Health annual report ending March 31, ’86? 

The annual report of the department? I would refer the member 

to inside the front cover on that table, on the inside of the front 

cover which is the “Table 1, Saskatchewan Health Services 

Expenditures 1984-85 and 1985-86 by Saskatchewan Health, 

Health Commission, and the Cancer Foundation.” If you look at 

the bottom row of figures under B, capital, where it says, 

$41.050 million, that’s the 34 million that I referred to earlier 

plus whatever the amount . . . And I don’t know what else 

might be in there, but certainly the amount that was there for 

special care homes, which I said I would give you an accurate 

figure of in a while. Okay? It’s very close to that unless there is 

. . . And I’ll check with these people to see if there is anything 

else that should be included in that, but that’s the number. 

 

The other thing is that the $34 million which I gave you, 

34,758,378 is the amount of public money expended, taxpayers’ 

dollars expended on health care facilities in the ’85-86 year. 

There were some of those dollars, on  

some of the larger projects, were converted to the new system, 

to the new system of loan agreements with the property 

management corporation, but it does not diminish the fact that 

the dollars were in fact spent on those health care facilities. 

Okay? And that was the transitional year. That’s what I’m 

saying, I think ’86-87 was transitional in some of the larger 

projects which flow through a period of some . . . of several 

fiscal years. Some of their projects were converted to loan 

agreements over the life of the project. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I have Public Accounts 

here for 1985-86. This is Public Accounts for 1985-86, and if 

you turn to page 32 of Public Accounts, and we look at the 

health capital fund, Mr. Minister, the original estimate was 

$36.9 million. There was a special warrant, Mr. Minister, of 

$4.15 million. Then there was the revised estimate, Mr. 

Minister, to $41.05 million. And then, Mr. Minister, there 

comes an item called expenditure. And expenditure, Mr. 

Minister, was $6,593,088. Then there is another item, Mr. 

Minister, which says underexpended, $34,456,912. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, something’s wrong here. We have a revised 

estimate in this Public Accounts that appears in your 

department’s annual report, and the revised estimate is $41.050 

million. But if you look at what actually happened, that wasn’t 

spent. Only $6,593,088 was spent. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, your annual report obviously is wrong. 

Obviously it’s wrong. Public Accounts, Mr. Minister, is the 

record of what actually was spend in any fiscal year and we 

have it right here. So I would ask you to once again check with 

your officials to see what, in fact, was spent. And do we have 

another example of someone trying to cook the books? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The discrepancy between the numbers 

that the member speaks of . . . And I’ll just go through this 

explanation once again. I had said that some of the money 

which was expended on capital projects in 1985-86 was 

converted to loans under the new system, which I described a 

few moments ago. And that’s the difference between, I believe, 

the 6 million and some-odd dollars that you talked about there 

and the 34 million which I outlined as what was spent on health 

facilities. 

 

I refer you back to the Health annual report, where, in the table 

that I referred you to earlier, under the notes below capital, on 

the same page that I referred to you earlier — number five, 

subsection 5 or whatever we’ll call it, it makes the notation. It 

includes: construction projects funded by Saskatchewan Health 

and project loans advanced through the Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation. So the payments over . . . of the 

amount between 6 million and 34 million would have been paid 

by the property management corporation in that year, and then 

subsequently converted to the loan structure which is now in 

place for all projects. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I mean this is another 

example of trying to figure out what exactly you’re doing with 

our books. This is the record of what was spent. You set up a 

health capital fund. Your  

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3154 

 

government set up a health capital fund which said, Mr. 

Minister, that you were going to spend $300 million on capital 

construction of health facilities over a five-year period. 

 

One would expect, Mr. Minister, in the year in which it was 

announced, and that was 1985-86, that the health capital fund 

would appear in Public Accounts and appear in your annual 

report, and we wouldn’t start messing around with the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. 

 

Health capital fund, Mr. Minister, was a creation of your 

government. It was a creation for a five-year program, Mr. 

Minister. It only appeared in your budget estimates for one 

year. It only appeared in the Public Accounts of this province 

for one year and that was the year of 1985-86. 

 

Mr. Minister, as far as I’m concerned, and until you can show 

me otherwise, you spent $6.6 million on the health capital fund 

in 1985-86 and then the fund disappeared, even though there 

was so much hoopla about how you were going to spend $300 

million on capital projects over the next five years. 

 

Then, Mr. Minister, you budgeted in 1986-87, which was an 

election year, Mr. Minister, $75.4 million, and you spent $71 

million. Mr. Minister — another shortfall of some $4 million. 

You’ve estimated in 1987-88 to spend $66.5 million. Mr. 

Minister, that’s a total of $143.5 million the way I do figures 

and the way I’d balance books — $143.5 million. Five-year 

program — we’re now getting well into three years of that 

program, and, in fact, you haven’t even spent half of that 

money. 

 

So this is another example of how you create these funds and 

then you simply . . . Somehow they magically disappear, Mr. 

Minister, they just disappear. You say you’re spending all of 

this money but there’s nothing to show that you are, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — It was only two years ago, Mr. Minister, that 

you put together this health capital fund. It was to be a five-year 

program. Are you prepared to state here today in this legislature 

that you will keep that promise of $300 million over the next 

five years if you consider those five years to be ’85-86 and 

onwards, Mr. Minister? Will you keep your promise to spend 

$300 million on capital projects for health facilities in this 

province? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Just a couple of points, because I want 

to clarify well, and frankly I understand what you’re saying as it 

relates to the way, because of this transition to property 

management corporation. But regardless of your resistance to 

change that this system will bring about, you will like . . . I 

believe that, that you as a legislator and all of us, once the 

change is there, you’ll like the results of the change. 

 

The people in the hospital sector, the people in the school sector 

like the results of that change, while the change itself and the 

transition during that change is somewhat difficult. And I 

recognize what you’re doing because I have sat in an opposition 

bench and tried to get all of  

these details in this kind of a circumstance before. 

 

But I will say to the member to go back to the question as it 

relates to the Public Accounts documents, and on page whatever 

it is, 32, under the subvote 62 — are you following me there 

now? — under subvote 62, under the various categories, one to 

seven . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay. What I will 

undertake to do to show you the expenditures that have been 

made under those categories, and where they’ve been made, I 

will provide you with a list of those expenditures so that they 

will show that they do add up to the amount that I had said 

before, the — what is it? — 41 million or whatever. Okay? So 

I’ll undertake to provide you with that list, which our people 

will undertake to pull together, and make sure that you have 

that list so you can see where it comes from. 

 

But I just want to reiterate again, the numbers and the 

discrepancy in the number is that some of that money came 

from the property management corporation in the form of a 

conversion to a loan agreements by the various hospitals or 

facilities, boards, and that you’ll see that the fact is and the 

bottom line of all of this is that the public or the taxpayer of 

Saskatchewan, whose dollars we’re here to scrutinize and so on, 

were spent on health care facilities to the level which I have 

outlined. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, you know all I can go on 

is Public Accounts for 1985-86. It was your government that 

created the health capital fund, and you just finished telling us a 

few minutes ago that you had spent some 36 or $41 million in 

that year. And, Mr. Minister, it’s true that there was an estimate 

that your government would spend some $41 million in that 

year and that is provided under the health capital fund in Public 

Accounts, which is the real document of what you spent in that 

fiscal year. And, Mr. Minister, it says expenditure, and it says, 

Mr. Minister, that you only spent $6.5 million — that’s all your 

government spent. 

 

So all I’m telling you, Mr. Minister, is that this health capital 

fund that your government created was a phoney fund — 

phoney. It was to spend some $300 million over the next five 

years, and it was released with a great deal of fanfare. In fact, 

the former minister of Health even got it into the budget 

document, this health capital fund. There was a lot of money 

spent on a flashy little paper that was presented to the people of 

this province showing how much money you people were going 

to spend on health care facilities. It was all smoke and mirrors; 

it was all fluff; and it really didn’t get spent. 

 

And I want to talk about another little fund that you created, and 

it’s called the patient care fund. And that little fund, Mr. 

Minister, was announced in February of 1986 by the former 

minister of Health, the member from Wolseley, and he 

announced a new patient care fund of some $100 million, and it 

too was supposed to be a five-year fund. He even got it 

mentioned again in the spring budget. He got it mentioned, 

another $100 million for a patient care fund. I would be 

interested in knowing, Mr. Minister, what happened to that 

money. What have you done with it, and where did it go? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay. I’ll come t the patient care fund 

in a moment, but I just want to . . . The member said  

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3155 

 

earlier, all I can refer to is the Public Accounts, and I went 

through . . . What I said is, I understand there’s a bit of a maze 

here and I wanted to walk through it because I think it’s 

important that we both understand it, if we both want to, I will 

add. Okay. So there’s the Public Accounts which you refer to. 

 

Now annual report 1985-86, on page 37, I will refer the member 

to ’85-86 annual report, page 37, there is an appendix B titled, 

“Provincial contributions for construction renovations ’85-86,” 

and there is a list of every payment for construction and 

renovation to every facility in this province that received those 

— ’85-86. I’m sorry, the annual report, Saskatchewan Health, 

Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan. Okay? 

 

And there’s a full page. There is another portion of a page with 

a total. The grand total for payments from April 1, ’85 to March 

31, ’86 — 34,800,000 with the detailed expenditures at every 

hospital and every facility in the province. And I can go through 

the whole list and read it. Okay? 

 

(1945) 

 

So what I’m saying to you is, the Public Accounts will show the 

grants. The Public Accounts, by the nature of the Public 

Accounts, does not show the loans or the money that was 

converted to loans through the SPMC, does not show. That’s by 

the nature of the way public accounts are. They’re the grants. 

But the money is right here. The money is right here and it’s in. 

So like I say, I’ll walk you through that. 

 

Let’s go one step further. Saskatchewan Health annual report, 

1986, year ending March 31, ’86, Saskatchewan Health page 

50, table 34, construction program as it relates to the continuing 

care branch which will be the long-term care facilities, and you 

will see them all listed there, the grant paid. And it totals 

5,915,926. 

 

And it starts with Arborfield, a new 36-bed facility; Big River, a 

new 30-bed facility; Dalmeny, nine new and 27 replacement 

beds; Duck Lake, new 30-bed facility; Eston, 22 replacement 

beds; Foam Lake, 10 new and two replacement beds; Goodsoil, 

12-bed integrated; Lampman, 19-bed integrated facility; Lucky 

Lake, 12-bed integrated facility; Meadow Lake, 25 replacement 

beds; Melville, 30 new and two replacement beds; Nokomis, 

12-bed integrated facility; Rabbit Lake, 12-bed integrated 

facility; Rose Valley, 12-bed integrated facility; Saltcoats, new 

30-bed facility; Saskatoon Lutheran Sunset Home, two new and 

78 replacement beds; final payments on prior years’ projects, 

and so on. 

 

So all I will say to the member, despite some of the things that 

you’ve been saying — and I once again recognize that it’s 

difficult to go through this maze of the various places where 

these are reported — but they are there and they are there to be 

reported. And I will say to you that with the new system, the 

change that I referred to, which I don’t think that we would be 

wise to resist the change itself . . . I understand the 

consternation as it relates to how the change takes place in a 

difficult transition time. 

 

But that transition, and I think has been well explained in  

some other departments and I think certainly — in fact I know 

this — that the people in the hospital sector, people in the 

various third-party bodies out there who use the property 

management corporation for their financing vehicle are very 

happy with the change. I’m sure that when times goes by, when 

we do this again next year, you will see that we won’t have to 

go through the same maze to find out where things are reported. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, thank you for that 

information. Mr. Minister, the information that you just gave 

me in terms of construction program 1985-86 for continuing 

care does show up in Public Accounts. The figures that you 

gave us do show up. The figures show that $6,250,000 was 

spend and that is accurate. It was contained in your annual 

report and it’s now contained in Public Accounts. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, there’s also a further grant that shows up — 

grants to hospitals and health centres — and that figure shows 

up as $433,088. But then there was a budget allocation to the 

Saskatoon Cancer Clinic, and Saskatchewan rehab centre, and 

Saskatoon hospitals construction program, and a grant to 

University Hospital, and grants to the Regina hospital 

regeneration for the General Hospital and the Pasqua Hospital, 

and yes, there is an estimate for all of those things. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, they don’t show up in Public Accounts. They 

don’t show up. You estimated $41,050,000 to be spent in that 

health capital fund. The only thing that shows up, Mr. Minister, 

is $6,250,000 for special care facilities and $343,088 for grants 

to hospitals and health centres. All of the other things that 

you’ve just talked about don’t show up. Why wouldn’t they 

show up in Public Accounts which is the real record of what 

was spent in 1985-86? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The simple explanation for that is that 

as it relates to the continuing care side, that the transition for the 

continuing care facilities into the property management 

corporation did not take place at the same time. It is a very 

small amount of money compared to what takes place in a 

hospital sector as you will know just from looking at the 

numbers. 

 

I want to thank you for reading the list of all of the good things 

that are happening to the various facilities in the province. I 

appreciate that, so will the people in those communities. 

 

So I’ll say that, you know, once again there’s a little more I can 

add expect to say that the explanation, as I’ve said, is that 

continuing care was not into the property management 

corporation structure and the transition did not take place at the 

same time. It, as I understand it, is now involved with the 

property management corporation. That’s right, I’ve had it 

confirmed. And as I’ve said before, I predict you will like the 

results of change while you may not like the change or the 

process of change. That’s a human frailty, frankly. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I love change and there’s 

lots of changes that are going to take place in this province 

when we’re elected in 1990. 

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3156 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Now, Mr. Minister, I asked you about this 

other phoney fund that you’ve created, a fund called the patient 

care fund. And this fund was announced in February 25, 1986. 

And this fund was to create 500 additional nursing positions, 

and it was to substantially increase patient care staff, and it was 

to provide for new equipment, and it was to reduce waiting 

times for surgery. These were the three goals of the fund. And, 

Mr. Minister, I asked you before, what happened to this fund? 

What have you done with it, and where did it go? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay. The patient care fund that the 

member refers to was announced as a five-year one, as you have 

said. It was set up as a $40 million operating plan to review and 

address areas where operating deficiencies rose between the 

time that it was set up and the last baseline review, which 

means the review of all of the payments to hospitals and so on 

which had been done in ’80 and ’81. Year one of the fund was 

in ’86-87 and $12.9 million was made available in ’86-87. 

 

The top priority was to adjust service volumes. And just to give 

you some examples: increase the average daily census; increase 

out-patient visits at the hospitals, so we can increase that aspect 

because it’s more efficient; to establish a proper volume base. 

These volumes included one that I know is close to your heart 

and is close to everyone’s, and that’s the waiting list in 

Saskatoon; and some surgical initiatives there. 

 

In addition, supply expenses were separately enriched, and new 

programs of high priority were commenced. And I’ll give you 

an example there. Regional ultrasound pathology program at 

Melfort; regional computer pharmacy system. A second staff 

person on nights was provided to rural hospitals, and the 

member will be aware, and I think all members will, of the 

issue that had been raised there as it relates to some of the 

smallest hospitals where nurses felt very isolated being only one 

nurse on staff over the night-time hours. 

 

And some adjustment was made to remuneration to pathologists 

and radiologists because there was some difficulty in those two 

specialty areas. So there was an adjustment to remuneration in 

that area. And 418 new positions were added to hospitals across 

the province. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I understood that $18.4 million 

was supposed to be allocated for this patient care fund. I gather 

that you only spent $12.9 million of that patient care fund. And 

as the minister said, we want this program to go straight to the 

heart of the matter, and that’s patient care, and that’s what this 

program will do. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, I can assure you that this program has not 

gone straight to the heart of the matter, and we have more stress 

in our nursing homes and hospitals than ever before. We have 

nurses that are thinking about getting out of the field altogether 

because they can’t take the stress of underfunding and 

understaffing. We have health care workers that in essence go 

to work sick because they don’t want to leave their colleagues 

short-staffed because those facilities can’t afford to bring in 

casual help or temporary help to take those sick people’s 

position. And,  

Mr. Minister, the situation is critical. 

 

Now I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, I note in your estimates this 

year we don’t have any budget item called patient care, and I’m 

wondering, Mr. Minister, if you are no longer committed to 

patient care. The three main goals of that fund were to be to 

reduce waiting lists for surgery, to provide new equipment and 

diagnostic services, and to substantially increase patient care 

staff, including the provision of about 500 addition nursing 

positions. With the deletion of the fund from your budget, does 

that mean that you are no longer committed to patient care? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The numbers that I quoted to you 

earlier, and I quoted the number 12.9 million that was in the 

hospital sector, and then you came back and mentioned the 

number 18.4. If you add the special care homes to that, which is 

5.5 million it does add to 18.4. So that’s where it is and that’s 

the explanation for that, so 18.4. 

 

(2000) 

 

And I just want to point out to you that the annualized amount 

. . . let’s take the hospital sector, $12.9 million, so if you . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Now I want you to understand this, 

so don’t shake your head at me like that. You can’t listen when 

your head is shaking. If you include last year’s, the annualized 

effect of the additional funding is 17.87 million in the next year 

because the patient care fund was implemented part way 

through last fiscal year and it amounted to 12.9 million, the 

annualized effect. In other words the effect that those positions 

that went into place . . . No, it’s not hard to understand if you 

really try, if you really try. 

 

The annualized effect is that that will be a cost of $17.87 

million this yea r- 17.87 — what was last year 12.9 million, and 

now when it goes through a full year because the 12.9 was spent 

over a period that did not include the total fiscal year. So the 

annualized effect is 17.87 million and that is in the system for 

this year. Those positions . . . As you’ve said, we haven’t 

included anything in the budget for the patient care fund, when 

in fact the patient care fund and those positions that were put 

into place, or those improvements that were put into place in 

1986-87, are still in the system. 

 

In other words the funding is still in the system, and the funding 

that we gave to the individual hospitals in order to hire their 

staff. Whatever their need was in individual circumstance, we 

did the funding which is as the system works, and you know 

that, and they will have those . . . That same funding is available 

to them this year to make sure they maintain the same positions 

in their system. 

 

Mr. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, you had budgeted $18.4 

million in 1986-87, but you only spent 12.9 million. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well you just finished telling me that it was 

12.9 million because you didn’t amortize it over the year and 

you weren’t looking at it for the full year. What is it? I’m 

talking about patient care fund for hospitals and  

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3157 

 

nursing homes and whatever else you want to include. Give us 

the full figures, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I thought that’s what I did because 

I said 12.9 and add the plus sign, 5.5, and that’s 18.4. And the 

5.5 is for the special care homes sector. You will know . . . and 

according to your own critic’s position, you’ve got hospitals 

and your colleague deals with the special care homes. In our 

case, I deal with both. Okay? 

 

So 12.9, 4.4, adds to 18.4. And then I gave you the annualized 

numbers when I gave you the explanation, so that you would 

see what it means to annualize that and what it costs the system 

when those new positions are in place and in place for the total 

fiscal year. Okay, the 12.9 annualized is 17.87 million; the 5.5 

annualized is 10.4 million. Okay, and the total of that is, what, 

27, 28 million or something in that order, and that’s what will 

be in the system this year according to what was in the system 

last year. 

 

Mr. Atkinson: — So $28 million this year is in the system for 

the “patient care fund.” I would ask, Mr. Minister, where does 

this figure appear in your estimates? Under what budgetary 

item? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No. Understand what I’m saying here. It 

does not show, patient care fund, this much money. What I’m 

point out to you, what I’m pointing out to you, because . . . Well 

let me go back one step: $40 million that was announced, or 

thereabouts, okay, over a period of time will be spent over a 

period of five years. That’s what we said. We are now in year 

two of that, so we have three more years to go, okay. That’s 

step one. 

 

Okay, now step two. We spent in the first year, ’86-87, 18.4 

million, which I have indicated to you how that was spent and 

in two sectors. I have said that if you take those numbers that 

were spent in the two sectors in 1986-87 — just so you know 

how this system operates — once the new positions are in place 

and the funding level is provided to the hospitals for these new 

positions, that funding level becomes part of the baseline of the 

hospitals budget, and this year, come to the one that we’re 

dealing with now, will include the funding for the positions that 

were added in a special way, last year. They are included. 

 

So it’s not an accurate statement to say that the patient care 

fund has been deleted or abandoned or any of that, because the 

money that was put through the patient care fund is put into the 

budget, it becomes part of the baseline, and is now annualized 

and will be there this year, and will be there next year, and the 

year after that. 

 

Now as far as the total of $40 million goes — $40 million 

which was a commitment of a patient care fund for special, you 

know for being able to respond to special needs — that was 

there, the commitment was there for that amount or thereabouts, 

and that commitment is still here. That was a five-year program; 

we are in year two. I remind you we have three other years 

beyond this year’s estimates. I hope to be able to discuss them 

with you for two or three years. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, how do we know that 

this money has gone into the baseline of  

departments? Your government set up the health capital fund. It 

was to be a five-year fund. It’s there for one year and the fund 

vanishes, Mr. Minister, never to be seen again. 

 

Your government sets up the patient care fund in February of 

1986. That fund was set up in response to the Saskatchewan 

Union of Nurses and their concerns about critical staff shortages 

in this province. And once again, Mr. Minister, the patient care 

fund, announced with a great deal of fanfare; press releases; 

included in the budget; the former minister of Health made it 

appear as though somehow it was going to be an ongoing 

budgetary item; but once again, Mr. Minister, this fund is a 

one-year fund prior to the election and it vanishes into the air, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

Instead of addressing the real problem here, Mr. Minister, 

instead of addressing concerns about critical shortages of 

nursing personnel and other health care workers in hospitals and 

nursing homes, instead of starting to resolve the problem, your 

government sets up a phoney fund, a fund called the patient 

care fund. And all of a sudden after the election, it disappears. 

 

There were a great number of concerns about the lack of capital 

funding for projects around this province and your government 

sets up another phoney fund, the health capital fund — another 

phoney fund. We’ve seen this pattern over and over and over 

again. There’s a problem. Instead of addressing it, you set up a 

phoney fund, and it soon disappears. 

 

Mr. Minister, I don’t know how anybody except perhaps Mr. 

Lutz, the Provincial Auditor, can understand how you people 

keep the books. You’re moving budgetary items around. You 

create the impression that you’ve increased funding to health 

care this year when that’s not true. You’ve moved items out of 

Supply and Services and over into Health and you do it in 

department after department after department, and you say 

you’ve increased the budget. And that’s not true, Mr. Minister. 

 

In the Department of Health, there’s been a budgetary decrease 

of $18.6 million. You say there’s a health capital fund and it 

disappears; you say there’s a patient care fund and it disappears. 

All of these funds disappear and yet they’re announced for a 

five-year period. They disappear. They’re scrapped, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

You play politics and you have no policies. You play politics 

with people’s lives; you play politics with people’s concerns; 

but you won’t come up with any clear policies on what, in fact, 

is going to be happening in health care — real policies on 

health care in the next five years. 

 

You say you’re committed to medicare. Well we’ve seen your 

commitments, Mr. Minister. You did in the prescription drug 

plan to such an extent that people have to pay up-front costs for 

drugs, and there are people making decisions about whether 

they put groceries on their table or whether or not, Mr. Minister, 

they pay for their prescription drugs. We’ve seen a betrayal of 

medicare in this province like we’ve never seen before, and it’s 

come from you, Mr. Minister, because of your  

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3158 

 

lack of vision, because of your lack of policies. 

 

Mr. Minister, just come clean. Tell us what happened to the 

patient care fund; tell us what happened to the health capital 

fund. Admit they were phoney funds, Mr. Minister. We’ll never 

see the money; we’ll never see your promises of $300 million 

here and $100 million there. We can’t find those nursing 

positions that you say were created, and if they’re there, Mr. 

Minister, tell us in what hospitals and what nursing homes you 

created these positions. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I just want to . . . First of all, I think I 

will resist the temptation, resist the temptation to tell the 

member a little story about her own penchant for stretching 

things. 

 

The member asked a while ago, where is this. And I’ll just walk 

you through another little book here, the Estimates which we’re 

to discuss tonight, ’87-88, on page 48 and on page 49. You ask 

where does the patient care fund show up. The Estimates on 

page 48 under Health, item number 22 under vote 32, payments 

for hospital services. And at the bottom of the page you will see 

under the double asterisk: 

 

A portion of this subvote was included in the vote Health 

— Patient Care Fund in 1986-87. The 1987-87 Special 

Funds estimates have been reallocated to reflect the 

transfer of this activity to the vote Health in 1987-88. 

 

Just so you know that the patient care fund was acknowledged; 

the patient care fund was there; and the patient care fund has 

been transferred and it’s in the regular estimates of Health — in 

other words, annualized; in other words, as I have explained it. 

 

If you go to the other page 49, just beside it, you will see under 

item 31, grants and allowances for special care services — 

which is the other portion, the special care side . . . And you 

will find under the triple asterisk at the bottom of that page: 

 

A portion of this subvote was included in the vote Health 

— Patient Care Fund in 1986-87. The 1986-87 Special 

Funds estimates have been reallocated to reflect the 

transfer of this activity to the vote Health in 1987-88. 

 

And I would just say to the member, as I have said to you 

before, I know it’s a maze to walk through to some extent. But I 

know this as well: in preparing for these estimates, it’s a maze 

that you might have thought about walking through and you 

didn’t. And that’s totally up to you; you can do that how you 

would like to do it. But I would say to you, that is the case; it’s 

there. 

 

You’ve stood here and said, there is no patient care fund; it’s 

one that’s disappeared — and to use your kind of inflammatory 

language, a phoney fund and all that sort of stuff. And it’s the 

kind of thing which you have a real penchant for doing. Phoney 

kinds of funds, is the kind of thing that you say. You say, 

phoney funds. 

 

What I’m telling you is that I want to go through these  

estimates in a sincere way with you because it’s important to do 

that. And you always come back and you say, you took away 

the drug plan, and once again you said that. The drug plan is 

still in place. There is a drug plan in place. But, I mean, we can 

argue about that. 

 

The fact is, this $1.2 billion, $1.2 billion that is being spent by 

the public of Saskatchewan on their health care system, is an 

extremely important department and it’s an extreme amount of 

money. There’s no question about that. In the times and the 

circumstances that we all find ourselves in, it’s extremely 

important that we deal with this in a serious way. And we will, 

and I intend to do that. 

 

There is more to the Health budget than whether or not a 

supplementary benefit like the drug plan is changed — far more 

to it than that. I would ask you to, sure, say what you like about 

the drug plan; say what you like about the dental plan, the two 

things which you are talking about. But please deal in this 

legislature in a serious way with the Health estimates of this 

very large and very important department. And if you do that, 

I’ll undertake to continue to give you and walk you through the 

various books and so on that you need walking through, and 

we’ll go through it in a reasonable way. And that’s the 

undertaking that I’ll continue to give you. 

 

Mr. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, for the 

patronizing lecture. Now, Mr. Minister, let’s talk about item 22, 

payments for hospital services. 

 

Mr. Minister, if you take into consideration your 1986-87 

estimate and you include your supplementary estimates, Mr. 

Minister, we only see a $3 million increase to hospitals. Yet, 

Mr. Minister, you advise us that there is going to be about $28 

million going into the patient care fund — even though it’s 

disappeared — but going into the patient care fund, and 

somehow it’s been included in payments for hospital services. 

With an increase of $3 million, Mr. Minister, if you take into 

consideration what was actually spent last year in ’86-87 and 

you compare it to this year, there’s only a $3 million increase. 

What happened to your patient care fund, Mr. Minister? 

 

(2015) 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The specific answer to the member, 

’86-87, the numbers we have used, the printed Estimates in 

’86-87 when it was 513 million, whatever, that includes patient 

care money. I just want that to be noted. And ’87-88, the 

estimates of 523,666 whatever, that’s there, also includes that 

annualized amount that I talked about. That includes . . . Well, 

what is the annualized amount? 

 

An Hon. Member: — It’s 17.8. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — It’s $17.8 million, okay. Just so that you 

know that we’re comparing as we said yesterday when we went 

through somewhat a similar discussion, so we compare apples 

with apples, okay? Both are the estimated amounts. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Okay. Well, Mr. Minister, then it looks like 

we’ve got another cut here. If you take your estimated 1986-87 

numbers for hospital services, it’s 513,313,690.  

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3159 

 

If you add on the $7,700,000 from your supplementary 

estimates, the money you had to spend in addition to what you 

estimated for 1986-87, what we’ve got, Mr. Minister, is a total 

budget for 1986-87 of about $520 million . . . 521 million, I 

should say. Yet, Mr. Minister, the year ’87-88, you had 

budgeted $523,666,300. 

 

It gets a bit complicated to explain this. In your patient care 

fund for last year, you allocated about 12.9 million. This year 

for hospitals, you’re allocating 17.8 million, which is a 

difference of about $5 million. There should be an additional $5 

million for ’87-88 going into hospital services, but that hasn’t 

happened, Mr. Minister. There’s only an additional increase of 

$3 million, or one-half per cent, Mr. Minister. There’s a $2 

million shortfall, Mr. Minister. Where is this patient care fund? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — A couple of things. First of all, in the 

hospitals, in the whole sector, in keeping with the total of the 

restraint practices which we asked the public sector to do all 

over, we have said to them, you know, increase your 

efficiencies, cut back on your administrative costs, and many of 

them have accomplished some great things there, some 

efficiencies. 

 

You will know as well . . . You will know as well that the 

salaries . . . because we’ve had the public sector two years with 

zero, so there is no provision for an increase in salary. And you 

will know, I believe that salaries account for something in the 

order of 80 per cent of all of the costs of the hospitals, of the 

hospital sector. So it’s 80 per cent for salaries, which is an 

horrendous number. 

 

And so those kinds of restraint measures which are across the 

public service, and certainly do include the hospital sector, will 

have some significant impact in terms of the amount of moneys 

that are available to the hospitals to do their, you know, to 

operate in the normal way. 

 

Mr. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, you didn’t answer my 

question. Mr. Minister, I think I’ve shown very clearly that 

there isn’t a patient care fund. It doesn’t exist. You say that 

there is a patient care fund included in the budget item for 

hospital services, but I’ve shown you that there isn’t. If you 

were so proud of that fund, Mr. Minister, you would have it in 

your budget as an additional item. And that patient care fund, 

Mr. Minister, was announced for very specific reasons. The 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses clearly showed the public how 

our hospitals were understaffed and how our patients in our 

hospitals were not getting the kind of care that they are entitled 

to under a quality and accessible medicare system. 

 

There was a lot of political pressure placed on your former 

minister of Health and on your government, not only by the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, but by a number of health care 

professionals and other health care workers as well as the 

public. 

 

So there was a great deal of fanfare around this press release 

because you people thought you were going to have a spring 

1986 election. The press release was dated February 25, 1986. 

There was a big announcement of $100 million, a five-year 

program to do three things: it was to reduce waiting lists and 

waiting times for surgery; it was to provide new equipment and 

diagnostic services;  

and it was to substantially, Mr. Minister — and I use your word, 

substantially — increase patient care staff including the 

provision of about 500 additional nursing positions. Now you 

talk about restraint, Mr. Minister; I’m talking about the quality 

of care in our hospitals and in our nursing homes, Mr. Minister. 

And quality care has to do with nursing care and other kinds of 

care, Mr. Minister. 

 

The $100 million that you so proudly announced prior to what 

you thought would be a spring election does not exist, Mr. 

Minister. There are no provisions, Mr. Minister, in this budget 

for that patient care fund. It was a phoney fund; it was a figment 

of your political imagination and your government’s political 

imagination. It had nothing to do with improving the quality of 

health care in our province. It had nothing to do with that; it had 

everything to do with politics. It has disappeared, Mr. Minister. 

You can’t explain to this House or to the people of this province 

where this so-called money has gone to in this budget. 

 

Mr. Minister, I conclude, and the public must conclude, that it 

has disappeared. We have a patient care fund that doesn’t exist. 

It was a phoney fund. We have a health capital fund that doesn’t 

exist. It was a phoney fund, Mr. Minister. 

 

We have a great deal more to say about hospital understaffing 

and nursing home understaffing, but my colleague, the member 

from Regina Rosemont, has a few questions for you. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Just a couple of things, because it goes 

back to the fact that I have said — my predecessor in this 

portfolio has said — in the patient care fund announcement that 

it would be there and it would be in the order of $40 million 

over a period of five years. I’ve said to you tonight that it’s 

there over a period of five years. Okay? 

 

Let me just reiterate some of the things which I said earlier and 

try to say. Four hundred and eighteen total staff have been put 

into the system — 418 total staff — those are still there; 242 

nursing staff positions, still there — or 242. I’m told that’s what 

was funded in the various hospitals around the province. 

Equipment purchases, still there in the hospitals, some of the 

ones that I outlined earlier here; the money for specialists, 

pathologists and radiologists that I talked about, still there in the 

system, continuing into this year, still there. 

 

Now the second staff position in the rural hospitals, which was 

a pressure point as I said to you before, still there and in the 

system now — still there. It’s not as though, you know . . . and 

this is why you either lack the understanding or you don’t, and I 

don’t believe you do. I think, it’s you choose to show this lack 

of understanding to try to present whatever it is for your own 

means. 

 

And I understand this is a political forum, so, you know, I’m 

not too sensitive to it. I know this is a political forum, but it’s 

also a forum to do the reasonable business of the folks as well, 

so I’d ask you to think about that for a moment. 

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3160 

 

So the member has, you know, talked at some length, frankly, 

about the various things that are not happening in the Health 

department. I have said that we’re spending this 1.2 billion — 

talking about that amount of money in this kind of a 

circumstance, at this society, and this jurisdiction of a million 

people find themselves in. 

 

Let’s just go back and talk about some of the things that have 

been added to the system over a period of just a very few years 

since we’ve come into office in this government. Transfer of 

ambulance services and northern health services and all those 

kinds of things into one department, that’s an extremely 

important thing and has been seen as that across the province, 

including the continuing care coming to Health. 

 

(2030) 

 

The extra billing of patients by physicians is gone, thanks to 

this government, and eliminated with the signing of Saskatoon 

Agreement II. 

 

A new mental services Act was passed which ensured that the 

rights of the mentally ill were adequately protected. Done here, 

by this government, not in the 11 years that you folks were 

there. And you’ll always say, oh, we had everything done. We 

had reached nirvana as it relates to health care; that’s your 

position. That’s the position of the old Democratic party. That’s 

the position of your old party. 

 

The full implementation of the program has been temporarily 

delayed pending completion of the review of health services. 

The 275 million, five-year construction program was 

implemented in ’85-86 to regenerate and expand hospital 

facilities around the province. Those expansions, and I 

mentioned them last night and earlier, expansions close to home 

for you as a matter of fact, were expansions which were 

necessitated by the legacy that you left in some good years with 

some high prices in potash and in oil and in wheat and in all of 

the other commodities that this province so depends upon. You 

left a legacy, and I hear the chirper here from Saskatoon South, 

former Health minister, part of his very personal legacy of 

leaving, leaving those facilities done. 

 

So since 1982, over 660 new nursing department positions have 

been funded for hospitals around the province. Six new CT 

scanners have been provided to the six base hospitals which 

will greatly improve access to new technologically 

sophisticated imaging services. 

 

A total of 1,700 special care home beds constructed and 

approved for construction since 1982. And it’s on and on — 

chiropody program, ambulance services, cancer treatment 

services, greatly strengthened by developing a new funding 

formula. A new cancer clinic in Saskatoon; a new community 

therapy program has been implemented to provide 

physiotherapy and occupational therapy to rural residents, 

which is something that just didn’t happen. I mean, the rural for 

you guys was the rural, you know, you didn’t worry about that, 

right? You still don’t. You still don’t. You’re a very, very 

backward looking party in a forward looking province, frankly. 

 

New initiatives to deal with alcohol and drug abuse, all of  

those kinds of things have been done. So for the member to 

stand in her place and say these things have not been done, 

there'’ no money being spent on health care, health care is 

falling apart, and so on, it is just not the case. It is just not the 

case. And I’ll just say to the member, please come back to 

reality and look forward — dare to look forward. Change won’t 

really hurt you. Step into the future; you’ll find that you might 

like it. You might like it. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Chairman, I’d like to ask several questions of the minister. And 

I’m not going try to be . . . even pretend to try to be partisan or 

political in the questioning. So I hope the minister will bear 

with me. 

 

It has to do with the construction, or lack of construction, or 

lack of funding, or maybe lack of funding, of the announced 

Pioneer Village special care facility in the constituency of 

Regina Rosemont. And I want to first of all refer this to the 

minister, Mr. Chairman. 

 

It was an announcement from the Government of Saskatchewan 

information services entitled: “Health ’85 to ’94, additional 

special care home projects announced.” And it goes on to say: 

 

Health Minister Graham Taylor today announced 

additional special care home projects as part of the 

five-year, $300 million health capital fund unveiled in the 

new provincial budget Wednesday. 

 

Then it goes on down, and I won’t read the whole thing; it says: 

 

In 1984-85, 328 beds were brought under construction. A 

further 438 beds were planned for ’85-86. The majority of 

these projects were announced last year but the ’85-86 

program has been expanded. The additions include a new 

facility in Duck Lake, and integrated facilities in Nokomis, 

Goodsoil, and Rabbit Lake, The remaining years of the 

program will continue to reflect four main principles. 

 

And it goes on: 

 

And for ’86-87 approvals begin for the construction of 

about 330 beds. Highlights include a new special care 

home in Lumsden, and development of an integrated 

facility in Dinsmore, Gainsborough, Mankota. As well, 

work will begin on a project to completely replace St. 

Anthony’s Home in Moose Jaw. Other communities will 

receive more beds, including Yorkton, Tisdale, and Santa 

Maria home in Regina. 

 

For 1987-88 and ’88-89, the last two years of the program, 

22 communities have been identified. The details of these 

projects will be worked out in consultation with the 

communities involved, Taylor said. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, one thing that is noticeable by its absence in 

this list, and I want you to clarify for us and for the people of 

Saskatchewan tonight, is that just prior to  

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3161 

 

the last provincial election, Mr. Gordon Dirks, then the member 

of the Legislative Assembly for Regina Rosemont, also minister 

who was responsible for Sask Housing Corporation, also the 

minister for Social Services and the minister for Urban Affairs, 

made a commitment to the people of this province that there 

would be funds provided to the tune of $9 million for the 

replacement of the single dwellings and the single dwelling 

units at Pioneer Village. 

 

Now part of the problem that I have in dealing with this and 

dealing with the estimates for this year is that I can’t find any 

reference in the Health estimates to moneys for Pioneer Village 

coming through the Department of Health — coming through 

either the health capital fund or anywhere else. 

 

So I guess my question to you is . . . Well, first of all, is it the 

intention of the government . . . And you as a member of 

Executive Council know very well that Mr. Dirks made that 

commitment for the Pioneer Village home in Regina; you know 

very well that he made that $9 million commitment. Is that 

commitment going to be carried out through money provided 

out of the health capital fund or continuing care branch or some 

other method out of your department or, in fact, is that $9 

million commitment going to be carried out through Sask 

Housing or through some other mechanism of government? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — To the specific on Pioneer Village: it is 

without question anything that’s done there and anything that 

has been talked about there was under the purview of 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation as a housing project. 

 

As it relates to the special care home section of Health in this 

budget, either in the past or even at the present with the ones 

that were announced there — and you’ve read out the lists of 

the ones that were announced — I can say most of those are 

completed, I think, and many of them are, at least the ones that 

were in the prior year. 

 

The ones that relate to Regina for the member from Regina: 

Santa Maria, 48 beds, is, as we all know, under construction, 

very near completion now; and Salvation Army, 30 beds; for a 

total of 78 beds in Regina, as it relates to these estimates which 

we’re dealing in Health. Any questions you would have as it 

relates to the project, or lack of project, or whatever, as it relates 

to Pioneer Village or anything that was said, should be directed 

to the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, I can appreciate that 

particular response; however in the health capital budget, in the 

health capital fund that you talk about, you list a great many of 

these homes to which you’ve already referred to. 

 

I guess I’m trying to get from you some sense of whether or not 

the commitment is going to be met because it was my 

understanding that only part of the commitment, and that part of 

the commitment that was related to the individual dwelling 

units at Pioneer Village as opposed to expansions to the special 

care home; and because of the ownership of Pioneer Village, 

that in fact it's a facility that's owned by the city of Regina and 

it’s the largest  

facility of its kind in North America, that in fact the 

departments which were responsible for Pioneer Village 

included Health as well as Sask Housing Corporation. 

 

Now I believe that’s true in terms of the actual special care 

units, if I’m not mistaken on that. I see you’re nodding your 

head, and I assume that’s correct. So is there any part of the 

funding of that $9 million . . . Can you tell us when that 

commitment is going to be made in terms of your department? 

And, in fact, will that commitment be carried out? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I just want to tell you that when I say 

that your best questions in that area, those same questions 

should go to Sask Housing for this reason. 

 

At no time has there been a discussion with the, as far as I’m 

informed, for the city of Regina, the board there, as it relates to 

special care home expansion at Pioneer Village. There was an 

enriched housing project or some related housing project which 

was strictly that — a housing project — but not related to an 

expansion or whatever of the special care home facility which 

would come under the purview of Health. That was not 

discussed. At no time was it ever in our plans or was it in, as far 

as I know, in the plans of the people there, in terms of coming 

forward with a formal proposal to the Department of Health. So 

the questions are not placed in the proper place in the scheme of 

things, and I would say, ask the questions of the minister of the 

Saskatchewan Housing. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, I want to make sure that I’m 

clear with what you’re saying because it’s my understanding 

that it’s part of the overall negotiations. I recognize that it’s 

certainly complex and that it takes in a number of areas, that its 

part of those overall negotiations. Special care needs and 

continuing special care needs were being discussed with the 

minister, not only before the election. I understand after the 

election as well that the negotiations between the board of 

Pioneer Village and the government were ongoing. Part of those 

discussions related to the special care needs part of the house, 

and I’m wondering if . . . Okay. Let’s pose the question this 

way: has there been discussions between Sask Housing 

Corporation and your ministry as to Pioneer Village? Have 

there been any discussions between those two as it relates to 

Pioneer Village, because I know there have been discussions 

between representatives of your government . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well you say Sask Housing, but because of the 

special care component I understand that in fact Sask Health 

has to be involved in it. 

 

Maybe the Minister of Urban Affairs can correct me if I’m 

wrong on it. You know, I’m certainly not trying to split the 

issue up. If, in fact, Sask Housing can handle the whole thing 

and they intend to honour the commitment, then be that as it 

may. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay. As I said earlier, the question 

should go to Sask Housing. There have not been, I’m told, 

discussions between Health and Sask Housing because 

whatever has been discussed there — and our people are aware 

that Sask Housing has had some discussions, or so you say, 

with our government — it’s through the auspices of Sask 

Housing. 

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3162 

 

So Sask Housing, I believe, has had those discussions, but I 

can’t speak any further than that for the minister of Sask 

Housing. They’ve had discussions with whoever is responsible 

— somebody related to Pioneer Village, I would think. But it’s 

related to the housing component, which would be an enriched 

housing thing. That’s all I can say. 

 

But it’s certainly never been included in our program, you 

know, the program that you quoted from. Pioneer Village at no 

time was included as a special care project in our program, and 

no consideration for heavy care for Pioneer Village has ever 

been on the books in, you know, the last term or this term or 

any other time, and no proposals or requests have come forward 

regarding heavy care, which is what we deal with in this 

department, heavy care level 3, 4, whatever. 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Just one final question because I didn’t find 

whether it was clarified in my own mind. Have there been any 

discussions of any kind between the special care branch in 

terms of the heavy care level 3 and level 4 care and Sask 

Housing? Has any of your officials been talked . . . had those 

kind of discussions to raise the issue of special care at Pioneer 

Village? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, they haven’t had discussions 

regarding special care beds at Pioneer Village with Sask 

Housing, regarding special care beds, which is what is our 

purview here. Okay? 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Just because you’ve narrowed the answer down 

in regards to special care beds, has there been . . . Let’s just say, 

has there been any discussions on special care facilities 

between, any discussions between Department of Health and 

Sask Housing as regards to Pioneer Village? Just so that we’re 

clear on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I’m informed, to the extent that 

our people know anything about this, anything that was talked 

about was enriched housing, and that’s really all I can say — 

okay? — because that’s all there is to it, I think. 

 

(2045) 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. Minister, 

I’d like you to now talk about the Saskatchewan hearing aid 

plan. I note from your budget estimates that there has been 

about a $600,000 decrease in the budget for the Saskatchewan 

hearing aid plan in comparison to the previous year 1986-87. 

 

You will recall, Mr. Minister, in the spring that we received a 

document that indicated that your department was 

contemplating the possibility of eliminating persons between 

the ages of 17 and 64 years from the plan. And I’m wondering 

if this decrease in the budget is a reflection upon that potential 

policy decision. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — As it relates to the hearing aid plan, we 

lost one of our . . . First of all the professional people, the 

audiologists, are very hard to come by in terms of hiring them 

and we’ve . . . As you will know, they’re trained, a number of 

them are trained, the closest place is  

in Minot, I believe. 

 

We lost one of those positions through the early retirement 

program which went across government. There were four 

vacant positions in that and the vacancies I guess — well, in 

fact, I know — were caught in that process of when vacant 

positions were deleted. And vacant positions in the hearing aid 

plan have been something that have been there for a long time 

just because of the circumstance that I told you earlier. They’re 

hard to hire, people in this area. 

 

We have an estimated reduction in the number of hearing aids, 

and it’s just, you know, always an estimate; it will change from 

year to year. We made some changes, one which means 

something in the order of $100,000 in that the hearing aid plan 

used to provide, used to have batteries available, and they 

would buy their batteries for the hearing aid from the plan, from 

the government plan. And what we’ve said is that those 

batteries should be purchased from the local pharmacy and so 

on, and that’s the case now, and that’s what it will be the case. 

And, you know, the adjustment is being made in that area, and 

the plan continues with the coverage that has been there and 

carries on. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, you still haven’t explained to 

me why there is a budget decrease of some $600,000. Can you 

explain to me what that $600,000 has been lost to? 

 

Surely that entire budgetary item can’t have been lost to your 

decision not to provide batteries to hearing impaired persons on 

a cost basis, Mr. Minister. Surely that’s not the entire reason 

why we’ve had a $600,000 reduction in the budget. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The numbers that I have is . . . As I said, 

I pointed out the staff reductions and vacancies and the 

retirement thing — it’s about $175,000. The batteries which I 

related to you, which we don’t no longer buy, that’s $100,000. 

And the inventory of hearing aids, the number of hearing aids, 

is cut down by about $300,000. Okay. And that means that, you 

know, just to put that into perspective in terms of the number of 

people who are served by the plan and so on, it’s about 4,000 

hearing aids a year. It’s about 4,000 hearing aids a year at about 

. . . This is the cost at about $200 each is what the cost to the 

hearing aid plan is. So that’s — what’s that? — $800,000. You 

know, just so that’s in perspective in terms of the amount of 

money spent on hearing aids themselves in a given year. Okay. 

So what’s that? Three, four, $575,000, you know, in rough 

numbers, is the sort of numbers that is there. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, in your annual report you 

indicate, and I can only go on the annual report for the year 

ending March 1986, but there is no direct charge for hearing 

tests to Saskatchewan residents. Hearing aids, batteries, and 

related accessories are sold at SHAP, which means the 

Saskatchewan hearing aid plan, at direct purchase cost. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I interpret that to mean that your cost is 

passed on to the purchaser or the consumer, the consumer 

requiring those accessories or those hearing  

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3163 

 

aids or those batteries. So I fail to see how you can possibly be 

saving any money by no longer purchasing batteries or 

purchasing certain kinds of hearing aids that you passed on to 

the consumer at cost. I fail to see how you’re losing any money 

or saving any money in that regard, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Just so the numbers that are there in 

terms of the hearing aid plan are the numbers as I said for 

inventory of batteries under the former system, and therefore, 

for inventory of hearing aids themselves and all of those things, 

the revenue which comes from the sale of those does not show 

up in that number. Okay? And that never has. I mean, that’s the 

way it always is. 

 

I’ll just refer you to the books, the blue book on page 9, 

budgetary — where is it now? — budgetary expenditures on 

page 9 under Health. That goes with the revenue which comes 

from the sale of hearing aid batteries, hearing aids, themselves, 

and so on goes into that pot of revenues. Okay? But the 

numbers that are reflected in the other one that you refer to 

under SHA, the hearing aid plan, the reductions there are 

basically inventory reductions in terms of the number of hearing 

aids. 

 

And some of it, I admit, is how many do we believe that we 

can, you know, will be able to process and so on in the year 

with the staff that’s available to us. And there’s no question, as 

you have seen before. We are and we continue to try to hire the 

audiologists which are required, the professional people 

required, and they are not available. They are very difficult. 

And we have programs, and have had over a period of years and 

will continue to have them, programs to train the people and ask 

young people to enter this field, because it is a field of 

opportunity for young people who want to enter it. It'’ a 

master's program following a bachelor's degree, and the 

master’s program is at Minot, the closest one. Just a little 

commercial for young people who may want a good career. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, it’s quite obvious that you’re 

no longer providing services to hearing impaired people in this 

province to the extent that you used to. You used to provide 

batteries at cost to hearing impaired persons. They now have to 

go to the pharmacy or the grocery store. I understand that the 

batteries were available at approximately $2 — that’s my 

information — and they’re now paying between 5 and $8 

depending on where they purchase those batteries. 

 

Once again, Mr. Minister, you have cut back on services in the 

area of health care to persons who have hearing impairments. 

And, Mr. Minister, it was a valuable service that you provided 

to the hearing impaired in our province by providing those 

batteries. And you weren’t losing any money, Mr. Minister, 

because you were providing those batteries at cost. And I guess 

my question to you is this: why would you decide to eliminate 

that particular service to the hearing impaired in this province at 

this time? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, two things I just want to correct to 

you. When I referred . . . I said page 9, I meant page 14. Just to 

go back so that'’ clear in the record — page 14 under Health, 

Consolidated Fund, summary of budgetary revenue by 

department. 

What the member says in terms of the batteries, it was a change 

in the process. And we have, you know, the hearing aid plan. 

You try to run it in an efficient way and it’s important that we 

do that with a reduced staff. But it’s important as well that you 

understand . . . and I am having reports of people being able to 

buy their batteries cheaper or at the same costs, so I don’t think 

there’s a problem them. And I say that because I have a letter 

just the other day which I’ll share with you, of someone said, I 

bought my batteries cheaper at the drug store — than what they 

were available before. So the cost of batteries for the hearing 

aids is not what I believe to be the problem, and I don’t think 

that it is a problem. And the people with the batteries or who 

are in need of them are not saying that it’s a problem, I would 

say that to you. So that’s a change. That’s a change, but it’s not 

an onerous one. And I just said before about the inventory and 

the number of aids themselves that we will buy or the number 

of batteries. 

 

But we remain committed to providing services for people who 

are hearing impaired in our province and obviously it’s an 

important area in terms of people who need that service in order 

to function in a normal way. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, you indicate that you are 

saving some $300,000 on hearing aids, and I’m wondering what 

kind of hearing aids you have eliminated from the program. 

And what will hearing impaired persons, most of whom are the 

elderly, where will they now have to go to get those hearing 

aids, and will they be able to get those hearing aids at cost or 

was the process prior to the elimination of certain kinds of 

hearing aids? 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — There’s no elimination of hearing aids 

or kinds, I am told. There is no elimination of any particular 

brands or kinds or whatever, so that’s not an elimination. The 

300 is the cut-down of inventory across the piece of the number 

of hearing aids which we think we will be processing, and that’s 

always an estimated amount. But you have to deal with how 

many do we think we’ll be able to process in a given year. The 

normal year is about 4,000 people served by the plan in a year, 

4,000 hearing aids per year at about, in terms of the cost to the 

plan, about $200 at $800,000. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, the population in 

Saskatchewan is ageing, so I have to presume that as a result of 

that, the population of people requiring hearing aids must be 

increasing as well. How would you arrive at the conclusion that 

you should lower your inventory for hearing aids by some 

$400,000, which is a drastic decrease, Mr. Minister, if in fact 

the population is ageing and therefore the requirement or the 

necessity for a hearing aid is probably increasing with that 

population ageing? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay. You know, I hear what you’re 

saying in terms of the ageing population and the need, or the 

perceived need, and I think it’s probably true, that there would 

be. But I just would say to you that we have an intention and we 

believe we’ll serve about the same number of people; I believe I 

said about 4,000 a  

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3164 

 

year. We have a couple of things . . . Every year there’s another 

4,000 people out there who are served and who have their 

hearing aid and so on. That’s added, plus others who will go to 

other private dealers and so on in the province, and some do 

that. 

 

But I would say to the member, as well, when we went through 

the process in Health and then throughout the whole of 

government, this was an example of one where when you get 

into it and really start looking at it. This is an inventory control 

measure. There was a whole batch, I guess you could call it, or 

whatever you call a group of hearing aids, but a whole batch of 

them were there. And what we’ve said is, look we’ll serve the 

same number of people or very close to it. We do not need to 

spend this extra $300,000 on increasing the inventory because 

we have a significant inventory. And there was a significant 

inventory there. And you will know, having been a public 

servant at one time in your life, in another kind of public 

service, you will know how the budgets work and so on. There 

was a significant inventory. We said, look, through an inventory 

control measure, we don’t have to spend this $300,000; we can 

provide the service. We believe that’s the case. 

 

Obviously if the audiologists and the people are able to process 

people — and they are — at the same rate, and if there is a need 

or if there is an increase or if there’s a need for more hearing 

aids, well I suppose there’s an adjustment can be made. But I 

don’t believe, and we don’t anticipate now, and we’re well on 

into the fiscal year, we don’t anticipate having to make a major 

expenditure in that hearing aid side, for the inventory side. 

 

So you know, it’s a small example of a very large process in 

terms of going program by program, and inventory by 

inventory, shelf by shelf, if you will, and see just what is 

available in the various warehouses of government and what 

isn’t. And we found that there was a significant inventory there. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, when four vacant positions 

were deleted, were any of those positions for audiologists? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Three of them were audiologists. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well that’s very interesting, Mr. Minister. 

When I look at your Department of Health report for the year 

ending 1986, each year, Mr. Minister, even though the 

population in this province is ageing, each year, Mr. Minister, 

the kinds of services to people and the numbers of people using 

those services is decreasing. 

 

Right now, Mr. Minister, people in this province are waiting 9 

months, 10 months, 11 months, 12 months to get an 

appointment with the hearing aid program, and I suspect, Mr. 

Minister, the reason why you’ve taken this $300,000 worth of 

inventory out of the budget on hearing aids is because you’re 

anticipating that people will get so frustrated in their wait for a 

hearing aid that they will go to private enterprise. Mr. Minister, 

you know what they’re paying for a hearing aid in private 

enterprise? They can pay anywhere from $800 to $1,200 to 

$1,500 for a  

hearing aid that your plan should be providing, Mr. Minister. 

 

You say there is a problem attracting audiologists to this 

province. Well I’d like to know when the last time it was that 

you advertised for an audiologist? If it’s such a big problem, 

Mr. Minister, what are you doing to recruit audiologists, and 

why, Mr. Minister, are you deleting — deleting — audiologists 

from the hearing aid program, Mr. Minister, if its’ such a big 

problem? If it was a big problem you’d be out across this 

country recruiting audiologists to start dealing, Mr. Minister, 

with that 8, 9, 10, 11 or 12-month waiting list. That’s the 

problem, Mr. Minister. Why would you delete three audiologist 

positions, and why don’t you go out and recruit? I know of an 

audiologist that left this province because he couldn’t get a job. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I’ll say to the member, we have 

advertised and it’s an ongoing advertisement. We have . . . I can 

provide the advertisements to you. We have just hired an 

audiologist for Regina that’s coming from Winnipeg — just 

hired very shortly ago. We are now advertising for an 

audiologist, and I’m glad you raised it because if anyone is 

watching who knows an audiologist, who is an audiologist, who 

wants a good position with the Department of Health, please 

apply to be an audiologist in Saskatoon. We want those people 

to provide the service, for some of the reasons that you outlined. 

 

So, sure, and the advertisements are ongoing and those 

advertisements have appeared across the country in the major 

publications and so on, and in the professional ones, I presume. 

But in any case, that’s going on, and, sure, we’re looking for 

another one in Saskatoon, and we have just hired one recently 

for Regina from Winnipeg. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, we’re getting calls from the 

North Battleford area, we’re getting calls from the Swift 

Current areas about the 9 to 12 or 13-month wait to get in to see 

the hearing aid plan. And I’m wondering . . . You tell me 

you’ve just recruited an audiologist from Winnipeg. It seems as 

though you might be on the right track in terms of recruiting 

personnel. Why would you delete three positions, Mr. Minister, 

from the budget? Why wouldn’t you aggressively go across this 

country and try and attract audiologists to this province so that 

we don’t see the privatization of yet another health care 

service? 

 

Because, Mr. Minister, when you’re hearing impaired, you 

don’t want to wait 12 or 13 months to get in to see the hearing 

aid plan. You want your problem to be dealt with immediately, 

and people are going to the private sector for their hearing aids 

and they’re paying a great deal of money. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’ve have just said . . . I’ve just said, we 

advertised, we advertised extensively. We were successful, 

thank goodness, for one to come to Regina from Winnipeg. We 

are advertising on a continuing basis for the vacancy in 

Saskatoon. We have not been successful. 

 

Now that’s not something that’s unique to Saskatchewan. 

That’s not unique to Saskatchewan. If these people were  

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3165 

 

available elsewhere, we would go in and aggressively try to 

bring them from wherever they can go, they can come from, 

where there’s no question. But the member says, why would 

you delete the three positions in the budget if you need these 

audiologists? And I say to you that we are actively pursuing 

audiologists, have been for some time for two positions. We 

now have been successful in one; we are unsuccessful in the 

other one up to now. Okay? 

 

So there is no use, I will submit to you, when you know the 

history and the availability of audiologists to have positions. 

We could put 20 positions in, to use your logic. We could put 

20 audiologist positions into the budget. If there are not people 

to fill the positions, there’s no reason to have them in the budget 

for the sake of numbers. 

 

But I will say to you that we are actively pursuing audiologists. 

I recognize the North Battleford area is one that you said, and I 

am familiar with that. We need to fill the one because it seemed 

to be more acute in Saskatoon. And we are searching now and I 

hope as a result of our discussion that somebody comes 

forward. If that’s the case, and if you know somebody in that 

business, tell me about it, that’s what I’d say. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, you say there’s a problem in 

North Battleford. I am wondering if you have advertised for an 

audiologist in the North Battleford area. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Put it this way, if we find an 

audiologist, if we have a whole run on applications, okay — 

you have my undertaking in this — if there are many 

applications, if there are two applications of very qualified 

people for the Saskatoon positions which has been extensively 

advertised, you can rest assured that we will direct the second 

one to North Battleford. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think we’ll go on to 

another area. And I’d like to ask you about the Saskatchewan 

aids to independent living. Can you give us an update on what 

is happening with that program in terms of that program 

transfer to the Saskatchewan Abilities Council? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — As you will know from the 

announcement that we made some time ago, the Saskatchewan 

Abilities Council — for those who don’t know it by that name, 

but certainly it’s been that way for some time — the former 

council of crippled children and adults, is now in charge of the 

equipment portion of what was the Saskatchewan aids to 

independent living in the Department of Health. And that 

equipment portion means mobility equipment — wheelchairs, 

walkers, canes, crutches, those kinds of equipment items; 

environmental equipment, which means, you know, within the 

environment, the home environment, the grab bars at bath-tubs, 

and so on, for people who are handicapped. 

 

That took effect on September 1, and it’s now administered by 

the abilities council. I think, and well I’m very confident in 

saying here, that it’s been a very positive move, seen as very 

positive move by the users of this equipment. The system that 

the abilities council has through a system of depots around the 

province, the people of our province are now served from four  

locations and soon to be five. They are served now from 

Yorkton and Swift Current and Saskatoon and Regina, and 

they’re working on a depot at Prince Albert. Under the SAIL 

(Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living) program, as you 

will know, when it was administered directly by the Department 

of Health, there were only depots in Saskatoon and Regina. 

 

So there’s no question that this is a positive move. It’s seen as a 

positive move and this equipment is available to people, in fact, 

is more readily available than it was under the program or the 

former system. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me how many 

employees at SAIL were given their lay-off notices? 

 

(2115) 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay, there were twelve, and as far as 

we know up till now, there were five of those have been picked 

up by the abilities council. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me what kinds of 

things that the five that were picked up by the abilities council 

used to do at SAIL? What were their positions? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I believe medical equipment technicians 

is what the term that was used in the public service description 

of them — medical equipment technicians and stock clerks. I 

think three or four of them are medical equipment technicians 

and stock clerks and that type of thing — people who handle 

the inventory and move it around and whatever. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, in your budget estimates for 

the year 1986-87 you had 19 person-years. In your estimates for 

1987-88 there were 18 person-years. It looked as though one 

position was deleted, Mr. Minister. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Eighteen, you said? 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Eighteen. Yet you’re now telling me that 12 

employees were laid off by your department. I’d like to know if 

you can explain the discrepancy between what your budget 

book says and what you’re now telling me, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — As I said, the program took effect on 

September 1, so the blue book which came down in the budget 

had to show it as it existed and so on, that was 18. I have told 

you about 12 that were deleted, and in the revised book now, 

that 18 will be changed to six. There are six people who are still 

with the Saskatchewan aids for independent living program. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Fair enough, Mr. Minister. But the dental 

plan, the budgetary item for the dental plan did take into 

consideration some of those lay-offs. So I guess I don’t share 

your view of the budget book. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I understand that 140 items used to be 

supplied by the Saskatchewan aids to independent living. As 

you say, some of those items included hospital beds, walkers, 

canes, crutches, environmental equipment, etc. Can you tell me 

how many items will now be supplied by the abilities council? 

How many items? 

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3166 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Individual items? 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Individual items will now be supplied by the 

abilities council? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I am informed that the abilities council 

carries the same list of items that were carried under the 

program as it was constituted under the aids to independent 

living program. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Okay then. So then I’m to understand that the 

abilities council, in essence, does the work of the old SAIL 

program. Now there’s still six employees left at the SAIL 

program. Can you advise the House what those employees are 

now doing? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well the abilities council, as I said, took 

over the mobility equipment, that type of thing. Okay? So the 

people who remain in SAIL continue to operate the remainder 

of the program which includes a whole series of things: 

paraplegia program; the congenital anomaly program; the cystic 

fibrosis program; the renal disease program; the ostomy 

program; the home hemophilia program; aids to the blind; home 

oxygen; nutritional supplements. 

 

So there’s various programs there for people who have special 

and very unique sort of problems and those are covered under 

SAIL because, you know . . . And I go back to when we’ve had 

this discussion as it relates to the drug plan, cystic fibrosis 

drugs, which are just huge costs and so on. Well they’re 

continued, and this is where they are covered from, under the 

SAIL program. And those six people are there now to conduct 

the remaining programs which I’ve just outlined. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I take it, Mr. Minister, that the remaining 

staff people administer the special benefit program for 

handicapped or disabled people who are disabled or 

handicapped because of specific diseases. Is that so? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — That’s a good description of it, I would 

say. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Okay. Can you advise me, Mr. Minister, 

what kind of contract you’ve entered into with the abilities 

council? Can you advise us whether or not the abilities council 

paid for the equipment that was turned over to them, and how 

much are they being paid to run that portion of SAIL that they 

now have authority over? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The arrangement that we have with the 

abilities council was that we’ve turned our inventory over to 

them, to the abilities council. In essence, they will be the 

administrators of that portion of the program, that mobility 

portion of the program. There is a budget provided in the 

Department of Health through SAIL for purchase of the 

equipment and replacement, so on, as it goes on. And they will 

undertake to do, and they have undertaken to do the repair 

portion which is, you know, a part of the same mobility 

program in terms of the repair of equipment as it comes in or as 

it needs repair and sending back out. 

 

I’ve had reports, now, from people who have said the  

repairs are done so much more quickly by the people at the 

abilities council and the turn-around is excellent. And it may be 

because of the better arrangement for terms of a depots spread 

around the province; it may be because of, you know, they’re 

just on to it; or it may be because they have some very 

motivated people which, I believe, they have. And I would be 

remiss to say, if I did not say, that this repair program, for 

example, and much of the other work that’s done there in terms 

of inventory and so on, is handicapped themselves and who 

now have very meaningful work in conducting this program. 

 

So it’s a win-win situation, certainly for us and the government 

or the public sector sort of thing to say, here’s a program which 

can be administered very well by the abilities council, in fact, 

administered better than what we were able to do. And here’s a 

program where they, through the good work that they do and 

various other areas as well and have done for a good long time, 

they’ve been able to add this to their list of very worthwhile 

work that they do. So, like I say, I think it’s a win-win situation 

for us all and certainly for the handicapped of our province. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, you didn’t answer the question. 

I’m wondering how much money the abilities council will be 

receiving from the Department of Health to administer this 

program, purchase equipment, and repair the equipment. Can 

you give us details on what the yearly contract will be between 

the Department of Health and the Saskatchewan Abilities 

Council? 

 

(2130) 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay, we estimate, and I say estimate, 

but the annualized cost in terms of a full year’s cost would be 

about $1.1 million or 1 million . . . Yes, about $1.1 million a 

year, which we would turn to the abilities council for the 

various costs that they incur and so on, which includes the 

purchase of new equipment and whatever else. There’s very 

many things in there, their operating costs and administration 

and so on. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Tell me, Mr. Minister, what you anticipate 

your department’s annual costs will be to administer that 

portion of SAIL that has not been turned over the abilities 

council. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — If you turn to your Estimates book on 

page 46, and I believe you’re there now — the aids to 

independent living. If you look at the number $4.5 million, and 

I said 1.1 is for this part that’s transferred — that’s our estimate. 

And so we believe that with that taken off, that the estimate 

would be 3.49 million, which is the difference there; 3.49 

million would be what it would cost for the total program of 

what remains in terms of these special needs and so on. Okay? 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — So, Mr. Minister, are we just talking about 

this year, or are we anticipating that your portion of the 

program for next year will be in the neighbourhood of $3.5 

million, Mr. Minister? 

 

Mr. Minister, are you telling this House then that your portion 

of the program SAIL, and I guess, as I understand  

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3167 

 

it, that’s the special benefits services for disabled persons and 

handicapped persons — that that program costs about $3.49 

million in this fiscal year, and that the universal equipment 

services that’s been turned over to the abilities council costs 

about $1.1 million per year. Is that what you’re telling me? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes. The answer is yes. But just to 

clarify — a little over 3 million of that — what did I say it was? 

— $3.49 or whatever — a little over 3 million of that is for 

actual benefits, not the administration and so on. Just to make it 

clear, but I think you knew that. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, there has been some indication 

and some concern expressed from persons who have disabilities 

and who require the services of SAIL, and I guess now the 

Saskatchewan Abilities Council, that there may be some user 

fees introduced. Now as you know, at this stage wheelchairs, 

ambulatory aids, environmental aids, and respiratory equipment 

is lent to people on a free loan basis. In addition, any preventive 

maintenance and repair services for SAIL equipment, or now 

the abilities council equipment and privately owned equipment 

is done at no cost to the individual. 

 

In addition, Mr. Minister, there used to be cost to the individual 

for the manufacture and repair of prosthetic and orthotic 

appliances which were manufactured in provincial workshops. 

I’m wondering if we can still count on that equipment being 

provided to people at cost. And can we still count on the old 

policy where equipment was loaned to people, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — You know, what I’ll say is yes. The 

program, as I said, is transferred as it is and as it was. The 

abilities council provides the same list of benefits as were 

provided before. And you know, obviously we’ll, on an annual 

basis, talk to the abilities council. 

 

And I would hope — and, in fact, I know already — they’re 

looking at the system and saying, here we think this would 

work better, and this would work better, and whatever. That’s 

fair ball; that’s kind of what we wanted to happen. Who better 

to administer this than that group who has a good reputation, so 

we’ll continue to discuss with them the way in which they see it 

running well and serving people well. But as far as the system 

goes now, it is exactly the same as what it was except 

administered by a different body. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, do you anticipate any user fees 

to individuals or repair fees to individuals? Or do you anticipate 

that prosthetic and orthotic equipment, or appliances, will be 

provided to people in the future at cost and not at cost-plus? Do 

we have your assurances, Mr. Minister, that we’ll have no type 

of user fees or cost-plus to our disabled community? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — What I’ll say is, I don’t anticipate any 

major changes, but I would say to the members this: I can’t say 

on into the future for ever and ever. I never would say that 

because I do want to talk to the abilities council about this. I do 

sincerely want to talk to them  

about how this will work. There has been discussion around for 

a good, long time, frankly, about some of the items — the very 

small items, the cheaper items and so on — there’s been some 

discussion about that for some time. There has been no decision 

about that, and I can’t anticipate if or when a decision would be 

taken on something like that. But as it now stands and in terms 

of these estimates, no, I don’t anticipate that to happen. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I guess what we’ve just heard 

form you is a warning, another warning that there is a 

possibility, there is a potential on the part of your government 

to introduce user fees to the disabled community, user fees for 

the loan of the equipment, repair fees for the repair and 

maintenance of the equipment. You’re not unequivocal in your 

statement, Mr. Minister, and I guess we will have to see in the 

days ahead what your plans are. 

 

This was one of the fears of the disabled community, Mr. 

Minister, that with the turnover of this program from SAIL to 

the abilities council that there was a potential for user fees, or 

repair and maintenance fees, to the disabled person. I am 

hopeful, Mr. Minister, that before you implement any kind of 

policy or program change that you consult the disabled 

community in this province because you didn’t consult them 

prior to your decision to turn over the universal equipment 

services to the abilities council. 

 

Now I want you to know, Mr. Minister, that I, as the Health 

critic on this side of the legislature, support the work of the 

abilities council. I do not support, Mr. Minister, any kind of 

attempt on your part to transfer from our collective good, or 

from all of us, onto the individual, any kind of user fees, Mr. 

Minister. And if you anticipate implementing any kind of user 

fees, Mr. Minister, I would suggest that you consul with the 

disabled community because they will tell you that they cannot 

afford any additional costs. 

 

As you know, Mr. Minister, many people in the disabled 

community aren’t working, they’re not employed, Mr. Minister. 

Many people in the disabled community, Mr. Minister, are 

living on disability pensions, or they may be living on social 

assistance, or they may be living on low incomes. And I can tell 

you, Mr. Minister, that they cannot afford any kind of user fees, 

any kind of repair and maintenance fees, any changes to the 

system that would add economic pressure onto themselves. 

 

Mr. Minister, I would ask you to assure this House that, before 

you change anything, you will consult with the disabled 

community and you will bring those changes before this 

legislature so that those changes can be dealt with in the form of 

the legislature and no behind closed doors. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I can say without, you know, carrying it 

out too long, but this move was made . . . the move that we 

made in terms of dealing with the abilities council was made in 

the interests of the disabled community — in the interests of the 

disabled community . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now the 

member says from her seat it was made to save money. If 

saving money is  

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3168 

 

one of the benefits, I don’t apologize for that either. But I’ll tell 

you that the move to the administration of this mobility 

program by the abilities council — a very reputable 

organization with a good network around the province and with 

an excellent concept of the needs of the disabled community, of 

which you just spoke. 

 

So the move was made in the interests of that disabled 

community. The move was made in a spirit of building 

partnerships with the people out there. This partnership between 

the Government of Saskatchewan and the Department of Health 

and the abilities council is an excellent one, one which they said 

they were unable to ever bridge with the former administration 

that was here. We were very pleased to be able to accommodate 

that partnership building process, and we will continue to do 

that kind of thing throughout the term of our administration. 

 

So all I can say is that it was done in the interests of the 

disabled people. They have received it well, and it’s a positive 

story that I would be proud to tell anyone in the province. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I just want to go back to a 

statement you made earlier that five people were hired by the 

Saskatchewan Abilities Council. I have a statement from the 

Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, August 13, 1987, where Mr. Wallace 

advises us that the council has hired six SAIL employees and 

two medical equipment technicians from the school dental 

program. He says that that leaves four from SAIL who will be 

without jobs at the end of the month because of the transfer. 

Other employees who would have been laid off have found jobs 

with other government departments. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you confirm this press story or can you give 

us additional information? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Our people say they believed, coming 

in, that there were five, but if there are six, that’s good. I mean, 

we’re pleased about that and if there could be more, that would 

be good too. But you know, I gave you the number five because 

there was how many we believed had been there or are there, in 

fact. But if it’s six, you know, we won’t quibble about it. I 

know for the extra person it would certain mean something, but 

that’s the case as I understand it. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well I would presume, Mr. Minister, if I’m 

receiving information here in the legislature, that it would be 

accurate information. I would hope that you and your officials 

would be able to give me accurate information, Mr. Minister. I 

think that you should try and do that. 

 

I’m wondering if you can tell me what happened to the other 

seven employees that were laid off by SAIL? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — If you go back and if you review the 

record tomorrow, because when I said five, I said, we believe 

that there are five that are hired and that’s exactly right. We still 

believe that. If there are six, that’s excellent. I mean, there’s no 

question about it. 

 

But we don’t have a running tally on whether the other  

people are. I’m not sure of what they’ve received in the line of 

employment. I don’t know that. But I do know that the abilities 

council took those that they were able to use and, of course, the 

abilities council had people, their own clients and others that 

they have been searching for work for, and those people are 

now employed in the system. So that’s a decision that they 

should take, and frankly, it’s a decision that is theirs to take. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I presume Mr. Wallace is 

with you today, and I presume that the information that you’re 

giving me should be accurate. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I have one final question as it relates to the 

abilities council and SAIL; can you tell me whether the abilities 

council has taken over the repair and maintenance of rocking 

beds which are needed to keep people breathing, or is that still 

under the auspices of SAIL? 

 

(2145) 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I don’t believe that this piece of 

equipment that you’ve mentioned is on the inventory of things 

which are provided by, or were provided by, SAIL and is 

provided by the abilities council. I don’t believe that this piece 

of equipment, a rocking bed as you describe it, is a piece of 

equipment which was provided by SAIL under the . . . or is now 

provided by the abilities council. I don’t believe it’s provided 

by either. I don’t think that that type of equipment is provided, 

but I can confirm it. 

 

Just to clarify the point, the Mr. Wallace that you mentioned is 

not here with us; he’s not part of the officials here . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Would the member please rise and ask her 

questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — If the member from Regina Centre, 

could I just ask you to . . . only because of where you’re now 

located, just between us, we were having a very excellent 

discussion here, and you just happened to be right between us 

and it’s . . . I can’t speak for the member, it may not be difficult 

for her, but it’s difficult for me with you right in the line of 

sight all the time. 

 

Anyway, I would say to the hon. member, I just sent the 

executive director, the executive director has just gone out to 

make a call to confirm the status of that piece of equipment, so 

he’ll do that now and we’ll get back to it if you like. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I made a mistake. I made a mistake. I believe 

SAIL doesn’t provide the equipment. I understand that SAIL is 

the only group authorized to repair it. And so I’m wondering 

who’s now authorized to repair rocking beds, that assist people 

in maintaining their breathing. Is that now looked after by 

SAIL, or is it looked after by the abilities council? I’m sorry 

about that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay. If the member has, and I believe 

you may have there, if you have a particular circumstance of 

one of these, because I’m aware of one, I believe in Saskatoon, 

where someone has — they’re a  

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3169 

 

rare piece of equipment, but somebody has salvaged one from 

one of the hospitals that needs repair, and they’re . . . But if you 

have some details on that that you’d like to provide, we’ll try to 

run it down and have someone repair it; and it probably would 

be under the abilities council, but I won’t speak for them. But 

we’ll do the best we can to be sure that someone does, or 

there’s something done for it. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, with the rocking bed there has 

to be someone on call 24 hours a day, because if the equipment 

breaks down in the evening, it has to be repaired immediately or 

it will endanger the person’s life. And I guess I’m wondering 

who’s now responsible for the repair and maintenance of those 

rocking beds. Is it the abilities council, or is it SAIL? If it’s the 

abilities council or if it’s SAIL, is there someone still on duty 

24 hours a day to look after that kind of situation, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’m informed that under the former 

process under SAIL, we’ve never had anyone on call 24 hours a 

day, and I don’t believe the abilities council has now. The 

circumstance that surrounds this one issue, if you are referring 

to that one issue, and you are indicating the one issue related to 

the one bed in Saskatoon, that’s the circumstance that I laid out 

to you. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No? Okay, well in any case we are 

aware of one problem which has been brought to our attention 

by a nurse in the home care system who’s brought this to the 

attention of the department, and there’s some work being done 

on that now. But I can, without reiterating more, and we can 

maybe talk about it, the particular circumstance, in another 

forum, which I would be pleased to do. But our people will 

confer more about this, and if you have other things . . . 

 

But we don’t have 24-hour people, and I don’t think the 

abilities council will have people on call 24 hours a day. It is a 

very rare kind of occasion, so if that’s the case, there may have 

to be some kind of arrangement made, but whether that’s made 

by the government, or made by the people involved, or 

whatever, that’s a case that we could talk about. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I understand the previous arrangement under 

SAIL, Mr. Minister, there was someone available if these 

rocking beds happened to stop functioning and required repair 

and maintenance. But we can discuss that at some later time. 

 

Just a final question on this whole issue of SAIL. We’ve been 

advised, Mr. Minister, that now that the abilities council has 

taken over the equipment aspect of SAIL, that there will now be 

a $200 deposit on wheelchairs and that clients will be charged 

$35 for repair and maintenance. Now some people have advised 

us of that, and I’m wondering if you can confirm or deny that, 

Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — There have been, as I said before, there 

have been a range of discussions surrounding all these kinds of 

things as we went through that budget process, which was a 

very long and arduous thing, as I said before. 

The system is in place, the same as it is now. I certainly don’t 

confirm any of the numbers that you’ve reiterated. I wouldn’t 

confirm any of those numbers, I won’t say that something like 

that will not be contemplated or could not be contemplated for 

the future. So all I’ll say to you is no, it’s not happening now, as 

far as I know. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, as far as you know — I don’t 

know what that means. Can you check with your officials to see 

whether or not there’s a deposit on wheelchairs now? And can 

you check with your officials to see whether or not there is an 

hourly rate for repair and maintenance of SAIL equipment, 

which is now the abilities council equipment? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The circumstances you outlined do not 

apply to SAIL equipment. The abilities council, I’m told, is 

offering their services to other institutions and so on who will 

have this equipment. It’s not SAIL equipment. They will offer 

their services in terms of a repair depot and so on, and they may 

well charge for that. But they do not charge on SAIL equipment 

or former SAIL equipment which they now administer. So 

there’s no charge for the maintenance as you said. 

 

And what was the other one that you asked about? 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Deposits. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Deposit — no deposit on SAIL 

equipment, as I said earlier. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, just a brief comment. I have 

heard some concern expressed from some Regina hospitals that 

they’re having to order equipment from Saskatoon. It appears as 

though the depot here may not be up and running, so they’re 

having to order some wheelchairs and some equipment from 

Saskatoon, and it’s taking a while for the equipment to get 

down here. Now that may just be as a result of the change-over 

from SAIL to the abilities council, but I’m wondering if you’ve 

had any feedback, similar feedback, Mr. Minister, that there 

seems to be some problem with getting equipment into the 

Regina area? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The main depot in all of the system is in 

Saskatoon. And the depot, the five depots around the province 

which I mentioned earlier, are in that system. We’re not aware 

of a problem. Like you say that you’ve heard this from someone 

on a particular case or whatever, we have not heard about that. 

We have not heard that there is a problem. There may be some 

transitional problem involved in this. But no, we don’t see it as 

a major problem — maybe in circumstances, a few pieces of 

equipment in a particular hospital, but I don’t think it’s acute, 

and I think that it will certainly be solved in short order by the 

abilities council? 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Apparently, Mr. Minister, there is a problem 

with occupational therapists getting wheelchairs into the Regina 

area, and there is also some concern that the equipment isn’t as 

well maintained as it might have been. And that may be due in 

part to the transfer over from SAIL to the Saskatchewan 

Abilities Council. 

  



 

October 6, 1987 

3170 

 

But, Mr. Minister, if you would, I’d appreciate it if you could 

keep your eye on that over the next month or so just to make 

sure that we do not have a problem developing in terms of 

getting equipment down to Regina and that the equipment is 

properly maintained. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I will do that. I would say that under the 

old system where we had two depots, Regina and Saskatoon, 

but Yorkton, Swift Current, P.A., North Battleford, the other 

places didn’t have the option. So under the present system and 

the new one under the abilities council, they have Saskatoon as 

the main depot. Saskatoon is the main depot, and that’s one, 

rather than one in Regina and Saskatoon which are both 

considered main depots, I guess. And I know you won’t 

disagree with Saskatoon being the centre of things in 

Saskatchewan for anything, so you and I can agree on that. 

 

And I think with that, Mr. Chairman, I would ask that the 

committee rise and report progress and ask for leave to sit 

again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:58 p.m. 

 


