













































September 8, 1987 Hansard Evening


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 8, 1987 

 

 

2361 

 

 

September 8, 1987 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 

 

Return No. 6 

 

Mr. Kowalsky moved, seconded by Mr. Lautermilch, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 6 showing: 

 

Regarding one P.J. (Paul) Schoenhals: (1) whether he is 

employed by the Government of Saskatchewan or any of 

its boards, Crown corporations, commissions or agencies; 

(2) if so, his exact duties and responsibilities; (3) his total 

remuneration; (4) the procedure used to employ him; (5) 

the date his employment took effect. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll be moving a motion to the 

Assembly, asking the Assembly to provide some information 

regarding one P.J. (Paul) Schoenhals – information about 

whether he’s been employed by the government or any of its 

boards, and information relating to the remuneration and the 

responsibilities of this employee. 

 

This entire procedure, Mr. Speaker, is designed for the purpose 

of scrutinizing the government, and the opposition members 

have put forth a series of motions, which if passed by this 

Assembly will provide information to the public through this 

Assembly – straightforward, honest information so that the 

public can judge whether or not the government is treating the 

expenditures of the people in the manner which, of course, they 

deserve. 

 

Now in this particular case we’re asking, and have asked for 

earlier today, previous to the 5 o’clock adjournment, we asked 

for a very similar motion regarding one Sidney Dutchak and 

one George Hill. We asked the government members to vote for 

these motions and show openness, show that they believe 

strongly in the appointments, that their appointments were the 

right ones; and they can do this by opening up their books. And 

then of course they would leave that to the public and to the 

people to decide, and if they trusted the people and the people’s 

decision in total they would open up the books on matters like 

this. 

 

Now in this particular case, the people of Saskatchewan are 

quite interested in knowing whether this Paul Schoenhals, who 

was a member of their former government, who is now 

employed by the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, whether 

it is $300,000 that he earns, or $200,000 that he earns, or some 

place in between, or some place a little lower, or some place a 

little above that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it is seeking this information, then, that I move the motion 

that an order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 6 

showing: 

 

Regarding one P.J. (Paul) Schoenhals: (1) whether he is 

employed by the Government of Saskatchewan or any of 

its boards, Crown corporations, commissions or agencies; 

(2) if so, his exact  

duties and responsibilities; (3) his total remuneration; (4) 

the procedure used to employ him; (5) the date his 

employment took effect. 

 

I make that motion, and it is seconded by the member from 

Prince Albert-Duck Lake. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, this is no different than a 

couple of other motions that were dealt with earlier today, and 

the same arguments apply; as has been – and, I think, invented 

by the previous administration – the long-standing practice of 

this kind of information being given through the committee of 

Crown corporations and then, as it relates to the management 

team, as an aggregate sum as opposed to individual members of 

the management team. 

 

So simply put, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be urging all members to vote 

against this particular motion. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to 

make a comment in respect to this particular motion. This 

motion is seeking information regarding Mr. Schoenhals, who 

was an hon. member in the House up until the last election 

when the people of Sutherland in Saskatoon decided that they 

would be better served with a New Democratic candidate 

member. And certainly they expressed their wishes on that 

particular election day. 

 

I think what is important here, although there is no way of us 

getting exact information other than through motions for return, 

it is our understanding that Mr. Schoenhals, a former defeated 

cabinet minister, who indicated when he took over Tourism and 

Small Business that he had virtually no business experience . . . 

 

And it’s our understanding that what he has been promoted to 

here, Mr. Speaker, is as a permanent – permanent – chairman of 

the board of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. The 

precedents in the past, Mr. Speaker, is that any member of the 

board of any Crown corporation, all were paid an equal amount, 

a per diem allowance. With Mr. Schoenhals, again he’s at the 

public trough, and unlike what was the practice in the past of a 

per diem allowance, apparently Mr. Schoenhals is a permanent 

employee, a permanent chairman of the board receiving a very 

substantial amount of money, estimated at over $100,000. 

 

And what we’re asking here, is this here Paul Schoenhals, 

which is chairman of the board, who in this House indicated he 

had no business experience, who supposedly is running the 

potash corporation as chairman of the board, what we want to 

know and the people of Saskatchewan want to know is: how 

much is being paid; how he’s employed; the basis of 

employment; and the amount that he’s being paid. 

 

And I think it’s significant because there has been a substantial 

change of simply paying on a number of meetings. I think that 

the former chairman of the board of the potash corporation, Mr. 

Cliff Wright, was the chairman, and they met somewhere in the  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

 

2362 

 

 

neighbourhood of eight times a year. Now what we have here is 

Mr. Schoenhals – the former cabinet minister, the defeated 

cabinet minister, the man who admitted in this House he had no 

business experience – being put on a very substantial amount of 

payment. 

 

So what we’re asking here is straightforward information for 

the people of Saskatchewan because after all many of these 

same people are banting about how they want the free enterprise 

system. It’s very strange that once the people of Saskatchewan 

have rejected one after another, these same people who say they 

want to go to the private enterprise come creeping back into the 

government at extraordinarily high pay. And this government is 

refusing to give to the people of Saskatchewan the amount of 

money that they’re paying to these patronage appointments. 

 

And as I say and my colleague has said, this is a straightforward 

request whether he is employed and the basis of employment 

and the exact duties and responsibilities, his total remuneration, 

and the procedure used to employ him and the date his 

employment took effect. That is straightforward, and I think 

that it’s becoming of the government who came in on the 

promise that they would have an open government, that they 

would communicate with the people of Saskatchewan, and now 

they’re hiding behind . . . and refuse to provide basic 

information and respect to these highly political appointments 

of defeated candidates, cabinet ministers who were rejected by 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And so I urge all members, and particularly the back-benchers 

on that side, not to just say no without even knowing why 

you’re saying it – to listen; to read this here; to think some day 

you may be in opposition then within a short period of time, and 

you will want information similar to this. So I ask you, the 

back-benchers, don’t just echo their words, but to join with us 

to bring open government to the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 14 

 

Blakeney Koskie 

Tchorzewski Rolfes 

Upshall Kowalsky 

Atkinson Hagel 

Calvert Lautermilch 

Trew Smart 

Van Mulligen Koenker 

 

Nays — 26 

 

Muller Meiklejohn 

Duncan Martin 

Andrew Toth 

Berntson Sauder 

Lane Johnson 

Taylor McLaren 

Smith Petersen 

 

 

Swan Baker 

Schmidt Gleim 

Hodgins Neudorf 

Gerich Kopelchuk 

Hardy Saxinger 

Klein Britton 

 

Return no. 7 

 

Mr. Kowalsky moved, seconded by Mr. Lautermilch, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 7 showing: 

 

Regarding one T.B. (Tim) Embury: (1) whether he is 

employed by the Government of Saskatchewan or any of 

its boards, Crown corporations, commissions or agencies; 

(2) if so, his exact duties and responsibilities; (3) his total 

remuneration; (4) the procedure used to employ him; (5) 

the date his employment took effect. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to move a motion asking 

for information regarding the employment of one Tim Embury 

on any boards, corporations, commissions, or agencies that may 

have been hired by this government. We know that one Tim 

Embury has had some contracts given under Coopers & 

Lybrand. Coopers & Lybrand were the people this government 

went to in desperation after they found that they were into a 

$3.4 billion deficit and they found that the lenders, the money 

lenders of New York and elsewhere, would no longer give them 

low interest money unless they made some definite changes in 

their direction of spending and spending wildly. They had to 

curb their spending habits so they employed the firm of 

Coopers & Lybrand for some – again, unknown to this 

government at this stage – but suggested in the vicinity of $3 

million of which Tim Embury, Tim Embury’s contract could 

come to as much as 50 per cent of that. Perhaps it’s only 

500,000, but it should be known to the public. And we ask you 

to come up with the numbers so that we know exactly what the 

numbers are. 

 

Because these members are very quick, are very quick to use 

public money for private enterprise and we’re saying, you don’t 

use public money for private enterprise. If you want to do that, 

you open it up and you let us know exactly what it is. 

 

So I move, then, this order of the Assembly, that we do issue 

for a return no. 7 showing that: 

 

Regarding one T.B. (Tim) Embury: (1) whether he is 

employed by the Government of Saskatchewan or any of 

its boards, Crown corporations, commissions or agencies; 

(2) if so, his exact duties and responsibilities; (3) his total 

remuneration; (4) the procedure used to employ him; (5) 

the date his employment took effect. 

 

I make that motion, seconded by the member from Prince 

Albert-Duck Lake. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will be moving a 

friendly amendment, seconded by the member for  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

 

2363 

 

 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

That in the first sentence after the word “is” we add the 

words “or has been.” 

 

Because of the significant question involved in this instance and 

because of the continued patronage of the government in hiring 

ex-MLAs, ex-members of this Legislative Assembly, that the 

Saskatchewan public has every right to know just who is on the 

public dole and who is not; and in this case we want to know if 

Mr. T.B. (Tim) Embury is in fact taking money at public 

expense – indeed, whether Mr. Embury is at the public trough. 

 

So for the reason stated by the member from Prince Albert, I am 

moving the amendment to the motion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, after the word “is” in the 

first sentence – I wonder if you mean the first line. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Is that what the hon. member means? 

 

Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, order. 

Order, please. 

 

The member asked a question and he’s had a right to ask that 

question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, not only do, not only do I 

. . . Mr. Speaker, I’m trying to get . . . I’m trying to . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. It seems that that 

query has caused a little bit of consternation in the House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the query. 

Now if we can settle down for a minute, I’ll try to explain what 

I would propose that we do with this because I have no 

objection, I have no objection to the amendment, Mr. Speaker. I 

don’t know why they didn’t draft it that way in the first place. It 

is their motion . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. We’re not 

going to get through this motion if we have constant 

interruptions, and I just ask once more for your co-operation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Let me just wrap it up by saying, Mr. 

Speaker, that I will be urging all members to vote for the 

amendment – for the amendment – the amendment, Mr. 

Speaker, that will cause the motion to ask the question that they 

wanted to ask in the first place. But they’ve now got it fixed, 

and I will, following that, Mr. Speaker, be urging all members 

to vote for the amended motion. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Having listened 

to the House Leader for the government side, I couldn’t help 

but to get up and find out, once again, that the only reason that 

we’re here, the only reason we’re here considering these 

motions is because, although they were put on the order paper 

last December, the government has stonewalled and has not 

allowed these motions to come forward until nine months 

hence, which is now in September. So for the member opposite 

to stand up and say that somehow the motion is not timely, it is  

only . . . If it isn’t timely, it’s because the government has 

deliberately stood in the way of trying to allow this Assembly to 

get the information that it has the right to have. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

Order, please. I’d like to ask the members for their 

co-operation. The Leader of the Opposition would like to make 

a few remarks, and I now recognize him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t want 

to make many remarks except to make the point that members 

opposite are obviously attempting to impede the work of the 

House. 

 

The member for Souris-Cannington – and we all heard him – 

raised a point saying, you couldn’t have meant the first 

sentence; you must have meant the first line. Now I invite him 

to read that and see if he can find another “is” in the first 

sentence. I invite him to read this. I invite him to read this, and 

he will find that the first sentence and the first line mean exactly 

the same thing, and when he raises an objection, all he’s doing 

is impeding the work of the committee because he doesn’t want 

to give this sort of information. 

 

If he had been thinking that he would like to expedite the work 

of the committee, he wouldn’t have raised that totally frivolous 

objection – frivolous objection – to which there is not one 

scintilla of merit. 

 

I noted the member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden indicated that we 

had got it wrong. May I ask the member for 

Qu’Appelle-Lumsden to bring all his legal talents to bear and 

explain to the House how there is any single difference between 

“is” in the first line and “is” in the first sentence. There is none, 

and accordingly, when you raise these points, you are impeding 

the work of the House and I invite all hon. members to get on 

with the job of getting these passed. We’ve already waited eight 

or nine months, and may I ask you not to raise frivolous 

objections and get on with the job of giving us the information 

we asked for last fall. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. The Minister of Finance 

has not been recognized because there’s too much noise in the 

House – I’m afraid on both side of the House in this instance – 

so I would ask all members to co-operate so we may hear the 

words of the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a rather 

interesting debate tonight that the opposition has taken more 

time tonight amending its own motion – that they had nine 

months to get correct in the first place – than they have on 

speaking on potash this whole session. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, they’ve had nine months to 

try and get the motion correct and they obviously couldn’t do it. 

 

  



 

September 8, 1987 

 

2364 

 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, with all respect, I think tonight is an 

example of what happens when the opposition back-benchers in 

particular try and do something on their own without the Leader 

of the Opposition. After what we’ve seen tonight, Mr. Speaker, 

I think for the good of the people of the province that the 

Leader of the Opposition should stay because they certainly 

can’t perform without his participation in action. And, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please, order. Order. I’m 

not sure that the Minister of Finance is discussing the motion 

before the House. However, I will allow him to continue. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, my point, I think, was rather a 

salient one in that nine months to try and get a motion correct – 

they couldn’t do it; that they’ve debated, amending their own 

motion and, like I say, taking more time to amend a motion than 

to debate potash, which I think is a rather telling story of the 

actions of the opposition in this session. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 8 

 

Ms. Atkinson moved, seconded by Mr. Calvert, that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for return no. 9 showing: 

 

Regarding the announcement in the March 26, 1986 

budget address that the provincial government would fund 

the establishment of a second day surgery unit at the 

Saskatoon City Hospital: (1) the date the second day 

surgery unit at the Saskatoon City Hospital opened, and 

the number of patients it has served; (2) the amount of 

funding the provincial government has provided to hire 

additional staff for this unit; (3) the total cost of 

establishing this unit, and the amount of that total provided 

by the Government of Saskatchewan; (4) the current 

waiting list for elective surgery at Saskatoon City 

Hospital. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, after a few remarks I would 

like to move that an order of the Assembly do issue for a return 

8 showing. 

 

In this return, Mr. Speaker, what we’re basically trying to get 

from the government is information with regard to the second 

day surgery unit at the City Hospital in Saskatoon. 

 

In March of 1986, all members will recall that the government 

thought that they were in the midst of a provincial election. At 

that time we had a serious problem in Saskatoon with hospital 

waiting lists. Well I can assure you now, Mr. Speaker, that if we 

had a serious problem in 1986 with hospital waiting lists in 

Saskatoon, we now have a critical problem. We now have over 

11,000 people in the northern part of Saskatchewan waiting for 

elective surgery in the city of Saskatoon at the three major  

hospitals. 

 

(1930) 

 

We have a situation, Mr. Speaker, where people with cancer or 

the possibility of cancer are waiting for over six weeks to get 

into hospital. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, our hospitals are 

so underfunded that the three hospitals in Saskatoon had to 

move to close over 300 beds this summer. 

 

It’s a critical problem, Mr. Speaker. Those beds are still closed 

and we’re into September. We now have more people than ever 

before in the history in Saskatoon waiting for a hospital bed. 

We have people that are waiting for over two years to get into 

hospital for such minor surgery, and yet the Government of 

Saskatchewan refuses to fund those hospitals so we can keep 

those beds open and get on with the job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would therefore like to move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return no. 8 showing: 

 

Regarding the announcement in the March 26, 1986 

budget address that the provincial government would fund 

the establishment of a second day surgery unit at the 

Saskatoon City Hospital: (1) the date the second day 

surgery unit at the Saskatoon City Hospital opened, and 

the number of patients it has served; (2) the amount of 

funding the provincial government has provided to hire 

additional staff for this unit; (3) the total cost of 

establishing this unit, and the amount of that total provided 

by the Government of Saskatchewan; (4) the current 

waiting list for elective surgery at Saskatoon City 

Hospital. 

 

I move that, and it is seconded by the member from Moose Jaw 

South. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 9 

 

Ms. Atkinson moved, seconded by Mr. Calvert, that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for return no. 9 showing: 

 

Regarding the statement in the March 26, 1986 budget 

address that the provincial government would fund nearly 

700 new health care positions for Saskatchewan hospitals 

and nursing homes in 1986: (1) the number of these 700 

new health care positions that have been funded and are in 

place; (2) the hospitals and nursing homes where these 

new health care positions have been created; (3) in each 

instance, the number of these new health care positions 

that are nursing positions; (4) the total cost of these new 

positions, and the amount of this total that has been 

contributed by the provincial government. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, after a few 

remarks, I would like to move that an order of the Assembly do 

issue for return no. 9 showing. 

 

Once again, in that March 1986 budget, that famous  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

 

2365 

 

 

budget when the government thought that they were going into 

a provincial election, and after the Saskatchewan Union of 

Nurses had brought to the attention of the people of 

Saskatchewan the sad underfunding and understaffing of 

hospitals and nursing homes, the government once again 

announced that they would create over 700 new health care 

positions in Saskatchewan hospitals and nursing homes. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I can report today that the Saskatchewan 

Union of Nurses don’t know where those 700 positions went to. 

They can’t find them in our hospitals and nursing homes, and 

the patients in this province can’t find them either. I’ve had 

report after report of people in hospitals not being able to get a 

nurse, not being able to have other health care workers come to 

their room, because of the understaffing in Saskatchewan 

hospitals and nursing homes. 

 

The situation is critical. We have a situation in Saskatoon where 

this government announced a huge nursing home, and it opened 

– a huge new nursing home – where we have 38 beds that 

haven’t yet opened because there aren’t staff, people to look 

after those patients. 

 

That’s what’s happening in Saskatoon. We have people on the 

waiting list to get into that nursing home and they can’t get in. 

There are 38 beds that haven’t opened because of underfunding 

of our health care system by this province and by this 

government – this government that said it was so committed to 

health care – that we have a situation where patients are worried 

about entering hospitals because they’re worried about the level 

of care they’re going to be receiving because of the 

understaffing. 

 

We have lots and lots of nurses in this province that tell us that 

they are getting out of nursing because they can’t cope with the 

stressful situation of having all of these patients and not having 

any colleagues to assist them because of the underfunding and 

understaffing of our hospitals and nursing homes. 

 

So therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return no. 9 showing: 

 

Regarding the statement in the March 26, 1986 budget 

address that the provincial government would fund nearly 

700 new health care positions for Saskatchewan hospitals 

and nursing homes in 1986: (1) the number of these 700 

new health care positions that have been funded and are in 

place; (2) the hospitals and nursing homes where these 

new health care positions have been created; (3) in each 

instance, the number of these new health care positions 

that are nursing positions; (4) the total cost of these new 

positions, and the amount of this total that has been 

contributed by the provincial government. 

 

And that is seconded by my colleague the member for Moose 

Jaw South. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I have an amendment to 

offer for this motion. And the reason for the amendment, Mr. 

Speaker, is that while the government funds the various health 

care facilities in the province, the  

positions and when and how and etc., that recruitment takes 

place are the responsibility of those individual facilities and not 

under the direct control of the government. 

 

So I simply want to make the amendment, Mr. Speaker, to 

reflect that, and I therefore move, seconded by the Minister of 

Justice: 

 

That return no. 9 be amended by deleting the words “and 

are in place” in subsection (1) of the motion. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, it is hard to understand why 

the House Leader for the government would want to make this 

amendment that he has just made because, clearly, what his 

explanation for it was, was not the real facts of the situation as 

it is. 

 

It is true that the government provides funding to health 

institutions, hospitals, and nursing homes, but it does it only 

after the hospitals and nursing homes have provided an 

indication of what their staffing positions are going to be and so 

on. But be that as it may, what the former minister of health 

announced when they announced these 700 positions was that 

this was a special allocation of money which was going to 

provide enrichment to staff over and beyond what was in place 

already. And that can only happen, Mr. Speaker, if indeed there 

is an agreement between the Department of Health and the 

individual hospitals as to what those positions will be. 

 

So what the member opposite is asking by his amendment and 

in his explanation, Mr. Speaker, is really not accurate. The 

government can provide that information. And this amendment 

that he is making, I suspect, is an attempt by the government 

not to provide the real facts because the announcement which 

the Minister of Health made a little over a year ago has never 

been put into place – has never been put into place. 

 

It was an enrichment announcement made prior to what was 

going to be an election in the spring of 1986. They decided, 

because they were in deep trouble, not to have the election until 

the fall of 1986, and in the meantime these positions that were 

announced have not been into place, and the difficulties which 

the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses brought to the attention of 

the Saskatchewan public are not only as bad as they used to be, 

Mr. Speaker, in fact they are much worse today than they were 

before the announcement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 10 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski moved, seconded by Mr. Kowalsky, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 10 showing: 

 

Regarding one G.E. (Gordon) Dirks: (1) whether he is 

employed by the Government of  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

 

2366 

 

 

Saskatchewan or any of its boards, Crown corporations, 

commissions or agencies; (2) if so, his exact duties and 

responsibilities; (3) his total remuneration; (4) the 

procedure used to employ him; (5) the date his 

employment took effect. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will be 

moving a motion for an order of the Assembly to issue for the 

following return which I shall state to you in a minute, but 

briefly I just simply want to state that since October of 1986 

there are not many defeated members of the government who 

have not been rewarded by this government for the fact that the 

public rejected them in their constituencies. 

 

This motion which I am going to move involves one Mr. 

Gordon Dirks, a cabinet minister of the former government, 

who along with his other colleagues lived high on the hog for 

the time this government was in power from 1982 until 1986, 

along with other members travelled the world, and then when 

the public said to these individuals, we will have no more of 

that and therefore voted them out of office . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Kicked them out. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — . . . kicked them out of office 

unceremoniously and with huge majorities, what does this 

government do? They make sure they line up at the patronage 

trough and they give them all lucrative positions which they are 

not worthy of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this former minister of the Crown is one of those 

individuals. Taxpayers are spending their dollars to pay for the 

salaries so that these people can live well while this government 

is telling to the parents of Saskatchewan that their children 

cannot have the best possible education because of cut-backs 

that they have to make to the education system – whereas in the 

Department of Education, I understand, there is Mr. Dirks hired 

to do some studies simply so that he can be put on a salary at 

the taxpayers’ expense. 

 

I, therefore, Mr. Speaker, because the public should know what 

the amount of that salary are and what the other costs are, I 

move that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 10, 

showing: 

 

Regarding one G.E. (Gordon) Dirks: (1) whether he is 

employed by the Government of Saskatchewan or any of 

its boards, Crown corporations, commissions or agencies; 

(2) if so, his exact duties and responsibilities; (3) his total 

remuneration; (4) the procedure used to employ him; (5) 

the date his employment took effect. 

 

Seconded by the member from Prince Albert. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 11 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski moved, seconded by Mr. Koskie, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 11 showing: 

Regarding the Regina plant of Nardei Fabricators 

(Saskatchewan) Ltd.: (1) the public expense involved in 

the Premier’s appearance at the plant’s official opening on 

October 14, 1986; (2) whether any provincial government 

industrial incentive grants have been approved with 

respect to the plant; (3) the number of people currently 

employed at the plant. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to move 

another order of the Assembly to issue a return. This is 

involving a Regina plant, which I understand no longer exists, 

called Nardei industries or Nardei Fabricators. This is one of 

those raving success stories of this government’s open for 

business policy which was announced after 1982 and heralded 

as being the solution to Saskatchewan’s economic growth and 

employment. 

 

The reason, Mr. Speaker, that this information is so very 

important is that during the election campaign the Premier, as 

part of his election campaign, had arranged for him a grand 

opening of Nardei industries in Regina with a lot of hoop-la and 

a lot of expense, once again at the taxpayers’ . . . at the 

taxpayers’ expense. It should have been considered an election 

expense that the members opposite should have claimed, but I 

suspect it was not. 

 

(1945) 

 

Mr. Speaker, right after the election was over, Nardei industries 

closed its doors and stopped its business. Now it is hard to 

believe that the Premier and his handlers didn’t know the state 

of that business just a few weeks before it collapsed when they 

arranged this official opening so that the Premier could give 

himself a media hit for the purposes of getting some publicity 

for the election campaign. 

 

This kind of abuse, Mr. Speaker, this kind of abuse of the 

public’s money, the public purse, should be unacceptable on the 

part of any government, but because it has happened it is only 

right that the information be made public, and I would hope that 

the government comes clean and supports this resolution, or this 

motion, so that indeed that information can be provided. 

 

I, therefore, Mr. Speaker, move that an order of the Assembly 

do issue for return no. 11 showing: 

 

Regarding the Regina plant of Nardei Fabricators 

(Saskatchewan) Ltd.: (1) the public expense involved in 

the Premier’s appearance at the plant’s official opening on 

October 14, 1986; (2) whether any provincial government 

industrial incentive grants have been approved with 

respect to the plant; (3) the number of people currently 

employed at the plant. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I didn’t get your seconder. You may have 

given it, but I don’t believe I got it. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, you’re correct. I 

didn’t name my seconder, the member from Quill Lakes. 

  



 

September 8, 1987 

 

2367 

 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, we are prepared to give 

the information asked for by the members opposite except as to 

it relates to the number of employees at the plant. And the 

reason . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Why? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — And the member asks why and so I’ll 

explain why. 

 

The reason that we are not prepared to give the number of 

employees at the plant, Mr. Speaker, is that Nardei has asked us 

not to do that because it’s the kind of information they’re not 

prepared to let their competitors have. But as it relates to the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — The number of employees? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, phone them up and ask them, 

you know. I’ll telling you what we’re prepared to give. And 

we’re prepared to give you the public cost, if any, as it relates to 

the Premier’s appearance. We’re prepared to give you the 

industrial incentives, if any. We’re not prepared to give you the 

number of employees. If they are, you can get it from them. 

They’ve asked us not to give that information and we respect 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I therefore move, seconded by the Minister of Justice: 

 

That return no. 11 be amended by deleting all the words 

after “plant” in subsection (2). 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 12 

 

Mr. Kowalsky moved, seconded by Mr. Upshall, that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return no. 12 showing: 

 

Regarding the employment of one Glen Penner as 

associate deputy minister of Education: (1) the date his 

appointment took effect; (2) his duties and responsibilities; 

(3) his salary. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’m asking that a motion be 

passed by this Assembly to issue information “regarding the 

employment of one Glen Penner as associate deputy minister of 

Education . . .” 

 

This one Glen Penner was formerly a Liberal member elected 

from Saskatoon. I believe he is now the only remaining 

employee of the Department of Education who has any 

corporate memory or possesses any corporate memory of what 

was done by the department in the field of the core curriculum. 

And as such, Glen Penner would have, what I think our minister 

would call, an awesome responsibility. 

 

In doing so I cast no aspersions whatsoever on his professional 

qualifications, I wonder what it is, Mr. Minister, that set him 

apart from the 20-some people that did get the sack from the 

department when it came to working on the core curriculum. 

 

So I do hereby, Mr. Speaker, move than an order of this 

Assembly do issue for return no. 12 showing: 

 

Regarding the employment of one Glen Penner as 

associate deputy minister of Education: (1) the date his 

appointment took effect; (2) his duties and responsibilities; 

(3) his salary. 

 

Seconded by the member from Humboldt. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I would only make one 

observation: the Department of Education was in estimates for 

about a month or three weeks in this House, and the members 

opposite asked a series of questions, including the staffing of 

the senior people within the Department of Education. The 

minister provided the information, undertook to provide that 

information to them, all the stuff that is here. 

 

But the nature of this particular question is that Glen Penner has 

served in a public field for a long period of time. And the 

members opposite, with this type of motion, want to cast 

questions about Mr. Penner only for the fact that he happened to 

stand for office and run for office and become elected to this 

Assembly by a party neither the NDP or the Progressive 

Conservatives. 

 

Following that time in the legislature, Mr. Speaker, he went on 

to become a director of education in the Saskatoon school 

district, hired by the people in that particular school district. 

Now, he then came from there into the government to work for 

the government – both very significant and senior positions. 

 

The members opposite would have one believe that just because 

someone served in this legislature that he is not capable of 

doing that type of a job, and I think that is a shameful type of 

motion to bring before this House. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 13 

 

Mr. Kowalsky moved, seconded by Mr. Hagel, that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for return no. 13 showing: 

 

Regarding one Myles Morin: (1) whether he is employed 

by the Government of Saskatchewan or any of its boards, 

commissions, Crown corporations or agencies; (2) if so, 

his exact duties and responsibilities; (3) his total 

remuneration; (4) the procedure used to employ him, and 

the date his employment took effect. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — I will ask the Assembly to give us 

information regarding one Myles Morin, who was a former 

member elected from North Battleford and defeated in the last 

election – a good choice by the people of North Battleford, I 

might say. This Mr. Morin was even in the cabinet. We want to 

know whether Mr. Morin has been or is employed by the 

Government of Saskatchewan or by any of its boards, or 

commissions, or Crown corporations, or agencies. 

 

I therefore move, Mr. Speaker, that an order of the  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

 

2368 

 

 

Assembly do issue for return no. 13 showing that: 

 

Regarding one Myles Morin: (1) whether he is employed 

by the Government of Saskatchewan or any of its boards, 

commissions, Crown corporations or agencies; (2) if so, 

his exact duties and responsibilities; (3) his total 

remuneration; (4) the procedure used to employ him, and 

the date his employment took effect. 

 

Seconded by the member from Moose Jaw North. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 14 

 

Mr. Rolfes moved, seconded by Mr. Upshall, that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for return no. 14 showing: 

 

Regarding the Executive Council’s Saskatoon cabinet 

office: (1) the number of people employed by the office; 

(2) in each case, their names, duties, and current rates of 

pay; (3) the 1986-87 budget for the office. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return no. 14 showing, and it’s in regards 

to the Saskatchewan cabinet office. I remember full well, Mr. 

Speaker, in the mid-1970s when some of the members opposite 

spoke most vociferously against the establishment of that office, 

and I have . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Untrue. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Oh, the records will show that, because they 

indicated that our government at the time were establishing 

nothing but a political office. And I think, if my memory serves 

me well, it was the present Minister of Finance who spoke very 

vociferously against this establishment. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what concerns me is now that we no longer 

see any ads in the Star-Phoenix indicating which minister will 

be in Saskatoon. The purpose of establishing that office was to 

give access to northern Saskatchewan to Executive Council 

members so that they wouldn’t have to drive all the way to 

Regina and they could meet with the members of the cabinet 

and have their concerns heard. 

 

As I indicated, I don’t see any ads in the Star-Phoenix 

advertising when the Minister of Health will be there or when 

the Premier will be there or even when the Deputy Premier will 

be there, so that people can come and see them. 

 

So I’d really like to know what the office is being used for at 

this particular time and how many people are employed. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the former minister of Health, if he 

wishes to speak to it, should get off from his seat and stand in 

this House and speak, Mr. Speaker. Otherwise I would kindly 

ask him not to interrupt. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I moved therefore an order showing, which 

asks: 

(1) the number of people employed by the office; (2) in 

each case, their names, duties, and current rates of pay; (3) 

the 1986-87 budget for the office. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member from Humboldt. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 15 

 

Mr. Rolfes moved, seconded by Mr. Koenker, that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for return no. 15 showing: 

 

Regarding the announcement in the March 26, 1986 

budget address that the provincial government would fund 

the expansion of in-patient surgical capacity at St. Paul’s 

and University Hospitals in Saskatoon: (1) the amount the 

in-patient surgical capacity at these two hospitals has been 

expanded, and the date the expansions went into service; 

(2) the number of patients who have been served by these 

areas; (3) the amount of funding the provincial 

government provided to hire additional staff for these 

expansions; (4) the total cost of each expansion, and in 

each case, the amount of that total that was provided by 

the Government of Saskatchewan; (5) the current waiting 

list for in-patient surgery at each hospital. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — I move that an order of the Assembly do issue 

for return no. 15 showing. This deals with the announcement 

made in the 1986 budget of in-patient surgical capacity at St. 

Paul’s and the University Hospital. And my colleague from 

Saskatoon Nutana has already alluded to this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I remember well when I was the minister of 

Health some years ago that we had a waiting list, a total waiting 

list in Saskatoon of little over 4,000, and everybody in the 

medical profession thought that that was a real crisis situation, 

and I tried to address the problems at that time and did so to 

some extent. 

 

Never, Mr. Speaker, never had we ever experienced that the 

waiting list in Saskatoon would ever get to over 11,000. I 

phoned the various hospitals today, Mr. Speaker, and asked 

them to give me the exact numbers of the people who are on the 

waiting list, and I would like to put them on the record. 

 

At St. Paul’s the in-patient surgical waiting list is 3,742 – that’s 

the in-patient waiting list; that is almost as large as the total 

waiting list in the worst year, Mr. Speaker, when I was the 

minister of Health. In the day surgery, Mr. Speaker, at St. 

Paul’s we have 648. So in the last days of August at St. Paul’s 

alone, we have over 4,400 people waiting to get into a hospital. 

 

At the university, Mr. Speaker, we have a waiting list of 

in-patients of 1,800, and I am told that many, many of those are 

for orthopedic surgery which is major surgery and they are 

long-stay patients, and the out-patient is 600; so another 2,400, 

over 2,400 at University Hospital. 

  



 

September 8, 1987 

 

2369 

 

 

At City Hospital, Mr. Speaker, we have 2,310 as of the end of 

August, in-patient; and out-patient of 2,123, for a total of 4,433 

– for a total, Mr. Speaker, of 11,223 people waiting to get into 

the Saskatoon hospitals. 

 

(2000) 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was an announcement made – and that’s 

what my motion is asking about – there was an announcement 

made in the 1986 budget that they would address the problem, 

that they would address the problem, and yet, Mr. Speaker, this 

year we see over 300 hospital beds closed in Saskatoon, not for 

one month, not for two months, and nor for three months, but 

for a period of at least four months. People are waiting not 

weeks; they’re waiting months, and in some cases, well over a 

year to get the necessary surgery that they require in Saskatoon 

and northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And I’m asking all members in this House to support the 

motion that I have put forward so that we can get this 

information and again we can address the problem and press the 

government and the present Minister of Health to come to grips 

with that problem in Saskatoon so that our people can receive 

the medical attention that they need. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the Assembly do issue 

for a return no. 15 showing – and I will not read through it, Mr. 

Speaker, — seconded by the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 17 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, on this particular motion, 

item no. 17 . . . We have a series of motions here, I think – 17 

through 60 – that are essentially the same motion, but for 

various departments, agencies, and Crowns of government. And 

in discussions previously with the opposition House Leader and 

today with the whip, I think we have an understanding that we 

can amend the last one of this series, which would be item no. 

60, in such a way as to provide all of the information asked for 

in one return. 

 

Now the only way we can do that and be in order is that if we 

drop items no. 17 through 59. The reason we can’t do it on 17, I 

understand, is because we are dealing with anticipating other 

motions that are still on the order paper, and it’s a far smarter 

guy than I that figured that out. But I will give you . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . We can if we drop them first, I 

guess. 

 

But I will give you the amendment now, and then ask for leave 

to proceed to item no. 60, or return no. 60, having dropped 17 

through 59, and the amendment that I would propose on 60 is as 

follows: 

 

That return no. 60 be amended by deleting all words after 

the word “by” and substituting: 

 

all government departments, agencies, and Crown 

corporations for the period of April 1, 1986  

to the date this return was ordered, to commercial airlines 

and travel agencies for air fares, including in each 

instance: (1) the names and positions of those for whom 

the fares were authorized; (2) the cost, the purpose, and 

destination points for each trip; (3) the air carrier on which 

each trip was taken. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is the amendment that I would propose, 

assuming that we would drop 17 through 59. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — What we want here, in agreeing with this, Mr. 

Deputy Premier, is we would agree to it but we want for each 

rather than all. In other words, we want it individualized as we 

have requested it, from 17 up to 60 for the individual 

departments, not a global figure of a combination of all of the 

departments, agencies, or Crown corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The intent is, for instance, in one return 

to give you the global number for Agriculture broken down as 

I’ve described in the amendment, and then in, say in Sask 

whatever – crop insurance, if it’s an agency or economic 

development – each one will be treated as a separate item but 

I’ll give it on the same return. And the only purpose for this is 

so we have it in one return to expedite the matter, number one; 

and number two, so we can expedite matters in the House here. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — It just seems to me that if you wanted to 

expedite you could . . . Each department could attack this here 

individual motion for return, and, very simply, get it in very 

rapidly. It seems to me that there is going to be less than 

expediting, if I may say so, and I wish you would assure me that 

there would be every intent to get it co-ordinated all together. 

Because it seems to me, it seems to me what you’re doing is 

packaging it all together which may, in fact, take much longer 

than if you had the individual departments submitting it. But if 

you give us the undertaking that when you will indeed get that 

information to us as fast as possible, we’re prepared to proceed 

on that basis, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I agree with the 

undertaking, and I will act in all due dispatch. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Is leave granted then to proceed to motions 

for return no. 60? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Drop 17 through 59 inclusive, and go to 

60. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Drop 17 to 59 inclusive and go to 60. I 

believe the member for Regina North East will still have to 

move motions for return 60, and then the amendment will come 

to the motion. 

 

Return No. 60 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski moved, seconded by Hon. Mr. Blakeney, that 

an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 60 showing: 

 

The total amount paid by the SaskExpo ’86 corporation, 

for the period April 1, 1986 to the  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

 

2370 

 

 

date this return was ordered, to commercial airlines and 

travel agencies for air fares, including in each instance: (1) 

the names and positions of those for whom the fares were 

authorized; (2) the cost, purpose, and destination points for 

each trip; (3) the air carrier on which each trip was taken. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thought that 

would be the case. We have had the discussion of the 

clarification so I simply would move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return no. 60 showing – and I will wait 

for the amendment – seconded by the member from 

Elphinstone. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I therefore move, 

seconded by the Minister of Tourism and Small Business: 

 

That return no. 60 be amended by deleting all words after 

the word “by” and substituting: 

 

all government departments, agencies, and Crown 

corporations for the period April 1, 1986 to the date this 

return was ordered, to commercial airlines and travel 

agencies for air fares, including in each instance: (1) the 

names and positions of those for whom the fares were 

authorized; (2) the cost, purpose, and destination points for 

each trip; (3) the air carrier on which each trip was taken. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 61 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, similarly we have a group 

of motions here, 61 through 103, that are essentially asking for 

the same information in government departments, agencies and 

Crowns, and so I would advance the same explanation if we 

could drop to 102 inclusive I would move, virtually the 

identical amendment: 

 

That return no. 103 be amended by deleting all words after 

the word “by” and substituting: 

 

all government departments, agencies and Crown 

corporations during the fiscal year ‘85-86 to commercial 

airlines and travel agencies for air fares, including in each 

instance: (1) the names and positions of those for whom 

the fares were authorized; (2) the cost, purpose and 

destination points for each trip; (3) the air carrier on which 

each trip was taken. 

 

This is almost identical to the previous amendment, Mr. 

Speaker, except that this one deals with the fiscal year 

previously, and the previous amendment dealt only with the 

year to date. Do you see what I’m saying? 

 

In addition the other amendment is giving much more 

information than was asked for, because they only asked for 

about 45 departments, government agencies and Crowns and we 

have given for all departments, agencies and Crowns. So this is 

essentially the same thing except for the fiscal year ‘85-86. 

Mr. Speaker: — First of all, is it agreed, then, that motions 61 

through 102, inclusive, be dropped? That’s agreed. 

 

Return No. 103 

 

Mr. Upshall moved, seconded by Mr. Van Mulligen, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 103 showing: 

 

The total amount paid by SaskExpo ’86 corporation during 

the 1985-86 fiscal year to commercial airlines and travel 

agencies for air fares, including in each instance: (1) the 

names and positions of those for whom the fares were 

authorized; (2) the cost, purpose, and destination points for 

each trip; (3) the air carrier on which each trip was taken. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would move that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return no. 103 showing, seconded 

by the member for Regina Victoria. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Is this where I should put my 

amendment? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Yes, this is where you should put your 

amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I therefore move: 

 

That return no. 103 be amended by deleting all words after 

the word “by” and substituting: 

 

all government departments, agencies, and Crown 

corporations during the ‘85-86 fiscal year to commercial 

airlines and travel agencies for air fare, including in each 

instance: (1) the names and positions of those for whom 

the fares were authorized; and (2) the cost, purpose, and 

destination points for each trip; (3) the air carrier on which 

each trip was taken. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

(2015) 

 

Return No. 104 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I beg your indulgence for one minute, 

Mr. Speaker. We have similarly here two groups of similar 

motions, one dealing with year to date and the other dealing 

with the previous fiscal year. And I would like to do two things 

here, Mr. Speaker, I would like to drop 104 through 147 

inclusive and then amend the final motion to give the 

information for all government agencies . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Departments, agencies, and Crown 

corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Exactly – departments, agencies, and 

Crown corporations. And the amendment that I would propose, 

Mr. Speaker, on return no. 148 is as follows: 

  



 

September 8, 1987 

 

2371 

 

 

That return no. 148 be amended by deleting all the words 

after the word “showing” and substituting: 

 

for the fiscal year ‘85-86, (1) the names of all reports, 

studies, investigations, or projects awarded to external 

consultants for each government department and agency 

and Crown corporation; (2) the names of those 

consultants; and (3) the final costs. 

 

And that’s the amendment that I would propose for no. 148. 

 

I’m sorry, there’s somebody else that . . . Okay, the amendment 

that I would propose for no. 148, which is the last one in this 

particular group. Okay? 

 

That return no. 141 be amended by deleting all the words 

after the word “showing” and substituting: 

 

for the fiscal year ending ‘85-86, (1) the names of all 

reports, studies, investigations, or projects awarded for 

external consultants by each government department and 

agency and Crown corporation; (2) the names of those 

consultants; and (3) the final costs. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Deputy Premier 

could indicate to me why his amendment didn’t include the 

purpose of the report or the study or investigation or project, 

which his amendment does not include, and the method by 

which the work was awarded. We are interested in both of those 

informations. The purpose of the report, I think, is fairly 

important to us, and the method by which the work was 

awarded. I believe we have the rest. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Did he name the external consultants? 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Yes, I think he did say the name of the external 

consultants. If not, I was wondering . . . Yes, I think he did say 

that. And the recommendations or analysis provided to the 

government, that was not included, I believe, in your 

amendment also. Could you explain as to why possibly those 

were not included in your amendment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The explanation, Mr. Speaker, is as 

follows: the amendment refuses particulars of the information 

and gives total cost only. The reason for this is to provide for 

the contingency that release of such information may be 

prejudicial to the government by giving confidential 

information that ought not to be given, etc. 

 

The amendment is not new. It’s not one that we invented. This 

is out of a long-time NDP practice of the previous 

administration, and we’ve taken it right out of the attorney 

general’s arguments of 1980. And a matter of fact, it was a 

return that I had placed on the order paper that the attorney 

general of that day was responding to, and those were the 

arguments that he advanced. So we have taken the amendment 

right out of that wise gentleman’s verbatim here and offer it in 

that respect. 

Mr. Koskie: — I would like to ask: what confidentiality is it by 

not giving us the method by which the work was awarded? 

What are you protecting there? And you’ve excluded that from 

your amendment as indicated in the original order for return. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The argument that I will advance, Mr. 

Speaker, is . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — It’s weak. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — It may be weak, but not one that was 

invented by me. This is to quote one Mr. Romanow of March 

25, 1980; and he says: 

 

One could or might interpret . . . (an outside prosecutor for 

instance) to be an external consultant. I am assuming there 

is no difficulty in that regard. You want the names of all 

reports and studies not of that kind of a category 

incorporated in the return, and in that regard that’s 

understood by everybody. I think with a great deal of work 

and a lot of effort, we’ll probably be able to come up with 

some answers on this. So, therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, 

seconded by the Hon. Provincial Secretary (Mr. Cowley) 

that . . . 

 

. . . (we provide) all that reports and studies commissioned 

by the . . . department to external consultants during the 

period . . . the names of these consultants and final costs. 

 

And that’s how the attorney general of that day was amending 

similar motions for return in 1980, and I simply advance the 

same argument. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — I would appreciate it very much if the Deputy 

Premier could send a copy of his amendments over to us so that 

we can have a look at it. I think it involves a little more than 

just listening to it. 

 

I am concerned about referring back to 1980. I have no idea 

what question you had drafted at that time, whether it was 

similar to this or whether you even at that time . . . I’d like to 

have one, the one that you’re referring to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes, it’s on page 1076 of 1980, March 

25 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m explaining to him and 

he’s asking me a question. And it’s in response . . . This 

particular one is in response to advertising for the attorney 

general’s department, and similar to tonight, it was one of a list 

that long. And it asks for: 

 

. . . or consulting firms (that) have been awarded a contract 

with the Attorney General’s department. (a) If so, the 

nature of the contract or contracts, the name and address of 

each consultant or consulting firm, the value of the 

contract, and the purpose of the contract. (b) In each 

instance, whether the contract was advertised, or awarded 

without advertising. 

 

So, you know, it’s essentially the same thing and the 

amendment of that day is as I’ve set out, and that is: 

 

To be amended by deleting all the words after  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

 

2372 

 

 

the word “showing” and substituting: 

 

for the fiscal year ’85-86, (1) the names of all reports, 

studies, investigations, or projects awarded to external 

consultants by government departments, agencies, and 

Crown corporations; (2) the names of those consultants; 

and (3) the final cost. 

 

Essentially the same thing except a little broader, that was 

provided by the House leader of 1980. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I just have a few comments on it. I 

think the Deputy Premier recognizes that it does not meet our 

request for information that we want . . . that we would like on 

these various questions. I mean, for example, it is imperative 

that we get the purposes or objectives of the reports and also 

how the reports or the projects are awarded by the government. 

Was it done by open tender? Was it done by closed tender? Was 

it simply pulling somebody out of the hat and that’s how it was 

done? Was it done through patronage? We’d like to know that, 

and the last thing we really would like to know is the 

recommendations or analysis provided to the government by 

these reports so that the people of the province have something 

at least to measure against whether their money was worthwhile 

spent. 

 

I’m sure you will agree that this is not just a few hundred 

thousand dollars; this is in the millions of dollars that this will 

amount to, and I think we do have a right, as the official 

opposition, to get this information regardless of how the 

questions were phrased or answered in the past. 

 

I think we are a legislature of our own, this one, and we should 

not necessarily just go back to the past and say this is what was 

done in the past. And I’m not certain that was done in the past. 

 

Well the questions were phrased different . . . The motions were 

phrased differently than what we have here, so I’m reluctant to 

accept the amendment, but maybe somebody else wishes to 

speak to it. But I think, having said that, to expedite the matter I 

am prepared to accept it but with great reluctance. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I, too, as my colleague 

from Saskatoon South, am concerned about the desire of this 

government, as has been displayed throughout the day, to 

conceal information from the public. 

 

I know that the government will have its way. They have the 

majority by quite a few members, so if they wish to amend 

these motions and hide the information that the public ought to 

have, that’s a judgement that the government has to make. I 

object to that, as do my colleagues on this side of the House. I 

fail to see how divulging information on the method by which 

the work was awarded in any way takes away from the 

confidentiality, if in fact it needs to be there, as the minister 

argued a few moments ago. 

 

Especially, Mr. Speaker, it is important to know the method 

used when everyone in Saskatchewan knows only too well that 

there have been so many people and  

organizations that have been paid frivolously by the 

government for doing almost nothing at all. And that is the 

reason the public needs to know whether in fact there was a 

tender, or was it proposal bids requested by the government in 

which the government went to a few select individuals or 

consultants and simply said, okay, you, you, and you give us a 

proposal and we’ll forget all about the others who might be able 

to do quite an adequate job. 

 

(2030) 

 

And that is the reason we object to what the House Leader for 

the government side of the House is doing here this evening. 

He’s using, I think, to his advantage, the spirit of co-operation 

which we have extended to try to expedite some of the work of 

this House, and conglomerating a number of motions into one 

because they should be able to cover all of the departments, 

Crowns, and agencies. And therefore is now going to use his 

majority, the government’s majority, to have the government’s 

will and carry out their intention not to provide the information 

that could quite easily be provided. I can’t see any arguments 

that can be made why it should not be provided. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Then I would like to ask, first of all, the 

member for Saskatoon South if he is agreeable to dropping 

motions for return no. 104 to 147. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — I think he wants to speak, sir. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — What is it that the member from Prince Albert 

wants to speak to? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Well I want to address the same matter that 

my colleagues have been referring to, and I have before me the 

copy of the debates from 1980, page 1076, which I believe the 

Deputy Premier is referring to. 

 

In this case the motion was moved – by the leader of the 

opposition at the time – asking for, and I would read it: 

 

Whether . . . any consultants or consulting firms have been 

awarded the contract with the Attorney General’s 

department. (a) If so, the nature of the contract or 

contracts, the name and address of each consultant or 

consulting firm, the value of the contract, and the purpose 

of the contract. (b) In each instance whether the contract 

was advertised, or awarded without advertising. 

 

This motion is fairly similar to what we were asking for and the 

wording is somewhat different. 

 

The difficulty that I see with the sort of amalgamated motion, 

Mr. Speaker, and I would ask the Deputy Premier, the House 

Leader, to accept that when you get only part of this 

information that the whole batch . . . It sometimes makes the 

whole batch of information unworkable. 

 

Now, when . . . It’s like a missing link in a chain. The chain is 

no longer worth what it would be if you add the one link in the 

middle keeping the whole works of them together. And in this 

case, the missing link is, in particular, the method by which the 

contract and the  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

 

2373 

 

 

work was awarded. 

 

So without arguing the contents of the 1980 motion, or 1987 

motion, I would simply ask him to add that into his amendment, 

and I think the members on this side would certainly appreciate 

that addition. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The member has correctly taken it right 

out of 1076, as I had previously, and put it on the record. And it 

says clearly: “In each instance” and this is in the English 

language. It’s a little different language than is used in their 

particular motion, but it says clearly: “In each instance, whether 

the contract was advertised, or awarded without advertising.” 

Or in effect, was there a competition for the awarding of the 

contract or was there not? 

 

And the amendment of that day, by that administration, said, 

Mr. Speaker, we will not provide that information. And I’m 

offering a similar amendment, and the member for Saskatoon 

South, however reluctant, has said that . . . And I take him, you 

know, at his word, that he will reluctantly accept that. Now we 

very reluctantly accepted it when we were sitting over there. 

And so I don’t understand the point that is being raised by the 

member from Prince Albert because it’s not different from what 

was happening. It’s the practice of the NDP of many, many 

years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — I want to express my reluctance, Mr. Speaker. I 

hope this does not become a precedent for future legislatures to 

go on, what has been agreed to here tonight. I want to put that 

on the record because I think this certainly should be 

investigated further for the future as to whether we can 

accommodate the opposition in getting that information. As I 

said, yes, I will reluctantly accept it and therefore agree to 

dropping all the motions preceding as you indicated before, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Thank you, then. To 147 inclusive – 104 to 

147. That’s correct. 

 

Return No. 148 

 

Mr. Rolfes moved, seconded by Mr. Upshall, that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for return no. 148 showing: 

 

For the fiscal year 1985-86, a detailed list of all reports, 

studies, investigations, or projects awarded to external 

consultants by the Saskatchewan Development Fund 

Corporation including in each case: (1) the name and 

purpose of the report, study, investigation, or project; (2) 

the total cost; (3) the method by which the work was 

awarded; (4) the name of the external consultants who 

performed the work; (5) the recommendations or analysis 

provided to the government. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return no. 148 showing: 

 

For the fiscal year 1985-86, a detailed list of all reports, 

studies, investigations, or projects awarded to external 

consultants by the  

Saskatchewan Development Fund Corporation including 

in each case: (1) the name and purpose of the report, study, 

investigation, or project; (2) the total cost; (3) the method 

by which the work was awarded; (4) the name of the 

external consultants who performed the work; (5) the 

recommendations or analysis provided to the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I’m afraid I didn’t catch the seconder. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — My humble apologies. Seconded by the hon. 

member from Humboldt. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I therefore move: 

 

That return no. 148 be amended by deleting all the words 

after the word “showing” and substituting: 

 

for the fiscal year 1985-86, the names of all reports, 

studies, investigations, or projects awarded for external 

consultants by each government department, agency, and 

Crown corporation; the names of those consultants, and 

the final cost. 

 

Seconded by the Minister of Justice. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 149 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — A similar explanation. The next group 

of motions would take us to return no. 193, and I would 

therefore ask that up to 192 inclusive be dropped and I would 

move an amendment similarly to 193. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Perhaps you should read the amendment. The 

members might want to hear it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — It’s the identical amendment except it’s 

dealing with year to date, as opposed to the previous fiscal year. 

And that is: 

 

That return no. 193 be amended by deleting all the words 

after the word “showing” and substituting: 

 

for the period of April 1, 1986 to the date this return was 

ordered, the names of all reports, studies, investigations, or 

projects awarded to external consultants by each 

government department, agency, and Crown corporation; 

the names of those consultants and final costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I would like to ask then the member for 

Prince Albert if he is agreeable to dropping motions 149 to 192. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the government House 

Leader is asking that we use exactly the same procedure that we 

used previous and I would indicate that I would be willing to do 

so, and again reluctantly – that I would prefer and I think it 

would be much better if we had in there the method by which 

the work was  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

 

2374 

 

 

awarded. But I will do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Therefore, I would like ask you, sir, to move 

motion 193. 

 

Return No. 193 

 

Mr. Kowalsky moved, seconded by Mr. Solomon, that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return no. 193 showing: 

 

For the period of April 1, 1986 to the date this return was 

ordered, a detailed list of all reports, studies, 

investigations, or projects awarded to external consultants 

by the Saskatchewan Expo ’86 corporation including in 

each case: (1) the name and purpose of the report, study, 

investigation, or project; (2) the total cost; (3) the method 

by which the work was awarded; (4) the name of the 

external consultants who performed the work; (5) the 

recommendations or analysis provided to the government. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — So I therefore move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return no. 193 showing: 

 

For the period of April 1, 1986 to the date this return was 

ordered, a detailed list of all reports, studies, 

investigations, or projects awarded to external consultants 

by the Saskatchewan Expo ’86 corporation including in 

each case: (1) the name and purpose of the report, study, 

investigation, or project; (2) the total cost; (3) the method 

by which the work was awarded; (4) the name of the 

external consultants who performed the work; (5) the 

recommendations or analysis provided to the government. 

 

Seconded by the member for Regina North West. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

Minister of Urban Affairs: 

 

That return no. 193 be amended by deleting all the words 

after the word “showing” and substituting: 

 

for the period of April 1, 1986 to the date this return was 

ordered, the names of all reports, studies, investigations, or 

projects awarded for external consultants by each 

government department, agency, and Crown corporation; 

the names of consultants; and the final cost. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 194 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney moved, seconded by Mr. Koskie, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 194 showing: 

 

For the period April 1, 1986 to the date this return was 

ordered, a list of all those employed by the  

Executive Council, including: (a) names and job titles; (b) 

duties and responsibilities in each case; (c) salary and 

benefits in each case; (d) date of commencement of 

employment in each case and, where applicable, date of 

termination. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if before the 

hon. member moves this motion, if we can lump 194 and 195 

together. They are essentially the same thing, and one is dealing 

with the previous fiscal year; the second is dealing with year to 

date, and I would propose that if we drop 194, we could move 

195 with the following amendment, and that is: 

 

For the period April 1, 1985 to the date of this return, a list 

of all those employed by the Department of Executive 

Council, including names, job titles, duties, and 

responsibilities, remuneration, date of commencement of 

employment in each case and, where applicable, date of 

termination. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Is the Leader of the Opposition agreeable to 

dropping 194? 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I think the answer is no. 

It’s hardly worthwhile to couple two together, and the wording 

suggested by the minister allows him to agglomerate the 

salaries over two periods of time, and I wanted the salary for the 

year, and the salary for the next year. So the answer is, I would 

not regard that as a friendly amendment. 

 

(2045) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier has properly identified this as 

asking the same batch of information: one, for the year 

1985-86, that being return no. 195, which I’ll come to in a 

moment; and the one we’re now dealing with, 194, is for 1986 

to date. All other information is the same. It’s for a different 

fiscal period, and it is the standard material which one might get 

in estimates. I think we can save the Premier and his staff some 

time if we have this information in advance to save the passings 

across of the information which would be asked for and no 

doubt given in any case. With that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I 

move that an order of the Assembly do issue for return No. 194 

showing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I have no reason to 

believe that the information wouldn’t be forthcoming, but since 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Excuse me. I’m sorry to interrupt. I’m sorry 

to interrupt, be we don’t have a valid motion. I don’t believe we 

have a seconder. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — You’re quite right, Mr. Speaker. I 

neglected to advise you that my seconder is the member for 

Quill Lakes. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I have no reason to believe that the 

information wouldn’t be forthcoming in any event, Mr. 

Speaker, but since I don’t, everything I know about this  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

 

2375 

 

 

and since the department offered this amendment for me to 

carry without much of an explanation, I would like to adjourn 

debate until next private members’ day and deal with both 194 

and 195 at that time. I’ll adjourn debate on the next one as well. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Return No. 195 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney moved, seconded by Mr. Koskie, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 195 showing: 

 

For the fiscal year 1985-86, a list of all those employed by 

the Executive Council, including: (a) names and job titles; 

(b) duties and responsibilities in each case; (c) salary and 

benefits in each case; (d) date of commencement of 

employment in each case and, where applicable, date of 

termination. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for return no. 195 showing: 

 

For the fiscal year 1985-86, a list of all those employed by 

the Executive Council, including: (a) the names and job 

titles; (b) duties and responsibilities in each case; (c) salary 

and benefits in each case; (d) date of commencement of 

employment in each case and, where applicable, date of 

termination. 

 

Just before I take my seat, I couldn’t imagine any reason why 

the government wouldn’t want to pass that tonight. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Once more, I didn’t catch the seconder. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Yes, and once more, Mr. Speaker, I 

neglected to introduce my distinguished seconder, the member 

for Quill Lakes. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the Leader 

of the Opposition, my guess is that there is likely no excuse for 

not ordering the information forthwith, but out of an abundance 

of caution and since, as I explained previously, they may well 

have reason that I am not aware of, I will just ask to adjourn 

debate on this one as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Return No. 196 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney moved, seconded by Mr. Koskie, that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 196 showing: 

 

A detailed list of all payments made by the Government of 

Saskatchewan to corporations or individuals under the 

industrial incentive program, including in each instance: 

(1) the dates payments were provided; (2) the amounts 

provided; (3) the names and locations of the 

manufacturing or processing firms assisted  

through these payments; (4) the number of permanent 

employees at these firms at the date payments were 

approved, and the current employee totals. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, this order seeks to obtain 

information with respect to the industrial incentives program, 

which is a grant program and which simply asks for information 

with respect to the recipients of the grant and the dates of the 

payments, the amounts, and the number of permanent 

employees respecting those grants. 

 

And it will be known that the grants are predicated on and 

conditional upon permanent jobs being created. Therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, I moved, seconded by the member for Quill Lakes, 

that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 196 

showing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I have an amendment to 

offer here as well, and this amendment deals only with the last, 

subsection (4), if you like, of the motion for return. And the 

reason for the amendment is it deletes the release of the 

information disclosing the number of employees at various 

times of private firms. This information is confidential at the 

option of the firm, and the information can be obtained directly 

from the firms involved, should they wish to release that kind of 

information. 

 

And I therefore amend or move an amendment to this return, 

Mr. Speaker, and seconded by the Minister of Small Business: 

 

That return no. 196 be amended by deleting all the words 

after the word “payments” in subsection (3). 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I speak to the amendment 

only, and I’m a shade baffled by at least part of the amendment. 

I’ve followed – I don’t agree with, but followed at least – the 

argument of the member for Souris-Cannington about not 

wishing to disclose the number of employees of a business from 

time to time. 

 

But when you are calculating a grant based upon the number of 

employees – which I think the incentive grants are and never 

have been anything else – and when you therefore are declining 

to give us the number of employees, then you are not giving the 

information which is necessary in order to calculate whether the 

grant was proper and appropriate. And that, surely, is the 

information requested when one is requesting the number of 

permanent employees of these firms at the date of payments. 

 

If I am not mistaken, Mr. Deputy Premier, the payments are 

supposedly predicated on the employees being there. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Then it should be a simple calculation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, if it’s a simple calculation, then 

you’re disclosing no information that isn’t public information, 

but since I don’t know whether or not you make any exceptions 

or other calculations, and since the public don’t know, we ask 

for this information. 

  



 

September 8, 1987 

 

2376 

 

 

And I’m baffled to know why you wouldn’t tell us when you 

pay a grant – allegedly on the basis of the number of employees 

– you wouldn’t tell us the number of employees on which you 

make your calculations, but you apparently believe that the 

public are not entitled to know that. I don’t know why, and I 

suspect they won’t know why. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion, as amended, agreed to. 

 

Return No. 197 

 

Mr. Solomon moved, seconded by Mr. Kowalsky, that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 197 showing: 

 

With respect to the Free Trade Commission announced by 

the Premier on June 18 1986, and chaired by Mr. 

Wakabayashi: (1) the total cost of the commission; (2) all 

groups and individuals the commission met with in public 

hearings; (3) all groups and individuals the commission 

refused to meet with in public hearings and why; (4) all 

reports and recommendations from the commission to the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to expedite 

matters, I would refer the Deputy Premier, the House Leader, 

from 197 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

Oh! I’m sorry I didn’t realize. The member from Regina North 

West is here. When I looked around before he wasn’t here, and 

I was going to expedite matters by moving to stand some, but 

since he’s here I turn it over to my colleague. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — I thank the Speaker for recognizing me, and I 

thank my colleague, the member from Quill Lakes, for 

recognizing me as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to, after I say a few remarks, move 

that an order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 197 

showing: 

 

With respect to the Free Trade Commission announced by 

the Premier on June 18 1986, and chaired by Mr. 

Wakabayashi: (1) the total cost of the commission; (2) all 

groups and individuals the commission met with in public 

hearings; (3) all groups and individuals the commission 

refused to meet with in public hearings and why; (4) all 

reports and recommendations from the commission to the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

And primarily what I need to know, Mr. Speaker, and we as 

members of the loyal opposition need to know, is more 

information about this Free Trade Commission that was funded 

by the provincial government. 

 

The Premier has been a devoted supported and promoter of free 

trade throughout Canada, and in particular in Saskatchewan, 

and we are hearing now a change in that decision and that 

promotion alignment. And we would  

like to know precisely some of the costs that the province has 

incurred. This government has become, over the last three or 

four years, Mr. Speaker, a very secretive government. They 

have centralized power in cabinet and they have not given 

information that has been requested of them in regular question 

periods. They have been very evasive; they have not 

co-operated in any sense of the imagination. 

 

In my view, I think that straightforward questions that have 

been put to them in writing and verbally have been basically 

neglected, or they’ve been ignored, and in my view that’s a 

position of a government that’s in deep trouble. I think it’s a 

reflection of a government that is totally mismanaged – that it is 

a government that has no competence whatsoever. As a result, 

Mr. Speaker, their credibility is as great as the federal 

government of our country right now and the federal Prime 

Minister. And that, I should add, is not very great at all. 

 

What really amazes me, Mr. Speaker, with respect to 

information that this government refuses to provide, is that 

when they were in opposition, and I recall vividly the member 

from Kindersley in 1980 got up in this House and spoke quite 

eloquently, I might add, about the need for a freedom of 

information Act. The member from Kindersley spoke on many 

occasions, not only when he moved his Bill, his private 

member’s Bill, but he spoke on other occasions around the 

province and in this Assembly about the need for a government 

to be more open, the need for a government to provide more 

information not only to other members of the Assembly but 

certainly to the public. 

 

And it’s our job as an opposition, Mr. Speaker, and as a 

responsible government, to provide the information with respect 

to taxpayers’ dollars. Taxpayers provide government funds to 

implement services and programs and to carry out those 

services and programs, and if we are not prepared as an 

opposition or a government to provide to the taxpayers how 

those dollars are spent on those services and programs and 

special projects such as this one, then we shouldn’t be in this 

Assembly, we should be in another country where there is no 

democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Kindersley went on about his 

freedom of information Act, and he talked about what a great 

job they would do in government. As a matter of fact, he 

influenced his party during the ’82 election campaign to the 

point where the party adopted his desire for a freedom of 

information Act. And of course we saw that promise in all of 

the literature in all of the constituencies that ran Conservative 

candidates – all 64 constituencies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you may recall yourself, as other Conservative members 

do that ran in 1982, that that was a commitment of the 

Conservative Party and the Conservative government if they 

became government. We see now, Mr. Speaker, a total lack of 

credibility because they have failed to carry out that 

commitment. They have not provided not only a freedom of 

information Act, but on the contrary they have squashed the 

opposition’s attempt to obtain information. 

  



 

September 8, 1987 

 

2377 

 

 

(2100) 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by my colleague 

from Prince Albert, that an order of the Assembly do issue for a 

return no. 197 showing: 

 

With respect to the Free Trade Commission announced by 

the Premier on June 18 1986, and chaired by Mr. 

Wakabayashi: (1) the total cost of the commission; (2) all 

groups and individuals the commission met with in public 

hearings; (3) all groups and individuals the commission 

refused to meet with in public hearings and why; (4) all 

reports and recommendations from the commission to the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I would urge the member from Kindersley to support that. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I didn’t catch the seconder. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — I indicated when I moved it, Mr. Speaker, the 

member from Prince Albert. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, just a minor amendment 

here. The reason for the amendment, Mr. Speaker, is the return 

is worded in such a way as to imply that there were groups with 

whom the commission refused to meet. This, Mr. Speaker, is in 

fact not the case. But there were groups with whom the 

commission was not able to meet for reasons other than refusal. 

 

The amendment, Mr. Speaker, firstly corrects this impression. 

The amendment also deletes the disclosure of information on 

the commission’s recommendations to the government. As free 

trade talks are continuing, Mr. Speaker, it is felt that the public 

release of this information is not in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I therefore move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the Minister of the 

Environment: 

 

That return no. 194 be amended by deleting the words “the 

commission refused” in the fourth and fifth line and 

substituting therefor the words: 

 

who requested to meet with the commission but with 

whom the commission was unable 

 

and by deleting all words after the phrase “in the public 

hearings and why.” 

 

I move, seconded by the Minister of Environment. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, the amendment in my view 

prevents the opposition from obtaining information which is 

very important for public consumption. What the member from 

Souris-Cannington is saying in this motion – and he’s said it on 

his feet just a few moments ago – was that he does not wish to 

make public the cost of the commission. 

 

Well just yesterday, or over the weekend, we have heard some 

public pronouncements that there are other organizations beside 

government who are spending a fair amount of money to ensure 

that the free trade  

negotiations are successful with the United States. 

 

And I recall some of the names — the Royal Bank of Canada, 

providing somewhere around $400,000 to the free trade group 

that has been put together to promote, through advertising and 

other means, a good feeling about free trade, to educate from 

their perspective what free trade means to multinational and 

large businesses. 

 

What the member from Souris-Cannington is saying this 

evening, Mr. Speaker, is that that information should not be 

made public. I might add that the Royal Bank’s contributions 

are made from the profits the bank makes that should be paid to 

shareholders. And that’s fine. They can make that decision 

through their board of directors. It’s an independent corporation 

in this country, and they answer to their shareholders. They are 

saying to their shareholders what they are doing with their 

money. 

 

And here we have the House Leader of the government saying 

that the shareholders in this province, that is the taxpayers of 

this province, should not have any idea what this free trade 

commission has been spending around the province to gather 

information which is secretive; to provide advice and 

consultation to our government which is not being made public. 

And who knows what it’s costing. I think the amendment 

basically destroys the question and it reaffirms our position, as 

the New Democratic Party, that this government is 

concentrating power in their cabinet, is refusing to provide 

information to the public and to the opposition for their own 

gain and their own political gain. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 198 

 

Mr. Solomon moved, seconded by Mr. Kowalsky, that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return no. 198 showing: 

 

For the period March 23, 1984 to the date of this return 

was ordered, with respect to the use of law firms: (1) the 

name of each law firm which has received remuneration 

from each department, board, commission, Crown 

corporation and agency of the Government of 

Saskatchewan; (2) in each case, the amount of 

remuneration received by the law firm, and the purpose of 

the work performed. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a couple of 

remarks to make with respect to this order and after my remarks 

I will move that an order of the Assembly do issue for return 

no. 198 showing: 

 

For the period March 23, 1984 to the date of this return 

was ordered, with respect to the use of law firms: (1) the 

name of each law firm which has received remuneration 

from each department, board, commission, Crown 

corporation and agency of the Government of 

Saskatchewan; (2) in each case, the amount of 

remuneration received by the law firm, and the purpose of 

the work  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

 

2378 

 

 

performed.  

 

Mr. Speaker, again the comments that I made a few moments 

earlier are relevant with respect to this order. And the comments 

that I would like to remind members of the government about is 

that information that this question is attempting to obtain is an 

information which is important to the public. 

 

Here we see again taxpayers of this province spending a great 

deal of money through their government, through this 

Conservative government, on law firms and other legal 

questions which are not being made public. This is a very 

important question of credibility. It’s a very important question 

of the taxpayers, and I feel that if we can obtain this 

information, we will see other major disasters, I’m sure, and 

make them public through the information, as we’ve seen 

recently with, for example, the law firm, the George Hill law 

firm out of Estevan, where Mr. Hill was appointed the chairman 

of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation because he was a 

former president of the Conservative party; where we see his 

partners, Mr. McLellan, who’s appointed to the position of 

Ombudsman because he was a partner of the former president 

of the Conservative party; and we see Dennis Ball, who was a 

partner in the same law firm appointed to a part-time position 

which has been provided a triple salary of somewhere around 

the $100,000 a year. 

 

And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, because I spoke with some 

people from Estevan just on the weekend, and they were telling 

me that this kind of patronage is just unbelievable. These people 

were not supporters of the New Democratic Party until this 

latest appointment. When the appointment of the Ombudsman 

was made, they were just shocked. They had no idea that this 

would continue. As a matter of fact, they’re curious to know 

how many lawyers are left in the law firm that will be begging 

for appointments by this government opposite. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Twelve. 

 

Mr. Solomon: — And there are 12. The member from 

Souris-Cannington says there’s 12 more. Well, if this 

information is provided to the House, Mr. Speaker, that we’re 

requiring, then I’m sure that will shore up the comments from 

the House Leader, and we’ll get them in some more hot water. 

 

But I think, Mr. Speaker, the serious point here in question is 

that information is very important for our party and the 

opposition to do its job. This information is important because it 

will prove and reassure the people of Saskatchewan that this 

government is as patronage-riddled as they have claimed, and 

opposition members have claimed that they are, and also that 

this government really doesn’t have a grip on providing decent 

government in terms of responsible government and responsible 

spending of taxpayers’ dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the Assembly do issue for 

return no. 198 showing, seconded by the member from Prince 

Albert: 

 

For the period March 23, 1984 to the date this  

return was ordered, with respect to the use of law firms: 

(1) the name of each law firm which has received 

remuneration from each department, board, commission, 

Crown corporation and agency of the Government of 

Saskatchewan; (2) in each case, the amount of 

remuneration received by the law firm, and the purpose of 

the work performed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I have a small 

amendment to offer for this particular return, Mr. Speaker, and 

the reason for the amendment, and an explanation of what the 

amendment does. 

 

The amendment deletes the disclosure of the purpose of the 

legal work performed on behalf of the government. Such 

information, as all members know, is subject to a solicitor-client 

privilege and may in certain instances prejudice the 

government’s legal position on a particular case or matter. 

 

I therefore move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the Minister of 

Consumer Affairs: 

 

That return no. 198 be amended by deleting all the words 

after the word “firm” in subsection (2). 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, I can understand why the House 

Leader of the government wishes to delete that final section. It 

means one of two things in my view: one, that they are trying to 

hide something, or two, that in fact the purpose of the work 

performed by these law firms and lawyers that they’ve hired has 

really no purpose other than patronage. 

 

I think if this amendment is passed that will confirm the 

suspicions of the people in this province, and certainly the 

suspicion of the opposition that in fact a lot of these law firms 

that have been hired will indeed have been either hired on the 

basis of patronage and for the purpose of patronage, as opposed 

to other purposes which the government would surely share in a 

general sense with us. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 199 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The member for Regina Centre has not been 

recognized. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh, have I not? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — No. However I will recognize the member for 

Regina Centre now. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, you are so kind. I’m just so 

overcome by the gesture that I’m having difficulty carrying on, 

but I will try. 

 

To save the House some time, we can stand – the reasons I 

think are obvious – motions for return items no. 199 to 216 

inclusive. 

  



 

September 8, 1987 

 

2379 

 

 

Return No. 217 

 

Mr. Hagel moved, seconded by Ms. Smart, that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 217 showing: 

 

Regarding the period December 4, 1985 to the date this 

return was ordered: (1) the total number of out-of-province 

trips made by the Minister of Parks and Renewable 

Resources; (2) in each case, the destination and purpose of 

the trip; (3) in each case, the names and positions of those 

who accompanied the minister at government expense; (4) 

in each case, the amounts charged on behalf of those who 

accompanied the minister at government expense; (5) in 

each case, the total cost of the trip separated according to 

costs incurred for: (a) air fares, (b) hotels (c) ground 

transportation, (d) means, (e) entertainment expenses. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I will be 

shortly moving an order for return no. 217. But before doing so, 

Mr. Speaker, I have a few comments I would like to make. 

 

There is a common perception in Saskatchewan, unfortunately, 

Mr. Speaker, that PC cabinet ministers are fat cats out to see the 

world at taxpayer expense. I think we have all heard that a 

one-sentence sarcastic statement that has been on the lips, I 

think, of virtually every Saskatchewan citizen at some point in 

time or more over the past several months, and the phrase very 

simply is: join the PC cabinet and see the world. I think it 

represents a very sinister view of the motives for the PC cabinet 

minister in the use of transportation at public expense. There 

have been a number, Mr. Speaker, of very questionable trips 

that have been taken over the past period of time. 

 

(2115) 

 

In this order for return, Mr. Speaker, I’m requesting information 

having to do with out-of-province trips since the period of 

December 4, 1985. I’m not saying that I don’t recognize that 

there is a need at times to engage in out-of-province trips. There 

is, although I think we have to question in this time of 

developing communications and communications technology, 

the need to have to appear in person out of province to deal with 

a number of business items. 

 

For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I believe it is the opposition’s 

responsibility to hold accountable government members, 

particularly cabinet members who are travelling at taxpayer 

expense on the stated reason of conducting government 

business. 

 

For that reason then, Mr. Speaker, I will move, seconded by the 

member from Saskatoon Centre, that an order of the Assembly 

do issue for a return no. 217 showing: 

 

Regarding the period December 4, 1985 to the date this 

return was ordered: (1) the total number of out-of-province 

trips made by the minister of parks and renewable 

resources; (2) in each case, the destination and purpose of 

the trip; (3) in each  

case, the names and positions of those who accompanied 

the minister at government expense; (4) in each case, the 

amounts charged on behalf of those who accompanied the 

minister at government expense; (5) in each case, the total 

cost of the trip separated according to costs incurred for: 

(a) air fares, (b) hotels (c) ground transportation, (d) 

means, (e) entertainment expenses. 

 

And I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m sorry I wasn’t a little quicker in 

getting onto my feet. What we have here, Mr. Speaker, is 

another batch, if you like, of similar motions – 217 through 261 

are essentially all the same motion, asking for the same 

information from the various departments, agencies, and 

Crowns of government. And so I would simply ask the same as 

before to drop 217 to 260, inclusive, and amend 261 to give the 

information on one return to all Crown departments, agencies, 

and Crown corporations. With an amendment, Mr. Speaker, that 

would have the effect of deleting the disclosure of the 

breakdown of the total cost of each trip. And there’s nothing 

terribly inconsistent about this either, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The past practice has been to provide in each instance the total 

cost of each trip. That was the past practice of the previous 

administration; it is the practice of this particular administration 

– has been in previous years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Cover-up, cover-up. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — And I know that members opposite 

will holler cover-up as we did, Mr. Speaker, when we were 

sitting on that side of the House. Back at that time, Mr. Speaker, 

I also recall that the House Leader of that day said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t know when our officials can be 

expected to do the job. I don’t know how long it will take. 

I’ll be very interested to knowing how many man-hours or 

man-years, depending on the measurement, that will be 

used in this area. 

 

And he laboured on and on, the member for Riversdale, the 

House Leader of that day, Mr. Speaker, as to the detail that was 

being asked for by the opposition of the day. 

 

And so the amendment was advanced, Mr. Speaker, to provide 

the total cost and not the breakdown. And so I simply offer the 

same amendment here today, Mr. Speaker. And since 217 to 

261 are identical throughout, I ask that we drop 217 to 260 

inclusive and then deal with 261 in the way that I’ve just 

explained. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Is the member from Moose Jaw North willing 

to drop his motions as requested by the Deputy Premier? 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, and 

members of the Legislative Assembly, we object to this. Mr. 

Speaker, the information that is thus provided is of very little 

use, and gives us very little assistance in  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

 

2380 

 

 

breaking down and knowing whether or not the government is 

responsible in its travelling. 

 

We have the spectre of members of the treasury benches 

opposite spending $300 a night on hotel rooms when they could 

well do better than that. We have no way of knowing . . . If 

transportation costs are provided in a lump sum, Mr. Speaker, 

we have no way of really knowing whether or not these 

ministers have been responsible in their travel, and it’s part of 

our responsibility to do so. 

 

I say to the members opposite, if you have nothing to hide, give 

us the information as was requested. If you don’t, I think we 

will fairly assume that your travel expenses cannot stand the 

public scrutiny. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I protest the amendment suggested 

by the Deputy Premier and the House Leader of the 

government. He may be interested in living in the past. I’m not 

sure what his motives for that would be, Mr. Speaker, but I 

know that seven years ago I was not a member of this 

Assembly, and I am interested in living in the present and 

holding the present day government accountable for its 

expenditures. 

 

Now if the Deputy Premier, the government House Leader, 

wants to bring forth some kind of nefarious arguments as to 

why he wants to change this motion, in effect, Mr. Speaker, to 

make the government unaccountable for the expenditures for 

out-of-province travel, as I said before, there are a number of 

people across Saskatchewan – I would suggest the majority of 

people in Saskatchewan – who are firmly of the opinion that PC 

cabinet minister travel is nothing other than fat cat travel to see 

the world at the expense of the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: — And to suggest an amendment, to suggest an 

amendment which denies a breakdown of the expenditures of 

those trips by way of the amounts spent for air fare – that’s 

probably fairly predictable – but then we come to items like 

hotels. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve all heard reports of government cabinet 

ministers. Maybe the House Leader would like to report on 

some of the hotel rooms he’s stayed in at expenses of over 200 

and $300 a night. And I don’t know that the people of 

Saskatchewan want their cabinet ministers seeing the world and 

staying in 200 and $300 a night rooms, and if that is happening, 

they have a right to know that. 

 

Ground transportation is probably fairly reasonable, although as 

we found in the federal House, Mr. Speaker, there were some 

questions about one of the members there and her ground 

transportation. How do we know that that’s not the case here in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Meals, Mr. Speaker, and also entertainment expenses. I think 

Saskatchewan people have a right to know. At a time in which 

the Minister of Social Services says that we cannot afford to 

pay more than $3.60 a day for poor people in this province — 

$3.60 a day for three meals to feed themselves – I think the 

people of Saskatchewan  

have a right to know when their cabinet ministers are out seeing 

the world at their expense, what they’re spending on their food 

and entertainment. 

 

Now for the House Leader to suggest that it is a reasonable 

amendment to eliminate the breakdown of these costs, to simply 

give a lump sum total report of the expenditures, I think, is 

highly unreasonable. Mr. Speaker, I think Saskatchewan people 

have a right to know what that breakdown is, and they are 

particularly concerned about the amounts spent on hotels, meals 

and entertainment expenses by their cabinet ministers who are 

out seeing the world at their expense. 

 

And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I strongly protest the 

amendment suggested by the House Leader. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake is 

involved in this as well because his amendments are from 244 

to 259, so would he agree to drop those motions? 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Under no circumstances, Mr. Speaker, 

would I agree to this amendment. It’s not often, as a matter of 

fact, that I get invited to get up and take a shot at a government 

that’s been spending taxpayers’ money over the last five years, 

flying from one end of this globe to the other. And I think you 

have a responsibility to account to the people just exactly how 

you’re spending their tax dollars. 

 

A minister the other day stands up and indicates that he flies to 

Calgary at government expense to attend a wedding. Now I ask 

you, I ask you, do you feel – and Mr. Speaker, do you not feel 

that the people of this province who this cabinet represents, 

have a right to know exactly how they’re getting there; to know 

what they’re spending while they are there; to know how many 

staff people they’re taking; to know if they’re renting 

limousines; to know those kinds of things. Of course they do. 

Most certainly they do. 

 

And I think it’s irresponsible of the Deputy Premier to stand up 

in this House, propose an amendment that will absolutely put a 

shutter on the window, the only window and the only 

opportunity that the people of this province will have an 

opportunity to know exactly what they’re about and what 

they’re doing. 

 

Given the fact that this government has built up since 1982 a 

deficit of some $3.4 billion; given the fact that they’ve turned 

Crown corporations into money losers that used to be money 

makers, and have just at every opportunity and every wheel 

they’ve turned they’ve proved that they can’t manage anything, 

that they’re out of control, why would the people of this 

province be any less willing to believe that that cabinet and 

their travel expenses aren’t out of control than on any other 

situation? 

 

I say to you, Mr. Speaker, as I listen to the proposal, the 

amendment from the Deputy Premier, I thought, how I would 

explain supporting that kind of amendment if I went downtown 

and talked to some of the small business people in downtown 

Prince Albert. And how I would  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

 

2381 

 

 

explain to them the fact that I, along with my colleagues on the 

opposition side of the House, weren’t willing to scrutinize in 

some form of detail the expenditure that cabinet has made. 

 

I tell you, I’d be ashamed to go back there and report that to 

them. That’s why I wouldn’t be supporting that kind of an 

amendment, and I also want to say, if we were government I 

would fighting any move to offer that kind of an amendment 

because it’s not fair. 

 

These guys promised, in 1982, open, accountable government. 

And what do you get from them? You get Bill 5’s. You get 

changes to the committee quorums, and you get amendments of 

this nature put before the people of this House – the legislators 

of this province. And we’re to accept that? I say, Mr. Speaker, 

this amendment is unfair, it’s uncalled for, and I don’t believe 

it’s any more acceptable to the people of this province than it 

will be to the members on this side of the House. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, 217 has been dispensed 

with, and so I simply go back to ask hon. members to lump 218 

to 260 inclusive, and drop them and deal with the amendment 

on 261. 

 

I don’t mind a broad-ranging debate on 261 dealing with all 

government’s agencies and Crowns. The reason, as explained 

before, to bring them all together all these motions of an 

identical nature is simply to facilitate the expedition, if you like, 

of bringing the information together and getting it to the House. 

 

So I simply ask members if they would drop 218 to 260 

inclusive and then deal with the amendment on 261. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That’s correct. So I once more ask then . . . I 

first of all asked the member for Moose Jaw North if he’s 

willing to drop the amendments which apply or, rather, the 

motion which applied to him. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask that the Government 

House Leader would send across a copy of that amendment so 

that we could see it. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I’ll send it over to you if you send it 

back. 

 

Mr. Hagel: — We’ll send it back. 

 

(2130) 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I think, to expedite matters here, I would 

have, if I had been the Government House Leader, I would have 

proceeded a little differently. However I think, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ll give the Government House Leader leave to introduce a 

motion which drops 216 – no, not 216 – 218, I guess we’re now 

on, 218 to 260 inclusive, and substitutes therefor the motion 

which he just read. 

 

I think that’s probably a more . . . The proper way to go about it 

is for him to get leave to introduce a motion, dropping those 

other motions, and moving his in  

substitution. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I know that the hon. member from 

Regina Centre would have done things differently, and I 

appreciate his suggestion. I think that we will find that his 

suggestion is out of order because, for whatever technical 

reason they will come up with, it is anticipating motions that are 

still on the order paper before they are dropped. And so to deal 

with the final solution, as it were, in the motion, the same 

motion that is dropping the previous motions is out of order. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, we’re prepared to proceed as we 

have been doing previously this evening. I think it would be 

proper to have the member from P.A.-Duck Lake move 261, 

and then the minister, the House Leader, move his amendment, 

as we have been doing in grouping them together previously. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Yes, this is what we have been doing, but just 

so the record is clear, I would just like to indicate then that, 

unless I hear contrariwise, the member for Moose Jaw North 

and the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake have agreed to 

drop their motion. 

 

I now ask the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake to move 

motion for return no. 261. 

 

Return No. 261 

 

Mr. Lautermilch moved, seconded by Mr. Smart, that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 261 showing: 

 

Regarding the period December 4, 1985 to the date this 

return was ordered: (1) the total number of out-of-province 

trips made by the Minister of Agriculture; (2) in each case, 

the destination and purpose of the trip; (3) in each case, 

the names and positions of those who accompanied the 

minister at government expense; (4) in each case, the 

amounts charged on behalf of those who accompanied the 

minister at government expense; (5) in each case, the total 

cost of the trip separated according to costs incurred for: 

(a) air fares, (b) hotels (c) ground transportation, (d) 

meals, (e) entertainment expenses. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 261 showing: 

 

Regarding the period December 4, 1985 to the date this 

return was ordered: (1) the total number of out-of-province 

trips made by the Minister of Agriculture; (2) in each case, 

the destination and purpose of the trip; (3) in each case, 

the names and positions of those who accompanied the 

minister at government expense; (4) in each case, the 

amounts charged on behalf of those who accompanied the 

minister at government expense; (5) in each case, the total 

cost of the trip separated according to costs incurred for: 

(a) air fares, (b) hotels (c) ground transportation, (d) 

meals, (e) entertainment expenses. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — And your seconder? 

  



 

September 8, 1987 

 

2382 

 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Seconded by the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Maple Creek: 

 

That return no. 261 be amended by deleting the words “the 

Minister of Agriculture” in subsection (1) and substituting 

therefore the words, “all government departments, 

agencies, and Crown corporations,” and by deleting all 

words after the word “trip” in subsection (5). 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 262 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I think we have another 

group here, from 262 to 306, that are similar in nature, and I 

wonder if we could drop from 262 to 305 inclusive and deal 

with 306 in this group, and I will offer an amendment to no. 306 

that will, in effect . . . yes, no. 306. 

 

This one deals with public opinion polls, Mr. Speaker, and the 

reason for the amendment is simply to negate the disclosure of 

the results and the analysis of the polls and of the market 

research projects. And the amendment will be as follows: 

 

That no. 306 be amended by deleting all the words after 

“ordered” in the first line and substituting therefor the 

words: 

 

the number of public opinion polls and market research 

projects ordered, performed, and commissioned by each 

government department, agency and Crown corporation, 

including a brief description of the purpose of the poll or 

project; (2) the total cost of the poll or project; (3) the 

name of the individual or company conducting the poll. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Is the member for Regina North agreeable to 

dropping motions for return no. 262 to 305? 

 

Okay? It is agreed. I would now ask the hon. member to please 

move motion 305. 

 

Return No. 306 

 

Mr. Trew moved, seconded by Mr. Solomon, that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for return no. 306 showing: 

 

For the fiscal year 1985-86, a detailed list of public 

opinion polls and market research projects ordered, 

performed or commissioned by the Department of 

Agriculture, including in each case: (1) the purpose of the 

poll or project; (2) the total cost of the poll or project; (3) 

the method by which the work was awarded; (4) the names 

of the individuals or organizations who performed the 

work; (5) the results and analysis provided to the  

government. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Speaking to motion . . . 

I will be moving order 306. I move that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 306, showing, and I will be 

reading that at the conclusion of my remarks. 

 

What we have here is a government that is run strictly by 

opinion polls. It has long been known that that is the manner in 

which Saskatchewan has been governed for about five years 

now. The people, that is the taxpayers of Saskatchewan who are 

footing the bill for the various opinion polls conducted in all of 

the Crown corporations, all of the departments, and so on, of 

the government, have a right to know the details, Mr. Speaker, 

of who is involved. 

 

We would have liked to know how they became involved and 

the details of the tendering – and indeed, I regret that the 

amendment has deleted that, but for purposes of facilitating, 

getting some information at least, we’ve agreed to it because 

these orders have been sitting around for so long. 

 

We have a situation where we should be having a government 

by the people, and indeed we have it by the people, in that the 

people are paying for these opinion polls, but it should also be 

for the people. So we want the taxpayers of Saskatchewan and, 

indeed, us as the opposition, to have the information that was 

garnered in these various opinion polls. 

 

There is – surprise, surprise – a crisis in agriculture dealing 

specifically with item 306. And I think that farmers and other 

taxpayers will be most interested to know what it is that your 

government proposes to do to deal with this crisis situation, 

and, indeed, what the public opinion polls show will be a good 

indicator of where you will be six months from now with your 

various legislations. 

 

So I am moving that an order of the Assembly do issue for 

return no. 306: 

 

For the fiscal year 1985-86, a detailed list of public 

opinion polls and market research projects ordered . . . 

 

And then from there, Mr. Speaker – my shorthand is not what it 

should be – there is the amendment from the Hon. Deputy 

Premier, and so I will move that motion as amended, seconded 

by the member from Regina North West. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I offer an amendment that 

return no. 306 be amended: 

 

By deleting all the words after “ordered” in the first line 

and substituting therefor the words: 

 

the number of public opinion polls and market research 

projects ordered, performed, and commissioned by each 

government department and Crown corporation, including 

a brief description of the purpose of the poll or project;  

  



 

September 8, 1987 

 

2383 

 

 

the total cost of the poll or project; the name of the 

individual or company conducting the poll. 

 

Seconded by the Minister of Urban Affairs. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I notice in the 

amendment that the third item we were asking for was “the 

method by which the work was awarded.” In other words, what 

tendering process did you go through, if any? The only reason 

that you would be not forthcoming with that information is if 

there indeed was no tendering. 

 

I remind the members opposite – the government – that this is 

taxpayers’ money, public money that has been used in an 

expenditure to garner some information; some of it may have 

been for very good cause, some of it may have been just crass 

get the Conservative government re-elected polls. In either case, 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan paid for those polls and, Mr. 

Speaker, I submit to you that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

should understand the method. In other words, how were these 

pollsters selected? 

 

I am going to be urging my colleagues to vote against the 

amendment because of the deletion of item no. 3 in the original 

order. 

 

Another disturbing aspect is item no. 5, which the Deputy 

Premier deleted completely. In item 5 we were asking for the 

results and analysis provided to the government. These are polls 

that had been conducted for the fiscal year 1985-86. I think that 

any argument that what results came out of that are confidential 

really does not hold a great deal of water when you look at the 

timing of the polls. 

 

Anything that the government is going to be – or has wanted to 

act on – surely they will have acted by now. And again I keep 

coming back to the argument: the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

paid for these various and numerous polls. You’re telling us that 

the taxpayers are not entitled to know what the results of those 

polls were, what the recommendations that came back to the 

government for, what those recommendations were. 

 

(2145) 

 

I think it’s just a real shame that we don’t know how the 

pollsters were selected, and indeed we don’t even know what 

the results of those polls are. You’re indeed being very, very 

secretive in withholding that information. 

 

I will, as I say, urge my colleagues to vote against the 

amendment, and indeed I urge the government to make a further 

amendment and include items 3 and 5 in the original Bill. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I don’t want to be drafting this for the 

government, but I’ve obtained a copy of it. It says by deleting 

all the words after the word “ordered” in the first line – the 

word “ordered” doesn’t appear in the first line of this motion. It 

then goes on. “Ordered” appears for the first time in the second 

line. But if you then read it as it’s supposed to be, it doesn’t 

make any sense. It says: 

 

For the fiscal year 1985-86, a detailed list of public 

opinion polls and market research projects  

ordered . . . 

 

And then it spins on: 

 

The number of public opinion polls and market research 

projects ordered, performed and commissioned by each 

government department and Crown corporation including 

. . . 

 

I’m afraid it doesn’t make much sense. Would you take a look 

at it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I can beg the 

indulgence of the House to offer the corrected amendment. Mr. 

Speaker, it should have read: 

 

That return no. 306 be amended by deleting all of the 

words after 1985-86 in the first line, and substituting 

therefor the words: 

 

the number of public opinion polls and market research 

projects ordered, performed and commissioned by each 

government department and Crown corporation including: 

(1) a brief description of the purpose of the poll or the 

project; (2) the total cost of the poll or the project; (3) the 

name of the individual company conducting the poll. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — We posthumously, I guess, give the 

minister leave to withdraw the old amendment and move the 

new one. 

 

I want to add my voice and my complaint to that of the member 

from Regina North with respect to what has been left out. 

Specifically, what has been left out is the method by which the 

work was awarded. Once again there’s no pretension that if the 

system for awarding polls were done fairly and above board, 

there’d be any reason to hide that. The only reason there may be 

not to disclose the information is the government isn’t awarding 

it fairly or giving everybody a fair chance. They are, in fact, 

feeding their friends. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just note it’s . . . I would note that patronage is a 

very expensive way to run a government. This government is 

running its affairs based on patronage. They’re wanting an 

enormous amount of money, and some of the more difficult and 

painful cuts in their budget could have been avoided if they ran 

a more honest administration. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Would the Deputy Premier perhaps withdraw 

the original amendment and then . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Can I withdraw the original 

amendment, Mr. Speaker, and offer the second one in its stead, 

the corrected version? And I have moved that, seconded by 

Urban Affairs. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 307 

 

  



 

September 8, 1987 

 

2384 

 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, we have another group 

here that takes us from 307 to 351 inclusive, and I will be 

offering a similar amendment here, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Similarly screwed up? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — And this one is not similarly screwed 

up, Mr. Speaker. This one is right, because this one deals with 

year to date, and so the wording for this one is as it should be. 

It’s the same as the other was, which it shouldn’t have been. So 

Mr. Speaker, if, with the co-operation of the hon. member, 307 

to 350 could be dropped, I would move this amendment on 

return no. 361, and it would read as follows: 

 

That return no. 351 be amended by deleting all the words 

after “ordered” in the first line, and substituting therefore 

the words: 

 

the number of public opinion polls and market research 

projects ordered, performed and commissioned by each 

government department and Crown corporation including: 

(1) a brief description of the purpose of the poll or the 

project; (2) the total cost of the poll or the project; (3) the 

name of the individual or company conducting the poll. 

 

It’s essentially the identical amendment to the previous one. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Speaker, I do intend to concur with that, 

but before I do, I must say that I object to the amendment. The 

Deputy Premier has said that this amendment is not right. I 

don’t think it’s a right amendment. The public have a right to 

know what the government has done with respect to polling; 

what the polling has cost them; who’s done the work; what the 

results of the poll are. 

 

The public simply doesn’t get that information as a result of this 

amendment, and that’s the reason I object to it. I think it’s 

symptomatic of a government that is looking for survival, that 

needs to resort to polls in order to survive. I think that’s a poor 

stewardship of public funds. 

 

There was no consultation with the public when the dental 

program was cut, and there was no consultation or polling of 

the public to determine, as far as we know, when the drug plan 

was cut, or when educational cuts took place. But there was 

polling done on a whole number of scores in secret, and we 

don’t really know the results of those polls, and we won’t as a 

result of this amendment. 

 

And so I object to it on the grounds that the public has a right to 

know this information. There’s a pretext of open government, 

but there’s a reliance on secret polls, likely performed by 

friends of this PC government. 

 

Return No. 351 

 

Mr. Koenker moved, seconded by Mr. Upshall, that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return no. 351 showing: 

For the period April 1, 1986 to the date this return was 

ordered, a detailed list of public opinion polls and market 

research projects ordered, performed or commissioned by 

the Department of the Provincial Secretary, including in 

each case: (1) the purpose of the poll or project; (2) the 

total cost of the poll or project; (3) the method by which 

the work was awarded; (4) the names of the individuals or 

organizations who performed the work; (5) the results and 

analysis provided to the government. 

 

Mr. Koenker: — Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I move, 

seconded by the member for Humboldt, that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for a return no. 351 showing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move an amendment, 

seconded by the member for Maple Creek, that return no. 351 

be amended by: 

 

deleting all the words after “ordered” in the first line, and 

substituting therefor the words: 

 

“the number of public opinion polls and market research 

projects ordered performed on commission by each 

government department and Crown corporation including 

a brief description of the purpose of the poll or the project, 

the total cost of the poll or the project, the name of the 

individual or company conducting the poll.” 

 

Mr. Solomon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I just want to join with 

my colleague in saying that the deletion of item no. 3, “the 

method by which the work was awarded,” is a deletion, in my 

view, which is a guilty deletion. They don’t want the people of 

this province to know how they’ve awarded their contracts. By 

that deletion the people of Saskatchewan can easily conclude 

that they are guilty of patronage again, in this circumstance, and 

the circumstance of awarding polls and other studies being done 

by the government and other departments and agencies. 

 

So I will certainly not support the amendment as put forward by 

the Deputy Premier on the basis that with the amendment being 

passed proves their guilt in awarding contracts purely on the 

basis of patronage. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 

 

 


