


















































October 29, 1987 Hansard Evening


 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
October 29, 1987 

 

3677 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Urban Affairs 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 24 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Local 
Government Finance Commission, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, 
made a number of recommendations concerning a new provincial 
capital fund. This is putting aside the question of whether there 
would be a fund. Would you be inclined to agree that any new 
capital grant program should be ongoing, as opposed to the limited 
types of programs that we’ve seen in the past years, so as to 
facilitate financial planning by municipalities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I suppose that part of our 
discussions that will be coming up shortly between myself, and 
my colleague, the Minister of Finance, and SUMA ( 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), will include 
capital requirements for municipalities and just how badly indeed 
they were hit, because so far we’ve heard the opposition’s claim to 
how badly they’re suffering. And indeed when we get with 
SUMA, we’ll find that out. 
 
But just to give you some idea, I suppose, I’ll randomly give for 
you, Mr. Chairman, some reserves that Saskatchewan cities have 
set aside for future capital funding, and it will give you some idea 
of the relative healthiness of some of these municipalities. Indeed, 
the city of Regina has set aside over $64 million in reserves; 
Saskatoon, over $68 million; Moose Jaw has almost $24 million; 
Prince Albert, 12 million; Lloydminster, almost 14 million; and 
the list goes on and on. So that certainly with these reserves that 
the larger municipalities have set aside, I don’t believe that it’s 
quite as dire as you indicate. 
 
Certainly we’re prepared to listen to SUMA and certainly if our 
revenues recover — as we hope that they will — and we’re in a 
position to work with the municipalities with regard to capital, we 
would. And there’s several ways to deliver that capital — they 
keep talking, and in discussions and deliberations. I’m certainly 
concerned with labour-intensive capital funding rather than simply 
the replacement of assets such as the typewriters and trucks and 
cars that I referred to earlier. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I’m interested in the minister’s comments. 
Can you advise me, sir, on those reserves that you mentioned — 
and specifically the city of Regina — what form of reserve that 
might be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, those are funded capital 
reserves and they’ve got them probably invested in some form of 
asset, whatever. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — What you’re talking about then is 
debentures that they’ve issued to offset capital requirements?

Hon. Mr. Klein: — No, Mr. Chairman, they are actually funded 
reserves that they have set aside for their capital budgets. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I spent a number of 
years on Regina city council and I don’t remember there being any 
$64 million reserve. I wonder if you could be more specific as to 
the title of these reserves. Just what it is that you’re talking about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — This information has been pulled from their 
regular financial statements available to the public. If you didn’t 
have any reserves when you served on council, maybe the new 
council has done a better job. I really can’t tell you, but that’s what 
I get from the statements. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well I would suspect that the minister is 
interpreting certain financial data in a loose way. How do you 
react to the proposal that any new capital grant should have an 
escalator index as a means of ensuring that whatever capital fund 
is there will at least rise or fall, I suppose, in accordance with 
provincial government economic conditions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t believe that capital 
funding connects any way with any form of an escalator index at 
all. One has nothing to do with the other. Certainly, and obviously 
after the year in the ’70s and after this year where the funding was 
withdrawn completely, the municipalities obviously have done 
something different. So to say, why don’t you spend X millions of 
dollars every year on capital funding and every year that sum will 
be increased, doesn’t make any sense at all. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I’d like to just . . . I asked the minister just 
a short while ago about whether in his opinion any new capital 
grant program should be ongoing to facilitate planning by 
municipalities. You mentioned that you would be holding 
discussions. Might I get your opinion, sir, might I get your view 
on just what view you will be bringing to these meetings. Or do 
you have no view at all? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I think I almost gave away my view tonight. 
There is no question that I lean to labour-intensive forms of capital 
funding, and particularly in the North where unemployment in 
some areas is extremely high. One way to try to alleviate that 
condition is through local employment, and if we can come up 
with capital improvement schemes in areas that would employ a 
lot of people, I think that that would be the best way to go, and I 
make no bones about it. And I hope that SUMA in their 
deliberations can see it that way. 
 
I don’t know that the government should have to fund various 
municipalities throughout the province, and perhaps hopefully you 
would agree, to buy them and replace typewriters or things along 
that line. I think that they should be able to get well along without 
provincial help in that area. Maybe in some other major pieces of 
equipment that might not be the case, particularly in smaller 
communities when they might need to replace a huge piece of 
road equipment or something. So that 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

 

3678 
 

aside, I believe that if we can concentrate on capital expenditures 
that would relate to heavy, intensive employment would be the 
best way that we could get value for our dollars. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — My colleague from Regina Centre is going 
to ask for leave but I just might say that a rather peculiar vision of 
capital works and capital equipment. And to somehow suggest that 
11 municipalities should get along without typewriters and they 
don’t need typewriters, I suppose your idea of labour-intensive 
works is that they write out everything longhand. 
 
At this point, I just turn it over to the member from Regina Centre. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I’d like 
to take a moment out to introduce to members of the Assembly a 
Scout troop from the city of Regina. They’re here . . . they actually 
live in the riding of Regina North West; the member, however, is 
not able to be present this evening. 
 
I say to the members of the troop, we’re exercising one of 
parliament’s most ancient rites, and that is control of the public 
purse. We’re examining the estimates of the Department of Urban 
Affairs, so you’re seeing a prerogative that has been exercised for 
many centuries. 
 
I know all members will want to join with me in welcoming this 
group to the Assembly this evening. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I too would welcome our 
young observers. I hope that you find these discussions interesting 
because one day you are going to be paying taxes, like your moms 
and dads do, and I know you’re going to want to keep them as low 
as you can, and that’s what we’re trying to do in here for you. 
 
But there you go, Mr. Member from Regina Victoria, putting 
words in my mouth again, and I wish you’d quit doing that. I 
didn’t say that we were expecting the municipalities to do things 
in longhand or to do without equipment. I didn’t expect them to 
wheel stuff in wheelbarrows either if they couldn’t afford to buy a 
half-ton truck. I didn’t say that at all. 
 
But I simply said that I believe if the municipalities want to keep 
buying these half-ton trucks and want to keep buying these 
typewriters, and where we have no way of controlling their 
expenditures, the only way to place an onus on them to replace 
their equipment/property is to let them pay for it themselves. 
 
Having said that, if we can create employment with 
labour-intensive capital projects, I believe that that’s the way to 
go. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, just for the interest of the 
Assembly, I would also like to introduce another person who’s 
seated in the Speaker’s gallery this evening. 
 
He is a young man who takes a great deal of interest in the 
goings-on in the constituency of Arm River, is active in

Arm River in a number of ways, and is a farmer and takes a great 
interest in the proceedings of the Assembly. I would ask all 
members of the Assembly to welcome Bob Robertson to the 
Assembly this evening. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — A lot of your comments tonight and this 
afternoon, Mr. Minister, hint at a new capital fund for urban 
municipalities. Will you confirm tonight that you are planning a 
new provincial capital fund and that you are taking steps in that 
direction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well I certainly can’t confirm anything and I 
think that the member realizes that, but I’m glad that you 
recognize and appreciate that under today’s difficult circumstances 
of revenue for the government, we recognize the needs of the 
municipalities, and as soon as the province finds its person a 
position to assist these municipalities, we certainly would like to 
do that. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — It certainly leaves a big hole in that purse, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
I would like to turn to the question of infrastructure. The minister 
will be aware that the Federation of Canadian Municipalities has 
done extensive work with respect to the question of municipal 
infrastructure. The FCM (Federation of Canadian Municipalities) 
undertook a survey of urban municipalities in Canada and 
concluded that urban municipal infrastructure, particularly streets, 
roads, sidewalks, bridges, and sewer and water systems, were 
deteriorating in that an expenditure of $6.3 billion would be 
required to bring that infrastructure up to standard. Now different 
figures have been tossed around. I think one figure that they had 
also was $12 billion. 
 
There is various estimates. If you take the FCM figures, it would 
be $558 million. If you take a projection by the Local Government 
Finance Commission, it would be more like $167 million per year 
over five years that would be required in Saskatchewan to provide 
for the kind of municipal infrastructure improvement program that 
FCM advocates. I wonder, sir, if you might tell us your position on 
this question of infrastructure improvement. 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I think that I have been very 
vocal on this issue, and I have spoken publicly on it. I’m 
extremely sympathetic to the view of FCM. Hopefully, all of the 
provinces were trying to convince our federal counterparts to share 
in this burden. You can understand the federal situation when 
they’re looking at a national problem. The infrastructure of a lot of 
the communities in eastern Canada, where Canada was first 
settled, their infrastructure is extremely severe, certainly compared 
to the newer settlements as we have here in Saskatchewan. And 
even in Saskatchewan, we’ve got a big disparity of different kinds 
of infrastructure problems that relate to our earlier settlements 
against our newer ones. 
 
So here again you’ve got a tremendous problem, and it’s a matter 
of all of the players getting together as this great nation of ours 
grew, and indeed our province and our 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

 

3679 
 

cities, and all of the various services required to give our residents 
the quality of life that they have come to enjoy and desire need 
replacing. 
 
Now, after all of these huge, great investment sums of dollars, 
indeed, over the centuries have occurred, the matter of replacing 
these facilities and improvements as they become worn out is a 
very big problem. I don’t think it will be solved overnight, and I 
believe that the local governments recognize this. They’re 
struggling, I guess is the best word to use, as best they can through 
their various incomes coupled with the grants that governments 
over the years have been able to provide and assist in that regard. 
And hopefully one day if we can get our federal counterparts to 
supply some funding to co-operate with that, we can start easing 
some of the problems that our communities presently have. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m trying to reconcile 
that position, and on a previous occasion in May, I believe it was 
May 2, you’re quoted as essentially saying the same things. You 
said the government would consider participating in a repair 
program, and you are quoted as saying: 
 

Certainly if there are agreements with two-thirds of the 
funding in place, that would be very attractive to us. 

 
I can’t reconcile this position of yours that somehow this kind of 
participation would be attractive to you. But by the same token, 
you decide to eliminate the capital fund for municipalities which 
was intended, in a large part, to help them with their infrastructure. 
 
How do you reconcile these two positions that: on the one hand, 
you cut capital fundings to municipalities; on the other hand, 
you’re trying to give the impression or leave the impression that 
you think it’s great and that you want to participate and give 
money? How do you reconcile these rather divergent views of 
yours? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Obviously if we could get co-operation 
between the municipalities and the federal government, why 
wouldn’t we participate to some equal amount? I mean, that only 
makes immanent sense. 
 
And so far, I would suspect that the majority of the capital dollars 
that all governments have been able to provide to their local 
governments with regard to capital spending have been rather for 
new infrastructure more so than replacement of the existing 
structures. And that existing infrastructure now is starting to 
become a separate big problem. And surely as time goes by, 
perhaps, and has gone by, some communities have found it 
necessary to use these new capital dollars for replacement. 
 
But by and large, I think that they have taken advantage of the 
capital programs offered throughout the years, even when your 
government was in power, to put in new types of infrastructure. So 
that the replacement — and that’s what I was referring to — of the 
infrastructure that FCM is talking about is indeed going to be a 
major problem as years go by and will require some recognition. 
 
And yes, we would like to participate. And certainly if  

FCM and the communities at the local level are able to convince 
the federal government of the day to participate in some type of a 
financial plan, obviously we would be interested in proceeding 
with that line of funding as well. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — But your concern doesn’t extend to the 
immediate, and that is to provide necessary capital funding for 
municipalities now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well I think we’re back to square one. Which 
came first, the chick or the egg? Obviously if the municipalities 
and the provincial government got together in joint infrastructure 
funding, the federal government could then sit back and say, well 
you’re doing it on your own, or Saskatchewan is doing it on your 
own, and as a result they wouldn’t have to help Alberta or Ontario 
or whomever. And I think that in discussions with my provincial 
counterparts throughout the province, we know exactly the 
direction that we would like to take and hopefully put the federal 
government in a position to participate. But if we each go off on 
our own, I think that we’d be doomed for failure for a tri-party 
agreement. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Do I then understand you to say that there 
will be no new provincial capital funding initiative until such time 
as the federal government commits itself? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — No, I didn’t say that. There he goes again, 
Mr. Chairman, putting words in my mouth. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, just a few minutes ago I heard you 
mention something about capital reserve funds. Could you repeat 
the figure for me please, as the capital reserve funds that you said 
the city of Saskatoon seems to have set aside? And secondly, 
would you break out for me what those reserve funds are for, or 
where are they found in the balance statement for the city of 
Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Okay. I’m advised that these are capital and 
all purpose reserves. The city of Saskatoon’s was some $68 
million, and it’s available from their financial statement. So you’d 
have to check with the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, what I wanted you to do was to . . . 
You said there were $68 million of reserves that the city . . . I think 
you indicated to the member opposite, let them dip into their 
reserve funds; maybe they should use some of their reserve funds 
if they are so hard pressed for finances. My understanding is, Mr. 
Minister, that some of those funds that you are referring to are in 
areas that simply cannot be used for other purposes than what they 
have been designated for — for example, the land realization fund. 
I think the city of Saskatoon has approximately $20 million in it. 
But that money must be used for that purpose, and they can’t use it 
for any other purpose. So if that is part of the fund that you are 
referring to, then I think your officials are misleading you or 
misleading the House as to the money that is available for the city 
of Saskatoon for capital projects. 
 
Now I just want to know, is that part of the fund that you are 
referring to? Are you also referring to, for example, the capital 
reserve that they have in the transit fund for the replacement of 
buses that they would need? Are you referring to, for example, the 
funds that they have in  
  



 
October 29, 1987 

 

3680 
 

reserve for the replacement of cars and trucks in the engineering 
department? Are you referring to all — I mean, are you referring 
to the reserve fund that they had in the Centennial Auditorium? 
Are you including those? 
 
If they use those funds for other purposes than what they are being 
designated, then, Mr. Minister, that is just . . . I mean you’re just 
taking out of one pot and putting it in another one, and they simply 
haven’t to the funds available for that specific purpose. So I think 
if that’s what you’re doing, I want to know. If they have $68 
million lying around in reserve funds, I’d like to know that too 
because that’s not my understanding. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — No, the member from Saskatoon South is 
absolutely right. I indicated the relative good health by showing 
what they had in reserve funds. I never indicated that they should 
dip into it, or could dip into those. And, of course, they’re set aside 
there for some of those situations that you just described for their 
capital needs and others. But that’s not to say . . . That’s not to say 
again that although that capital reserve might very well be there 
for whatever reason — the replacement of trucks or cars — that 
they can’t change their plan, or something might happen that they 
might not require those reserves and that funding would or could 
be free. 
 
But all I’m saying is, Mr. Chairman, that they are in a relatively 
good, healthy position if they have those kind of reserve funds, 
which are assets just sitting there waiting for the replacement to be 
used. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, I just want to make the point that I 
really do believe that you were not being totally honest with the 
House here in saying to the member opposite that the city of 
Saskatoon should simply dip into those funds. And I’ll check the 
records tomorrow as to exactly what you said. But you left me 
with the implication — and if I’m wrong, fine, I’ll apologize — 
you left me with an indication that, look it, if the city of Saskatoon 
is so pressed for funds, let them dip into that reserve fund that 
they’ve set aside. You know full well, for example in the land 
realization fund, they cannot use those funds unless they get 
special permission from the Local Government Board, I believe, 
in order to use those funds. 
 
It would be very foolish of them, for example, to use all the funds 
in their transit reserve fund when they know that they have to 
replace the buses next year. My understanding is that there is no 
longer a capital fund available for the replacement of buses, or it 
will come to an end very shortly. 
 
So what would you expect the city of Saskatoon to use? I mean 
that doesn’t really make sense to do that. I think the city of 
Saskatoon and our officials have been very prudent in what they 
have been doing and setting money aside for their various projects. 
And for you to say in this House that, look, they’ve got $68 
million available, and they aren’t that badly off, I think is not 
presenting the true picture, Mr. Minister. I just wanted to clarify 
that situation here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well I don’t know. If it needed clarification it 
might have been for the member from Saskatoon South. I don’t 
believe I said that they could dip into those funds, and you can 
check those records. Clearly, I don’t believe that I said that, and if 
you misinterpreted my remarks, it’s unfortunate. I simply said that 
those assets were sitting in a reserve fund, and indeed those 
communities should rightfully be proud of the fact that they were 
able to prudently manage their accounts to indeed set up those 
reserve accounts. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, if I just might on this topic. 
Are you advocating tonight then, Mr. Minister, that you’re 
prepared to give direction to the Local Government Board and 
prepared to bring in changes to legislation so as to enable those 
municipalities to dip into those reserves so that they can dip into 
building reserve funds which many of them have, so that they can 
use those funds to repair roads and that type of thing? Are you 
prepared to say tonight that that’s what you’re going to do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — No, Mr. Chairman. All I was demonstrating 
was the fiscal good health of those communities. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, that doesn’t demonstrate 
anything except that you seem intent on stringing a line of 
half-truths and quarter-truths, and you seem to have some real 
problem in coming out with the complete and full truth. 
 
Mr. Minister, you know that the Local Government Board requires 
that, in terms of certain funding projects or undertakings that 
municipalities have, they have to set money aside to be able to 
make their first-year payment and those types of requirements. 
The figures that you throw out are not an indication of the 
financial health of those municipalities; it just simply indicates that 
they had the money to go. But they’re not going to go any further, 
given cuts in capital funding. Mr. Minister, you do a disservice to 
the public of Saskatchewan; you do a disservice to urban 
municipalities when you continue to stand in your place in this 
Legislative Assembly and come out with things that are just 
simply not the full truth. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to turn again to infrastructure, and I want to 
ask you just what efforts your department has made with respect to 
the western diversification initiative, and when this House and the 
public and municipalities might see a submission on your part 
with respect to accessing the funds in that diversification initiative 
with the view to utilizing these funds to improve municipal 
infrastructure in Saskatchewan. 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I suppose we’ll just have to let 
the citizens of this province and the local elected officials 
determine and judge just who points out realistic information and 
who does not. If I don’t disclose the full truth about the relative 
health of these various communities and point out those that are 
healthy enough to put those reserves away, what about those 
communities that I didn’t mention, that don’t have that ability, that 
don’t have the financial health? Are you then 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

 

3681 
 

going to tell me that those communities are as healthy as the other, 
when they were not able to put those reserves away? I mean, let’s 
face it. As far as the diversification fund is concerned, we have 
identified potential capital projects as a possible use for those 
funds and we are implementing discussions to see if we can’t get 
benefit of some of that funding. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Can I just ask you to repeat that with 
respect to the western diversification? Have you made a 
submission or is it your intention to make a submission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, we have internal government 
discussions going on, trying to identify possible uses for the use of 
those funds, and as time goes on and those discussions mature and 
the diversification fund is in fact going to be used, hopefully some 
of the projects that we identify would be included in that array. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Would it be your intention, sir, in 
consultation with SUMA, to identify a municipal infrastructure 
program with a view to improving the infrastructure in many of 
our communities so as to improve conditions for business, so as to 
improve the potential for diversifying the economy? Is this your 
intention? Will you or have you undertaken discussion with 
SUMA and other parties with a view to fleshing out that type of 
proposal to the western diversification initiative? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I think, in the interests of the province of 
Saskatchewan, we’re trying to identify as much as we can, to see if 
we can tap into those funds. There’s a significant amount of 
dollars there. And certainly if we can use some of those dollars 
and if we can transfer some of those dollars into our municipalities 
and working co-operation and in agreement with the three-party 
system, we’ll do whatever we can do to use those resources within 
the criteria of that western diversification fund. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — If, if, if . . . Mr. Minister, this program has 
been under way now for a number of months. You mean to tell me 
that you still haven’t got it clarified as to what potential there is for 
access to those funds and how it concerns urban municipalities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, it’s a federal program. It’s not 
our program. So we’re trying to put as much pressure as we can on 
that federal department to see if we can indeed capture some of 
that money for use in our department as well as in our province. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I’d like to turn to the question of the 
Saskatchewan Assessment management Agency at this time. 
There is a sense that the major cities are under represented on that 
board. Are you taking any steps to redress that particular problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, in spite of the fact the large 
cities — or the two large cities, Regina and Saskatoon — do their 
own assessment, their representative on the board was indeed 
selected by agreement between Regina and Saskatoon and they 
chose an alderman from the city of Regina to represent them on 
the SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment 

Management Agency) board. I introduced him earlier this 
afternoon, Alderman McKeown. There are seven on that board; 
three out of the seven are from urban municipalities, large cities. 
So I can hardly make any sense out of your question, Mr. 
Member, and so far I have had absolutely no official grievance 
form either city to that effect. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Would it be your intention, sir, that in the 
future that the chairman of the board will be elected in some 
fashion or another as opposed to being appointed by yourself? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well the legislation presently dictates that the 
government selects the chairman. And I think that until and after 
SAMA has been in existence for some time, the government 
should retain that position, to cover off eventualities as you just 
brought up. 
 
The member from Regina Victoria indicated that he felt that the 
cities weren’t properly represented. Well certainly if the 
government was appointing the chairman, they could do that, and 
appoint someone from the city. If the business community felt 
they weren’t represented, then the government could appoint a 
chairman from the business community, and on and on. 
 
So being that it is, you know, an agency not controlled by a 
government but out on its own, I think that the control of the 
chairman . . . One of the two appointees by the provinces is the 
chairman, and I see nothing wrong with that at this time. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, I’d just like to ask you, with 
respect to northern municipalities, to what extent, if any, you’re 
following up on the, I suppose, the conclusion of the Local 
Government Finance Commission that they were simply 
ill-equipped, not in a position to do justice to a thorough review of 
the requirements of urban municipalities and/or all of local 
government in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And I quote them. They say that they were: 
 

. . . deeply impressed by the seriousness of economic and 
social conditions of the North and believes that processes 
and mechanisms other than this particular commission are 
required to address them. 

 
I wonder, sir, what have you done in follow-up to this conclusion 
and that suggestion by the Local Government Finance 
Commission. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I think until we are able to see 
the success, indeed, of the local government finance report in itself 
that it would be unwise to begin another one dealing with the 
North. I think that it’s fair to say that our government is deeply 
concerned with northern Saskatchewan. There have been more 
than several ministers that express this concern. I can tell you that 
I have had many discussions with the mayors and councils in the 
North. I will continue to do so. My officials just completed 
another round of discussions with them now. As I mentioned 
earlier, I will be visiting the North again immediately following 
the closure of this session, 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

 

3682 
 

whenever that may be. 
 
And I’m trying to . . .(inaudible interjection). . . In view of the 
seriousness that I hold for the North, I don’t appreciate the 
response or the member from Regina Rosemont chiding from his 
seat, and that was an uncalled remark. Mr. Chairman, I’m talking 
seriously here about the problems of the North that I fervently and 
deeply am concerned with — that I try to deal with in fairness — 
and I don’t need that kind of junk coming from the members 
opposite. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I was wondering, Mr. Minister, if you’ve 
gained your cool back. The Local Government Finance 
Commission basically did nothing in the North except to 
recognize that there are very serious problems — identified in 
respect to urban municipalities that they have some very serious 
and unique challenges, unlike municipalities in southern 
Saskatchewan. They believe very strongly that some mechanism 
must be found to address those problems and to basically 
determine for us all, for the people in northern Saskatchewan as a 
government, just how their problems might be addressed, at least 
in terms of initiatives, funding, and what have you, in local 
government. 
 
Would it be your view, sir, that perhaps a thorough look at the 
problems in the North and urban municipalities in the North, the 
fact that those municipalities have far greater social and economic 
problems, and their councils are much more apt to be dedicating 
their time and energy and whatever limited resources they have to 
dealing with those kinds of problems, as opposed to southern 
municipalities, to look at and examine the fact that these 
municipalities have a very, very limited assessment base, not a 
base which really lends itself to very much in the way of local 
revenue, and that perhaps the answers are to look for ways for 
those municipalities to extend their boundaries, to take in land 
which might be suitable for resorts or other types of 
revenue-generating enterprises. 
 
Are you prepared to dedicate your government to taking that kind 
of look at northern Saskatchewan so that there can be some 
satisfaction for all of us — the people in the North and the people 
in the government — that we’re taking the steps in the right 
direction, and that finally there will be some resolve to the very 
serious challenges faced by northern municipalities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, you’re absolutely right. The 
hon. member — I appreciate his concern for the North, and I’d be 
prepared to discuss this topic with him seriously at any length. I 
can tell you that we are concerned with the problems that exist up 
there. They are a part of Saskatchewan, and some settlements 
indeed are our very earliest settlements. 
 
Our northern secretariat department is doing now what I consider 
to be an excellent job of starting to co-ordinate all of the various 
departments and agencies of government that work with the North. 
And perhaps governments in the past, in their wisdom, have gone 
about spending an awful lot of money in the North but not in a 
concentrated, co-ordinated fashion, perhaps, as we would like to 
see it. And I think that through a proper co-ordination and 
planning with all the players together 

in one room, so that each one knows what each department is 
doing and how it might impact on another department as they set 
about to do it, will be the key to the success for the North. 
 
I know that it has been a problem for the provincial government, 
the North, for many, many decades now, as they try to deal with 
the situations that exist up there. And every year we hope to make 
a little advancement, but we’re at a point now where we certainly 
hope we can start making giant strides in that direction. And I 
know that I always look forward to my meetings with the northern 
mayors and their council members. There’s a whole new roll of 
players emerging up there that really take their role as elected 
officials very, very seriously, that are deeply concerned with their 
communities, and quite frankly, are very easy to talk with and 
consult with, and have good ideas, living up there, that they 
convey to us. And hopefully with that kind of dialogue we can 
address some of those situations and make improvements in the 
North occur even more rapidly than I would like to see that 
happen. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, I’d like to turn to the 
question of summer student employment. If there is one little 
annoyance that many municipalities seem to share with respect to 
your government, it’s the matter of the summer student 
employment programs. You will know that in the past 
governments have provided summer student employment 
programs that municipalities have been able to take advantage of. 
This arrangement seemed to make a lot of sense given the 
seasonal nature of some of the operations of municipalities — 
things such as playgrounds for children in the summertime and 
those types of things. 
 
(1945) 
 
This year, you know that the Opportunities ’87 program was not 
available to municipalities. I wonder if you can assure 
municipalities that you will be making every effort to convince 
your colleagues in cabinet that they, in fact, made an unwise 
decision, and that next year there will be a summer student 
employment program that again municipalities can take advantage 
of? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, the member does bring up a 
good point and because of the position and situation that we found 
ourselves in as we developed the summer employment program 
for students, it’s true we concentrated our efforts again on the 
private sector with business communities and couldn’t extend that 
program to municipalities. 
 
They have, in no uncertain terms, indicated their displeasure with 
that to me and — as the member points out again now — I can say 
that, yes again, when and if that program should ever be put in 
place, I will surely make representation on behalf of the 
municipalities to see if they could participate in it. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I thank you for that assurance, Mr. 
Minister. Mr. Minister, can you tell this House about one of your 
employees, and just what it is that he does for you? His name is 
Morley Leonard Evans. 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

 

3683 
 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I understand that Mr. Evans is 
currently employed in the Department of Urban Affairs as a 
temporary research officer. He is currently establishing and 
implementing a computerized demographic inventory, an analysis 
system to assist in the review and projection of population changes 
and trends in urban communities. 
 
It might very well be, and hopefully in the future as he is able to 
improve his situation, that the very thing that we discussed earlier 
of population changes and the like that would assist us in our 
revenue sharing. Population change might have some useful 
information as a result of the research that he would do. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — It’s not the only thing that Morley Leonard 
Evans seems to be doing, Mr. Minister. I have here a copy of a 
submission by Mr. Evans to Don Abel, the Mayor of Melville, in 
his capacity as president of the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association, basically inviting Mr. Abel and 
SUMA to engage Mr. Evans with a view to setting up a 
conference, I believe, to deal with the privatization of municipal 
services. 
 
Are you aware, Mr. Minister, that Mr. Evans seems to be doing 
this thing in his spare time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — That was brought to my attention, and I 
suppose that it’s fair to say that although I was perhaps not 
pleased, he was doing that in his role as a private citizen after 
hours, and I have no control over that part of it. I did, however, 
point out that I was not pleased. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Is that not a potential for a conflict of 
interest in this case? Here you have a person who’s employed by 
the Urban Affairs department and in his spare time — or so he 
says to you — he’s making contacts with the president of the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association with a view to 
arranging work for himself. Might he not have access to 
information at Urban Affairs that would assist him in the kind of 
moonlighting that he seems to be doing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well I would certainly hope that in his 
judgement as a professional civil servant he would recognize the 
potential that exists for him to be in a conflict. And should that 
conflict ever come up — and I don’t want to prejudge the young 
man or his initiative — but he is certainly aware of the potential 
danger that exists if he is not careful. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — So we have your assurance, then, that any 
and all the work that he seems to be doing on a private basis is not 
condoned or is not supported or encouraged by you and your 
departmental officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — No, Mr. Chairman, we haven’t encouraged 
him or instructed him or anything to do that type of activity. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, I’m curious to know 
whether or not you still have a position of director of community 
planning? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, no, that job is one of four that 
were removed from that particular department 

as part of our budget exercise and as the budget progressed 
through its normal channels and we were looking at possible ways 
to implement reductions, in consultation with my department 
officials. In this particular area of the department, it was felt that 
we could abolish four positions in view of proposed changes. And 
that was one of them. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Does The Planning and Development Act 
not state that there shall be a director of community planning? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I acknowledge that, as so 
we designated another official — as a matter of fact, his superior, 
the executive director of community planning, Mr. Henry 
McCutcheon, who is one of my officials this evening. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well now I just want to get this straight. 
You abolished the position, a position which is called for in 
legislation. Now you say that you’ve appointed someone. But how 
can you appoint someone to a position that you’ve abolished? As I 
understand it, the position of director — not a question of 
abolishing an incumbent, but the position of director of 
community planning was abolished. Are you saying that it was 
abolished and it’s now been brought in, that’s it in full force? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, being that my senior officials, 
through the budget deliberations, found that this job was 
redundant, we abolished the position. But we did not abolish the 
statutory provision that was included in the legislation. And I 
suppose, you know, if we wanted to, we could have either chose to 
do it the way we did or we could have changed the legislation that 
the executive director of community planning would in all cases 
have the same name. So it gets back to what’s in a name. The 
senior official is performing the same duty and fulfilling the 
statutory conditions of the legislation. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, is there any requirement that 
the person who acts or is the director of community planning be in 
fact a member of the association of professional planners or some 
such professional body in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — No, that condition doesn’t exist. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I’ve just got 
two or three short questions to the minister. Mr. Minister, your 
predecessor just prior to the last provincial election made a 
commitment to the city of Regina to provide them with funding 
for the renovation of Pioneer Village. Could you, sir, tell us if you 
intend to honour that commitment, and if you do, could you tell us 
when in fact that money will be made available to Regina to 
develop that fairly significant capital project. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, that should have properly 
been asked this morning when my officials from Sask Housing 
were here. We had the whole series of events outlined. We were in 
fact anticipating that question to come from some member of the 
opposition, and it did not. And I’m not prepared to answer that 
because I don’t have the proper officials here, that of Sask 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

 

3684 
 

Housing. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, was the former minister of 
Urban Affairs . . . When I asked this question of the Minister of 
Health, he said, ask it of the Minister of Urban Affairs. I take it 
that you’re the Minister of Urban Affairs. I also know that you’re 
the minister in charge of Sask Housing. 
 
It’s a very simple question; it requires a yes or no answer. Watch 
my lips. Will you live up to the commitment you made, your 
government made, to the people of Regina to provide funding for 
the renovation to Pioneer Village? Yes or no? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Watch my lips. Ask in the proper light and 
you shall receive. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Oh, so now it comes, Mr. Minister. Am I to take 
that response that, if in fact the people in the city of Regina want 
to have capital projects from your government, that they must 
crawl up to your doorstep and ask in the proper light and kiss your 
boots? 
 
It’s a very simple question. We don’t need your silly political 
games. Are you going to provide the money for Pioneer Village or 
aren’t you going to provide the money for Pioneer Village? Or is 
this just another Tory promise broken? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, although the member doesn’t 
seem to have been here long enough to recognize what areas of 
concern should be addressed in the proper departments, I will go 
back to my prior estimates to respond to your question. And 
maybe next time you’ll pay attention when the proper department 
is up. 
 
The project was originally designed to proceed in 1986. Pioneer 
Village was unable to do so. It’s jointly-sponsored, non-profit 
program between the federal government, Canada Mortgage and 
Housing Corporation. And our federal partner requires that when 
we agree to a budget in any given year, that the budget be 
committed or in fact we lose it, which is exactly what happened 
because Pioneer Village couldn’t produce in 1986. 
 
As a result, Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation 
transferred the funds that they had earmarked for that, out of the 
budget into some other area. It can only be reasonably expected 
that when we offer financial assistance for a project to a sponsor in 
any given year, that it’s the responsibility of that agency to indeed 
pick up that responsibility and make their commitment. 
 
In 1987, in this year, we again contacted Pioneer Village to see if 
they would be ready to proceed in this year, so that we could 
include them into this program, and again we were told that their 
position was such that they could not proceed. Then we asked 
them to participate in the innovative housing program, and I 
believe — and I’m not sure, and that’s the area that I’m grey on 
without my officials — that they may have submitted some form 
of participation in the 1987 innovative housing project. But it was 
such, and in such a form, that they didn’t win out on the 
innovative housing process. 

Mr. Lyons: — In other words, Mr. Minister, just to get you 
straight, you are saying that the money for Pioneer Village, 
promised by your level of government, the provincial government 
— the senior level of government — that you will not be 
providing the money for Pioneer. Is that a correct statement or 
not? 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — No, it isn’t. What I said is that in conjunction 
with our federal partners, when a commitment of that nature is 
made, it must proceed in that budget year. And it did not. And our 
federal partners then had to reallocate their budget to some 
community that was prepared to go ahead with enriched housing; 
that was prepared indeed to put up housing for their seniors. And 
you can’t expect them, when they are committed to housing right 
across the country, to hold back on projects while people are 
waiting to make up their mind. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Just one final question on this, Mr. Minister. If 
CMHC (Canada Mortgage and Housing corporation) makes its 
commitment good, will you as the Minister of Urban Affairs, will 
you guarantee that the province of Saskatchewan will make good 
on its commitment? Since the problem seems to be . . . As you’re 
putting it now in the lap of CMHC and the federal government, if 
you’re saying it’s the federal government that’s holding it up, if 
the federal government comes through, will you come through? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, all I can commit to is my 
annual budget that’s approved by this Assembly, and that we put 
together, with Canada Mortgage and Housing in the best way we 
can. That budget was approved earlier this morning. That budget 
did not include funding for Pioneer Village. Certainly Pioneer 
Village, once they’re ready to go, if they want to put in another 
bid, and are prepared to do so, absolutely we would look at it. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have no more 
questions at this point but I want to make a few concluding 
remarks. I might say that I do that with a certain amount of 
sadness as I watched the minister, not only today, but I’ve watched 
him over the last year, and his performance in his portfolio. When 
he was appointed a year ago his appointment was met with a fair 
amount of praise. There was a newspaper article which was 
entitled — I bet the indulgence of the House — it said, “Klein said 
good choice.” 
 
Mr. Chairman: — You are not supposed to use members’ names. 
Refer to them by their portfolio or their constituency. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, I’m quoting from an 
article. Is that permissible? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — No, that’s not permitted. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well anyway I’ll try to do the best I can 
but I may have to take some liberties. Anyway the article said that 
“(Blank) said good choice.” And by “Blank” I mean the present 
Minister of Urban Affairs. And 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

 

3685 
 

it said that . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — The article quotes Herb Taylor, who was 
then the president of the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association, who said that he’s pleased the new Minister of Urban 
Affairs has not been saddled with extra portfolios. “We are very, 
very happy,” Taylor said in an interview. “We’ve worked with 
Mr. (Blank) before on some other projects so we know him.” 
 
The appointment of “Blank” as Urban Affairs minister was also 
described as being: 
 

. . . extremely good news Wednesday by Regina Mayor 
Larry Schneider. (Blank) has always left me with the 
impression that when given a job he’s going to do it. 

 
Mr. Minister, those were the expectations. That was the praise that 
followed you subsequent to your appointment as Minister of 
Urban Affairs. I might say that it’s been a big disappointment, a 
very big disappointment for urban municipalities to have viewed 
your performance in the last year. 
 
I’d like to review that year. You authorized the single largest 
reduction in provincial revenues for urban municipalities that we 
have ever seen. never before in the history of the province have we 
seen a minister in a department take the attitude that it’s 
appropriate to shift revenues in such a massive way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — In effect you authorized a potentially 
massive shift in taxation from the province to property taxpayers; 
from a wide variety of revenue sources to a single source of 
revenue that is generally conceded — even if you do not — 
generally conceded to be regressive and unfair. 
 
At a time that municipalities were looking for federal government 
assistance to help them with major challenges in terms of 
improving their infrastructure, you moved in completely the 
opposite direction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — You cut all capital funding to 
municipalities. 
 
When it comes to other provincial government actions which 
affect municipalities, it is clear that your word carries no weight 
whatsoever around the cabinet table. 
 
How else, how else do you explain, Mr. Minister, cuts in grants 
under the municipal water assistance program? Where was your 
voice to say, that’s wrong and it’s not good for municipalities? 
How do you explain changes to the summer student employment 
program so that municipalities could no longer employ students 
under those types of programs? Where was your voice to say, 
that’s wrong and it doesn’t make any sense whatsoever?

Where was your voice, where was your voice when the Minister 
of Finance proposed and introduced an increase in the E&H tax, 
an increase in taxes which means that municipalities must pay 
more? It means higher costs for them. Where was your voice with 
respect to the gasoline tax — a gasoline tax which means that 
municipalities must pay more, they must pay higher costs? They 
must pay more to the provincial government for necessary 
municipal services, services such as urban transit. Where was your 
voice to say, that’s wrong and that’s going in completely the 
wrong direction? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — You know, Mr. Minister, the other day 
when we were discussing Urban Affairs in this House, you said, I 
do my best. Well, frankly, Mr. Minister, that’s what worries 
municipalities and that’s what concerns us. Your best is simply not 
good enough. Certainly you have done nothing to really protect 
their interests, and you’re going to have to do a whole lot better 
than you’ve done hitherto. 
 
We’ve seen this last year, or at the beginning of your term, we saw 
the tabling of the Local Government Finance Commission report 
which was arguably the most comprehensive, thorough, and 
complete review of local government financing that we have seen 
in some decades. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve had this report for a year. The only 
recommendation that you seem to support is the one that says that 
municipalities should borrow more. You have not followed up on 
any of the recommendations. You have done nothing to reduce the 
property tax burden, which the report outlines is the third highest 
in Canada — a property tax that is unfair, regressive, and should 
be far more limited than is now the case. And your absolutely 
goofy explanations bout how some government-induced economic 
stimulus should make up for the fact that property taxes are high 
and therefore need not be of concern to people in Saskatchewan, I 
think completely misses the point. 
 
You have shown no leadership whatsoever when it comes to the 
business tax. Instead, you prefer to attack . . . You attack me for 
my time on Regina city council; you attack governments of the 
’70s. Your government has been in office since 1982. The 
business tax has only become a problem for business since 1982. 
But your government has done nothing; your government blames 
everyone else but doesn’t do anything itself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — This is an issue that cries out for strong 
leadership if it is to be resolved. It hasn’t been resolved; you 
haven’t provided the strong leadership. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, you talk a lot about 
consultation, and I say that consultation is welcome. But, Mr. 
Minister, I wonder where was the consultation when it came to the 
cuts. Somehow in your own particular goofy way, you’ve tried to 
give the impression here that 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

 

3686 
 

municipalities were asking for cuts in capital funding, that they 
wanted cuts in revenue sharing, that they want to see their 
reserves, depleted. If that’s consultation, Mr. Minister, I think I’m 
going to have to look in the dictionary to make sure on my own 
definition of that word. 
 
Where was the consultation when it came to delaying the schedule 
of payment of urban revenue-sharing payments to municipalities, 
an issue that we’ve been addressing these last few days in the 
legislature? You mean to say that you went out to municipalities 
and asked them, can we delay your payments to you? Well that’s 
not the message we got; that’s not the message anybody got. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Again, we’ve gone through an extensive 
process of consultation when it comes to local government 
financing in this province. It took a number of years, it involved 
hundreds of thousands of dollars, it involved many hundreds of 
submissions — it was called the Local Government Finance 
Commission — and you say that we’re still reviewing it, you say 
that we’re still reviewing it. 
 
And you say well now the Minister of Finance and I will meet 
with SUMA and others and we’re going to study the issue some 
more. We’re going to discuss the financial needs of urban 
municipalities. Mr. Minister, I predict that in another two years 
you’ll still be studying, you’ll still be consulting, and that you 
won’t have come up with any answers. You still won’t be 
providing any leadership. And municipalities will still be facing 
the kinds of financial problems they’re having now. All I can say 
is that consultation to you seems to be a byword for delaying. 
 
Again, I think that municipalities appreciate consultation when it 
results in positive and effective action, but that’s not something 
that they’ve seen. You talk a good game, Mr. Minister, but you’ve 
really shown very little leadership. You’ve really shown very little 
good, positive, constructive action. 
 
What we do see is a lot of hedging, evasion, and simply 
unbelievable comments, if not downright incompetence — and 
also, I would say, a lack of knowledge and understanding of the 
nuts and bolts of how local government works. 
 
You must have spent 20 minutes today in consultation with your 
officials trying to get answers to simple questions about local 
government. This does not display someone who is in control of 
his department, someone who is knowledgeable and thorough 
when it comes to his department. 
 
We see less than complete honesty. No one believes you any more 
when you talk about your reasons, which seem to change now 
every day, for the delay in urban revenue-sharing payments. 
 
To justify your capital cuts, you paint some very incomplete 
picture of events in 1979 and ’80. You say, well the NDP cut the 
capital grants, and there’s a good reason for us to cut our capital 
grants. But you forget to mention that even as the NDP cut 10 
million, they 

increased it by another 23 million, for a net increase of 13 million. 
Again you try to give an incomplete picture of what’s going on, as 
you just did now with the question of reserve funds for larger 
municipalities. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a sense that you shoot and you bluster and 
you go off in all directions, and that you don’t make much sense, 
or really don’t have much of a positive impact. In many ways you 
remind me of that cartoon character, and it’s little wonder that they 
call you that — the Yosemite Sam of Saskatchewan politics. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve been a very big disappointment. We shall 
expect very little from you in the coming years. Thank you. 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, my mind has gone blank. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — After that scathing personal attack, I’m glad 
he ended it off with not expecting much for the next couple of 
years because that will make my job easier — not that he expected 
that much anyhow. 
 
I appreciate, at least, that he recognized a couple of things: that I 
started off right — hopefully, a year down the road now, other 
names have been added; we’ll see. I think that my 
straightforwardness is well known not only in this Assembly but 
throughout the province. I’m probably the last one in the world to 
hedge or hide and be afraid, and as a result, unfortunately, you lost 
a great deal of impact with some of the verbiage that you spouted. 
But at least I must have some sympathy on their benches, Mr. 
Chairman, because there was no motion made to reduce my 
salary. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 10 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. Minister, 
I’m wondering about the Meewasin Valley Authority. I commend 
you for not cutting this past year, but I suspect that there may be 
cuts coming in the future. I’m wondering if you could confirm 
what your plans are for Meewasin Valley Authority, and whether 
we can expect cut-backs to the important work being done by the 
authority in Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I appreciate the question from the member 
from Saskatoon Sutherland, and I’m not in a position to forecast 
what our new budgets will be. 
 
But I’m glad that you recognize that we were able to hold the line 
on the funding for our urban parks not only Meewasin but 
Wascana and Wakamow, as well, and Chinook in Swift Current. 
And I can tell you that within the confines of our next budget, we 
will also attempt to do the best we can for those important urban 
parks. 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

 

3687 
 

Mr. Koenker: — Well I’d just like to commend it for your 
consideration, Mr. Minister, because it does create some 
substantial employment for people on low incomes or on welfare 
in Saskatoon. It also enhances the quality of life in Saskatoon. It 
has to do with such things as monitoring water quality in the city, 
cleaning up the city and providing recreational facilities for 
people. Those are all very positive measures which the people of 
Saskatoon continue to look for support from the provincial 
government. 
 
I’d also like to ask if you can confirm that you will increase 
funding for Meewasin in order to provide provision for the 
Wanuskewin Heritage park. This park has been officially declared 
a national heritage site by Parks Canada, and it’s been estimated 
that some 110,000 people will visit it annually once it’s completed 
— 75,000 of those being from outside Saskatchewan, so there 
certainly is tremendous potential there. 
 
But the point is that it needs a commitment from this level of 
government to ensure that those improvements go forward, and 
that the city, then, and that the federal government will kick 
money into the heritage project as well, so that in three or four 
years from now we have a project that is world class. You talk a 
lot about world class tourist facilities and here’s an opportunity to 
do something. Can we expect to see a commitment to increased 
funding for this particular aspect of Meewasin’s work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I believe that the member has 
pointed out something that is recognized and accepted, and I think 
he fully understands that I am not in a position to indicate anything 
tonight. But there might be other areas, certainly as that park 
develops, that there might be some form of financial assistance 
wherever it may be. And we recognize the importance of it to that 
area, and as time goes by, we’ll just have to see how we can 
improve the situation. 
 
Item 10 agreed to. 
 
Item 11 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, as I look as these estimates, it’s 
clear to me that you have not listened or heeded the many 
representations that have come to you from people in the 
Wakamow Valley Authority and people in Moose Jaw concerning 
the funding for Wakamow. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, is this: why have you maintained the 
differential in funding that occurs for Wakamow as compared to 
the other like valley authorities around the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, while I recognize that, I 
disagree with the member when again he says that I’m not 
concerned with Wakamow Valley and the people of Moose Jaw, 
and that I don’t listen to them. I did. I represented them very well 
during the deliberations of our budget and was pleased when we 
could maintain the level of funding that we did. 
 
They went through an unnecessary exercise, well orchestrated by 
the authority — probably at much time 

certainly of volunteers that I recognize exists in Moose Jaw, and at 
some expense — to do something that was totally unnecessary. 
Because I am in touch with the board and I do talk to them and I 
do recognize the problems that exist, and as much as I would like 
to perhaps get them on an equal footing with the other parks that 
are in existence throughout the province, that opportunity was not 
available to us this year. And the only thing that I can say, and it 
relates back to the time of the original agreement, and that was 
negotiated with Moose Jaw at the time. And I believe that until 
such time as we are in a position to honestly be able to afford to 
catch up that situation, all we can do for the Wakamow Valley 
Authority is the same as we’re trying to do for the other urban 
parks. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Minister, I have little faith that things 
are going to change this year, so I guess what I’m doing tonight is 
lobbying for the next time you put a budget together. And I want 
to ask you tonight: will you give very serious consideration, 
indeed, would you make a commitment here in the House tonight 
that you would bring the Wakamow funding up to at least equal to 
the levels of funding provided to the other valley authorities in the 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not able to give that 
commitment tonight, obviously. 
 
Item 11 agreed to. 
 
Items 12 to 21 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 24 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Urban Affairs 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 162 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 162 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Urban Affairs 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 24 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Any questions on ’88 supplements? 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Urban Affairs 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 24 

 
Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 24 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1987 
Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 

Urban Affairs 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 162 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 162 agreed to. 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

 

3688 
 

Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister and his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, while no one enjoys personal 
attacks, by and large some were in jest and enjoyable this evening. 
 
I appreciated most of the questions that I received and certainly all 
of the debate. I do apologize for the few times that I displayed a 
loss of my temper, but I think that that’s recognized. You can 
imagine the wrath that I occasionally deploy on my officials, but I 
do thank my officials for a job very well done. I do recognize and 
appreciate the work that these truly professional civil servants do 
on our behalf. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, I want to join with the 
minister to thank his officials for attending here tonight. Some of 
these officials are known to me from my time in municipal 
government, and I would agree with the minister that these are 
high-calibre people and they are well-qualified for the positions 
that they serve. They’re a credit to the civil service and they’re a 
credit to the minister’s government. 
 
I also want to thank the minister for taking the time to answer the 
questions. Even if some of the questions were answered in a less 
than adequate way, I want to thank him for the time and for being 
available. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
(2030) 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 22 — An Act to amend The Municipal Revenues 
Sharing Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I would ask the minister to please introduce 
his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I have with me Dave Innes, 
my deputy minister, and I think that most of the argument will 
have been covered in the Committee of Finance that we just 
concluded. I really don’t have anything to offer unless of the 
member from Regina Victoria would ask for some clarification in 
some manner, and I leave it up to him. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, no, I agree with the 
minister. I think we’ve covered the ground when it comes to 
revenue sharing during estimates. I think that all of us would wish 
that we had more time to give to this very important subject. Be 
that as it may, we do not. I would simply indicate that this caucus 
stands fully opposed to the Bill. We believe that it’s a step in the 
wrong direction. Thank you. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to.

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister and his officials. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 15 — An Act to amend The Student Assistance  
and Student Aid Fund Act, 1985 

 
Mr. Chairman: — This Bill has been before the committee 
previously and we have already agreed to clause 1 to 5. We’re 
currently on clause 6, and an amendment was proposed by the 
member from Saskatoon University and seconded by the member 
from Regina Centre. 
 
Clause 6 (continued) 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, this amendment before the 
committee is to the effect that the Saskatchewan student bursary 
program established pursuant to this Act be continued in contrast 
to the policy of the government which has been to abolish the 
Saskatchewan student bursary program in this province, originally 
established by the New Democratic Party. 
 
When we were last considering these estimates, I was asking the 
Minister of Education to verify the fact that students in this 
province, in effect, now have to borrow almost two and a half 
times as much money before they’re eligible for any direct 
assistance and then it’s only in the form of a forgivable loan. And 
the minister, last time these estimates were under consideration, 
was unable to tell me how many students — how many thousands 
of students in this province — will lose their bursaries as a result 
of his changes to the bursary program. And he was also unable to 
verify my statement, because his officials just didn’t know. But 
my contention is that a student in a technical institute, taking a 
38-week program, now has to borrow over $6,800 from this 
government before being eligible for one penny of forgivable loan 
—an increase in borrowing of more than $3,000 over what would 
have been required last year. 
 
And I ask the minister now to answer two specific questions so we 
can get on with the vote on this Bill. One is: how many thousands 
of students in this province will lose their bursaries as a result of 
the policy that you’ve implemented? And secondly, will you now 
acknowledge that a student at a technical institute must borrow 
more than $6,800 if they’re in a 38-week program — the standard 
length of program in an institute — before they can receive one 
penny of forgivable loan from your government? And will you 
further acknowledge that that’s an increase of more than $3,500 in 
borrowing over what would have been required last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, the first 
question is the number of students who had a bursary last year but 
this year will receive their assistance in another form. 
 
Point number one: approximately 50 per cent of university and 
technical institute students receive student 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

 

3689 
 

assistance. Approximately 40 per cent of the students who receive 
assistance received bursaries in ’86-87, or in other words about 
7,000 young people. Therefore 20 per cent of all Saskatchewan 
post-secondary students are projected to be affected by the change. 
Some students will receive forgivable loans — 4,200 is what we 
are projecting versus 7,000 who received bursaries in ’86-87. 
 
The second question . . . And what we had worked up was for a 
student in a 37-week program at an institute — $6,600 repayable, 
2,590 would be forgivable on the total eligible amount of $9,250. 
And for your information, in ’81-82, the maximum assistance 
available for the same student was $112.50 per week, or $4,160. 
Now you could make the case, certainly, in a 37 or 38-week 
course, that they have to borrow 6,600 or 6,600-plus, before they 
get some assistance. 
 
But as well, there are a number of students who are not in 37 or 
38-week course. I have numbers here for 21-week courses, 
12-week courses. We’re there. Of this amount, 75 of the first $900 
is repayable and the next 840 is forgivable. So there is all kinds of 
different combinations and permutations. I think as you can 
appreciate, depending on the length of the course, and of course 
that doesn’t take into consideration our special needs category for 
northern students, disabled students, single parents, that kind of 
thing. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. The 
minister has just acknowledged that 2,800 students in this 
province are going to lose their bursaries as a result of your 
policies. And, Mr. Minister, the remaining 4,200 — it’s clear from 
the changes you’ve made, that the large majority of those students 
will get lower amounts of direct assistance, less direct assistance, 
than they did in previous years. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ll not belabour the point any more, because I’ve 
asked the question now six or seven times. You simply fail to 
acknowledge the fact that almost every student realizes now, and 
that is that last year a student only had to borrow $80 a week in 
Canada and Saskatchewan student loans before they received a 
bursary. This year they have to borrow $180 a week in 
Saskatchewan and Canada student loans before they receive a 
bursary. And for a university student, taking a standard 
eight-month program, that means they now have to borrow $5,940 
a year before they receive one penny of direct assistance from 
your government in the form of a forgivable loan. And a technical 
institute student, the large majority of which, Mr. Minister, are in 
38-week programs, has to borrow $6,840 before they receive one 
penny of assistance. There are thousands of students in this 
province, as a result of that, who will suffer cuts in bursary 
assistance. You’ve acknowledged yourself just now that 2,800 will 
get no assistance at all who got them last year. 
 
I just want to ask you one more question before we conclude this 
debate, Mr. Minister, and that is with respect to the question of 
whether you have the legal authority to cancel the bursary 
program at all. I want to say that I’ve consulted with the 
Legislative Law Clerk of this Assembly. I’ve asked the clerk 
whether, in her view, you have the legal authority under The 
Department of 

Advanced Education and Manpower Act to make regulations 
regarding student loans and bursaries. 
 
She informs me, Mr. Minister, that in her legal opinion you do not 
have the authority. That’s the Act under which you chose to pass 
regulations eliminating the bursary program. And I want to ask 
you tonight to table the legal opinion that indicates that you do 
have the authority to make regulations under the Act I just 
indicated, abolishing the bursary program, because I believe, Mr. 
Minister, you don’t have that legal authority and that you in fact 
have abolished the student bursary program in this province 
without even having the legal authority to do so, Mr. Minister. 
 
So will you table the justification for using The Department of 
Advanced Education and Manpower Act as the vehicle for passing 
regulations to do away with the bursary program? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I would read into the 
record, and then I’ll send it over to the hon. member, the opinion 
we have from the civil law division, Department of Justice, re The 
Student Assistance and Student Aid Fund Act, 1985. 
 
Under subsection 7(1) of the above Act: 
 

The minister (of Education) may (subject to that Act and any 
regulations under that Act) make awards in the form of 
scholarships, bursaries, loans or any combination thereof, to 
(students for the purposes set out in that subsection). 

 
And I’ll skip over a couple of sentences and I’ll pick it up again 
where it says, the use of the word “may” in that subsection is 
permissive and empowering and does compel the minister to make 
any awards or to continue making any awards previously 
instituted by the minister on the criteria established by him. 
 
There’s nothing in the Act or the regulations made under that Act 
which delimits or impairs the minister’s ability to discontinue 
making any or all awards pursuant to that subsection. 
 
Under section 4 of the Act: 
 

The Scholarship Bursary and Loan Committee is continued 
(with one of its functions to be to) . . . make 
recommendations to the minister concerning the 
development and administration of scholarships, bursaries, 
loans or other forms of assistance for students. . . 

 
And finally, another sentence here that might be worth reading: 
 

(In any event the duty of the committee is really to) make 
recommendations to the minister. 

 
in these areas, and there’s nothing in the Act or regulation which 
would compel the minister to follow such recommendation in 
establishing, administering, or 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

 

3690 
 

discontinuing any awards pursuant to the power given to the 
minister under subsection 7(1) of the Act. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I guess we have two 
conflicting legal opinions. I’m glad that at least the minister’s got a 
legal opinion to reinforce his argument. We’re not in a position as 
an opposition to pursue that argument any further. I’m quite 
prepared, Mr. Minister, to bring this subsection to a vote now. 
 
I just want to point out in closing that this is an average student in 
my riding and this is how he’s been impacted by the changes that 
you’ve made. In both summers, this student was able to save 
$1,000, Mr. Minister, in summer earnings to apply to his 
education. His total allowable expenses, both last year and this 
year, were $6,100 under the student loan program. His total 
allowable needs in both years were $5,100. In both years he got a 
Canada student loan of $3,465. That student, Mr. Minister, got a 
$1,500 bursary from the provincial government last year and this 
year, as a result of the changes that you made, that student will get 
nothing in the form of a bursary, and I think, Mr. Minister, that 
that simply illustrates the great disservice that you’ve done to the 
thousands of young people in this province who, as a result of the 
policy change you’ve made, will go many thousands of dollars 
more into debt to get an education than they would have prior to 
you introducing those changes. 
 
Let’s bring this section to a vote, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I 
hear what the hon. member is saying and we’re going to . . . we 
can vote this off and agree to disagree on it. But I would, too, want 
to read in the record again, because what we’re really talking 
about is: why do we have student assistance? Why would he 
propose bursaries instead of changing to a program where we 
forgive the loans to those who are most needy. That’s what we’ve 
done here is to try and target giving more money to those who 
most need it — the handicapped, natives, single parents, those 
kinds of things, Mr. Chairman. 
 
But let there be no mistake about our commitment to student 
assistance and having our young people gain accessibility to our 
secondary institutions. So, once again, and just very briefly, Mr. 
Chairman: in ’81-82, provincial assistance was $4.25 million — 
5,400 recipients; ’86-87, $34 million in provincial assistance - 
17,000 recipients. We have eight times the dollars being put 
forward from the province, Mr. Chairman, over that time frame 
and three times as many recipients. It seems to me that’s 
addressing in a very fundamental way the question of 
accessibility. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, I just want to add my voice of 
complaint, Mr. Minister, to that of my colleague and other people 
who have complained about this legislation, and complained about 
what you are doing to students. Mr. Minister, there is no question 
but what you are cutting back on the expenditures which this 
province makes to students and to education. You’re making it 
more difficult, and I can’t believe any government would be so 
short-sighted, Mr. Minister. 

Mr. Minister, we are not bequeathing young people a very pretty 
mess. And there is not perhaps very much we can do about that. 
We can, however, ensure that they get the best education, and that 
so far as it is possible they are trained to meet those problems. By 
cutting back on education here, as you are doing elsewhere, Mr. 
Minister, you are making it more difficult for young people to get 
an education, and you are discouraging them from getting it. We 
ought to be doing the opposite. 
 
Mr. Minister, the sort of assistance that was available to you and I 
when we were that age was vastly better than it is now. And that’s 
a real crime, Mr. Minister, if young people are not outraged with 
what you are doing in education, then they don’t sit where I sit. I 
think they are outraged. I think the absence of the Conservative 
Party opposite to find anyone who would participate in a debate on 
campus in the last election is perhaps some indication that you’re 
not altogether proud of what you’re doing. 
 
I say, Mr. Minister, this is short-sighted, it’s unfair, and I just can’t 
believe that you’d fail to make this kind of an investment in the 
young people of the province. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 6 agreed to on division. 
 
Clauses 7 and 8 agreed to. 
 
Clause 9 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, I just very briefly want to move a 
motion and bring it to a vote pretty well right away. I’d like to: 
 

Amend section 10 of the Bill as being enacted by section 9 of 
the printed Bill: 
 
(a) by striking out subsection 1; 
 
(b) by striking out “minister” in the first line of subsection 2, 
and substituting “Lieutenant Governor in Council”; 
 
(c) by striking out clause 2 (j); and 
 
(d) by renumbering subsection 10(2) as section 10. 

 
Mr. Chairman, I move that, seconded by the member for Regina 
Centre. 
 
I simply want to say in speaking to this motion — I’ll give it to the 
page if I may, and I’ve given the minister a copy of this 
amendment earlier. I simply want to say, Mr. Chairman, with 
respect to this amendment that I do not think it is appropriate for 
the minister to be giving himself the authority under this Bill to 
make regulations himself and adopt them himself without taking 
those regulations to cabinet. I simply think that’s not good policy. 
It’s not standard practice in legislation. It’s just another little 
example of the desire of this minister to grab power wherever he 
can get it, Mr. Chairman. 
 
This is simply not a good section in the Bill. I ask the 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

 

3691 
 

minister to agree to this very simple amendment, and I hope he 
will, Mr. Chairman. And I’ll conclude my remarks with that. 
 
Amendment negatives on division. 
 
Clause 9 agreed to. 
 
Clause 10 agreed to on division. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Before the minister’s officials leave, I’d like to 
express my thanks to them for being present. I know some of them 
will be leaving as we switch education Bills, so I want to thank 
them for their presence in the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I join with the critic in 
thanking my officials as well for their assistance in this Bill. 
 
Bill No. 46 — An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister please introduce his new 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members of 
the committee, to my right is Lawrie McFarlane, deputy minister 
in the department; behind him, Kevin Costante, executive director 
of training; beside him, Elizabeth Crosthwaite, assistant deputy 
minister, training; and to my left, Larry Anderson, Justice solicitor. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to welcome 
the minister’s officials to the Assembly. 
 
I’d like to say, Mr. Minister, that I can’t think of an educational 
Bill or a labour Bill that’s been initiated in this Assembly in the 
current year that has led to as much opposition and dissatisfaction 
across the province as Bill 46, Mr. Chairman. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Minister, you are really doing a great disservice to the people 
of this province, and particularly to the students and instructors in 
our technical institute and community college system in this 
province, with the introduction of Bill 46. You have tried to 
pretend, Mr. Minister, that this Bill which amalgamates 
Saskatchewan’s four technical institutes and four community 
colleges into one super institute is going to usher in a new era in 
post-secondary education in this province. 
 
I want to say to you, Mr. Minister, that all this Bill does is, first of 
all, continue the attack on the rights of employees who work in 
post-secondary education in this province that you began this 
spring when you fired 142 instructors in our technical institutes 
and our community colleges. All this Bill does, Mr. Minister, is 
put in law what you have been unsuccessful in negotiating as 
minister responsible 

for the Public Service Commission with employees who work in 
the technical institute and community college system. 
 
What you have failed to negotiate by way of a collective 
agreement with those employees, you are now trying to force 
through using Bill 46. And we, Mr. Minister, say that that is 
simply a disgrace and that you are breaking with all the traditions 
of collective bargaining in this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to summarize briefly our three major 
objections to this Bill and then provide an opportunity for my 
colleagues to ask some specific questions of you. 
 
Our first objection, Mr. Minister, is that you are simply trying to 
re-write the labour laws of this land as they apply to technical 
institute and community college staff. You, Mr. Minister, are very 
consciously singling out those professional educators and those 
staff persons who work in our institutes and colleges and you are 
trying to make an example of them, Mr. Minister, with respect to 
the kind of labour law that we no doubt will see from you in the 
future applying to a much larger group of employees. 
 
But specifically with respect to this group of employees you are, 
first of all, taking away their seniority rights. You are denying 
them, Mr. Minister, the right to belong to the trade union of their 
choice. You are abolishing the certification orders that led to all 
the urban college instructors and all the urban technical institute 
staff being members of Saskatchewan Government Employees’ 
Union, and you, Mr. Minister, are consciously abolishing their 
collective agreements. And, Mr. Minister, you know full well 
what you’re doing because you as minister of the Public Service 
Commission have a good deal of experience with trade union 
legislation, and particularly as it applies to the public sector. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, this is nothing short of union bashing and a 
denial of the rights of employees in our technical institute and 
community college system. And, Mr. Minister, I say that in 
denying their rights, you are directly resulting in a demoralization 
of staff in our institutes and, as a result of that, a decline in the 
quality of education that is available at our institutes. 
 
I’ve never seen a time in the history of the province, Mr. 
Chairman, when institute staff and college staff have been so 
demoralized. And this minister has compounded the firings of this 
spring with now this Bill that denies their basic rights to a 
collective agreement and membership in a trade union. 
 
There are two other issues, Mr. Chairman, that I want to briefly 
touch on. One is the issue of the failure of this government to 
agree to local autonomy for boards and instead to go with the 
notion of one central board, which in reality under this Bill, has 
very little power. The Minister of Education retains the right to, in 
effect, implement any policy in the institute and college system 
that he wishes. He has given this board so little autonomy that it 
bears absolutely no resemblance to the University of Regina or the 
University of Saskatchewan, contrary to his claim. Contrary to his 
claim that this is an autonomous board, this is merely a puppet 
board which is a front for this Minister of Education to continue 
exercising his 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

 

3692 
 

power over the direction that the college and institute system in 
this province will take. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, we, in the New Democratic Party, have met 
with instructors and with staff and students in the institutes and 
colleges across this province, and time and again, they have 
expressed to us their disappointment with this Bill, their 
expectation that when the Minister of Education talked about 
autonomy, he meant local autonomy that would give faculty and 
students and staff in the technical institutes and community 
college some real say in the programs that were to be offered, in 
the way the budget was to be allocated, and in the priorities that 
would be set by a local institute or college. 
 
Instead we have one central board with no elected members, all 
appointed by the Minister of Education. He’s free to appoint his 
own political hacks to set up and run this super institute. And 
those appointees have a free reign to fire or delete positions and 
attack employees in the institute and college system that they don’t 
want to see around any more because those employees have lost 
their seniority and their collective agreement. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we on this side of the House, stand for elected 
boards, locally elected boards that have authority and 
responsibility with respect to the setting of programs at the local 
level, the allocation of the budget at the local level, the hiring of 
staff at the local level. And we say, Mr. Chairman, that some 
things in the institute and college system should still be done on a 
central basis, and those should include the negotiation of a 
collective agreement with the employees in the institute who 
should continue to be represented by the Saskatchewan 
Government Employees’ Union, who is their legally recognized 
union — the union that they voted to be members of, in some 
cases many years ago, and in some cases recently. 
 
That’s the kind of structure, Mr. Chairman, we want to see. We 
want to see either the Department of Education or some central 
body continue to ensure that credits are transferable between 
institutes, something that’s long overdue in this province, and to 
set a global budget for each institute. And beyond that, Mr. 
Chairman, we want to see other decisions made at the local level 
with input from students, faculty, staff, local employers, and 
interested community organizations. I’ll stop at that, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
I want to ask the Minister one question before turning this over to 
my colleagues, and that is simply this: I want to ask the Minister 
why it is that he is making an exception to the labour laws of the 
land for technical institute and community college employees? 
Why it is that he is saying to those employees that their collective 
agreement is to be abolished, that their seniority rights are not to 
be recognized, and that their right to transfer SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union) membership to 
the new institute is being violated contrary to section 37 of The 
Trade Union Act? Why are you singling out, Mr. Minister, 
technical institute and community college staff and trying to 
exempt them from the labour laws of this land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think some of this . . . The issues

the hon. member raises in his last question, Mr. Chairman, we 
have dealt with on previous occasions to some degree through 
question period. But I will reiterate why we’re doing what we’re 
doing here, briefly. 
 
The first point I would make is, this is a Bill relative to education 
and post-secondary education in this province. It’s not a labour 
Bill. And I think as the hon. member, when we had second reading 
. . . I mean, this view that it’s somehow labour legislation is a new 
view because that wasn’t his view when we had second reading of 
this Bill, Mr. Chairman. 
 
It also is well-known, because the hon. members opposite 
themselves conducted a survey relative to the form of governance 
that we had for the institutes prior to this Bill coming in —in fact, 
it’s still in force this very day — and that was that the institute 
faculty and staff were members of the department of advanced 
education. They did not like that. The whole concept didn’t have 
the flexibility and the responsiveness that it should have. It was 
their view that everything was run out of government and it was 
totally apart from what was happening in the universities where 
we had boards operating each university, as well as community 
colleges which had their own boards. So we had this anomaly 
where we had institutes that were an arm of the department of 
advanced education. Everybody agreed, including them, that we 
had to change that. Now we’ve changed it and they still don’t like 
it. 
 
What we have here now, and why we have done what we’ve done, 
is now we have an exclusively educational institution. It’s got a 
new mandate, with new goals, and new objectives. And we’re not 
violating any rights of those people because we want to do right 
by our people. 
 
As I’ve said in this House before, there were rumours going 
around that when this Bill passed, they’d lose their jobs and their 
pay would go down and all those kinds of things. We want to do 
right by these people. We want to have them have more 
opportunities to do research and to have time and money for 
research, Mr. Chairman. We want to do right. Those are the 
people that are going to make this thing click. 
 
It’s a new institute. It’s strictly an educational institute. And the 
thing that the hon. members can’t get through their heads yet, it 
seems to me, is that these people will no longer work for 
government, they’ll work for the Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology — much as people today work 
for the University of Regina or the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
There’s no sense clinging to that notion that somehow everything 
should be run by government. They didn’t want that. Those 
members opposite agreed with that. But we have not violated their 
rights. We have left it to them to choose if and how they shall be 
represented and by whom they shall be represented. We’ve left 
those choices to them. But this is a new institute, new goals, new 
mandate. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, you are really misleading this 
House and the people of this province in the remarks that you 
make. Because you know, Mr. Minister, full well 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

 

3693 
 

that it is standard practice that when employees are transferred 
from one institution to another, their union rights go with them, 
their certification order goes with them, their collective agreement 
goes with them, their seniority rights go with them, and in every 
one of those cases, Mr. Minister, as a result of the legislation that 
you are passing in this House today, all those rights are being 
denied to technical institute and community college employees. 
Do you deny that, Mr. Minister? Do you deny that? 
 
This is, in effect, rewriting the labour laws of Saskatchewan under 
the auspices of an education Bill. And I ask you, sir, to at least 
have the courtesy to acknowledge that, and better still, if you think 
that you’re not doing that, then delete all the sections of this Bill 
that say notwithstanding section 37 of The Trade Union Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t deny 
anything of what is in the Bill relative to collective bargaining 
agreement. I mean the hon. member somehow — never mind 
those very fundamental arguments I put forward about (a) they no 
longer will work for government. And is it not right . . . It seems to 
me it would only be fair to employees, in fact, it would only be 
fair, right, and proper to employees to give them the choice now 
that they are working for a brand-new educational institute. 
 
They should have the choice as to how and whom shall represent 
them. I think we ought not impose that. That should be their 
choice. And that’s what we’re doing here, Mr. Chairman — no 
rights violated. They will have the choice to choose, as always 
people have had in this province, Mr. Chairman. And I think this 
is a point that the hon. member and I are going to disagree on, and 
maybe all we can do is agree to disagree. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister is making me 
more and more angry, as I’m sure many people who are involved 
in the trade union movement tonight are feeling as they watch on 
television. 
 
Because I say to the Minister of Education, many people in the 
community college system made the decision to join 
Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union just a short matter 
of three or four years ago. Are you telling those people who just 
voted a mere three or four years ago to join SGEU that they’ve got 
to vote all over again? That’s exactly what you’re saying in this 
Bill. In fact in the counterpart to this Bill, you are telling the 
community . . . Under Bill 47, you are telling the community 
college employees of Beauval, who only decided in July to join 
SGEU, that they have to vote all over again. 
 
Now you explain to me, Mr. Minister, what the logic of that is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I gave you the very fundamental 
arguments as far as why we’re doing what we’re doing. There are 
some technical arguments that, some would argue, that would add 
additional credence for what we’re doing. 

(2115) 
 
For example, the hon. member is somehow suggesting that we 
should leave well enough alone, change nothing. Well where that 
takes you, is really you’re arguing: do not change the form of 
governance . . .(inaudible interjection). . . And the hon. member 
says, never claimed that. Well then somehow he says that when 
you bring all this together, then if you do change the form of 
governance, that somehow these 10 or 11 bargaining units that 
you would be bringing together, that any discrepancies that might 
exist in them, that that’s okay. I mean, how . . . Even technically it 
wouldn’t work, if you look at it in that light — 10 or 11 bargaining 
units, some get paid twice a month, some get paid once a month, 
different job classifications, different hours of work in some 
instances. 
 
Technically there’s lots of good reasons for doing what we’re 
doing. Those arguments, really, in my mind, aren’t the compelling 
ones because one could argue you can always deal with the 
technical problems. The fundamental ones are the ones that seem 
to me are the compelling ones. And if this is an educational 
institution, they no longer work for government. They’re no longer 
part of a structure that has parks workers, and oilfield workers, and 
highway workers, and forestry workers, and so on and so on. 
These people now are part of an educational institution, and it 
seems to me it is only right, fair, and proper that we should give 
them the choice to decide how and by whom. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Chairman, to the minister. Mr. 
Minister, the way to work out any differences — and many of 
them are pretty modest differences that may exist between the 
various collective agreements that are coming together here — is 
at the bargaining table with the legitimate trade union organization 
that represents all these employees, which is SGEU. That’s the 
way to work out those differences in the collective agreement, 
through the collective bargaining process, not by abolishing the 
trade union and the collective agreement and giving those 
employees no one to represent them, Mr. Minister. 
 
And you know, Mr. Minister, full well, that it is standard practice 
that when employees are transferred from government to another 
institution, whether it be a public or private one, that their trade 
union rights and their collective agreement go with them. You are 
making a special exception for technical institute and community 
college employee staff. And I ask you now, Mr. Minister, will you 
agree to sit down and allow the new super institute board to work 
out, through the collective bargaining process, with Saskatchewan 
Government Employees’ Union what the new collective 
agreement for technical institute and community college staff will 
be? In the interim, will you recognize the existing collective 
agreements that are in place? Will you agree to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’ll sit down with whomever the 
employees choose, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, in your remarks earlier you 
mentioned that this Bill will do something for education. Now 
we’ve looked through the Bill, and I have looked through the Bill, 
and I tell you it does nothing for 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

 

3694 
 

education that you couldn’t have done without this Bill. 
 
To me, this Bill looks completely like a power grab, a power grab 
on the part of your department, because what it does is instead of 
giving to a board, a locally elected board — the power over 
managing the curriculum — it gives you an overriding power. It 
gives you an overriding power over the board, over the budget. 
Instead of appointing the board . . . Instead of having elected 
boards, it gives you the power to elect them. It gives you the 
power to set fees, over and above, or just the fees that the board 
might suggest. It gives you the power to set the standards. You say 
that you’re going to appoint a . . . that there’s going to be a review 
committee. You have the power of appointing the review 
committee. If there’s going to be any kind of a meaningful review 
committee, it should at least be independent and not appointed by 
you to review your powers. 
 
So I’m asking you, Mr. Minister, to answer the question: why is it 
that you need this particular power? What is your reason? What is 
your reason for this particular power grab? Don’t you trust the 
people in the communities to elect their own boards and run the 
institute? Don’t you trust the people in the local communities to 
adjust the programs and to keep budgets going? Don’t you 
recognize that municipal governments and local school boards 
have been far more efficient than any provincial or federal 
government levels have been? What is your reason for this power 
grab? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I have some difficulty 
with the hon. member’s logic. What I hear him saying is that 
somehow with this change in the form of autonomy and the form 
of governance, that this is somehow a power grab by myself. But 
if I examine it, what do I find? I find the situation today is that 
these people work for the department of advanced education — or 
today the Education department who I am the minister of — and 
so one could argue, I suppose, and in a very direct way, this very 
day, I have all the power. I can hire and fire, if you like. What we 
are going to do now is that they shall work for an institute board, 
and I will have no authority to hire and fire; I won’t even see the 
applications. I will have no part of that. 
 
The second point I would make . . . And so I would argue, Mr. 
Chairman, that rightly so, that puts the power in the hands of the 
institute which is what they wanted. Secondly, Mr. Chairman, he 
is saying that anything in this Bill we could have done without 
having legislation. I don’t know whether that’s right or not. Quite 
frankly, to do . . . To make this kind of major restructuring without 
bringing it before the people, and without bringing it before this 
legislature, in my mind, would be irresponsible and probably in 
contempt of this legislature. 
 
I am proud of what we’re doing in the post-secondary education. I 
want the people to have the chance to debate it. The opposition are 
to be the . . . (inaudible) . . . of democracy, to examine and make 
commentary where necessary. It seems to me if we hadn’t brought 
it to the legislature what would the opposition have said, Mr. 
Chairman. They would have said, ah, ha! There it is again. Those 
Tories in the dead of night, in the dark of night, cloistered away in 
the cabinet room. What are they 

doing? Oh, yes, changing things again — hidden away. And then 
when we bring it here, they say, oh, you could have done that 
without bringing it here. And I don’t think you can have it both 
ways, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if he would have given 
the board true autonomy like the university has, then there would 
have been a point to the legislation. But if all you’re doing is 
setting up a puppet board over which you as minister have all the 
powers, the budget powers and the program powers, there just 
doesn’t seem any point to it. 
 
The way the previous institutes were organized, the previous 
community colleges, they at least had full autonomous powers. 
They had all the powers granted to them under The Interpretation 
Act, and that means that they had the power to sue and to be sued. 
 
Now in this particular case, this new institute is going to be 
making transactions and business dealings with numerous 
individuals and numerous businesses, and they should have the 
powers of a full corporation. Why is it that you did not give them 
powers of a full corporation? Why did you use the name 
“institute” in so many places instead of using the name “board” as 
is traditionally done? Why are you doing that? What is the 
significance of using “institute” if you don’t intend to use your 
power to override the board? Because the board obviously doesn’t 
even have the power to give you or give the government any kind 
of directives, or to even write a criticizing letter to the government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I think your interpretation, relative 
to the corporate nature of the institute, your interpretation of 
section 3 and mine must be different. As I understand section 3, it 
means the institute established as a corporation separate from the 
government. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Now could you answer the question of why 
you used, in section 4 for example, why you used the word 
“institute” where ordinarily I would have expected the use of the 
word “board”, the board may provide. Or on page 4 in section 
7(2), again you did the same thing; and again in section 9(9), the 
“institute” instead of the “board.” Does that board not have 
corporate powers? Why did you use the word “institute?” What is 
the significance of it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the institute is the body corporate, 
and the board is the management structure. I don’t know if I can 
really say much more than that. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I just want to clarify. Are you saying that this 
institute board will have the same corporate powers as . . . in terms 
of legal authority as say, a library, an elected library board has, or 
as an appointed library board has or as a school board has? 
 
I would just add to that question: would this institute board have 
the power to sue the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Relative to whether they can sue the 
government or not sue the government, I guess the best analogy I 
could use is that they would have — and you used some examples 
of library boards and etc., etc. 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

 

3695 
 

— the best example I could use is it would been to unlike what the 
university could do. They have a board of governors; this has a 
board of governors. 
 
The powers is so far as . . . is what this Bill is all about, at least 
some several sections of it. That’s what’s outlined in here, and 
delineated in the various sections. The institute, it’s a body 
corporate, it has a management structure, a board of governors, 
board of directors, whatever you want to call it. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — You know, the minister’s answer, Mr. Chairman, 
is just unbelievable. This board, Mr. Minister, bears absolutely no 
resemblance to the University of Regina Board of Governors or 
the University of Saskatchewan Board of Governors whatsoever. 
 
But let me just give you two or three examples, Mr. Minister, that 
ought to make that obvious. First of all, in section 20 of this Bill, 
you give yourself the power not only to: 
 

approve the budget (but to) require the board to revise all or 
any part of the budget (right down to the final dollar spent) in 
any manner that he considers (to be) appropriate. 

 
And I’m quoting now from section 20(2). 
 
Mr. Chairman, the minister doesn’t even give the board the power 
to decide who their chairman or vice-chairman will be. The 
minister appoints them. 
 
And in section 7 of this Act, Mr. Minister, not only do you very 
clearly give yourself the power to set directions for all courses, all 
programs, and all activities of the institute, you even go so far, Mr. 
Minister, to actually give yourself the ability to set directions on 
what the accounting systems of the new super institute will be. 
 
Now are you trying to tell me that any of those provisions are in 
the University of Regina; the Act that constitutes the University of 
Regina and establishes the power of that board of governors? Can 
you show me one example of where the items that I have 
mentioned fall within your powers as they relate to the University 
of Regina, because I suggest to you that you will not be able to 
find a single example of that happening. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, the question that the member 
poses here, really when you get down to the nub of it, is the whole 
question of accountability in that the public purse must . . . and the 
expectation that the public might expect, given the sums that are 
coming from the public purse of the institute. On the other hand, 
it’s to provide the institute with its autonomy. 
 
Now I have no doubt, to flip this argument around, the operation 
of this will go something like this: on an annual basis, 50 to 60 
millions of dollars will be taken from the public treasury and given 
to the institute to run. Now are you saying that we ought not have 
some accountability relative to that sum? Because sure as I stand 
here — and I stood in this very spot, and you questioned me for 42 
hours in Education estimates — and I’ll tell you what, it didn’t 
matter whether it was the university, the technical

institute, or community college that had a board in place, you 
wanted to know lots of stuff on behalf of Her Majesty’s loyal 
opposition. 
 
(2130) 
 
Now you can’t have it both ways; you can’t have it both ways. 
You can’t say, send them a blank cheque. I would argue that if we 
didn’t have that section in there, you would say this: are you trying 
to tell us, Mr. Minister, that you’re going to send them a blank 
cheque and have no expectation of how that’s spent? Is this what 
you’re really telling the people? You send them a blank cheque 
and have no understanding of where it might be spent, or how it 
might be spent. I mean, what this is is common sense and reason. 
We’re moving it out of the department, giving them that flexibility 
and autonomy, but certainly the public purse has to have some 
accountability, and that’s what it’s all about. it’s not onerous. You 
can argue that we don’t have the same lines and words as the 
University of Regina, whoever; I accept that. Maybe my example 
was a bad one. I’m trying to tell you what we’re fundamentally 
looking for here. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, obviously we are not arguing 
that the educational system shouldn’t be accountable to 
government with respect to how it spends money and whether or 
not that money is wisely spent, but the minister knows full well 
that there is provision for accountability with respect to how the 
board of governors at the University of Saskatchewan spends their 
money. There was provision with respect to accountability of how 
the former community college boards in Saskatchewan spent their 
money. This board, Mr. Minister, has even less authority and less 
autonomy than the community college boards that were 
established during the time when the New Democratic Party was 
in government. You are providing, under this Bill, even less 
autonomy than is available under the old Community Colleges 
Act. And you know that to be the case. 
 
This board, Mr. Minister, allows you essentially to interfere in 
academic freedom. That’s essentially what a large part of this 
issue is. This board is simply going to be a front for you 
continuing to exercise your authority — and I might add, your 
tyranny — over the educational system in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I think, Mr. Chairman, the only 
answer I can give to that is that, relative to his last statement, 
history will prove him wrong. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I’d like 
to talk about some of the labour provisions of this so-called 
education Bill of yours. You seem to be saying in an earlier 
answer that this was an education Bill and not a labour Bill. And I 
shouldn’t be surprised if you didn’t believe that. I shouldn’t be 
surprised if you didn’t believe that was true. But I want to tell you, 
Mr. Minister, that you’re doing some of the most radical, some of 
the most radical things with respect to labour law in this Bill that 
we have seen. 
 
I think that you’d have to go a long way in this country to 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

 

3696 
 

tomorrow on the street. At first it was, when we brought the Bill 
in, oh, 20 per cent of us are going to lose our jobs. The next day it 
was, when we put that one to rest, oh, oh, we’re going to take a 20 
per cent cut in pay. 
 
I’ll tell you what; we are going to do right by these people. We are 
going to give them something that they haven’t had, in my mind, 
or at least — let’s entertain the notion. We’re going to let them . . . 
we’re going to look at notions like this: sabbatical leaves, 
provision for research. This is an educational institution that’s 
going to serve our citizens well into the 21st century. We want to 
do right by our people, and how do you square that with the term 
“radical”? 
 
I have no trouble with the opposition, I have no trouble with the 
opposition being the detergents of democracy, but let’s get this 
thing in perspective. And I don’t think there’s anything radical in 
making sure that people have their jobs, and their pay is secure, 
and all those other things that I read into the record. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, that’s a bunch 
of ill-informed and hypocritical nonsense, and you should know 
that. You’re not looking after the rights of employees when you’re 
tearing up their collective agreement by legislation. If you were 
concerned about their rights, you would maintain the protection of 
their collective agreements. In so doing you would maintain their 
seniority, you would be maintaining benefits that they and their 
colleagues have bargained for, fought for, went on strike for, over 
years and years and years of bargaining. 
 
If you were concerned about the employees, that’s what you’d be 
doing. You wouldn’t be ripping up their collective agreements. 
You wouldn’t be throwing them in the ash can. 
 
It’s hypocritical of you to talk about freedom of choice. 
Employees in this province have always had freedom of choice. 
The basis for that has been set out in our legislation in this 
province for years and years since the inception of the Act, since 
the inception of The Trade Union Act. And it’s not dissimilar in 
Saskatchewan than it is in any other province in any other 
jurisdiction in Canada. You’re not giving these people any 
freedom of choice with this Act. You’re stripping them of their 
collective agreement; you’re stripping them of their right to be 
certified by the trade union which has been representing them, 
some for months, some for years. You’re stripping that right away. 
You’re saying to them: start over again. And that’s in no possible 
sense a protection or a concern for the rights of employees. It’s 
quite the opposite. 
 
You say that they no longer work for government; they are now 
going to be working for an institute. But, Minister, surely even you 
understand that these people will be doing the same thing. They’ll 
be instructing students; they’ll be administering programs; they’ll 
be doing whatever jobs are there in the institute. 
 
You’re not taking a bunch of Cat operators and making them into 
instructors. You’re not taking a bunch of forest fire-fighters and 
making them into institute 

administrators. You’re taking a bunch of people who have been 
employed in these institutes for varying lengths of time, and all 
you’re doing is changing the legal arrangement so that now they 
work for an institute rather than for the government. But they’re 
doing the same work, the same job, same problems, same working 
situation, same environment, but not with the seniority that 
they’ve built up over years and years, and not with a guarantee 
that the same benefits and the same provisions that were contained 
in their collective agreement will continue to apply. They’re going 
to have to start all over again and negotiate those collective 
agreements from the ground up. 
 
(2145) 
 
Now I can understand that you . . . some of your people may not 
be entirely happy with the restrictions put upon their actions by the 
collective agreement. And I can understand that they’d like to 
work some changes in that collective agreement. But the way that 
that’s done in this province and everywhere else in Canada is to go 
to the bargaining table and negotiate the things that you want 
done, not to come into the legislature and pass laws throwing that 
entire collective agreement into the waste basket, not by using all 
of your muscle and might of the sovereign power to come down 
on the necks of a number of teachers and people employed in our 
educational institutions and use your might to strip them of rights 
that they’ve built up over years and years. I mean, that’s not fair. 
And it’s not just. 
 
And all across this country, over years and years of study and 
debate, the best minds in the labour relations business on both 
sides of the table and in academia have concluded that 
governments ought not to do the precise thing that you’re doing. It 
is not a proper exercise of the sovereign power. It is an abuse of 
your right to pass laws. 
 
And what you’re doing is conferring on yourself advantages as an 
employer as a result of your role as the lawmaker. That’s not fair. 
Ipsco can’t do that; Intercon can’t do that; the CNR (Canadian 
National Railway) can’t do that, but you can, and you’re doing it. 
And it’s not fair, and everybody knows it’s not fair, Minister; 
everybody knows. I mean, all of the people concerned with labour 
relations and collective bargaining across this country would 
answer it in exactly the same way that I’m doing it, that I’m 
answering it. it is not fair, and it is an abuse of your power as a 
government. 
 
You, as an employer, if you want some changes made in the 
working conditions in the institute, should go to the bargaining 
table and bargain those provisions. If you want sabbatical leave 
written into the collective agreement, you should have no trouble 
getting that. Take it to the table, take it to the table just like every 
other employer has to, and work out the details. Don’t come in 
here and pass a law that rips up the collective agreement and then 
you can start all over again from scratch and force the union to 
argue over every little thing to try somehow to get themself back 
into a comparable position to what they are now. That’s not fair. 
That’s not right, and you shouldn’t be doing it. 
 
Let’s just take some examples now. Let’s just zero in and



 
October 29, 1987 

 

3697 
 

find precedents for this kind of treatment of a bargaining unit and 
for this kind of a treatment of a collective bargaining agreement. 
This is very, very radical stuff indeed. 
 
It raises a fundamental question that I had assumed you were 
aware of but which you may not be aware of. It’s a fundamental 
question of the role of a government in a situation like this, the 
role of a government where, on the one hand, you are the 
employer of the employees in question, and at the same time, as a 
government, you represent the sovereign. You are the sovereign 
power. You are the legislators. And that’s a very old question in 
Canadian labour law, a very old question indeed, a much debated 
question and a question which has been the subject of a good deal 
of study and a good deal of writing over the years. I assume that 
you and your advisors have looked at that literature and have 
considered very carefully the implications of what you are doing 
because — Minister, I’m not sure I have your attention — but 
what I’m trying to say to you is that you are abusing your role as 
the legislator, as the exerciser of the sovereign power in respect of 
your role as the employer of employees. 
 
Now I can understand how frustrating it may be for some of your 
management people to have to deal with the collective bargaining 
agreement respecting these employees, and I can quite understand 
that some of them would like to get rid of the SGEU as the 
bargaining unit. Some of them would like to operate without a 
trade union at all, or with a different trade union. In any event they 
hope, I think, out of all this, to be able to start over again as far as 
the collective agreement is concerned. 
 
And that, I think, is the effect of your Bill. I think that the current 
collective agreement which covers these employees falls, and that 
in the result, if they are certified by the Labour Relations Board, in 
the future they will have to start building a collective agreement 
again from the ground up. And that’s a very radical thing for any 
government to do. 
 
Now if this were a collection of . . . If this were something that 
was happening entirely in the private sector, Mr. Minister, if you 
had eight separate employers who were merging their businesses 
into one business, then the labour laws of this province — as in the 
case of every other jurisdiction in Canada — would provide a 
result that is much different than the one that you’ve fashioned for 
yourself in this Bill. 
 
If this were in the private sector the legislation of this province and 
every other province, and the Parliament of Canada would 
safeguard the bargaining rights with respect to those employees, 
that legislation would safeguard the collective agreement that 
applies. So if these were employers in the private sector who were 
merging their businesses into one big company, there would be no 
question that the trade union certifications would continue to 
apply, and there would be no question that the collective 
agreements would continue to apply. Now that’s The Trade Union 
Act, and it is also the law in every other jurisdiction in Canada. 
 
Most jurisdictions also cover situations where the transfer is 
between the public and the private sector and vice

versa from the private to the public sector. Your Bill gives a 
treatment which is radically different. What you’re doing in your 
Bill is wiping out all of the orders of the Labour Relations Board, 
granting bargaining rights to the trade union, and you’re wiping 
out the collective agreement. 
 
Now on what possible basis, Minister, can you justify the 
government using its power to legislate in order to produce a result 
that would be different in the private sector in this province and 
every other province in Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, hon. member, I think the 
rationale that I would give you is the same that I gave your hon. 
colleague for why we’ve made the provisions in this Bill that we 
have. Yes, it’s true that the collective bargaining agreements no 
longer apply. 
 
But it seems to me the fundamental question here is, you know, do 
we want to do right by our employees? They’re going into . . . I 
mean, I think the essential concept, and I think the NDP cannot get 
their heads around here, is that these employees are no longer 
going to work for government — no longer going to work for 
government. They’re no longer going to be part of a structure that 
includes parks’ workers and forestry workers and oilfield workers 
and electrical inspectors, and the list goes on and on. They’re 
going to be employees of a brand-new educational institute. 
 
And you can talk all you like about labour legislation and what 
you read into this and use words like “radical” which, quite 
frankly, I think have no place in there. This is a brand-new 
institute with new goals, new objectives, and new mandates. What 
this Bill is about is making sure we have the right adult education 
system for the 21st century. 
 
And you can scoff at that if you wish. We were just, along with 
your colleague from Saskatoon University, at a conference, a 
forum, a national forum. What I heard and saw there tells me more 
than ever that we are right on the money with what we’re doing 
here. 
 
And how can you stand and say that somehow what we’re doing 
as a government here is radical? How can you say that? What 
we’re saying to the employees is that every right that you have 
relative to freedom of choice is intact; you can pick by whom and 
how. 
 
The acid test is to me: how do you back up that term “radical”? 
Are the employees going to lose their job as a result of institute 
formulation? No. Are they going to have a cut in pay? Somehow 
is their pay going to be slashed with this new educational institute? 
No. Are the current 200-day year going to be gone somehow? No. 
Vacation leave? — no; sick leave? — no. Those on 
re-employment lists, are they going to be honoured whether it’s 
the Department of Education or community colleges? yes, those 
lists are going to be honoured. 
 
So you can try and use fear tactics if you like. I do not think that 
faculties and support staff are well-served by that kind of thing. I 
have fought rumours for the last two months on this. And I don’t 
know what the rumour will be 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

 

3698 
 

the collective agreement, Minister. Now people working in the 
institutes and community colleges have been working under 
collective agreements for some years now — some of them for a 
long time, some of them for only a short time. 
 
If this were an employer in the private sector, a group of 
employers who were merging their business into one super 
business, those collective agreements would all apply, and the new 
employer would sit down with the trade unions and would 
hammer out the little differences that seem to be giving you so 
much problem, like: when are they going to receive their pay 
cheques, and what will be the classifications, and that sort of thing. 
 
These are questions that in the labour relations community are 
resolved routinely whenever mergers occur. Rarely do they have 
problems. Very often the Labour Relations Board has got the 
authority to help them and sort out how these things will work, but 
no big problems arise form it. Now why, in your case, when you 
have employees who have been working in institutes and 
community colleges and are now going to be working for the 
super-institute doing approximately the same kind of work, why 
was it necessary in their case to scrap the collective agreement, 
when in the case of any private sector employment that collective 
agreement would remain binding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member, Mr. Chairman, has 
suggested that somehow we’re stripping rights away. And I went 
through what is indeed intact — I mean, so that everyone is clear 
— because we want everyone . . . because we wanted all of our 12 
or 13,000 dedicated employees to be clear, because we expected 
that there might be some who would try and create a picture other 
than what was the real facts, Mr. Speaker. We made sure that 
when this Bill went out that they had an update on each and every 
one of their desks relative to employee relations issues, so that 
they would be assured that they had jobs and there was no pay cuts 
and those kinds of things. 
 
And while he would . . . And I find the logic lacking when I go 
through that list of what we say is there, Mr. Speaker, down in 
print, Mr. Chairman. It’s not as though we’re trying to hide behind 
some rhetoric; it’s in print before each and every one of them. It 
seems to me that flies right in the face of his term “stripping”; it 
flies in the face of the term “radical”; it flies in the face of 
“everybody knows it’s not fair what we’re doing.” 
 
I’ve gone and met with 300 or so in each one of those institutes, 
and I’ve answered their questions. And sure, there are issues that 
have to be resolved. But it seems to me what we’re talking bout 
here is not stripping anybody’s rights but giving them the choice, 
as they’ve always had in this province, to choose, now that they 
are by themselves an educational institute. I mean, that’s the point 
that you overlook constantly. They are not going to be part of 
government. They are no longer going to be government. They are 
a new institute, an educational institute. They may have — I don’t 
know — they may have, some of them may have an idea that 
somehow being part of an organization that’s got parks workers 
and highway and everything else, that that might not be the

kind of structure they want. I don’t know, that’s up to them to 
decide — how and by whom. 
 
What we want to do is even go further in terms of making sure 
that we have the best working conditions that we can provide for 
our staff. And that’s why we’ve talked to them and made it 
available to them what our thinking is in areas like committing for 
staff development a portion of the government grant and a portion 
of the funds generated through entrepreneurial activities. Does that 
sound like you’re somehow trying to abuse the employees you 
value? We want to keep them on the leading edge of their 
profession. 
 
We’ll work together with these employees to formulate 
professional development policies, priorities, and initiatives, 
seeking and facilitating return to industry opportunities. Does that 
sound like we’re stripping them of something? We want to explore 
a positive notion there, providing a measure of pay protection for 
employees who do take those opportunities with industry. 
 
Encouraging sabbatical professional exchange leaves: how do you 
organize that across government, if you like, as you somehow 
would suggest that that’s the way we ought to continue to go? 
Pursuing an implementation of a deferred-income leave plan: now 
how do you rationalize your rhetoric with what we are telling, in 
black and white, our employees? Because we value them, they’re 
going to make this thing run tickety-boo. They’re going to make 
this the best technical institute, the best institute of applied science 
and technology, across this . . . across North America. That’s what 
you’re going to see. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to comment on a couple of 
points in regards to the minister’s statement. I would like to 
comment in the area of a short statement on governance, and then 
also a comment in regards to the employees and the affect of their 
union agreement. I state so in recognition that I was part of a 
bargaining process in regards to the establishment of the 
community college system when the employees organized under 
SGEU. 
 
First the area of governance: I think it’s extremely important to 
recognize that the institutes and the community college were part 
of a general development of adult education in our province 
during the late ’60s and the early ’70s. And it was a point of 
debate then that we should be moving towards elected autonomy 
that we have seen in the elementary school and high school 
systems, and also in the universities and so on, that a more 
autonomous system was simply the historical way to go; that 
governments had to have faith in people to govern themselves in a 
more autonomous fashion than in the past. 
 
And when I see the Bill, it shows very clearly that there is greater 
control to the minister. There is an assumption made that if greater 
power shifts to the minister and less power to the community 
level, that automatically everything improves, that if there is more 
power to the central government controlling agent, the minister, 
then it automatically assumes that it’s going to be better than the 
community power that existed. 
 
And so when I see those questions being raised 
  



 
October 29, 1987 

 

3699 
 

approximately 15 years later with a new Bill, and the fact that we 
did raise it again this spring, I thought that the minister would take 
the important step of paying respects to the community of 
Saskatchewan people and their long history of a strong educational 
tradition and come out with an elected board system. I thought that 
he would do that. 
 
I think that it shows that the minister does not have faith and trust 
in Saskatchewan elected control systems. But a lot has been said 
on that, and I think that the minister should already understand that 
point. I think it has been made very clear by many of the adult 
education institutions that the way to do it was through an elected 
autonomy system. 
 
But let’s get to the issue of the importance of the relationship, of 
the establishing of a relationship on an educational institution 
between the managerial system and the employee system. It’s 
extremely important to recognize that the relationship that is 
developed there is one that impacts on the student and also the 
programming. 
 
As a former principal in an adult education institution in 
Saskatchewan, and one who has come through bargaining, it’s 
extremely difficult to go through collective bargaining agreements. 
I thought when I went through one that it would be a lot easier 
than what it really was. It takes a lot of energy from both levels — 
from the managerial level and also the staff level — to deal with 
an issue, to go through every single item that is required in the 
collective agreement. 
 
But this is precisely what the minister has done. He has displaced 
completely the old agreement, and now we have to go through the 
process again. It created instability. It creates a situation where a 
lot of the people are affected. The morale goes down. Students are 
affected. It’s as if the minister does not care what happens in the 
classroom level in our adult education institutions. 
 
If the minister knew the impact of changing contractual 
agreements between the management system and the staff, he 
would not have done what he had done. It wasn’t from forestry to 
education that we went. It was from educational institutions that 
existed before to educational institutions now. That is what is 
clear. The agreement was in the past. It was not one of forestry, it 
was educational institutional agreements. That is very clear. The 
minister seems to imply that it wasn’t. 
 
(2200) 
 
So when I look, and having had the experience of going through a 
collective agreement, I know then that the minister must have had 
other ideas in mind other than the quality of education, the quality 
of adult education at the class-room level. 
 
So this is the main point. When you completely have disrespect 
for the people who put the practice of education on a daily basis 
with students and you threw away the basis of their livelihood — 
that they have to stand back and worry about it while they’re 
teaching — it puts everything in turmoil. And that’s what the 
minister

has done. There is very little caring when it comes down to how 
the legalities of contracts impacts on the class-room. And unless 
you have gone through that as a teacher and as a person who has 
been involved, then you will not really know what has taken place. 
 
So with these comments, those were the two major things that I 
saw form the minister’s statements today. I think it’s extremely 
important that, in some of the statements that he has made, he has 
made some commitments in regards to the collective agreement 
tonight in some of the statements that he has made. I hope that we 
indeed see something important into the future. 
 
But the way that he has treated people in the past few months is a 
sad state of affairs in Saskatchewan adult educational history. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 22 — An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 
Sharing Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill now be read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title 
on division. 
 

Bill No. 15 — An Act to amend The Student Assistance and 
Student Aid Fund Act, 1985. 

 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:07 p.m. 
 


