













































October 13, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 October 13, 1987 

 

 

3267 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Free Trade Agreement and Canadian Patent Drug Laws 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is to the Premier of the province and it pertains to the 

proposed free trade treaty between Canada and the United 

States, and in particular, the information, or perhaps the best 

word to use, the revelation, just before the long weekend that 

the Government of Canada secretly promised to change our 

drug patent laws as part of the free trade treaty between Canada 

and the United States. 

 

Mr. Premier, my question to you is this: were you aware of this 

arrangement whereby the Canadian drug patent laws were to be 

sacrificed as part of the free trade deal; and if you were not, 

have you subsequently told the Prime Minister that this kind of 

— putting it bluntly — double dealing on the part of the Prime 

Minister’s vis-à-vis the Americans, but not keeping the 

premiers informed, simply won’t be tolerated by you and your 

government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can respond in 

saying a couple of things. The first is that the move to 

encourage the production of chemicals in Canada and in 

Saskatchewan is endorsed by me, because I’d rather be making 

them and manufacturing them here than just importing them 

from some other country. And as you know now, most of the 

manufacturing takes place certainly outside western Canada and 

must of it outside the country as a whole. So let’s agree on that 

point that I’d rather be producing them here, which in the long 

run reduces the cost as opposed to just importing them. 

 

Secondly, I believe the member is wrong and is not accurate 

with respect to his information that says that the federal 

government has struck a separate arrangement with respect to 

the trade agreement. It’s not tied to the trade agreement. And I 

don’t profess to speak for the federal government, but as far as I 

am concerned, the legislation was there before we went into the 

trading negotiations, and it’s there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So somebody has said, well they’re tied. Well I’m just saying, 

as far as I’m concerned, they’re not tied. And I would just ask 

the hon. member: is he for or against the production of drugs 

here in Canada as opposed to just importing them? And I would 

think that he should make that point very clear because the 

more we can produce here, at least in my view, the lower the 

cost, the more economies of scale, and in fact the benefit to the 

consumer could be immense. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Canadian Energy and Free Trade 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. 

I . . . of course the rules prohibit me to answer questions, but I 

would say that I’m for the production of drugs if they’re by 

Canadian drug companies and not American drug companies 

which will result in higher costs to those that are patients. But 

that’s not the issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — The issue, Mr. Premier, is in this line of 

questioning, the process of how this so-called free trade treaty 

has been negotiated — the degree of revelation, the degree of 

openness, not only with you, sir, but with the people of Canada 

and the public of Saskatchewan. 

 

For example . . . a new question. Over the weekend the Premier 

of Prince Edward Island, Premier Joe Ghiz, had this to say 

about free trade and energy. This comes from The Globe and 

Mail. Mr. Ghiz says . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. I believe the member rose on a 

supplementary? 

 

An Hon. Member: — A new question. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — New question? My mistake; go ahead. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps if I may 

receive your indulgence for just a half a second to say that this 

is a new question; it pertains to the process of which this 

so-called deal has been negotiated between the Canadian 

government and the United States. And in specifics, this new 

question relates to a statement by the Premier of the province of 

Prince Edward Island, the Hon. Joe Ghiz, who said this about 

energy, from today’s Globe and Mail: 

 

The premiers were never told energy was on the table. It 

was not discussed at any of the meetings the first ministers 

held on the trade talks. 

 

Then at the final hour we find out all U.S. powers of 

protectionism are there, all U.S. penalties still apply, and 

we have given up tariffs, energy and so much more. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is this: is 

Premier Ghiz correct that energy was never on the table, and 

that the premiers of this country never were told about energy 

being on the table? Is this yet another conclusive piece of 

evidence of how this deal has been negotiated in secret without 

the approval not only of the Canadian public and the 

Saskatchewan people, but your approval, sir. What is the 

situation there? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — A couple of responses, Mr. Speaker. 

Firstly, let me say that access to the United States market for 

our energy is good for Saskatchewan. If the hon. members is 

against that, I wish he’d just stand up and say, I’m against that 

whole relationship of marketing heavy crude and other forms of 

energy, uranium or natural gas or electricity, into the United 

States. Howard Pawley, the Premier of Manitoba, in fact likes 

the arrangement with  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3268 

 

respect to energy into the United States. 

 

Secondly, energy has always been on the table because it’s a 

big trading item. It’s big for us, it’s big for Alberta, it’s big for 

Manitoba, the province of Quebec, and the province of Ontario. 

Now if you believe the paper, because somebody said that 

something isn’t on the table, I can say that obviously energy is 

on the table. So when we put this together we say, yes, we want 

access to the United States for our energy and access for 

agriculture products. And that’s, of course, what is in a trade 

agreement. 

 

Third, let me just say with respect to how we do these 

negotiations, the hon. member should know. The last time he 

was involved in the constitution, it was done in the heat of the 

night, in the middle of the night in a kitchen. Never before has 

the Prime Minister called every premier together nine or 10 

times to discuss a trade treaty. In fact, when Prime Minister 

Pearson cut the deal on the auto pact, Mr. Speaker, there wasn’t 

even a premier involved, not even the Premier of Ontario was 

involved at that time, and he cut a trade deal worth up to 80 or 

$90 billion, himself, because he has that responsibility. 

 

So there’s never been more openness, never been more 

discussion, never more in the history of the country that the 

provinces could be involved. And yes, every single solitary 

thing was examined. Those that are exempted are clear, and I’ve 

mentioned those — sovereignty and culture and marketing 

boards and so forth — but agriculture and energy are obviously 

important, and they’re part of the trade package. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Secret Deals in Free Trade Talks 

 

Mr. Romanow: — A new question, Mr. Speaker, to the 

Premier. The Premier says, in his response to the last question, 

that never has a Prime Minister consulted with the premiers on 

all the issues. 

 

That may or may not be the case. But I would say to you, 

Premier, with the greatest of respect, that never has there been 

so much confusion and contradictory statements about the most 

fundamentally important issue facing Canada as there has been 

about this. Witness the difference between you and Premier 

Ghiz. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Witness the difference between you and 

Premier Ghiz. 

 

My question is this, Mr. Speaker, since clearly the Minister of 

Energy or the minister in charge of the negotiations for the free 

trade deal for Canada, Pat Carney, the former Minister of 

Energy, and Harvie Andre are definitely at odds about this 

question of the drug patent Bill, since you’re not able to give us 

a straight answer, is it not correct to assume that in fact there 

have been a series of secret deals negotiated by the Canadian 

negotiators in order to obtain this deal. Now we’re seeing some 

of them. And if that’s the case, what guarantees do we have that 

such valuable Canadian institutions as the Canadian  

Wheat Board and medicare are not part of those secret deals in 

the future? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 

knows that when you do historic things — and I will give him 

credit, he was involved at one point in time in the constitutional 

change, and frankly he knows it will take years and decades — 

maybe a hundred years — for the courts to figure out the impact 

of the charter of rights and the constitutional changes that he 

was involved in. 

 

We’ve just done one with respect to Meech Lake, and we had 

every single premier in the country agree, and the Prime 

Minister, and all political persuasions, everyone of us, Mr. 

Speaker. And it will be debated and argued about how it could 

be modified from time to time for the next decade and for 

decades to come because, frankly, it’s not perfect, but it is a 

good deal. 

 

The same applies to this trade, a comprehensive trade 

arrangement with the United States to take tariffs to zero. That’s 

what we’re talking about, Mr. Speaker, taking tariffs to zero so 

we can trade back and forth without harassment. Now he asks 

me whether there are longer run implications with respect to 

things like sovereignty, with respect to culture, or marketing 

boards, and we’ve said no; 85 per cent of the things we do now 

with the United States are tariff free, and we’ve grown for years 

to 150 billion in two-way trade, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 

strengthened Canadians and strengthened Saskatchewan people. 

 

We just want to see more of that opportunity, and we don’t 

want to see it denied us by either central Canada or Ontario or 

P.E.I., who obviously want energy security. If he wants the 

national energy program — if that’s what he wants, there are 

very little consultation by anybody out in western Canada when 

Prime Minister Trudeau applied the national energy program to 

us. This kind of consultation is useful for western Canada 

because Saskatchewan will be on the same footing as Ontario, 

and it’s about time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ratification Process for Free Trade Deal 

 

Mr. Romanow: — New question, Mr. Speaker, and to the 

Premier. Montana and North Dakota and California will be on 

an equal footing with Saskatchewan and our energy and 

resources as well, as a result of this well-out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And that’s now my view of building 

Canadian unity or building for the protection of Saskatchewan 

future. 

 

My question is this, Mr. Speaker — my new question is this, to 

the Premier. First of all, we don’t have any documents. In fact I 

have to obtain an initial document by the Canadian and 

American negotiators from outside this province, 

notwithstanding repeated written requests to your office and 

questions to you. 

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3269 

 

But my question specifically is: how in the world can we be 

assured — we, meaning the citizens of Saskatchewan and 

Canada — that all aspects of this deal are going to be put out on 

the table, that they’re going to be openly debated, and that there 

is a ratification process or, if you will, an approval mechanism 

which extends beyond the secrecy of your cabinet room? — in 

fact, I would say, extends beyond the secrecy of your office, 

since I don’t believe your cabinet is even privy to these 

negotiations, what kind of a ratification process . . . Well the 

Minister of Economic Trade and Development laughs at that. 

Well I’ll tell you, judging from his answers, my statement 

stands. Nobody but the Premier seems to know anything about 

this operation. 

 

Mr. Premier, my question to you is this: how in the world can 

the farmer, can the worker, can the student, can the 

small-business man see the details and have a say as to whether 

or not this is a good deal or a bad deal? I ask you, Mr. Premier, 

will you fight for a ratification process that gives Saskatchewan 

people a meaningful say, rather than your obviously biased 

commitment to this sell-out of Canada? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will point out to the hon. 

member that even when the province of Saskatchewan finally 

got a veto in the constitution in Meech Lake, even when we did 

that, the NDP members, like the NDP member from North 

Battleford, voted against it. Historically the only time we have 

had the same kind of power, the NDP is on the other side of it. 

 

Now you can’t seem to make up your mind. You’ve never seen 

so many premiers and provinces involved and public 

participation right across the piece as you had in this. There are 

sagits across the country that meet on every single aspect of 

trade, Mr. Speaker. The consumers, the industry, farmers’ 

groups, industrial developers — all these people have been 

involved in a sagit that goes right from Victoria right through to 

the east coast. It’s fully debated. 

 

And certainly you couldn’t say that the Premier of Ontario has 

been secretive about things that go on, or the Premier Ghiz, or 

Premier Pawley, or anybody else. Now if you can’t find out, I 

mean, you’ve obviously got a personal problem with getting a 

hold of information. Everybody else in the country seems to be 

able to get access to the information, whether they’re Ontario or 

some place else. 

 

Let me just say this, Mr. Speaker, let me say this. If, in fact, you 

want to take Bob White’s view, if you want to take Bob White’s 

view of Canada and say that this is only going to be good and 

always going to be good for southern Ontario . . . Let me tell 

you, you can go out in the oil patch, the potash areas in the 

communities, the agriculture communities across this province, 

and you stand up and try to defend Bob White’s view of this 

country in the province of Saskatchewan and I think, my friend, 

you’ll stay there a long time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Speaker: — I’d just like to remind hon. members that 

while questions and answers are interesting, I believe that 

they’re both getting a little too long and we’re entering more 

into debate than questions and answers. I’d like to remind both 

parties. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have one last new question 

to the Premier. And my question, Mr. Premier, is this. First of 

all, I’ll make a deal with you. I’ll stop listening to Bob White if 

you stop listening to Clayton Yeutter and all of the Americans 

who are taking you and the Canadian government to the 

cleaners on free trade. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Now look, Premier, rather than listening to 

the Minister of Finance for your next answer, please listen to 

my question. This is a very specific question, Mr. Premier. My 

question is very simple. I have been asking, this caucus has 

been asking now consistently in this question period, for a full 

scale debate. We’ve been asking for full revelation of the 

documents. That means the initialled agreements. We’ve been 

asking for all of the internal studies. And I remind you, sir, you 

promised me in giving your word that those would be tabled. 

 

My question to you simply is this: where are they, and when 

can we expect that basic documentation to show the people of 

Saskatchewan that this is, in fact, the worst sell-out in the 

history of Canada? How about showing that information to us? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad the hon. member 

admits in public and in this legislature that he does listen to Bob 

White. I’ll tell him that I don’t listen to Clayton Yeutter or other 

Americans. But at least we know who you do listen to, so that’s 

very clear now. It’s on the record that you listen to Bob White, 

and I’m sure everybody in the province will agree to that and 

will be happy to know that that’s your position. 

 

With respect to the whole question, Mr. Speaker, of debating 

the trade agreement. We have had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, 

to see one of the most historic arrangements any place in the 

country, and in this country to review the trade possibilities 

with the United States. 

 

Now I see, not only is the NDP and the new leader-to-be against 

it, and then kind of say, well, maybe there’s parts of it . . . 

Today he says that the NDP is not opposed, Mr. Speaker, to 

privatization. They’re not opposed to privatization. Next, Mr. 

Speaker, he says that they’ve always believed, Mr. Speaker, in a 

blend of public and private enterprise, and that all Crown 

corporations are going to be under review, Mr. Speaker. I am 

just waiting for the next day or the next week to say they’re not 

necessarily against a free trade deal with the United States as 

well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3270 

 

Access to American Oil 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I want to direct a 

question to the Premier dealing with the free trade issue, and 

it’ll be a fairly simple and direct question. 

 

The Premier has put forward the idea that it’s all right to make 

an energy deal as outlined, at least in the press, on free trade 

because we have access to U.S. markets for oil and electric 

power, and the like . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, 

I wonder if you could cause the member for Kindersley to 

restrain his enthusiasm a bit until I get my question out. 

 

My question is simply this: do you say that our access to the 

U.S. market to market our oil is the same as their access to get 

our oil in Canada? Is it not true, Mr. Premier, is it not true that 

they can pass any law which would stop our access to their 

markets if this free trade deal is signed, and that we cannot pass 

a law in Canada which would deny them access to our supplies 

of oil? Is that not true? And does not that show the essential 

unfairness of the free trade deal which was negotiated and 

which you have said your support? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I said at the outset, Mr. Speaker, that 

anything that is done with respect to an international treaty does 

not affect our constitution here. And under the constitution we 

have the right to turn the tap off, and we can do that. We can 

turn it off in potash; as you know, we’ve just passed legislation 

here. We can turn it off with respect to oil and gas. We have the 

complete ability to shut it off, if you like, nationalize it. We can 

control it any way we like, Mr. Speaker, under the constitution 

that we have in this country. 

 

And we know, today — and I believe it was supported by the 

opposition and I appreciate that — the fact that we have passed 

legislation to manage the supplies of potash in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And the whole world watches us do that, and as 

a result of that we now have the full endorsement by the 

American farm lobby to say we are doing the right thing 

because the actions in the United States are wrong; we believe 

that you’re right in Saskatchewan. And you’ve got farmers in 

the United States supporting the Government of Saskatchewan 

and the potash miners here as a result of the kinds of things 

we’ve done. So let me say, Mr. Speaker, we have the 

constitutional ability to control our resources. We take that very 

seriously, and we will continue to have that ability, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Elimination of School-based Dental Plan 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Minister of Health and it has to do with his government’s 

elimination of the school-based children’s dental plan. Mr. 

Minister, we’ve reviewed and updated your list of dentists 

under the new dental plan and the results are rather startling, 

Mr. Minister, particularly for rural Saskatchewan. 

Until this year, Mr. Minister, families in rural Saskatchewan 

were served by 392 school-based clinics in 330 different 

communities. Today these same families are served by 93 

dentists in 71 communities. Mr. Minister, your government and 

yourself made a commitment to rural people in the last election 

and in the 1982 election. How does this kind of cut-back to 

rural communities and rural families constitute a commitment 

to rural people, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as we have said on 

several occasions in the House, the decision as it relates to 

service to people, whether they be in urban or rural 

Saskatchewan, as it relates to dental services for children 

between 5- and 13-years-old, that commitment is still there. 

Children do have dental services through the dentists’ offices of 

Saskatchewan, and I might add, in light of the question asked 

by the hon. member from Nutana, that there is an increasing 

number of communities in this province, rural communities, 

who now have access to dental services, dental services through 

a dentist’s office for their whole community the children 5 to 

13, plus the adolescents and plus the adult population of those 

communities who did not have dental services in their 

community until this initiative took place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

you talk about new dentists joining, but you fail to mention the 

fact that many of the dentists on the list that you provided 

parents in September do not serve the communities that you 

claim they serve. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you table today an updated list of dentists in 

this province who actually are in the plan, without the phantom 

clinics and the phantom dentists as you gave us last September, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the list of dentists and the 

locations in which they’re operating is changing on a weekly 

basis. Now in terms of satellite offices, those are changing all 

the time as the need and as the people out there are registering 

with the various dentists that have been put forward to them. So 

that is changing. And as the need is increasing, the number of 

dentists operating in rural communities, as I’ve said, is 

increasing as time goes on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member chooses to use words like “phantom 

dentists” in “phantom offices.” I’ll tell the hon. member from 

Nutana and all members across there, those are not phantom 

offices. The people in the communities where these dentists are 

opening new offices and opening satellite offices are extremely 

pleased at the new services provided in their communities. 

 

The member can say phantom if she likes. I say that is in fact a 

commitment, a continuing commitment to rural Saskatchewan, 

which this government has in so many areas, and this is just 

another area where rural  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3271 

 

Saskatchewan will be well served. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — New question, Mr. Minister. Are you aware 

that in the rural constituency of Arm River there used to be 13 

school-based clinics in 12 communities, which today there are 

four private dentists, available in only two communities? 

 

Are you aware, Mr. Minister, that in Bengough-Milestone there 

used to be 16 clinics in 15 communities, but today there is one 

private dentist in only one community, Mr. Minister? 

 

And, Mr. Minister, are you aware that in the rural constituency 

of Canora there used to be 13 school-based clinics in 11 

communities, but today there are only two private dentists 

available in only two communities? How is that improved 

service to rural Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the one other point I 

should make besides that and which points out where the new 

communities, new clinics are in new communities, there’s also 

the fact in this province that many dentists’ offices which have 

been in operation for some time are changing dramatically their 

hours of operation. And you will see that whether you live in 

the urban or in the rural — the hours of operation — which 

makes it a very convenient thing, or a much more convenient 

thing, for people to visit the dentist. 

 

It’s interesting to note that the hon. member from Nutana will 

say the constituency of Arm River, the constituency of 

Bengough-Milestone. Her mind turns on the basis of politics — 

this is the constituency — she’s not thinking of rural 

Saskatchewan, she’s thinking of some constituency, whether it 

be Arm River, or whether it be Bengough-Milestone, or 

Meadow Lake, or whatever. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’ll say to the hon. member from 

Saskatoon Nutana, if you want to talk about constituencies and 

start marking them off as it relates to rural constituencies, you 

will find the members here, on this side of the House, 

representing those people very well, and will continue to 

represent those people very well. And the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana, in the centre of that city, will stand here and 

tell the members here who represent their rural people what’s 

best for those rural people. If they want to continue that, I say 

so be it, let her continue that for a good period of time, but the 

residents in those rural areas are not raising the concerns that 

she is raising in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. All I have to 

say to the minister is that someone has to tell you, Mr. Minister, 

someone has to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Atkinson: — I’m not prepared to be one of the silent 20 on 

your side of the House. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, question — simple question, is there 

improved service and improved access to service in rural 

Saskatchewan with your elimination of the school-based 

children’s dental plan? Will you answer that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — If we are to consider the wider 

population, in other words all the population of this province 

who will use, from time to time, dental services, the answer to 

that question is definitely yes — definitely yes. There is 

improved service for the adult population in rural 

Saskatchewan, for others who did not have services prior, under 

the dental plan. 

 

And one other point that needs to be made and made very 

clearly, the member suggests that in the school clinics in the 

very small communities, in these school clinics there was this 

dental service which was there on a yearly basis. All of her 

questions are based on that premise. They’re there all the time. 

 

The fact is, under the school-based program those dental 

therapists and the dentists, whenever they did visit, visited there 

about, and for the most part, once a year — one day a year. One 

day a year they visited. That member will stand here and 

suggest to the public of Saskatchewan that that was a 

wide-based public service that they would visit the community 

once a year. And it’s also important to recognize . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. I think the minister’s made the point. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if, as arranged 

before today’s sitting between the staff of the House leaders at 

least, I wonder if we might have leave to go directly to 

government orders, adjourned debates, Bill No. 34. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McLeod that Bill No. 34 — An Act to 

amend The Prescription Drugs Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in rising to participate in this particular debate I do so 

with some considerable regret, but I am duty-bound, Mr. 

Speaker, to express my concern and that of my constituents 

about this government’s decision to dismantle the prescription 

drug plan and thereby impose a very substantial new cost 

burden upon all Saskatchewan people, including, Mr. Speaker, 

a great many of those who are least able to shoulder that 

burden. 

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3272 

 

Like all members of this House, Mr. Speaker, including I’m 

sure those in the government, I have received a huge flow of 

correspondence on this particular issue. It comes not only from 

my own constituency in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, but indeed 

from across Saskatchewan. In this debate many heart-rendering 

letters have been read into the record about the impact of this 

proposed legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I too could bring a brief-case full of similar letters 

into the House for reading here, but I won’t do that. The point 

has already been made, and powerfully so, about the type of 

pain that many people in Saskatchewan fear will be inflicted 

upon them as a consequence of the government’s policy 

announcement and this legislation which flows from that 

announcement to dismantle the Saskatchewan prescription drug 

plan. 

 

It’s clear, Mr. Speaker, that a great many Saskatchewan people 

will be hurt by this legislation, and they will be, Mr. Speaker, 

for the most part, the least fortunate and the least privileged 

members of our Saskatchewan society. 

 

From this legislation two consequences will inevitably flow. 

Either these people will see their disposable incomes eroded, 

and in some cases seriously eroded by new higher personal drug 

costs, or, as the other alternative, Mr. Speaker, these people 

who need duly prescribed drugs will simply not get them 

because they cannot afford them, and their health will be 

jeopardized as a result. Either one of those results, Mr. Speaker, 

should be unacceptable. But the government moves ahead, none 

the less, to dismantle the prescription drug plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was astounded last evening to watch the Premier 

in his free-time political telecast trying to justify this Bill that is 

before the House today. By some convoluted reasoning the 

Premier suggested that Saskatchewan’s prescription drug plan 

somehow contributed to slack public morals and to drug abuse 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I heard that I couldn’t believe that I had 

heard the Premier correctly. Surely he could not seriously be 

making that preposterous argument. So I checked with others, 

Mr. Speaker, who had also listened to the Premier’s telecast, 

and I have confirmed that the Premier’s argument is indeed as I 

thought I heard it. He believes that the prescription drug plan, as 

it was previously constituted, was an unhealthy program, 

damaging to Saskatchewan’s moral fabric and contributing to 

drug abuse. If that is the Premier’s logic, Mr. Speaker, if that is 

the kind of mind-set that dominates the government’s thinking, 

then health care in Saskatchewan is indeed in serious trouble. 

 

Last Friday when we were debating this matter in the House, 

Mr. Speaker, the always talkative member for Weyburn shouted 

across the floor that I must surely support the government on 

this Bill because I would save money. Fiscal responsibility, 

fiscal responsibility he cried, that member from Weyburn. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am indeed an advocate of fiscal responsibility in 

government, but the crucial difference  

between me and this government is that they don’t practise 

genuine fiscal responsibility. What they’re doing in this Bill and 

elsewhere is not fiscal responsibility. It is in reality fiscal 

brutality, devoid of honesty, devoid of competence, devoid of 

fairness, devoid of any decent vision of Saskatchewan’s future 

and where we ought to go, and therefore, Mr. Speaker, I cannot 

support this Bill. 

 

This Bill will burden the sick and the poor in Saskatchewan, 

and that, in my judgement, is not fiscal responsibility. This Bill 

reneges on fundamental Conservative Party commitments made 

repeatedly and unequivocally to Saskatchewan people, and 

surely that is not fiscal responsibility. 

 

This Bill chips away at the underpinnings of health care in 

Saskatchewan, and surely that is not fiscal responsibility. The 

argument made by the member for Weyburn last Friday, in my 

judgement, just does not hold water. There is a big difference, 

Mr. Speaker, between fiscal responsibility and fiscal brutality. 

The government preaches the former, but it in fact practises the 

latter, and I cannot support them in that double standard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the issue here is one of proper public priorities. 

When times are tough, when the economy is tight, when people 

are beset by painful issues on all sides, both economically and 

socially, what are the proper choices for government to make? 

What should the government’s priorities be in the public 

interest in difficult circumstances? 

 

This Bill, sadly, Mr. Speaker, demonstrates that health care 

matters much less to the Government of Saskatchewan than it 

used to. The government has chosen to downgrade the priority 

of health care for Saskatchewan people. The government says it 

has to do that — by this Bill and by other means it has to do 

that to cut costs. That’s what the government says. Health is cut 

to cut costs. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, you can only judge the validity of those 

proposed cuts by examining, on the other side of the coin, what 

is not cut. If the government says that it must cut health in order 

to cut government cots, you can only judge the validity of those 

proposed cuts by examining the total government program of all 

expenditure patterns and where they have chosen not to cut. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty obvious that the government has chosen 

not to cut in the field of government patronage. They have 

chosen not to cut in the field of untendered government 

contracts. They have chosen not to cut in respect of tax-paid 

government advertising. They have chosen not to cut in relation 

to the expensive political support staffs around various cabinet 

ministers and the Executive Council. They have chosen not to 

cut in relation to the travel and other expense accounts of 

government ministers and officials and others that are close to 

the government. 

 

They have chosen not to cut in respect of some of their freebie 

election give-aways announced last fall on the eve of the 

election campaign — like, for example, the so-called home 

program, which is flawed and suffering from major defects in a 

whole range of areas, which I  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3273 

 

would dearly love to talk about, but it would take me away from 

the subject matter of this particular Bill. 

 

But at the bottom line, Mr. Speaker, that program, that election 

give-away in September of last year, will have a price tag 

attached to it, in the final analysis, of several hundreds of 

millions of dollars. That program is untouched. That program 

goes on with that level of spending. 

 

And one must ask, when that kind of financial commitment is 

made by the Government of Saskatchewan, are the priorities of 

government correct when the give-aways and the freebies 

continue, but health care, and specifically the prescription drug 

plan, is literally cut to the bone. The government says health 

care must be slashed. But those other things I’ve just 

mentioned, and others that I could mention, Mr. Speaker, go on 

unabated. 

 

That’s what I mean when I talk about a double standard. That’s 

what I mean when I say this government is practising a policy 

that is fundamentally unfair. That’s what I mean, Mr. Speaker, 

when I talk about misplace priorities which abound in respect of 

this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those fundamental problems with this legislation 

are also compounded by poor and uncertain administration of 

the so-called new program that the government has brought in 

as a replacement for the prescription drug plan. Mr. Speaker, I 

am told by a number of pharmacists in the province of 

Saskatchewan that they are still waiting for reimbursement for 

their claims under this new program from claims that were 

incurred back in the month of July; that there is in fact up to a 

three-month delay in processing the claims that are filed by 

pharmacists. The government is still dealing with a backlog 

from the month of July. Mr. Speaker, that additional 

administrative problem is another argument as to why the 

government in this legislation is headed in exactly the wrong 

direction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t intend to belabour the point. I simply want 

to participate for these few moments in this debate to make the 

point clearly and unequivocally that I do not believe that this 

legislation is in the best interests of Saskatchewan. I do not 

believe it is in the best interests of health care in the province of 

Saskatchewan. I certainly don’t believe it is consistent with the 

principles of fiscal responsibility in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I will not be 

supporting this legislation, and I would urge the government, 

even at this late hour, to reconsider the course that they have 

chosen — a course which I think, Mr. Speaker, sadly, will 

impose a great deal of harm upon the people of Saskatchewan 

and most particularly, Mr. Speaker, the least fortunate and the 

least favoured members of our society. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks I will 

be moving an amendment. And I just want to point out to you 

that I did speak on this in earlier debate, but I wasn’t here to 

pick up the debate on the day that we went back into second 

readings, so I’m allowed the opportunity to speak again. 

Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to read a quote to you before I get 

into the text of my remarks. And this quote comes from W.S. 

Lloyd who was the premier of our province in 1962. And this is 

what he had to say about medical services: 

 

Medical services are essential to health and to life itself. 

Good medical services are part of the basis for a healthy, 

productive economy. Medical care is not an optional 

commodity, it is a necessity. When medical services are 

needed, they should not, in the interests of each of us or all 

of us, be denied to any of us. When a commodity or a 

service is essential, our society has long since accepted 

that consumers have a legitimate right to a voice in 

making the essential governing decisions in such matters. 

That voice has been for medicare. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I quote from the readings of Woodrow Lloyd, the 

speeches, The Measure of the Man: Selected Speeches of W.S. 

Lloyd, for a very simple reason, Mr. Speaker. It was Woodrow 

Lloyd and Tommy Douglas that brought to this province our 

system of medicare. And that has included, Mr. Speaker, an 

enhancement of medicare over the years and has led to such 

programs as the prescription drug plan and to our children’s 

dental program. 

 

While the events surrounding the termination of the children’s 

dental plan in June were more drastic, Mr. Speaker, the 

wholesale undermining of the prescription drug plan will likely 

have a more profound program and political effect. In many 

ways this is the most devastating program cut. 

 

These changes to the prescription drug plan undermine 

medicare, Mr. Speaker. These changes show the PC betrayal of 

their sacred promise not to undermine medicare, Mr. Speaker. 

These changes are a betrayal of medicare and, Mr. Speaker, 

ultimately it’s a betrayal of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I submit, and I believe that the Conservative PC 

caucus members agree, that this drug plan of ours has been — 

and the changes to the drug plan — have been a deliberate 

attack against medicare, more than any other single thing that 

the Devine program and government has done. 

 

The changes to the drug plan, Mr. Speaker, have betrayed us 

because members opposite talked of, during election 

campaigns, that they wanted to bring new drugs under the 

prescription drug plan. In order to understand these changes to 

the drug plan and this attack on the drug plan, we need to 

examine it in the context of the overall PC strategy when it 

comes to health care in our province. 

 

(1445) 

 

These changes, Mr. Speaker, are part of a larger policy. We’ve 

heard the Premier and his lame rhetoric about the need for 

restraint. But there isn’t restraint when it comes to people like 

Peter Pocklington. There isn’t restraint when it comes to 

patronage jobs for George Hill and Paul Schoenhals. There isn’t 

restraint when it comes to jobs for  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3274 

 

Sid Dutchak, a defeated Conservative cabinet minister, and the 

list goes on and on and on. 

 

But there is restraint, Mr. Speaker, for people in this province 

who are elderly and who are sick. The Premier says over and 

over again that there has been a budget increase in his health 

care spending. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not true. That’s not 

true at all. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the other day when I brought to 

the attention of the minister that there had been an $18.6 million 

cut in health care spending, he did not deny that. He, in fact, in 

some ways agreed that there had been an $18.6 million cut, in 

his convoluted way. 

 

And we’ve heard over and over again the Premier talk on his 

commitment to health care. But as is so often the case, that’s all 

it is. It’s talk. And we heard him last night again talk about how 

he was going to improve the health situation for people living in 

Saskatoon. And I had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to speak to 

several people in the medical community last night and this 

morning, and once again they say the proof will be in the 

pudding. And the proof will be in the pudding, because they 

can’t believe any longer the phoney funds — the phoney patient 

fund, the phoney health capital fund, and all the other press 

releases and talk, talk, talk. They can’t believe it, so they are 

waiting to see whether in fact the changes that the Premier 

talked about come through in the weeks and months ahead. 

 

When the dental workers came to this legislature bearing their 

petition with over 15,000 signatures, the Minister of Health and 

the Premier of our province didn’t have the courage to be here 

when they came. They ducked, Mr. Speaker. They were afraid 

to talk about their deliberate policy changes, their policy 

changes that undermined and in my mind, in my view, attacked 

medicare. 

 

And this is the same with when it comes to the prescription 

drug plan. We’ve had example after example brought before 

this House of people who are experiencing difficulty with the 

prescription drug program, the changes. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

government, in response to that, set up this special review 

committee — a special review committee that was to look at 

individual’s person circumstance, individual personal costs 

when it came to up-front charges for prescription drugs, and 

their income. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have an example here of a man that last week 

went to the press in Saskatoon. And his name’s Larry Simpson. 

He’s 36 years old and he’s living on unemployment insurance 

of $368 a month. And he says he can’t afford his medication. 

And I believe that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that he can’t. He tells 

us that he used to pay about $8 for three drugs, dispensing fees, 

prior to the time that the prescription drug program was 

changed. He’s now in a situation where he has to pay over $75 

a month, Mr. Speaker, and that is a tremendous amount of 

money for a person who is living on $368 a month. 

 

I had a person call me on the weekend, and his up-front drug 

costs are over $400 a month, and he is living on about $1.600 a 

month to support himself and his three children. That man, Mr. 

Speaker, was practically in tears because he didn’t know when 

and how he was going to  

afford the up-front costs of those drugs. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a 

tragedy — it’s a tragedy because of the number of people who 

are coming to us, and I’m sure they’re coming to the members 

opposite, asking: how are they going to afford these drugs? 

 

I want to read into the record a letter that was sent to my 

colleague, the member from Cumberland constituency. And this 

is what this letter says: 

 

What has happened to Saskatchewan’s economy? We the 

seniors, the aged and sick, are called upon to bear the 

brunt of the provincial debt not incurred by us. Surely 

there’s enough resources in our province to take care of 

the needs of Saskatchewan people. The drug plan is indeed 

a hardship for the average person, especially when one has 

medication that they have to take for a lifetime. The price 

is high and getting higher. The statement that drug prices 

would not go up in price is a myth. The eroding of 

medicare is cause for concern. 

 

The long waiting lists for hospital care is also cause for 

concern. It’s a sad day for Saskatchewan to see the eroding 

of our medicare system and its health plan — everything 

that we enjoyed as residents of a great province slowly but 

surely being dismantled. It is time to call a halt to the 

present way of things and get back to the fact that the heart 

patient and the cancer patient and the sick do need 

attention now, not at the end of a long waiting list when it 

could be too late. 

 

We thank you for the heritage grant. It did help a little to 

defray some of the many taxes, and what have you, that 

we have been burdened with. It states on the stub, thank 

you for your efforts in building a better Saskatchewan. We 

had a better Saskatchewan, built by the pioneers, the 

seniors of this province. We showed you the way. Please 

let us get back to reality, to the province that we know 

Saskatchewan can and should be. 

 

That is a letter, Mr. Speaker, from a gentleman from Creighton, 

Saskatchewan. And he is writing, he applauds the government 

for the heritage grant, but he talks about how the changes to the 

prescription drug program are hurting people. 

 

There’s another example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of a lady that 

lives in Saskatoon, and she requires $70 worth of prescription 

drugs each month. And her DVA (Department of Veteran 

Affairs) pension, which supports herself and her husband, 

comes to about $1,078 a month. She applied to the special 

review committee to have her situation reviewed. She got a 

letter from the review committee saying that she wasn’t 

eligible, that her costs weren’t that high. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that lady lives in an apartment, and it’s very 

difficult to get into senior citizen housing these days, and she’s 

living in an apartment where the rent is over $440 a month. 

Along with the other costs that go along with the day to day 

living, Mr. Speaker, she says that her prescription drugs of $70 

a month are too much, that she  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3275 

 

got no special consideration from the prescription drug plan. 

And she’s not the only one. There is story after story of people 

who are denied any kind of special consideration by this special 

committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have another letter, another letter from a person 

who’s concerned about what’s happening to the prescription 

drug program, and I want to read from it. This is a letter, and 

this lady says that: 

 

We are not usually motivated to writing letters of protest 

or support to various political parties or members of those 

parties, and this is only the second of our lifetime. 

However, the plight of our grandchild has caused us much 

concern and we, as well as our daughter and her husband, 

are becoming frustrated with the lack of answers or 

apparent concern by those in power. 

 

It is with the above in mind that we would like to take up 

the offer to be in the legislature. On June 12, 1987, we 

forwarded a letter to our MLA, but as of yet we have not 

so much as received even a note of recognition or an 

inquiry as to what we might have been referring to in the 

copy of the letter attached to this letter. 

 

Since this writing of that letter, our daughter has informed 

us that she has been informed that the drugs have 

increased to the point where the one drug taken by our 

granddaughter will cost at least $137 per month. This will 

come to almost $1,700 per year as long as the present 

price continues. As well, the drug taken is not on the drug 

plan. But the doctor has helped acquire special status so 

that it is eligible for the 80 per cent reimbursement. This 

status, as we understand it, terminates in March of ’88. 

 

After that time it will then depend upon two factors as to 

whether they will continue to receive an 80 per cent 

reimbursement, an extremely expensive pay-out, especially for 

low income families. And the two requirements, Mr. Speaker, 

are if the doctor can acquire special status, and two, if the drug 

will be accepted as special status by the drug plan. 

 

This family goes on to explain the situation as it applies to her 

daughter and her son-in-law and the child. Mr. Speaker, I want 

you to know that they sent an application in and it was denied. 

They say that $137 a month is not too much for this particular 

family to afford. 

 

The interesting problem with saying that is that when you look 

at the drug forms or requests for special drug coverage, it has a 

little box that you tick. Estimated total annual family income for 

current year: 0 to 20,000; 20,000 to 30,000; 30 to 40; and so on. 

There is no indication of how much, in fact, that family makes: 

15,000 a year; $8,000 a year. There’s no provision for that. 

There’s no provision for the personal expenses of that family. 

Do they have a house payment? Do they have a car payment? 

Do they have all of the other expenses that normal families have 

in this province? And this family was denied. 

I’ve had letter after letter from people who’ve been given 

Priority Post envelopes, and their drug costs are 1 or $200 a 

month and their old age pension is 6 or $700 a month. Why 

wouldn’t they be eligible for the 20 per cent of the drug store? 

But they’re denied, Mr. Speaker, and it goes on and on and on 

and on. 

 

These changes to the prescription drug plan are causing a 

tremendous amount of pressure and stress in families in this 

province. Families now are making decisions: do I put groceries 

on my table, or do I put drugs in my medicine cabinet. Mr. 

Speaker, I want you to know that families are deciding to put 

food on their table — that’s where their priorities are. 

 

We have elderly people that tell us that they’re only taking one 

or two pills a day instead of the three or four. They’re trying to 

stretch out the use of those pills. We have elderly people saying 

they’re no longer taking their arthritis medicine and their 

stomach medicine and all of the other medicines that many, 

many elderly people in this province have to take because of the 

ageing process. They’re making those decisions. 

 

And it doesn’t seem right to us, and it doesn’t seem right to me, 

Mr. Speaker, that these people over here have money for 

George Hill, $200,000 a year; Peter Pocklington, $10 million a 

year; Paul Schoenhals, $100,000 plus perks; and all of the other 

political friends have help. They’re got jobs, but the people that 

I represent, and we represent, don’t have access to a 

prescription drug plan that was fair. 

 

Because it didn’t matter what your personal circumstance was 

with the old plan. It didn’t matter what sort of drugs you were 

taking, or how sick you were, or what sort of financial 

circumstances you were in, the drug plan was there. You knew 

that you had to come up with the $3.95 dispensing fee and that 

was it. But now, Mr. Speaker, people are going to drug stores 

and finding out that their prescriptions are 50 or 60 or $70, and 

they don’t have the money. 

 

Another problem that’s come to light in the last few days and 

some weeks before is that people have sent in their application 

to be rebated, their 80 per cent for the prescription drug 

program on their cost of prescription drugs, and they’re still 

waiting. And for people who are on limited incomes and fixed 

incomes, members opposite, who don’t earn $60,000 a year, 

$40,000 a year, to wait for a cheque for $50 or $70 or $100 and 

you’re waiting five, six, seven, eight, ten weeks, and you have 

to fill your prescription again, is a tremendous period of time to 

wait. And we are told that a number of people have been laid 

off by the prescription drug program some time in August, and 

there are people now running those key punch machines that 

don’t know what they’re doing because they haven’t been 

properly trained, and that’s part of the reason for the delay, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Surely if you’re going to change the prescription drug plan you 

would have put the procedure in place so that the waiting 

periods would have been minimized. Even people who have 

Priority Post envelopes, those people who have been given 

special consideration by the drug review committee, are waiting 

two to three weeks to get their Priority Post envelope back with 

their money. 

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3276 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier and his government have 

advanced several arguments to try and defend their attack on 

our drug plan. Several Conservative arguments have been put 

forward, and they’ve tried to defend these hurtful and harmful 

changes — hurtful and harmful changes that impact upon real 

people, not people we read about or hear about, but people that 

we know, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to look at those arguments. Let’s consider the first one. 

The Premier and the Minister of Health argue that we now have 

the best drug plan in Canada. Well I want you to know, Mr. 

Speaker, that we had the best drug plan in Canada until your 

people made it worse, your people made it worse, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It was the best drug plan. It was not conceived by those people 

over there; it was conceived by members of the New 

Democratic Party. It was implemented by our party, and it was 

established by our government. It was not developed by the 

members opposite, members of the Conservative Party. It was 

conceived and established by the people of Saskatchewan, but 

it’s now being attacked and betrayed by the Conservative Party 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Premier and the government argue that the prescription 

drug plan was becoming too expensive; that somehow we 

couldn’t afford it any more. And to me that’s the weakest 

argument of all, for the PC changes will not reduce the 

prescription costs of Saskatchewan people by one dollar — not 

one dollar. 

 

We’re not reducing the cost, Mr. Speaker, we’re simply shifting 

the costs over and shifting the higher costs of medicare onto 

those who can least afford it. And those people are the elderly 

and the sick and low-income people, people who can least 

afford it; that’s who’s being impacted by these changes to the 

prescription drug plan. 

 

The minister and the Premier tell Saskatchewan people that they 

are reducing their prescription drug costs, and they don’t 

believe it. People don’t believe that we’re reducing prescription 

drug costs by one cent, because it’s not true. The Premier and 

the Minister of Health claim that the opposition, people like 

myself, are somehow using scare tactics, that we’re scaring the 

public. That’s their phrase — scare tactics. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

if anyone is scaring the public, it’s the government over there. 

It’s the PC government and their attacks on medicare, their 

attacks on the prescription drug plan, the increasing costs of 

prescription drugs to every family in this province — that’s 

what’s scaring the public. 

 

Let’s consider another argument. The Premier and the Minister 

of Health argue that there was abuse under the drug plan, and in 

fact I heard the Premier speak about that last night on 

television, that somehow people were abusing the drug plan. 

Well I want to see documented proof of that. I have never seen 

that. Somehow he’s intimated, as my colleague, the member 

from Moose Jaw North talked about, roving bands of senior 

citizens running around the province writing out prescription 

drugs so that they could get them from the pharmacist, that 

somehow senior citizens in this province are drugged, and that’s 

simply not true. 

As you get older your body starts to age and you require 

medication. You require medication for things like arthritis, 

stomach problems, gall bladder, all of those kinds of things. 

How can they possibly say, how can the members over there 

and the Premier of our province say that people are abusing the 

prescription drug plan. People don’t write their own 

prescriptions. Doctors write those prescriptions. If we have 

documented proof, then let’s deal with it. Why attack sick 

people and older people because they say the cost of the 

prescription drug plan is going up. When you say that there is 

abuse . . . the members over there are accusing physicians of 

abuse, or pharmacists of abuse, but they shouldn’t be accusing 

the older folks and the senior citizens and the people who are 

sick of abuse. They go to the doctor, they get the prescription, 

and they take it to their pharmacist. 

 

Then they say there was abuse because medical care costs were 

rising, rising in terms of the price to the public and that 

somehow this reducement of the abuse would lower the costs of 

medicare. Once again that’s wrong-headed logic. What we’re 

simply doing is shifting the cost from all of us as the collective 

good, onto the individual, people who tell us they can’t afford 

changes to the prescription drug plan. They have to make 

decisions — do I buy food, do I buy my medication? And I’m 

telling the people over there that citizens in this province are 

deciding to buy food and go without their medication. 

 

Then we have this unique circumstance special committee 

program that the members opposite put in place. That program 

is an insult to the public because people have to go begging to 

that committee for special consideration. People in this province 

don’t like governments . . . other people to know their personal 

business. They don’t want to have to lay out the entire history 

of their family. They don’t want to have to lay out their 

financial plan and their personal financial circumstances and go 

begging for charity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this special committee is an insult. People feel 

degraded when they have to go to these kinds of committees. 

There isn’t even a consumer, Mr. Speaker, on that committee 

who can say, yes, I could relate to that person or I can 

understand that it’s difficult to raise a family these days or there 

are expenses; and yes, that person can’t afford prescription 

drugs. We have a doctor on the program, we have a pharmacist 

on the program, and we have someone from the prescription 

drug plan, but we have absolutely no one who is a user of 

medication in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would now like to move an amendment, an 

amendment that I think will put this thing into perspective, and 

I move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon Centre: 

 

That all of the words after the word “that” be deleted, and 

the following substituted therefor: 

 

Bill 34 not now be read a second time because: 

 

(a) the erosion of the prescription drug plan unfairly shifts 

health costs onto the sick and those least able to afford 

them; 

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3277 

 

(b) the erosion of the prescription drug plan constitutes a 

betrayal of Progressive Conservative election promises; 

and 

 

(c) the erosion of the prescription drug plan is a betrayal of 

medicare in Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise and second this amendment to Bill 34, an amendment that 

expresses very clearly our feelings about this Bill that we’re 

debating here. I feel, like so many of my New Democratic 

colleagues, that I must rise to comment on Bill 34, an Act to 

amend The Prescription Drugs Act. Much of what I have to say 

has probably been said already, but it must be said again and 

again, because this legislation refers to actions by the PC 

government which have caused distress and hardship to many, 

many people in Saskatchewan and to many people who live in 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

We as elected representatives have the right to speak as long as 

is necessary in order to present the concerns of our constituents 

to this Legislative Assembly. We as New Democrat 

representatives have the responsibility to oppose any legislation 

which, according to our policies and our philosophy, is poor 

legislation, and to oppose any government actions which, 

according to our judgement and experience, is harmful to a 

majority of the people in this province. And for these reasons 

I’m going to take quite some time to present my response to this 

Bill 34. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill 34 which we’ve been debating 

today and have been debating for some days, is called An Act to 

amend the Prescription Drugs Act. But it is not, in my view, an 

amendment at all. It is a Bill which should more aptly be called 

an act to destroy The Prescription Drugs Act because that is, in 

essence, what this Bill does. It destroys the drug plan as 

Saskatchewan people have known it for years. It destroys a 

program which has brought help and financial relief to many 

sick people in this province. And it destroys the concept of a 

universal comprehensive public health care system. 

 

And I’m fairly sure that the PC members opposite wince when I 

say that this Bill destroys the drug plan. Destroy is a strong 

word, but I’m using it thoughtfully. What the Premier of this 

province has done with this Bill and what the Minister of Health 

has done with this Bill is destroy the best prescription drug plan 

in North America. And what the PCs have done is turn the 

clock a way back in time — way back. And in doing all this, 

what the Premier and the Minister of Health and all the PC 

members of the government benches opposite have done is once 

again betray the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Premier never ran for election on a platform of dismantling 

the drug plan. He never told the people that he was planning 

this attack. Instead he said that medicare was sacred. And in 

1982 the PCs said they would eliminate dispensing fees on all 

drugs prescribed for senior citizens. But like so many other 

things they talk about, this PC government says one thing and 

does completely the opposite. They dissemble, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and I say they are world-class dissemblers. I say  

they’re dissemblers, or either they don’t know the meaning of 

language and of words. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill 34 is a Bill of betrayal. The PC 

members opposite have not been honest with the people of 

Saskatchewan. Bill 34 destroys a valuable health service and it 

puts such an added burden on those who are ill that it deserves 

to be severely criticized. And it puts an obligation on all of us 

on this side of the House to speak out strongly in our role as 

opposition members. We can’t let a Bill like this be passed 

without being sure that people in Saskatchewan know that we 

heartily condemn it. 

 

And everywhere I go, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people are stopping 

to tell me how angry and disgusted they are at this PC 

government. People are appalled by the destruction of the 

prescription drug plan and the school dental plan and the other 

attacks on our health care services. Cut-back in home care 

services and the cutting of funds to valuable volunteer groups 

like Evergreen Neighbourly Services in Saskatoon are more 

examples. 

 

And I noticed that in speaking to this Bill, the only member of 

the government benches that had the courage to stand up and try 

to defend it, the minister from Weyburn, said that this 

government opposite: 

 

. . . in dealing with the ageing population, the Minister of 

Health is addressing . . . 

 

And I’m quoting from Hansard on page 3239: 

 

. . . what ultimately is even the larger and better solution 

and the solution that can perhaps do more for our seniors 

than all the nursing homes in the world can do, and that’s 

the whole question of keeping them fit; the whole question 

of wellness; the whole question of gerontology, Mr. 

Speaker, of proper nutrition for our older people; the 

whole issue, Mr. Speaker, of physical exercise for that 

ageing population; the whole question of keeping them 

ambulatory and out of nursing homes and in their 

community and in their homes Mr. (Deputy) Speaker. 

 

And that is what programs like Evergreen Neighbourly Services 

in Saskatoon was doing for senior citizens. They served over 

300 people, keeping them in their homes and keeping them well 

looked after, and keeping them exercised and keeping them out 

to the stores and taking them around and taking care of them. 

And this government opposite was so cheap that it cut $75,000 

from that small budget for that small agency that was serving 

the people in Saskatoon Centre and Saskatoon Westmount, and 

many of the other elderly people in the city. Just dreadful that 

that was happening. 

 

So I really mean it when I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I’m 

hearing it from people who stop me on the street in Saskatoon 

to tell me how upset they are with the cuts to the health care. I 

hear it at the community gatherings that I go to and I’m hearing 

it at the formal events that I go to. People are absolutely shaking 

their heads in disbelief and they are saying that it’s dreadful, it’s 

just dreadful what’s been done. 

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3278 

 

And I would like to take this opportunity to read one letter that 

came to me. It was a copy of a letter that’s been sent to the 

Minister of Health, so I know that he’s received it. And I’m 

going to begin the quotation now. This is a quotation, Mr. 

Speaker, so I’m reading the language as it is in the letter. The 

woman says: 

 

I would like to comment on the drug plan. Where is the 

rationale? Why should a single person, possibly on daily 

medication, possibly working part-time or at best for 

minimum wage, have the same deductible as the married 

man earning $100,000 a year? 

 

None of your cuts are fair. You cater to the rich and to hell 

with the rest of society. 

 

Before the election, you promised no cuts to health or 

education. Both have been slashed and I hear long 

standing Conservatives say they are disgusted. 

 

You were not elected to tell blatant lies. Why do people in 

public office think that is their right. 

 

Give your heads a shake before it’s too late. If you’ve 

never felt disadvantaged or depressed, maybe you could 

pretend for a day. For sure you’ll feel defeated come 

election day. 

 

That’s the end of the quote from that woman and that letter. 

 

(1515) 

 

But like many of my colleagues here, I’ve also received phone 

calls from people, like the one I received from my constituent 

the other day, who phoned to tell me that she’d been in the drug 

store and she had just seen an old man walk away without his 

prescription. He had not been able to afford it. And this 

constituent was pretty concerned, to take the time to phone me 

at my home to let me know that this had happened. 

 

People are talking about this. They’re talking about it all over 

the province. They’re seeing this happen to people. They’re 

upset that this old man hadn’t been able to afford his medicine, 

and so he had left it with the druggist and he’d gone home 

without it. There’s been many similar stories of this happening. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the reason why this is happening is 

that the PC government, with this drug Bill, is introducing a 

user-pay system for drugs. That old man and the others like him 

have to have the money up front to pay for their prescription. 

Never mind that you’re most likely on a fixed income, and 

never mind that you might eventually get some of the rebate 

back. And by the way, the rebate are being very slow in 

coming. But these people, this old man and others like him, 

have to have the cash on the spot or they’re absolutely out of 

luck. 

 

Now I’ve reflected many times in this House, and I think about 

it quite a lot, how much I doubt that any of the PC government 

members have ever had to live on a fixed  

income or a low income or that you have any idea what it’s like. 

They buy $100-a-plate luncheons and they think nothing of it, 

while many people in Saskatchewan have barely $100 for food 

and drugs per month. 

 

The problem of people not getting their rebates before they 

must pay for another prescription. I’ve mentioned that already, 

how difficult that is. And I’m getting phone calls about that 

right now, that it’s taking a long time for the rebates to come 

back, so people that have monthly drug bills have to pay it 

again up front. So there will be more and more people walking 

away from their prescriptions. 

 

The PC government has put the burden to pay for medicine on 

the shoulders of those who are already ill. Granted that they 

have a rebate program after a certain amount has been spent by 

the person who is sick, but my concern also is that these rebate 

programs can be easily altered so that more and more of the 

burden falls on the individual so that right now they’re getting 

80 per cent of their drug costs back. But I wouldn’t put it past 

this government to bring in an amendment in the future that 

makes it 70 per cent or 50 per cent is all they get back, because 

that’s the pattern that they’re using. 

 

It’s just like the flat tax has now been increased and people 

should realize that, and I know that they do, that the 

government, once it puts a plan in place, will start to burden 

people more and more with the horrible effects of their attempts 

to squeeze more and more money out of people on fixed and 

low incomes. The basic concept of a universal comprehensive 

program has been tossed aside and that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

one very good reason why we say this Bill destroyed the 

Saskatchewan prescription drug plan. 

 

Now I ask myself, why this destruction? Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

the Premier and the Minister of Health and the PC government 

say the Saskatchewan prescription drug plan must be changed 

because people are taking too many drugs. They imply that 

hundreds of Saskatchewan people are abusing their prescription 

drugs, that senior citizens are somehow forcing doctors to give 

them medicine. That’s absolute nonsense. It’s absolute 

nonsense, and it’s terribly insulting to the very many people in 

this province who are so sick and need their prescription drugs. 

 

Let’s take a look at who’s taking these drugs. Obviously it’s 

people who can now be helped by the new drug discoveries in 

the last years. People with chronic illnesses are taking these 

drugs. People who become suddenly ill or suffer infection are 

helped by the so-called new miracle drugs. Women who are 

seeking ways to prevent pregnancy are often dependent on birth 

control drugs, and many people with mental illnesses are now 

helped by drugs. But I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 

destruction of the drug plan puts many people at risk. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Do you really buy that word, 

destruction? 

 

Ms. Smart: — Birth control drugs are no longer covered. Many 

mentally ill persons have had their drug therapies thrown into 

chaos. 

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3279 

 

The Minister of Education, the member from Weyburn, says, do 

you really call it destruction? I call it destruction when many 

mentally ill people have their lives thrown into chaos 

Absolutely destruction. And the many, many older people who 

are not yet 65 but on low incomes have been hurt. And I’ll say 

it again, that you have no understanding of what that means to 

live on a low income. 

 

Now it was only after intense pressure from thousands of 

citizens and from the New Democrat opposition, that the 

Premier and the Minister of Health consented to set up a 

tribunal to screen unique cases. But we still don’t know how 

this tribunal works. How are they judging unique cases? What 

is the bottom line in terms of income to qualify for help? And 

how many layers of surveillance do unique individuals have to 

go through, and why are so many people being denied this 

help? We don’t know any of this. We have been given no 

guide-lines for this tribunal. We are pleading cases to the 

Minister of Health; some are getting help, others are not. And 

there seems to be no rhyme or reason for the decisions being 

made. 

 

In case you haven’t gotten the message, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

for one am deeply worried. I’ve very deeply worried about 

what’s happening to people, because this PC government that’s 

sitting in judgement on who needs help and who doesn’t is this 

same government that says single, employable people can live 

on $123 a month for food, clothing, personal needs, and now 

also, a bus pass and laundry money. This is the same 

government that takes away the transportation allowance from 

urban people because rural people weren’t getting it. Instead of 

providing it for everyone, they take it away. 

 

It’s the same with the drug plan and other health care issues. 

Benefits are being taken away. If the PCs think people can 

survive on $123 a month, what mercy will they show, for 

example, to my constituent whose husband has left her, who has 

a very low maintenance support allowance, and who needs 

drugs to function normally? What mercy will the tribunal show? 

On what basis will they judge her unique or not unique? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill is so offensive. It comes in late, 

after the changes have already been made; it gives us no 

information about the tribunal; the PC government gives us no 

information when we ask questions in House. This Bill ratifies 

the destruction of the drug plan, a destruction which took place 

in the most incompetent manner, pulling the rug out from so 

many people so suddenly. Rather than saying that people are 

taking too many drugs, the PC government must recognize that 

prescriptions drugs are important to many, many people. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m proud that the drug plan that 

existed under the New Democrats recognized that every person 

is unique, every person deserves care, every person is precious. 

Our health care programs were based on the principle that 

health care should be universal, comprehensive, and publicly 

funded. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill sets up a system where every 

person has to plead their uniqueness, has to beg the government 

to be recognized, has to fill out forms and juggle budgets to 

make ends meet, and still find cash up  

front for expensive medication. Is this the government that says 

it’s for the individual, when people have to plead to be 

considered unique? If that isn’t the move of big government, I 

don’t know what is — to make people have to beg to be 

recognized. And I say that what this PC government has done is 

shameful, that it’s really shameful. 

 

Now the government, the PC government is saying that this 

destruction of the drug plan is necessary because drugs cost too 

much money. And I say if the Premier and the Minister of 

Health and the PC members opposite were really concerned 

about the cost of drugs they would have done everything 

possible to prevent the federal PC government from introducing 

the federal Bill to change the Patent Act. 

 

Now we’ve discussed this federal legislation in the Assembly at 

other times, and to anyone with reasonable intelligence and 

knowledge of how the multinational drug companies operate in 

Canada and other countries, it’s crystal clear that our drug costs 

will escalate tremendously once the generic Canadian 

manufacturers are unable to provide us with cheaper substitutes. 

And if the PC government really wanted to reduce the cost of 

drugs they would have opposed this legislation. 

 

They refused to recognize the truth that was written in this 

article in the Star-Phoenix, an item from New York with the 

headlines, “Cash-rich drug firms scramble to invest funds.” 

Now these are the same multinational drug companies that are 

now going to provide us with all our drugs because we’re doing 

in our generic firms. And the item says this: 

 

Shareholders could be in line for a bonanza from major 

pharmaceutical companies which, cash-rich from drug sale 

profits, are buying back their shares and are considering an 

increase in dividends, analysts say. 

 

A major reason for the growing generosity of 

pharmaceutical concerns towards their shareholders is that 

they are sitting on piles of excess cash from their booming 

business. 

 

Industry leader, Merck and Co., for example, was 

expected to have about $1.5 billion in cash at year-end 

1986; Bristol-Myers Co., $1.3 billion; Pfizer Inc., $1.4 

billion; and Eli Lilly and Co., $810 million. And some 

analysts predict that such cash reserves will double over 

the next two years. 

 

And where are those cash reserves going to start coming from, 

adding to it. They’re going to come from Canadians. They’re 

going to come from us because we’re having t pay. We have to 

pay through the nose here in Saskatchewan, and we’re going to 

have to pay through the nose across the country because this 

government opposite would not oppose those changes to the 

patent drug Act. They want to go ahead with the multinational 

corporations having total control over our access to drugs. 

 

And I say that as we unravel the PC actions related to our 

Saskatchewan prescription drug plan, we get a clearer  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3280 

 

and clearer picture of the real PC priorities, and we get a clearer 

and clearer picture of the real PC plans for this province. 

 

The PC government’s incompetence, their lack of credibility, 

their willingness to engage in double-talk and newspeak has one 

prime purpose: to ensure that the vested interests which fund 

and support their right-wing ideology and actions are paid off. 

The multinational drug companies will benefit from PC federal 

legislation. Vested business interests will benefit from the 

destruction of the drug plan, as this destruction paves the way 

for more privatization of health care services. More user fees 

will divide the people of Saskatchewan between those who can 

pay for middle-class services and those who are left behind to 

depend on a severely weakened government system. 

 

And instead of seeing government as a vehicle for people to 

provide universal, comprehensive public services equally to all 

citizens, it has become very clear to me in the time that I’ve 

been here in the legislature that the PC government prefers to 

encourage the image of governments as mismanagers and 

deceivers. This government is positively leaping at the 

opportunity to heap more and more costs on the shoulders of 

individuals regardless of their ability to pay. You have 

absolutely no regard for people’s ability to pay. You live in a 

world where you and your friends have buckets of money and 

you have no concept of what it’s like, as I’ve said here many 

times before, to live on a fixed income or a low income. This 

PC government is obviously enjoying the chance to line the 

pockets of its pals with patronage plums. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the PC government does a great disservice 

to the people of Saskatchewan by taking this stand, but 

hopefully the majority of people in Saskatchewan now see 

through the Premier and his false populism and, through actions 

like the destruction of the drug plan, know that the PCs must 

not be allowed to continue dragging us backwards in time and 

further into debt. 

 

(1530) 

 

The drug plan costs too much money, the PCs say, so they 

destroy the benefits of the plan as it was. But the money was 

there, and is there, if the drug plan was a priority. It isn’t a 

priority. What is a priority with this PC government is getting 

as much of the taxpayers’ money into the hands of their friends 

as possible. 

 

There are some indications that some of the members opposite 

don’t believe me. But people who live in Saskatoon can just see 

it quite clearly on the streets in Saskatoon. An office of the 

Premier has just opened across the street from the Sturdy Stone 

Building — from the government-owned Sturdy Stone Building 

— where there’s lots of store front space available for an office 

of the Premier on the ground floor, if that’s what the Premier 

wants, and the building is completely accessible to wheelchairs 

and it’s a very fine building and it’s owned already by the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

But no, you move the office of the Premier, which should  

in all the terms of convention be called the office of the cabinet, 

but the office of the Premier has been moved across the street 

because the PCs want to give rent money to one of their pals 

who owns the building across the street. That’s where the 

money is going that could help fund the drug plan. 

 

This is happening all over Saskatchewan where money is 

hemorrhaging out of this government to pay the rent in private 

buildings — and they’re paying very high rents. But we’ve not 

been able to find out how much rent people have been paying 

for these buildings because the government in its deviousness 

has said to us: oh, we can’t tell you how much rent we’re 

paying in a separate department for, for example, the Archives 

Board, because while that item is under the Parks and 

Recreation and Culture budget, it’s under the property 

management corporation, and the property management 

corporation will not come to the Crown Corporations 

Committee for another year. So we can’t find out how much 

money you’re paying to your PC pals, but we can be darn sure 

that they’re getting a good rent. 

 

And we can be darn sure that when the government moves out 

of a building like the Sturdy Stone Building in Saskatoon, 

which has empty space on the ground floor and is wheelchair 

accessible and is a very find building, and goes across the street 

into a private building where the person is known to be 

supporting the PCs. that what the government is doing is paying 

out large patronage appointments, large business deals, and 

large property owners. 

 

The Premier and his PC government’s main goal seems to be 

that a chosen few get more and more money while the rest of 

the people of this province get less and less. A few people with 

all the benefits and a lot of people with all the costs, and that, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the PC vision of society and the reason 

why they see nothing wrong with this destruction of the drug 

plan. They see nothing wrong with it. 

 

They think they have a vision for the future. But I assure you, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I and my colleagues here and the 

people of Saskatchewan know that what the PC government has 

is a nightmare from the past. And it’s a vision of a people of 

privilege from 200 years ago, it is not the vision of 

Saskatchewan people today. 

 

But I would ask that the PC government back-benchers opposite 

— the member from Rosthern, the member from Pelly, from 

Kelvington-Wadena — to stand up and to defend this 

destruction of the drug plan. You’ve only been able to put up 

one person to speak in defence of this destruction of the drug 

plan. Why don’t you tell the people in your constituencies what 

a wonderful job you’re doing; why do you think the PC 

decision to attack — tell them. Tell them why you think the PC 

decision to attack our universal comprehensive public health 

insurance is a good idea. Tell us why the Premier and his PC 

government have your support in burdening the sick with extra 

costs. Some of the people that you’re hurting are your friends, 

your neighbours, and your parents. 

 

So tell us, I ask you, tell the people of Saskatchewan why  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3281 

 

you like receiving letters from people who write to tell you that 

they are desperate because they have to choose between buying 

food or buying medicine. I know you get those letters. All of us 

are getting those letters. They’re coming from people all over 

the province, because these changes, these destructive changes 

in our health care system, have hit people hard right across this 

province. 

 

In the rural areas and the urban areas, in the North and in the 

South, you know and I know that people everywhere are 

terribly, terribly angry at what you have done. And they want us 

to convey this anger to the PC government opposite, but the 

government already knows about this anger. You know about it, 

but I have learned from listening to you in this House and from 

seeing the changes that you’ve brought in that you know about 

it, but you don’t care. You don’t want to respond when you 

raise the taxes. You don't want to respond when you make these 

horrible changes and this destructive decisions. 

 

And I ask you to stand up and to defend what you’re doing, to 

let the people of Saskatchewan know exactly what it is you’re 

thinking about when you put more and more burden on them 

and give more and more to your PC pals in patronage. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I look at this Bill and when I 

look at what the member from Weyburn said the other day in 

terms of the drug plan, I reflect that the Premier and the PC 

government really love to talk about providing people with 

choices. That’s one of the big party platforms that they have. 

And therefore I’m sure that they see this Bill as providing lots 

of choices for the sick people in Saskatchewan. 

 

People who are sick can now choose food or medicine. And 

when you’re living on a very low income or a fixed income, 

that’s what the choice is. A $50 drug bill is a choice out of your 

food budget, and you’d better believe it. People can choose 

clothing or medicine. And now they can even choose a drug 

that costs $85 or one that costs $90. 

 

And I’d even heard the Minister of Health bragging about how 

people now have the choice to shop around for drugs, and if 

they don’t like the price of drugs in one drugstore or in one 

town, they can go to another drugstore or another town, and 

they can keep driving around this province looking for bargains. 

they can keep looking for bargains now that we have all these 

choices. And if it wasn’t so tragic for people, it would be almost 

silly — the idea of people who are sick cruising around town, or 

cruising between towns, trying to get the cost of their drugs 

down. 

 

The cost won’t go down, of course. It’s going to go up — it’s 

going to go up. They may say that they expect the costs to go 

down, but my advice to the people of Saskatchewan is, don’t 

hold your breath, because the costs of drugs are as likely to go 

down as the cost of gasoline did when the price of a barrel of oil 

dropped so dramatically, and I’m sure that many Saskatchewan 

people can remember that. Because consumers pleaded for 

months for the reduction in the cost of oil to show up at the gas 

pumps, and it never did. They retail price stayed up. And yet 

when the cost of a  

barrel of oil increased again, we had a situation where the price 

at the pump went up immediately. 

 

There is nothing in this drug plan, there is nothing in the federal 

drug patent Act that in any way is going to say that the cost of 

drugs is going to go down. Absolutely the contrary — 

absolutely the contrary. The cost of drugs will go up. 

 

I noticed that the member from Thunder Creek seems to think 

. . . foresee lower drug prices because he says changes will 

actually spur druggists to cut, not increase, drug prices; because 

now that they have to pay more of the cost for drugs, consumers 

will closely watch drug prices and choose cheaper drugs more 

frequently. 

 

There’s that prescription that you go shopping for drugs. When 

you’ve got a temperature or you’re frail and elderly and you’re 

sick, you’re going to have to go around town trying to strike a 

bargain with your druggist. 

 

And that will force drug producers and retailers to emphasize 

cheap alternatives . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Not very 

likely. Once the multinationals have control of the drug scheme 

in Canada, once the general drugs are out, the price of drugs 

will go up and up. 

 

It was cute, how much we had to plead to try to get the cost of 

gasoline down at the pumps when the cost of oil had dropped. It 

was really interesting how the price of gasoline went up 

immediately when the cost of a barrel of oil went up. And I say 

these are the cute business tricks, the cute shafting of the 

consumers that happens every time, Mr. Speaker, when large 

profit-hungry multinational firms are in control of our economy. 

And when it comes to lusting after profits, the drug companies 

are among the worst, as I’ve already pointed out. 

 

If the federal Patent Act is passed, the costs of drugs, as I’ve 

said, is going to go up and up. And now, with the destruction of 

the Saskatchewan prescription drug plan, those ever-increasing 

costs will not be shared equally by those who are well and those 

who are ill. The increased costs of drugs are going to be borne 

totally by those who are already weakened by injury and 

disease. Their expenses are going to go up and up, while those 

who are in good health have less to bear. The increased costs 

hurt all those who are ill, but of course they hurt those with less 

income much, much more. 

 

And I found it interesting, Mr. Speaker, how insensitive the 

Minister of Health has been to our pleas that people can’t afford 

huge increases in their drug bills. Whenever we mention this 

point, he points out that people on social assistance are 

protected, that seniors have a lower deductible, and that his 

mysterious tribunal are looking after all the unique cases. 

 

An Hon. Member: — A phantom tribunal. 

 

Ms. Smart: — A phantom tribunal. The Minister of Health 

appears to have no concept of what it means to live on a low 

income on minimum wage. And I want to ask him, what about 

all the farmers who are barely making ends meet? What are 

they doing? And I know that there are many farmers who are 

dependent on drugs. One of the  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3282 

 

things that they are struggling with is reactions to the chemicals 

that they’re using on the farms. And they don’t have the extra 

cash to pay for their medications. What are the farmers going to 

do? As much as the people in the urban areas. 

 

How are people going to survive all the increased taxes, the 

hidden taxes, the added costs, and, in the future, the horrible tax 

changes being promoted by the federal PC government, and the 

repercussions from integrating our economy with the United 

States? 

 

And I say to you and to the people of Saskatchewan and to the 

constituents of Saskatoon Centre that all these questions are 

crucial and they’re all integrated. And all these actions of the 

PC government, including the destruction of our drug plan, are 

dragging us down into a poverty that we haven’t known in this 

province for a long time. 

 

And when I look at the changes that you’ve been making and 

the legislation that you’ve been bringing in, I realize that your 

vision of the 21st century is lots of people desperately living 

from hand to mouth and a few people sitting pretty. That’s the 

system our ancestors knew, Mr. Speaker. That’s the system of 

the past, not the future. That’s the system we want to escape. 

And if it is the PC vision of the future, I say it’s a nightmare. 

 

(1545) 

 

But I know from talking to my constituents in Saskatoon Centre 

that unfortunately this nightmare seems to be coming true, that 

there are more and more people who are losing their income 

and losing their ability to pay for their basic needs. The sales 

tax increase, the flat tax increase, the hidden costs that are 

everywhere, the burdens that you’re putting on the people of 

Saskatchewan are causing more and more people to slip into 

poverty. A person earning a minimum wage is only making 

$9,000 a year. They may not be eligible for help under the 

Saskatchewan assistance plan, but they have very little money 

for the high cost of drugs. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s a section of this Bill 34 which 

indicates to me that the Minister of Health may be giving 

himself the power to directly and personally bestow favours on 

certain people. And I want to read this section of the Act. It’s 

section 5.1; and it says this: 

 

Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act or the 

regulations, the minister may make a payment, in any 

amount and in accordance with any terms and conditions 

that the minister considers appropriate, to or on behalf of 

any resident who has received a drug whether or not the 

drug is listed in the formulary. 

 

Now to me that clause means that the minister can bypass 

everything else in the legislation including the tribunal. And I 

say that that reads to me as if the minister is taking on to 

himself some pretty sweeping powers. And I’m looking forward 

to the discussion of this section when we move into Committee 

of the Whole, because it sounds very much as if the minister is 

providing himself with a vehicle through which to provide 18th 

century style  

largess to a chosen few. And it sounds to me like the 

unravelling of any logical, rational, equitable system of 

benefits. 

 

And I have had a personal experience with the power of the 

Minister of Health and one of my constituents in Saskatoon 

Centre, a person who phoned me when the drug plan changes 

first came in. He has a condition where the drugs that he was 

taking were taken out of the drug plan completely, and the 

experimental help that he was . . . therapy that he was getting at 

the university was also taken out of medicare. And he phoned 

me and he was very, very angry about this change because he 

was a constituent who had worked for the PC party. He was a 

constituent who had given a lot to the government opposite, and 

he was very angry at being shafted this way with this change in 

the plan because he was a person with not that much of an 

income, a small business, but not the kind of money that some 

of the members opposite, I’m sure, have on a regular basis. 

 

And this constituent asked me if I could help because he phoned 

the Minister of Health’s office and he’d gotten no help. So I 

phoned and I told the Minister of Health’s office the truth, I said 

I have a constituent whose drugs have been taken out of the 

drug plan, whose medical services have been taken out of 

medicare — experimental therapy. I said that he’d worked for 

the PC party, that the Premier had been in his living-room, and 

that he was very angry and upset. And they phoned me back 

and said that they’d taken care of it, that his drugs would now 

be within the plan and his therapy would be within medicare. 

 

And I phoned him up to find out if this is exactly true, what 

they had told me. And it was. In fact the Premier had phoned 

him the very next day. Now that’s the kind of preferential 

treatment that some people are getting but not everyone is 

getting it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Ms. Smart: — With this Bill 34 and with the developments that 

have come before the House and before the people of 

Saskatchewan over the last two months, each person in 

Saskatchewan is being provided with the opportunity to beg and 

plead for health to the minister of the basis of having to show 

proof that, one, their particular illness is worse than their 

neighbour’s, and two, that their financial distress is worse than 

their neighbours’. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know and you know that many, many 

Saskatchewan people are too proud to engage in this kind of 

begging. Because access to low-cost drugs is no longer their 

right, they’re going to suffer the loss in silence and bear the cost 

individually. And that is a basic change in access to medicare. 

That is a return to the past. That is fundamentally regressive, 

old-fashioned, and a product from the Dark Ages. And I say 

that is typically Tory. 

 

Mr. Speaker, much earlier in what I was saying today I referred 

to the fact that the PC government has broken many of its 

promises to the people of Saskatchewan. I said that the Premier 

and his government often say one thing and then do exactly the 

opposite. 

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3283 

 

And with their destruction of the Saskatchewan drug plan, they 

have done something they’re supposed to be against. They 

have, Mr. Speaker, imposed the full force of government 

arbitrarily on the people of this province and also tangled us in 

a bureaucratic maze which is beyond belief. Tribunals sitting 

secretly in judgement on us deciding, without published criteria, 

who is eligible and who is not; rebate forms to deal with that 

don’t come back in time to help pay for the next prescription; 

pharmacists having to negotiate their own prices for drugs 

instead of a government negotiating directly with the drug 

companies for hopefully a cheaper price. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education knows the high 

rate of illiteracy in this province. And yet he supports a 

government that continues to put on the people of 

Saskatchewan the mandate to fill out forms in triplicate, to fill 

out detailed forms, written in language that even people with a 

reasonable level of education sometimes can’t understand. 

People on social assistance with a 16-page form to fill out; 

people who are sick having to fill out these forms to rebate their 

drugs, and having to fill out forms to appeal to the tribunal, and 

having to write letters to explain their individual situations. 

 

And many of the constituents that I have find this a tremendous 

burden, and I think that their needs should be taken into account 

when we’re looking at what happens to people in Saskatchewan 

with the changes in this drug plan. We need to realize how 

important it is to give equal service to everyone. We need to 

realize the problems that people may have in accessing 

government services. We need to make it as easy and as 

equitable as possible for people to be helped, particularly 

people who are sick — particularly people who are sick. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve pointed out how this government is imposing 

the full force of government arbitrarily on people in this 

province — a government that says it’s not going to do this. 

 

But like so many of the things they say they’re not going to do, 

they do exactly that. They say they’re opposed to massive 

bureaucracies, but with the rebates on the gas tax and the 

rebates on the drugs and the tribunals and the other systems that 

they’re putting us through, the problems with the dental plan, 

the problems getting children to the dentist, this government is 

tangling us more and more in a bureaucratic maze which I say 

is absolutely beyond belief, given the ideology that they say 

they believe in. 

 

They have tribunals sitting secretly in judgement on us. That’s 

pretty horrible. We should have the criteria published so we 

know how some people are getting their costs rebated and 

others are not. On what basis are people making those decisions 

about other people’s lives? On what basis are they putting more 

burden on some of the people in my constituency to pay up, and 

other people getting their drugs paid for? I would like to know, 

as their representative . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And I 

think that the Minister of Education, the member from 

Weyburn, who believes in this information age should give us 

that information. That’s what I think. And I know that the 

people in my constituency believe that too. 

We have the tribunal operating in secret. We have the rebate 

forms that people have to fill out. We have the pharmacists 

negotiating the price of drugs. And over and above all, Mr. 

Speaker, we now have a user-fee policy for health care in this 

province, a demand that the sick pay up, a backward approach 

to the modern phenomenon of prescription drugs — an 

absolutely backward approach. 

 

And I say that Saskatchewan had the best drug plan in North 

America and that the PC government has destroyed it. And I 

say that the day is going to come soon when the New 

Democrats can put it back together again. Therefore I am very 

pleased to support this amendment that my colleague, the 

member from Saskatoon Nutana, has put forward: 

 

That Bill 34 have all the words after the word “that” deleted, 

and the following substituted: 

 

That Bill 34 not now be read a second time because: 

 

(a) the erosion of the prescription drug plan unfairly shifts 

health care costs onto the sick and those least able to 

afford them; and 

 

(b) the erosion of the prescription drug plan constitutes a 

betrayal of Progressive Conservative election promises; 

and 

 

(c) the erosion of the prescription drug plan is a betrayal of 

medicare in Saskatchewan. 

 

That is clearly what it is, Mr. Speaker. I strongly support this 

amendment, and I’m completely opposed to this Bill and this 

change in the drug plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to speak 

in this debate because of its importance, and because, Mr. 

Speaker, of the importance of this amendment in light of the 

facts that face us now which have been developing over the past 

several months, and which even members opposite should not 

be able to deny. If they can deny some of these facts, Mr. 

Speaker, I invite them to rise and speak in this debate, explain 

what the rush is all about, and show to the public of 

Saskatchewan why it is so important to have this Bill passed at 

this time without all of the due consideration that should be 

given to the factors that are involved here. 

 

This amendment, Mr. Speaker, is important because there has 

been so much public concern expressed about the changes to 

this prescription drug Act, to the prescription drug program. 

There isn’t a community in Saskatchewan in which there are 

not numbers of people who have said since the plan was 

introduced that financially they are being strapped to the point 

where they are either not taking their drugs or are not taking 

them in an appropriate way. 

 

There is not a community in Saskatchewan in which you will 

not find people on low incomes with families, and senior 

citizens, Mr. Speaker, who are not being hurt by the changes 

which the government has brought about in  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3284 

 

the proposed Bill and this changed drug plan. Those concerns 

are being expressed every day. We have had on many occasions 

in this legislature, long petitions presented by almost every 

member on this side of the House, petitions which people have 

sincerely signed because they see the harm that’s being done. 

 

They are saying to the government, please take a second look. 

Please reconsider what you are doing here. Please understand 

that there are some people whose health will deteriorate even 

further because of what this drug plan will do in the way that 

they take their prescription drugs. 

 

And I use this word and I will elaborate on it further, Mr. 

Speaker, but I draw your attention once again as other have, that 

we’re talking here about prescription drugs, and that is drugs 

that people cannot take at will because no pharmacist will sell it 

to them unless there is a prescription. 

 

So in light of this major concern that is being expressed, 

probably in a greater way than it has been in recent memory on 

any other issue, we should reconsider passing this Bill at this 

time and wait for at least six months while all of the harm that’s 

being done can be considered, and so that the government can 

reconsider what it is intending to do here, and hopefully, in light 

of that, will make some changes and back off this devastating 

proposal and this devastating Bill. 

 

(1600) 

 

The other reason, Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak in favour of the 

amendment is because, in spite of the concern that’s there, in 

spite of the harm that’s being caused, there has been no 

response from the government with regard to those concerns. 

Now that should be enough reason to delay the passage of this 

Bill for at least six months. Hopefully at that period of time, 

reasonable minds will reconsider what is happening here. 

 

Until the government is prepared to address the problems and 

respond in the positive way, this legislature has no business 

passing this legislation. Any person with any degree of 

compassion and caring about the health and welfare of the 

citizens, which we all represent, should not even contemplate 

the thought of passing this Bill at this time if they’ve been out 

and about their constituencies. 

 

And if any member opposite can stand up and say that he has 

not, or she has not seen evidence of the harm that this new 

prescription plan is causing, then I say to them, they are out of 

touch with their constituencies like they have never been since 

they got involved in politics. And you know what the sign of 

that is, Mr. Speaker. That’s the sign of a government that 

almost has a death wish, a government that’s even convinced 

itself that the people are going to reject it. And so they say, 

damn the torpedoes, we’re going to do what we want whether 

it’s right or not; but somehow this is ideologically what we 

intend to impose on people, against their wishes, even though 

we promised to them that we wouldn’t do it. 

 

That’s what that government is saying. That’s what those 

members over there are saying by their silence on this Bill. 

That’s why only the Minister of Health, and as far as I  

know, the member from Weyburn, have risen to speak on this 

Bill. And I want to later make some comments about the 

comments that he made when he addressed the Bill. 

 

Now that’s a pretty weak defence of something which the 

government tries to pretend is right and positive and good, 

when two members rise to speak on the Bill — a Bill which ash 

created a debate which is so important, is so significant, not 

only in this Assembly but in every senior citizen centre from 

one end of this province to another, in hundreds and thousands 

of homes from one end of this province to another, among 

people wherever you can go, that kind of debate. And members 

opposite won’t even stand and defend this debacle, this cruel 

measure that will cause people not to take needed drugs because 

they cannot afford them. 

 

And the third reason why this amendment should be supported, 

Mr. Speaker, is because this so-called panel which the minister 

announced several weeks ago, when the public pressure got so 

great that the Premier decided they could no longer withstand 

the pressure, this panel of I don’t know how many people which 

the minister announced, is not working. It is not doing a job to 

solve the problems that are faced, and in view of that, that is a 

third reason why the Bill should be stopped and that the whole 

program should be reconsidered before even more harm is 

done. 

 

This is not the time to pass this Bill. It is a time for the people in 

this legislature, if all are reasonable, to stop and to sit back, to 

take a look what’s before us, to listen to all that is being said by 

constituents who see us daily, and then hopefully reconsider the 

implications. 

 

Families are being hurt. There are families in this province who 

work hard day in and day out, not for a big income. The 

minimum wage in this province has only been increased 25 

cents since 1982, and there are families that I personally know 

as a school teacher, and I taught some of their children, who are 

raising those children, sometimes two or three or four of them, 

on an income of the minimum wage because they want to work. 

Because they want to be able to say, I am working on a job and 

I am going to raise my children as best I can, and I’m going to 

pay my rent, and I’m going to pay my mortgage if I have a 

mortgage, but I’m going to work even if I have to do it on a 

minimum wage. There are many such people. 

 

And what these government people, this Conservative Party is 

saying to them is, you stay where you are but if you happen — 

and I’m going to give you some examples later — but if you 

happen now to have a drug bill of 3 or 4 or $500 a month, that’s 

too bad, you’re going to now have to pay it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the member from Shellbrook-Torch River or 

Saltcoats says that’s not right. Well if that’s as close as he is to 

his constituents, then I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, he should 

resign and give them an opportunity to pick someone who will 

listen to them once in a while. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Because if he really sincerely believes 

that there are no people in his constituency who  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3285 

 

are being grievously hurt by this new prescription drug plan, he 

most obviously is out of touch. Now he represents a rural 

constituency and he should know the impact it is having on 

those people,. This plan affects farm people in the same way as 

it affects people in the cities and the towns and the villages of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

If the doctor says, in order to be able to improve or maintain 

your health, or in some cases in order even to live you must 

take this prescription, it doesn’t matter where you live. They 

have to take it. And they now have to shell out, they now have 

to shell out in many cases money which they can’t afford 

because of some ideological tendency of this government to say 

we’re going to privatize the prescription drug plan. 

 

That’s what it’s all about. That’s what it’s all about. They have 

given, as my colleague from Riversdale has said, the whole 

notion of privatization a dirty name because they have tried to 

implement it in areas, Mr. Speaker, where it has caused harm 

and hurt. And in the case of this prescription drug plan, we have 

a prime example of how they have given the word 

“privatization” a dirty name. Because they are using the slogan, 

just as they used “open for business” which amounted to 

nothing after 1982, after 1982, they’re now using this other 

slogan to try to impose an ideology over the wishes of the vast 

majority of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Now the members opposite have finally woken up . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Because when the truth is said to them 

and they’re reminded in the debates in this House what their 

constituents are telling them, they cannot sit in silence and 

listen. They have to natter away from their seat, instead of 

standing up behind their table and defending this Bill. 

 

Why don’t they do it, Mr. Speaker? Because you cannot defend 

the indefensible. No one can defend the indefensible. And every 

one of those members know it, that they can’t defend this Bill 

because it’s indefensible. And I’ll give you one example, and 

I’m going to take some time to do it, because I think it’s a clear 

example of the harm that ‘s being done and the failure of the 

Minister of Health and his new panel to deal with this problem. 

 

And this is a letter which, I might add, the minister will know 

about because he has had communication on it, dealing with the 

prescription drug plan. And it’s from a lady who write on behalf 

of her mother. And I want to put on the record, this example, 

because it’s one of many. And this lady write to me and she 

says: 

 

I am writing on behalf of my mother who will be 90 years 

of age on the 6th of November of 1987. The recent 

changes made to the prescription drug plan will mean a 

drastic drain on her finances and will cause real hardship. I 

am her daughter and look after her at home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, she goes on to say: 

 

She is presently on at least 11 medications; for her  

heart, because she has had a heart attack, for this she takes 

two different pills four times a day; for her stomach, 

because she has had ulcers and needs protection from all 

the different medications that she has to take. 

 

Anturan, a blood thinner, because she has had numerous 

strokes and falls. Eltroxin, because she had her thyroid 

gland removed years ago. Fluid pills to prevent congestion 

in her heart. Potassium, because her fluid pills drain her 

natural potassium. Arthritic suppositories for severe 

arthritis. Buscopan, a stomach relaxant, necessary because 

of medications. Betagen eye drops, because she has 

glaucoma. Diabetes pills because she has diabetes, and all 

these prescriptions, in addition to the body rubs and the 

powders, etc., needed for her care will be an extreme 

financial hardship. 

 

My mother receives her old-age pension cheque plus a 

supplement, and that is the extent of her earnings. And 

since we have had only a few of her prescriptions filled 

since the plan changed, I can give you only a few 

examples of the cost to date: $19.22 for potassium 

prescription; $30.46 for diabetes pills; $33.79 cents for 

Anturan, blood thinner; $65.10 for another drug which 

relates to something to do with the stomach; and $27.07 

for Ratogen eye drops. 

 

And these, Mr. Speaker, she goes on to say are on a monthly 

basis. And this goes on and on. 

 

Now I ask the members opposite: do you think that this woman 

has a choice? Do you think, as the Premier said last night on 

television, that this woman is abusing the drug plan? I think not. 

I think she certainly is not because she does not get any one of 

these pills unless a doctor gives her a prescription. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, surely, surely if the member from Rosthern, 

who speaks from his seat, is concerned about these kind of 

people, and he must know some of them, he will stand up in this 

House and he will defend this Bill, which he hasn’t done to 

date. He will try to explain why the needs of this certain 

individual are of no importance, or so little importance to the 

Conservative Party and the Conservative government that they 

want to go ahead with this Bill without even considering a 

six-month delay so that some of these problems can be 

considered. 

 

Now the members . . . I will give you some more. Don’t be too 

impatient. I bring this letter to your attention, Mr. Speaker, 

because it’s only an example of many. And I have some — if I 

have time I may bring them to the attention of this House that 

are even worse. This is not the worst example. 

 

But what I’ve found of interest, which should be stated in this 

House, is that this letter was written to me on the 10th of the 

eighth month of 1987, Mr. Speaker. Since then, because the 

minister had announced this glorious plan since this letter was 

written — if I can find the page here, in August, to me — I 

wrote to this lady and I said that the Minister of Health had 

announced a review panel to review your mother’s case. And so 

she did what any  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3286 

 

daughter would do, she contacted the Department of Health 

about the review panel. You know what they said to her? They 

said to her, we’re going to send you out this form, and you type 

it all out, and you give us all the information, and we will 

review this case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the director of professional services division 

finally wrote. This is early in August when this woman first 

wrote to me — finally wrote to this lady on September 2, 1987, 

more than a month later, saying that the minister had announced 

that certain persons with chronic diseases who experience 

extraordinarily high prescription drug costs on a regular 

monthly basis, might, might qualify for special consideration. 

Today, today, Mr. Speaker, there has yet to be a response — 

there has yet to be a response. 

 

And that’s why, in my list of three reasons why this 

amendment, Mr. Speaker, should be supported, I said that 

because this review panel is a failure and it’s not working it’s a 

legitimate reason for all members of this House who are really 

interested in a universal health care program to vote for delay of 

this Bill for a certain period of time. 

 

(1615) 

 

Now I’m finding it somewhat interesting, as I stand here to 

express my concern on behalf of people like this woman and 

many, many others like her. I do this because I think it’s the 

responsibility of me as an elected member of the Legislative 

Assembly to help bring for them a voice to this Assembly, a 

voice which is being denied by the members opposite who will 

not address the issue. 

 

And so as I said about 15 seconds ago, I find it somewhat 

interesting that as I stand here to speak, I have heard at least a 

dozen of them speaking from their seats — speaking from their 

seats, sometimes in a derogatory manner, but they don’t have 

the courage to stand up in this Assembly and put their 

statements on the record. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — They don’t have the courage to stand up 

and put those statements on the record because they know that 

they are not correct. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — And because every one of them knows, 

including the member from Arm River who’s just speaking 

from his seat, that if they put on the record their defence of this 

Bill, no one in their constituency would forget or forgive. And 

that’s why they’re afraid to stand up and be honest on this issue 

because you cannot defend the indefensible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, others of my colleagues have said, others of my 

colleagues have said that this is just another example of 

dishonesty on the part of this party and this Premier and this 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I think the hon. 

member should be allowed to speak without constant 

interruption. 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for that. I 

certainly look forward to the opportunity to speak. I feel strong 

about this matter. I don’t need to stay in my seat to speak about 

it. I speak about it in my constituency wherever I go, and I want 

to speak about it here in this Legislative Assembly because I 

think the concerns of these people have a right to be heard. And 

if the members opposite aren’t interested, that’s their business. 

So I thank you for calling them to order. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this is an example of another major promise 

that has been broken by this Conservative government and by 

this Premier. The people of Saskatchewan were never told a 

year ago that health care was going to be under attack — they 

were never told that. They were told by the Premier, as he went 

in his election campaign, how he was going to build. They were 

told how he was going to take our health care system and make 

it better. They were told in 1982 how they were going to take 

our health care system and make it better. They were told in 

1978 and in 1982 that never under this government would there 

be a deterrent fee for drugs — and they called at that time the 

prescription free a deterrent fee. In fact, they made a solemn 

commitment to Saskatchewan people that they were going to do 

away with it. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the people should be able to 

expect at least as a minimum — at least that — honesty from 

their politicians, and honesty from their government. That is 

what our whole system is all about. If they can’t have that from 

their elected members, then they can’t have democracy. If they 

can’t have honesty from their politicians, then can you blame 

them if they become cynical about the process. 

 

The Tories and this government and this Premier made solemn 

promises on health care and the prescription drug plan. This Bill 

is a breaking of that solemn promise, as well as many other 

examples which have taken place. Is this building on our health 

care program and our health care system? Is $18 million less in 

this year’s budget for health care building a health care system? 

Is the destruction of the dental plan for children, which people 

are now becoming more and more concerned about as their 

children go to school, building a health care system? Is this 

attack on the prescription drug plan, so it’s unrecognizable, 

building on our health care system as the members opposite 

promised? Of course it’s not. 

 

It’s a broken promise. It’s a broken promise along with other 

examples which one can talk about. The hearing aid plan has 

been cut. In mental health a hundred positions have been 

eradicated, destroyed, wiped out. The community health 

services budget has been cut and the staff has been reduced by 

20. The patient care fund no longer exists. The capital fund no 

longer exists. This is what the Premier went on television last 

night and tried to explain as “improving the health care 

system.” What a joke! 

 

Now I heard one of the members from this House last night call 

it bush league. I won’t call it bush league, because I don’t think 

it even deserves the dignity of that kind of a response. It’s just 

that I thought it was  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3287 

 

unfortunate that last night, when the Premier had an opportunity 

to speak to the people of Saskatchewan, provided to him freely 

by certain television networks, that he could have stood up and 

provided a report card on the activities of his government and 

the activities of his cabinet, all he did is repeated the campaign 

speech of 1986. He failed. He failed. And I’m sure that people 

are disappointed, from one end of this province to another, as I 

watched and sat there with some anticipation, was disappointed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this, I believe, is one of the most important 

debates on health care since medicare was introduced in the 

’60s in Saskatchewan. I have no doubt about that. We have had 

programs which were introduced back in the ’70s, such as the 

dental care for children, which was a major program. 

 

When the prescription drug plan was introduced, all of those 

things that were really building our health care system — and 

the opposition in those days supported the government, when 

. . . and it was a different government. It was a government that 

was a New Democratic Party government. So there was not a 

great debate because there was almost unanimity on the 

goodness and the value of those programs. 

 

But today we’re going the other way. We have a proposed Bill 

here that destroys one of those major programs, so this debate is 

one of the most important debates since the introduction of 

medicare. And to some degree sides have drawn in much the 

same way as they were when medicare was introduced. 

 

Now maybe you’re too young to know this, Mr. Speaker, but 

I’m not sure. But you might recall that when medicare was 

introduced in the ‘60s there were those who were 

progressive-minded and thought that making universal 

accessibility to health care was important. And then there were 

those who thought that was not the case, that it had to be left on 

sort of a privatized basis where people either had to mortgage 

everything they had so they could have a decent health care 

when they needed it or they didn’t get it at all. 

 

And my parents, who aren’t young any more, will tell you, tell 

me, stories and relate incidences where their friends and 

neighbours actually died in those days because they couldn’t get 

health care — good friends of theirs. That came to an end in 

1962 or ’64, and we see here a government that’s trying to turn 

the clock back to that period of time. Surely that . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . the member from Arm River says that’s exactly 

. . . from his chair, did you hear that, Mr. Speaker? He says 

that’s exactly what they’re trying to do. They’re trying to turn 

the clock back. Well I say, shame on him. Shame on him, 

because we don’t need the clock turned back to the day when 

people were living in fear of getting ill because they knew the 

would not be able to afford the medical care that was necessary 

because they became ill. 

 

And so again, Mr. Speaker, we have today much the same sides 

drawn, the Conservatives who, when medicare was introduced, 

stood on streets and demonstrations fighting against it. The 

record shows that. One of the biggest fund raisers for the 

Conservative Party, now a senator, led the  

campaign against medicare. Their record is there. Now we have 

those same people, albeit some of them a younger generation, 

who now stand in this House and try to turn the clock back and 

destroy those gains which our society made in the great fight in 

the 1960s, and won’t even stand up in this House and explain 

why they’re doing it, other than the member from Arm River in 

his seat standing up and saying, yes, you’re darn right, we want 

to turn the clock back. 

 

Now I say, Mr. Speaker, those same sides are drawn once again. 

And that’s why I chose to rise and speak in this debate. As the 

debate began I wasn’t going to. I was going to let the House 

deal with it, but as I listened to this debate and heard all of the 

arguments made, I realized how important it was as an 

individual member to stand up and speak out. And so I’m 

standing up and I’m speaking out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — I’m speaking out because before us the 

very future of our health care system is at stake, the very future 

of our health care system — a system which I believe, and the 

New Democratic Party believes, should be available to 

everyone without fear; a health care system that should be 

available to everyone without having people worried about 

whether they’re going to be able to pay other bills when health 

costs fall upon them. That’s what this debate is all about. 

 

It’s a debate between the Conservative government and the 

Premier who is saying, we will provide the best health care 

possible for those who can afford it, and not such a good health 

care system for those who cannot afford it. And if you have a 

heart problem, or if you have asthma, or if you have children 

with allergies, if you have enough income, you won’t be hurt 

because you will easily be able to buy those drugs. 

 

But if you’re working on minimum wage or even the modest 

income of 25 or $30,000 a year, which is not great these days, 

or if you’re a farmer with financial difficulties, then you’re 

going to have to find that money which you don’t have, 

somewhere else, and sacrifice something else so that you can 

provide those medications for your children who are suffering 

from allergies, or whatever prescription drugs that are 

necessary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier said last night that these people were 

drug abusers. The Premier was on television last night, and he 

spoke of this woman whose letter I read, and he said that this 

new prescription drug plan is so great because it’s going to deal 

with those people. He said that it’s going to save a lot of money 

because a lot of people who are now taking drugs will no longer 

take them. Well that’s where the problem is. That’s true. There 

are going to be some people who need drugs for their heart 

condition, or for their arthritic condition, or whatever the 

problem that they face. And they will either not take the drugs 

because they can’t afford them, or they will not be following 

their prescription instructions and not take them in an adequate 

way, which is just as bad. 

 

That’s the result of this thing that we have here before us. And 

while the Premier is saying, well, it’s these people’s fault; it’s 

their fault that they’re taking these drugs and  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3288 

 

we’re going to deal with them with this plan and we’re going to 

stop this abuse — the one thing he didn’t say, he didn’t say that 

the only way anyone can get a prescription drug is if a doctor 

prescribes it. 

 

There is no abuse because of that. And if a doctor is providing a 

wrong prescription — and I’m not being critical of the medical 

profession because they do their job — then it’s not the fault of 

the patient, it’s not the fault of the patient. Anyone can get a 

prescription drug only with a prescription. And the Premier, in 

his defence of this prescription drug plan and many of the other 

major cut-backs in health care, said he’s dealing with drug 

abusers. 

 

(1630) 

 

Now this I say, Mr. Speaker, is not what we should be able to 

expect of the Premier of Saskatchewan if he was a caring man. 

He portrays the image as the Minister of Health has tried to 

portray the image. I might say, the only one who hasn’t tried to 

portray the image of compassion and caring is the Minister of 

Social Services. But they all, the others, portray the image about 

how they’re concerned about the family, about how they’re 

concerned about senior citizens. They talk about nursing homes 

that they’re building. But it’s the family and it’s the senior 

citizens who are being devastated by this new prescription drug 

plan which many of them cannot afford. 

 

An Hon. Member: — And the Premier calls them drug 

abusers. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — And the Premier calls them drug abusers. 

And I object to that — I object to that in the strongest of terms 

here today. I did last night in my press interview, and I do it 

again today. Because this woman in the letter I read, it’s no 

fault of hers that she has to take those drugs. She has to take 

them to survive, and her physicians says so. It doesn’t stop with 

drugs, it doesn’t stop with prescription drugs, Mr. Speaker, 

when it comes to the suffering that’s being inflicted by the 

policies of this government which has broken all of its promises 

to health care. 

 

You can just look at what’s happening in the Wascana hospital 

in Regina. And what’s happening there is that some many 

patients are not able to get out of bed on weekends. They’re left 

in bed on weekends because there isn’t sufficient staff provided 

to look after those people. Is this how we treat those senior 

citizens who built this province and provided for us all of those 

privileges and opportunities that we have had and continue to 

have? 

 

I say no, that is not the way to treat them. That is the action of a 

vindictive government whose ideology has blinded it from all 

reason and all consideration of the needs of the people who 

they’re supposedly representing. 

 

I took some interest in what the member from Weyburn had to 

say when he rose in this debate. It took a cabinet minister; they 

really had to come on hard to sell this plan. None of their 

back-benchers have had the nerve to stand up yet. But I was 

interested in what the member from Weyburn had to say. He 

talked about the need to make  

these changes in the drug plan and make people pay because 

they had to deal with the deficit. He said, if we don’t do this, the 

deficit will rise. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there are other ways to deal with the deficit. 

The members opposite had choices to make, and they made the 

wrong choices. They chose to deal with the deficit by 

destroying our health care program, such as the prescription 

drug plan. 

 

But even as late as the latter part of last week the Deputy 

Premier stood up in this House and announced another 

expenditure of hundreds of thousands of dollars — because he 

yet hasn’t given us the figure, so we assume it’s that much — of 

somebody else that they’re going to station in the great old city 

of New York, and they’re going to call him a trade officer. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I told you it was $300,000. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well the member says $300,000. Well I 

say, Mr. Speaker, just think, just think what $300,000 could 

have done to provide enough staff in the Wascana hospital so 

that those old people wouldn’t have to be left in their beds all 

weekend, and would be able to get out of their beds on the 

weekend — $300,000. They’ve got $300,000 to this individual 

that they’re going to put up to live high and in style in New 

York — $300,000 — but they’re saying to people who need 

drugs, you pay, you pay your way because we have to deal with 

this deficit situation. 

 

Now the Premier last night again said, we’ve got to do this 

because we’ve got to control costs. Well I ask you, where was 

this Premier, where was this Premier when the federal 

government was putting through its amendments to the drug 

patent legislation and increasing the cost of drugs to 

Saskatchewan people by 75 million over the next five years? He 

was cheering the Prime Minister, and he was saying, go to it, 

Brian; we only talk about controlling costs, but we’re going to 

put to the people of Saskatchewan an additional cost in drugs of 

75 million over the next five years, and you go ahead and do it, 

and we won’t say a word. 

 

If this Premier was so serious about the need to control costs, I 

ask you, where was he at that time? And where was he today in 

question period when he was asked about it, and he slipped 

away from the question and never addressed it? You have to 

question the sincerity of such a person when out of the one side 

of his mouth he says concerned about costs, and on the other 

side of his mouth he encourages the increase of those costs by 

supporting the amendments to the drug patent Act. 

 

And then you have to ask the next question. Is this program 

going to reduce the cost, this new, changed prescription drug 

plan, and if so, how? It’s not going to reduce the cost, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s simply shifting the cost to a few. Instead of the 

cost being shared by the whole society so that those who can 

least afford it get the same benefits as those who can afford it, 

this program is going to say to people who have to take costly 

prescription drugs, you now are going to have to pay a lot more. 

And it’s simply a shift of the cost, and not a saving of the cost. 

If anything, because of the amendments to the drug patent  

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3289 

 

Act, the costs are increasing. 

 

I remember back in 1968 we had another minister of Finance 

who rose in this House and presented a budget. And this present 

Minister of Finance, the member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden 

who promised never, never to have deterrent fees on drugs — 

he even signed an ad which he put in his local newspapers — 

this Minister of Finance must have copied the speech from the 

budget speech of 1968. 

 

The senator, who now is a senator, presented that speech on 

behalf of the Liberal government of that day and he said, we 

have got to control health costs or it’s going to destroy our 

health care programs. Did the health programs get destroyed 

between 1971 or 1968 and 1982? No. They were improved. 

They were better. And somehow we had the funds to pay for 

our education of our children. We had the funds to keep our 

roads in repair, which they’re not these days. We had all of 

those funds and the health care programs functioned. 

 

Now we have another Minister of Finance, now a Conservative, 

stand up in this House — oh, we’ve got to control health care 

costs or it will destroy our health care program. Same argument 

— same old argument from the past. And it’s just not the case, 

Mr. Speaker, because they’re not controlling the cost; they’re 

simply shifting it on to those who can least afford to pay. 

 

So I say, Mr. Speaker, when the few members . . . the two 

members who have risen in this House to speak have risen, they 

have not provided a defence of this proposal — they have not 

provided a defence of this proposal. Even the Minister of Health 

spoke so briefly that I can’t remember what he said. I think it 

was two or three minutes. Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, 

anyone who would introduce a Bill which has as broad and as 

major implications as this one, not even be able to take the time 

to explain it and to defend it appropriately. It’s hard for me to 

imagine that, but that’s all he took. 

 

And so in view of all of those arguments, Mr. Speaker, in view 

of the fact that there is so much concern being expressed, in 

view of the fact that the government has not in any substantive 

way responded to those concerns, and in view of the fact that 

this so-called review panel which they have established is not 

doing anything to deal with the problem, and also in view of the 

fact of the potential dangerous situation in the health care of 

some people of Saskatchewan that this plan brings about, I 

think this legislature, if it is reasonable and sensitive and caring 

enough, will vote for this amendment which delays this Bill for 

at least some time so that the government and all members of 

this House can review what is being proposed here and 

hopefully come back with some changes, or doing away with 

the government proposal altogether so that the damage that is 

going to result will not happen. 

 

I urge the members opposite, especially those back-benchers 

who are not tied to those commitments that the Executive 

Council members have, I say to them, stand up and speak for 

your people. Stand out and represent those voices in your 

constituency that need to be heard. Vote for this amendment 

and they will  

appreciate it, and they will appreciate you for doing it. 

 

I’m going to support the amendment. I’m going to support the 

amendment, and I’m going to proudly go back to wherever 

people ask me and say I supported it because I objected to and 

opposed the proposed changes to the drug plan which this 

government is trying to impose on the citizens of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1648) 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas — 9 

 

Blakeney  Brockelbank 

Tchorzewski Mitchell 

Atkinson Trew 

Smart Van Mulligen 

Koenker  

 

Nays — 30 

 

Muller Duncan 

McLeod Andrew 

Berntson Lane 

Taylor Swan 

Muirhead Maxwell 

Stemmed Hodgins 

Gerich Hepworth 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I ask hon. 

members to please allow the vote to go forward without 

interruptions. 

 

Hardy Meiklejohn 

Pickering Martin 

Toth Sauder 

Johnson McLaren 

Hopfner Petersen 

Baker Gleim 

Neudorf Gardner 

Kopelchuk Britton  

 

Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 

referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 48 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Hospitalization Act. 

 

Clauses 1 and 2 agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 

  



 

October 13, 1987 

3290 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, I just have a couple of questions for the 

Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, can you advise me that with 

this elimination of the hospitalization fund, will Finance and not 

Health now be responsible for the payment of these funds to 

hospitals? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Health maintains the responsibility for 

the payment but, as is the case throughout government and 

other areas and agencies, the actual writing of the cheque or that 

physical sort of distribution of the cheque will come from the 

Department of Finance out of the Consolidated Fund. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — In the budget speech in June there was some 

hint at the government’s plan to amalgamate some health care 

institutions and reduce the number of financially distinct health 

care organizations. With this elimination of the SHSP 

(Saskatchewan hospital services plan) fund, do we have the first 

step in that plan, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — This SHSP fund, as was explained in 

the second reading speech, is not part of that at all. It has strictly 

to do with an administrative thing inside the government itself 

in terms of the capability of the computer systems now within 

Finance to be able to handle that. And no, it’s not part . . . it’s 

not related to the other thing to which you refer. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — You now say that the capability is within 

Finance. As you’re aware, there has been some concern about 

the delay of payments to the doctors and to hospitals and to 

people who are getting refunds on the prescription drugs. Is this 

a ploy, so to speak, as per the Coopers & Lybrand study, where 

you delay payments from Finance in order to save the 

government some money in terms of interest, but at the same 

time cause a great deal of hardship for individuals waiting for 

those payments? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I recognize the point the member raises 

as it relates to payments to pharmacists and physicians. There 

was a problem a month or so ago. No, there is no deep, dark 

plot here or anything like that, and I just want to . . . I’ll give 

you the assurance, and the House the assurance, that that’s not 

the case. This is without question a more efficient and effective 

way to deal with it and it is not related at all to any kind of a 

plan to delay the speed with which payments are made or 

anything like that. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — So, Mr. Minister, then you’re giving us your 

word that we’re not going to have some concerns expressed by 

hospitals or other health care institutions down the road about 

the delay of payments from the Department of Finance and how 

this is hurting them financially in terms of meeting day-to-day 

expenditures at those health institutions. Are you giving us your 

word on that? 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I will say this . . . I’ll give my 

word to this extent. I can’t say that there won’t ever be in some 

time in the future a complaint, you know, from a delay of 

payments, if some unforeseen thing should happen. But I will 

say that there . . . I will give my assurance to the House that the 

plan is, and the way in  

which this will operate, is that there will not be delays. And 

there will not be undue delays for payments to hospitals under 

this new system, which will come from the Consolidated Fund. 

 

Clause 3 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 4 to 7 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend The Hospital Standards Act 

 

Clauses 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 48 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Hospitalization Act 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend The Hospital Standards Act 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 50 be 

now read a third item and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Being near 5 o’clock, the committee is 

recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


