













































October 21, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 October 21, 1987 

 

 

3409 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: — According to rule 11(7), I have examined the 

following petitions which were laid on the Table yesterday. I 

hereby now lay them on the Table for reading and receiving: 

 

Of certain citizens of the province of Saskatchewan, praying 

that the Legislative Assembly may be pleased to urge the 

Government of Saskatchewan to stop its policy of eroding and 

undermining medicare in Saskatchewan — Sessional Paper No. 

151. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me to 

introduce to you, and through you to the other members of the 

Assembly, a number of individuals seated in your gallery, sir, 

with whom I had the honour to meet earlier today, with several 

of my colleagues. They represent various cultural and 

multicultural organizations within Saskatchewan, sir. 

 

I’d like to name them and have them stand as I read their 

names: Dr. Hamid Javed, Multicultural Council of 

Saskatchewan; Mr. John Rozdilsky — I trust I pronounced that 

correctly, John — Ukrainian Canadian Committee; Mr. Paul 

Rezanoff, Saskatchewan Council of Cultural Organizations; Dr. 

David Ngai, Saskatchewan Organization for Heritage 

Languages; Dr. Ernie Epp, Saskatchewan Multicultural 

Advisory Council; Dr. Harbans Narang, Saskatchewan 

Association for Multicultural Education; and Ms. Nayyer Javed, 

from the Immigrant Women of Saskatchewan. 

 

Would you please join with me in welcoming them in the 

normal fashion. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with our 

minister in welcoming this delegation to the Assembly, and I 

hope that they are able to sit through question period, and 

perhaps will be able to have a chance to meet with several of 

you individually, shortly after question period. I’d look forward 

to do that, and I ask the members on both sides of the House, 

once again, to welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Deficiency Payment for Farmers 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Premier. Mr. Premier, you know that in today’s trying times 

many farmers are strapped for cash, and their families are 

worried about how the bills are going to be  

paid, and they are thinking forward to the next spring, if they’re 

going to have enough money to put a crop in. 

 

Mr. Premier, can you tell us today: is there going to be a 

deficiency payment from the Mulroney government before the 

end of November to ease that cash flow problem? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member has 

asked me that several times. As he knows, a premier of the 

province does not speak for the federal Minister of Finance or 

the federal Minister of Agriculture, or the Premier Minister for 

that matter, so he knows that I can’t announce it. I mean, to be 

fair, yesterday he said the number one problem in rural 

Saskatchewan was going to the dentist, and today he’s asked me 

for the fifth time whether I’m going to announce a deficiency 

payment, and he knows that that’s impossible for me to do. 

 

I will say to the hon. member that we have provided the 

information to the federal government like we did a year ago, 

saying that because of international subsidies we should have a 

deficiency payment. We received one, Mr. Speaker. We 

provided that information again, and have the support of all the 

ministers of Agriculture in the country and all the premiers in 

the country, and they have agreed that it should be paid, Mr. 

Speaker. And the Prime Minister will be making the 

announcement, as only the Prime Minister can. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, that’s incredible. Farmers of this 

province can’t put brown sugar on your idle words and feed it 

to their families. It seems that whenever it’s convenient for you 

to know when the deficiency payment is coming for your 

benefit, you do know, and when it’s supposed to come for the 

benefit of Saskatchewan farmers, you don’t know. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Could you give us some indication — surely 

you are in contact with the Prime Minister of this country — 

could you give us some indication whether or not we will be 

receiving a deficiency payment by the end of November. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the hon. member 

can stand up and talk about brown sugar for farmers so that 

he’d maybe get a little of media so the NDP can look like 

they’re defending farmers. And he’s just had . . . evidently 

they’ve just come back from a meeting from Nokomis last night 

and he was with some farmers. So you’re now going to look 

like you’re going to defend farmers. Well, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, 

please. Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we have fought for and  

  



 

October 21, 1987 

3410 

 

have had delivered the largest payments to farmers in the 

history of Saskatchewan, in the history of Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — We have fought for again an even larger 

payment, and have got the co-operation and the endorsement 

from every province in the country and every minister of 

Agriculture to have the same amount, if not larger amount, of 

money be paid again. 

 

Now in 1986, in 1986-87 the farmers received a payment. They 

received it in May, June, July, that period, this year — this year. 

And they’re waiting for, Mr. Speaker, another payment. Now 

it’s not . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — When? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — And they say, when? They know that 

they received the payment this spring. And the hon. member 

wants to know, when are they going to announce the next 

payment? Well, Mr. Speaker, if they did announce the payment, 

you wouldn’t hear one word of congratulations or bouquet from 

the NDP or from the member, because he never said he like it in 

the first place. 

 

So we’ll announce it; the Prime Minister will announce it when 

he’s ready to announce it, and farmers will appreciate it. And 

they won’t appreciate your sly little remarks about brown sugar 

and other things that you talk about that make no sense at all to 

the rural people in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Loss of Two-price Wheat 

 

Mr. Upshall: — I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, what 

the farmers don’t appreciate is your not telling them the truth 

when they need the truth about a deficiency payment. So I’ll 

just leave that because I’ll let the farmers of this province judge 

for themselves. I’ll ask a new question. 

 

I’ll ask a new question to the Premier, and it deals with the 

claim that the Mulroney government will make up the $280 

million loss which farmers will suffer from the elimination of 

the two-price system. 

 

Mr. Premier, can you tell me: where and when has the Prime 

Minister of this country ever made a public statement as to how 

this loss will be covered, or even if it will be covered? And can 

you table the documents which commit the federal government 

to do just that? Tell us how it’ll be covered and when it will be 

covered. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. members are 

against the trade with the United States. They’ve introduced a 

motion, a resolution in this House, against the trade agreement 

between the United States and Canada. And any time, Mr. 

Speaker, that they can raise any issue that would say that they 

don’t want this trade agreement, and he’s going back to the 

whole question of  

two-priced wheat, I mean, we know their position. It’s very, 

very clear. 

 

In the Leader-Post today, Mr. Speaker, there’s the big NDP 

supporter, Bob White, with a centre-fold out there saying, make 

sure that we go to a vote on trade, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Every single NDPer across the country is against trade because 

they’re afraid, Mr. Speaker. The young people in this country 

are for trade. The young people in this country are for speaking 

more languages. The young people in this country want to see 

agriculture succeed, Mr. Speaker, and they will continue to 

fight it regardless of whether it makes any sense for the country 

or not. I’ll say it makes sense for agriculture; it makes sense for 

farmers; it makes sense for people who grow wheat; it makes 

sense for people who grow beef; people who mine; people who 

are in the forestry business, Mr. Speaker, and they’re against it 

because they don’t understand it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

you, along with the Prime Minister of this country and the 

President of the United States, have been saying we need to 

eliminate subsidies. And now you’re turning around and you’re 

saying we’re going to give the farmers another subsidy, instead 

of giving them the dollars that they deserve from the wheat they 

produce, thus dividing again the consumer from the producer, 

so the consumers are saying, there’s another subsidy to farmers. 

Can you tell me where the Prime Minister of this country has 

said, and can you table that document where he has said that we 

will be compensated as farmers for that $280 million shortfall 

because of the loss of two-price wheat? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, if I could . . . I believe the 

member from Regina North East asked me that question earlier, 

and . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — You know I did. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — You did, with respect to two-price wheat 

and whether the consumer should pay or the taxpayer should 

pay. and you asked it, and if I might, Mr. Speaker, it’s the same 

question, but I’ll take it back to the hon. member. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, Order, please. Order, please. 

Order. Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The hon. 

member wants to know whether it would be better to have the 

consumers pay higher prices for their products — bread, bakery 

products. Should we force consumers in Canada to pay higher 

prices; the poor to pay higher prices; those on welfare to pay 

higher prices to subsidize farmers, or would it be a better idea, 

Mr. Speaker, to tax people who have income and make the 

same payments? 

 

Now I will argue . . . I will argue anywhere in Canada that  

  



 

October 21, 1987 

3411 

 

people would say, don’t tax the poor. And that’s what the NDP 

is saying. They’re saying, put a bread tax, put a wheat tax on 

the poor, and they cant hen subsidize the farmers. Why would 

you? 

 

You know what, you haven’t really thought about this very 

much. That’s the problem. You as a farmer, and you as an 

NDPer, and you with the so-called social conscience haven’t 

thought very much about this. You’re going to charge seniors, 

people on welfare, low-income people, too much for the price 

of bread so that in fact you can subsidize farmers when in fact 

you wouldn’t be in favour of taxing those that have money and 

helping the farmers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I would just like to remind hon. 

members that question period should not be a forum for debate, 

and I’d ask them to . . . Order, please. 

 

I would like to remind the hon. member for Regina North East 

that his interventionist comments, when the Speaker is on his 

feet, is not part of the practice of this House, as he knows, and I 

ask him to refrain from that. 

 

Possible Conflict of Interest at Sask Forest Products 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

to the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Forest 

Products Corporation, and it deals with the incredible admission 

in Crown Corporations Committee of this legislature that the 

chairman of the SFPC board of directors, one Pat Hill, is also an 

employee of the corporation’s largest customer, AFA Forest 

Products. 

 

I want the minister to explain to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

how that is not a clear conflict of interest. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the prices which are set by 

Saskatchewan Forest Products, and in the case that the member 

refers to at the plywood plant at Hudson Bay, those prices are 

set on an ongoing basis within the corporation and on a daily 

basis. Whatever the price is on a particular day, whatever 

company, regardless of what company is buying, whether it be 

MacMillan Bloedel, whether it be AFA, or whoever it is — it 

doesn’t matter which company it is — they pay the price that is 

set and the price that is going. It has nothing to do, Mr. Speaker, 

it has nothing to do — and there is no opportunity for the 

chairman of the board or any board members to influence the 

price at any particular time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, you can’t explain away the fact that the chairman of 

the board of directors of that corporation is also listed as the 

president of AFA Forest Products, SFPC’s (Saskatchewan 

Forest Products Corporation) largest customer. As chairman of 

SFPC, his job is to get the highest price possible from every 

customer. And as an employee of AFA, his job is to buy the 

product at the  

cheapest possible price. 

 

In whose interests is Mr. Hill acting when he is both an officer 

of SFPC’s biggest customer and the chairman of SFPC’s board 

of directors? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, just to set the record 

straight, Mr. Pat Hill, who is the chairman of Saskatchewan 

Forest Products, is an employee of AFA, which is a very large 

company — has a branch in Saskatchewan located in 

Saskatoon, which Mr. Hill is associated with. The purchases 

that are done by that company are by and large for the Ontario 

and Quebec market, purchased by AFA from the Ontario 

branch and purchased from Saskatchewan Forest Products’ 

representative and the broker who is residing in Vancouver, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

That is the fact. That is the fact, and I will stand in this House 

any time and say to that member who wants to drag the good 

name of a citizen of this province, a citizen who serves this 

province well as chairman of the Saskatchewan Forest Products 

Corporation, and a citizen who, as chairman of that corporation, 

under his jurisdiction in that corporation, that plywood plant 

that the member wants to drag through the dirt as well, has 

made money in every single year — has made money in every 

single year for the public of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, you’re denying that Mr. Hill is in a position to 

influence any decisions. Well let me explain it to you. Number 

one, he is in a position to influence the shipping dates of a 

product and, number two, he’s in the position to guarantee 

supply of product to AFA when supply is limited. 

 

Mr. Minister, those are just two ways to influence the price. 

Because, number one, the price of this product is determined on 

the shipping date and, number two, prices rise when supply is 

limited. I’m going to ask you again: do you still deny that Pat 

Hill is in a position to increase profits for AFA at the expense of 

Saskatchewan taxpayers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Hill — Mr. Speaker, I’ll say this in 

an unequivocal way — is not in a position, is not in a position 

to . . . in a conflict of interest position. 

 

And the second thing, Mr. Speaker — I want to repeat this once 

again. Since Mr. Pat Hill has been chairman of Saskatchewan 

Forest Products Corporation, each and every year of his term of 

office as the chairman of Sask Forest Products Corporation the 

plywood division of Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation 

has shown a profit, and a significant profit, which is something 

that those folks over there cannot claim during the years that 

they were in office. 

  



 

October 21, 1987 

3412 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Let me 

explain. Let me explain another way and ask the question again. 

Do you not agree that the marketing manager reports to the 

general manager, who reports to the board, who is chaired by 

one Pat Hill? Do you still tell me that that is not a conflict of 

interest? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I said there is no conflict 

of interest. There is no conflict of interest. The members over 

here will say — they’ve said the same thing in the forest 

industry, that very member, same thing in the forest industry — 

they said that there should not be a Weyerhaeuser corporation 

in Saskatchewan; there should not be a paper plant located right 

in his own city. They said that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you were here. Other members of this House 

who were here in the last session, the last term of office, said, 

those members over there said, Weyerhaeuser will not build a 

paper mill. But . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. I believe the member is off the 

topic. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — New question to the same minister. Mr. 

Minister, do you deny that one of the groups trying to buy the 

Hudson Bay plywood mill is headed up by the current sales 

manager that lives in Vancouver, one Eric Hedlund? And were 

you aware that the principals of AFA Forest Products are part of 

that group? 

 

What we have seen here is an employee of a company which is 

trying to buy your mill and also serve as the chairman of the 

board of directors. I want to know, Mr. Minister, can you deny 

that? And how do you explain away that conflict of interest? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I have said to the member 

in the past, I’ve said to the member in the past and I say to . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. The member . . . the 

minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for 

bringing the members opposite to order while I give my answer. 

Mr. Speaker, there are a couple of things that need to be said. 

I’ve said to the member from Price Albert-Duck Lake in the 

past that, yes, various elements of Saskatchewan Forest 

Products, including the Hudson Bay plywood plant, are for sale 

and we would accept proposals from whoever will come 

forward with proposals. 

 

We have two proposals, Mr. Speaker, one from a group of 

employees of the mill, employees of the mill, and the member 

I’m sure will stand in his next question and say, that’s a 

conflict, employees of the plywood plant should not be putting 

forward a proposal to in fact buy that plywood plant. That’ll be 

his position — that’s a conflict.  

Well I’ll tell you that it’s not a conflict if those employees have 

confidence in that industry and have confidence in the mill 

within which they themselves work. That is not a conflict, 

though that’s what he says. That’s one proposal, and another 

proposal comes from a major company. 

 

Those two proposals are being looked at by the government 

now and the announcement, or any announcement that is to 

come forward will come forward at the appropriate time. But 

that member over there — and it should be noted, Mr. Speaker, 

that critic over there is a critic of anything which happens in the 

forest industry, any changes that take place. That’s the case. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — New question to the same minister. Mr. 

Minister, you should talk about fairness and honesty. Mr. 

Minister, you say there’s no conflict of interest. Can you tell us 

today if SFPC (Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation) 

plans to invite the rest of its customers to sit on its board of 

directors with Mr. Hill, and if you aren’t going to do that, can 

you tell me why not? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I say once again 

very clearly, there’s no opportunity, and there is no conflict in 

the position of Mr. Hill as chairman. That’s number one. That’s 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, and the other point is, and 

it must be made again, that member who represents the Prince 

Albert area in a forested region of this province, as I do, as I do 

— forested regions of the province which are not often talked 

about in this House, and should be- he stands here and against 

the kind of development that must take place in the forest 

industry. He stands against it, and he’s a critic of it at every 

turn, regardless of whether it’s Weyerhaeuser, Sask Forest 

Products, the plywood development — what it is, he’s against 

it. Mr. Speaker, he is against the development . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Constitutional Rights and Land Claims of Treaty Indians 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. 

During the Queen’s visit yesterday it became apparent that there 

was a big difference between our federal government 

representative and Her Majesty. On the one hand, on the one 

hand, Mr. Premier, we had the minister in charge of Indian and 

Northern Affairs state, in his building of Saskatchewan . . . he 

mentioned that there was absolutely no mentioned of Indian 

people, treaty Indian people, in this province. Her Majesty, in 

turn, mentioned that . . . about the special relationship and also 

the involvement of what she stated as the original people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Premier, many treaty Indians are worried that you are 

adopting the federal Indian Affairs policy rather than the  

  



 

October 21, 1987 

3413 

 

goals, the long-term goals, that have been stated through the 

treaties, and through the Queen’s words. I would like to know, 

Mr. Premier, what are you doing to resolve the constitutional 

rights and land claims of the treaty Indians of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t speak for Her 

Majesty, and I don’t speak for the federal government, and I can 

speak, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the offers that we have put 

on the table that have been accepted by a large number of the 

native people — formal offers and formally accepted with 

respect to self-government, land entitlements, treaties, and 

constitutional reform. 

 

And in fact, Mr. Speaker, the kinds of things that we put on the 

table were accepted by all but one major group, Mr. Speaker, 

and rejected by the natives themselves. And the very reason, 

Mr. Speaker, they were rejected is because they were afraid to 

bring it into the Saskatchewan legislature and let the people of 

Saskatchewan deal with it as we even deal with Meech Lake 

accord, which means Quebec’s a part of the country. Now if 

Quebec is going to be part of the country and passed in this 

legislature, and somebody else wants any form of 

self-government, believe me, as long as I’m Premier, it’s going 

to be passed in this legislature, just as any other province would 

be passed in this legislature. 

 

And this province, Mr. Speaker, this province now has a veto 

that it didn’t have before, constitutionally, just as powerful as 

Ontario, just as powerful as Quebec or anybody else, Mr. 

Speaker. The same rules are going to apply to each and every 

province, and the same rules are going to apply to anybody else 

that gets any form of increases in government as long as I’m 

Premier of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, another question. I must state that 

in regards to the remarks by the Premier that his position was 

strong, a lot of people thought it was indeed one of the weakest 

positions that Indian people and Metis ever have seen in the 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — A question in regards to the Metis. Again I 

refer to the Qu’Appelle Treaty, and in here it says: 

 

The Queen will deal generously and justly with them. 

 

And this is through the treaty-making process with the treaties 

of Canada, and these are the words of the Queen’s 

representative, Lieutenant Alexander Morris. 

 

Would you say, Mr. Premier, that it was generous and just for 

you to cut $700,000 from AMNSIS (Association of Metis and 

Non-Status Indians of Saskatchewan) and their constitutional 

budget this year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we’re now finally finding 

out where the hon. member is really coming from and what he 

wants to know. If he wants to know — and it’s the same 

arguments that have been applied for a long time. You get more 

political freedom, and you have more freedoms generally with 

more economic freedom and more economic independence. 

And he knows that. 

 

It’s the reason, Mr. Speaker, that all jurisdictions are trying to 

promote more education, more economic development so that 

people themselves can grow in economic independence, so that 

they can be stronger, so that they can have more liberty and 

more freedom. If they are tied to the state, if they are 

perpetually on welfare, they know themselves that it’s a trap, 

it’s a trap. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that the changes that we have made with 

respect to status Indians, the changes we have changed and 

brought to bear with Metis, are linked to economic development 

projects and not to political organizations. I know that, and it’s 

the right thing to do. You may not agree, because you want 

money for political organization. 

 

History will support my argument that the more economic 

development and the more economic independence, the better 

off we will all be in Canada whether we’re Metis, status, 

non-status, treat Indian, or any other nationality in this great 

country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Agriculture 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 1 

 

Item 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will 

introduce four members of the staff that are with me in the 

legislature today: Mr. Jack Drew, deputy minister of 

Agriculture; Mr. Stuart Kramer, assistant deputy minister, 

Saskatchewan Agriculture; Mr. Les Bowd, assistant deputy 

minister of Agriculture; and Mr. Wes Mazer, director, 

administrative services branch of the Department of 

Agriculture. 

 

While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would like to sincerely 

thank my staff and all the people in the Department of 

Agriculture for the work that they have done in some difficult 

times in the province of Saskatchewan and across western 

Canada. We have seen many, many new programs and large 

amounts of financial assistance go to farmers across the 

province, and it’s taken a great deal of co-operation, and it’s 

taken a great deal of effort. And as you will see, our staff has 

not grown. In fact it is smaller than it used to be, Mr. Speaker,  

  



 

October 21, 1987 

3414 

 

administering millions of dollars of more money and several 

new initiatives to the livestock industry and to the grain sector. 

 

So I can’t think of a group of individuals in the public service in 

Saskatchewan that have done a better job, and have 

administered more money, and have contributed more 

significantly to rural people, and to, obviously to farmers, than 

the people in the Department of Agriculture. So I acknowledge 

that as I introduce them, Mr. Speaker, and given that I am only 

too happy to be prepared to go through the estimates today and 

say that this department and me, as minister, will continue to 

support farmers in this province not only financially but on the 

national and international fronts where it’s extremely important. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I welcome this 

opportunity, Mr. Chairman to attend to, and question the 

minister for the first time on Agriculture estimates. We have a 

situation in Saskatchewan, as we all know too well, that bodes 

very hard on the farmers of this province, flows over the 

small-town business person, through them to the mid-size town 

and to the cities. 

 

And what has this government done, I ask, to help this 

community of Saskatchewan, based on agriculture, based on 

people co-operating with each other for the good of all? We 

have seen the last few years, since 1982, a Tory government 

that has tried to build and convey a myth. That myth is one of 

standing up and defending family farms — and what a myth it 

is. 

 

First of all we have the myth of the Premier, our Minister of 

Agriculture, being solely responsible for the deficiency 

payment. I hear members opposite, and I hear the Premier 

saying, I went to Ottawa and I got it and I delivered for the 

people of Saskatchewan. Hear, Hear! Hear, Hear! Let’s hear it. 

 

How did this minister do so much more than the Premier of 

Manitoba or Alberta or Ontario? And yet they try to put out this 

myth that our Premier was the only person who had anything to 

do with the deficiency payment. The myth was brought out 

before October 20 last year, and it was brought out by a 

minister and a government who knew that it was to their best 

advantage. The timing was great, couldn’t be better. 

Coincidence, or not? 

 

(1445) 

 

Coming from a premier and a cabinet and a government who, 

early in 1986 when our caucus called them for a motion to have 

a deficiency payment, voted against it. Voted against it because, 

I say, it was not politically opportune to vote for it. And yet the 

myth is still being propagated. 

 

We have government who is going to protect the family farm. 

They’ll protect the family farm — huh — they’ll protect the 

Tory government. They, led by the Premier, fed by a Prime 

Minister in Ottawa who nobody believes, still try to say Grant 

— I’m sorry, Mr. Chairman — the Premier of this province is 

going to deliver again with a deficiency payment. He and only 

he is going to go to Ottawa and deliver a deficiency payment. 

And I asked today, a few moment ago in question period when 

are we going to get this great deficiency payment that we need 

so desperately? The Premier of this province is not the only one 

who could get this deficiency payment. Anybody with any 

smarts with regard to the situation in agriculture in this country 

today knows that we need a federal deficiency payment. We 

needed it in the past, and we need it in the future. It’s not the 

Premier of this province solely, and it’s not the Prime Minister 

of this country, it’s common sense. And yet we have this myth 

that this great duo, this dynamic duo- I use the term loosely — 

is delivering a deficiency payment. 

 

And just a few moments ago when I asked: when are we going 

to get the deficiency payment, Mr. Premier? We got one before 

the election in October last year; we need one now. And what’s 

the response? I don’t make the decisions; I can’t announce the 

federal program. And yet he had a fair amount, he thought . . . 

He tried to tell the people of this province that he had 

everything to do with it last time, and now he can’t do anything 

about it. 

 

How can the farmers of this province believe a man like that? 

 

An Hon. Member: — They do. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — The member opposite said, they do. And I 

suggest that there are a number of people who have been put in 

a situation, because of a lack of responsibility by this 

government, that they’ve got no other hope but to hang on to 

the government that’s there. But they know that’s not true any 

longer. They know that’s a myth. They know the man is not 

credible. 

 

I would just like to read from the blues, Mr. Chairman, relating 

to the deficiency payment. As I said a few moments ago, I 

asked when we’re going to get it. Are we going to get it by the 

end of November? No answer. I can’t call the government 

programs. 

 

In the government motion section, on page 2, the Premier’s 

motion. Number one . . . I’ll read the preamble: 

 

Therefore, be it resolved that this Assembly support the 

four western Premiers in their unanimous call on the 

Government of Canada to continue support of agriculture 

by: 

 

1. Announcing immediately its intention to implement a 

deficiency payment of at least $1.6 million for 1987 to 

Canadian grain producers . . . 

 

Announce, I repeat, immediately. 

 

And I have asked time after time after time on behalf of the 

people of this province, the farmers who are hard pressed, when 

are we going to see some money? When are we going to see the 

needed cash flow, the cash flow that the farmers don’t have? 

We saw it before an election. Will we see it before a June 

federal election? That’s quite possible because that’s how this 

government operates. And so the  

  



 

October 21, 1987 

3415 

 

myth of our Premier or Minister of Agriculture, coupled with an 

unbelievable Prime Minister in Ottawa, of being the only two 

people in this world that could give Saskatchewan farmers a 

deficiency payment is just that — a myth. 

 

And then there’s another myth — the Premier of this province, 

the farmer. Like the member from Riversdale says, the farmer 

from Albert Street south. Well I say that’s a myth too, because 

if this leader of this government in this province was really a 

farmer, I say, and hundreds and thousands of others say, that he 

would be more responsive to farmers. 

 

If the Premier of this province was really a farmer he would 

know, as I know. Last year I shipped malting barley at $3.24 a 

bushel. I would guess the Premier doesn’t even know what the 

price of malting barley is. This year the price of malting barley 

is just over $2 a bushel. That’s $1 a bushel less, or 33 per cent 

less this year than last yea r- 33 per cent. He would know, as I 

know. And I just hauled my no. 4 durum into the elevator. I got 

$1.74 a bushel for it, and I was lucky not to get no. 5 at $1.52 a 

bushel. 

 

I say the Premier of this probably doesn’t know what the price 

of no. 4 durum was. And if you take that $1.74 a bushel on a 

30-bushel crop, as I had, it comes out to $52.20 an acre on a 

quarter of rented land, farmed half and half — $52.20 an acre. 

 

So I take a third of that off for the rent, and I end up with $35 

an acre. And here’s the Premier saying, well I’m doing great for 

Saskatchewan farmers. I can’t live on that. And nor can the 

farmers out there live on that. And he’s dragging his feet on 

deficiency payments. And he’s cutting the agricultural budget 

by 26 per cent — cutting many of the programs. 

 

We can’t live on it. We need a government with some direction, 

some response. We don’t need a myth of the Premier, the 

farmer, jumping on his combine — while it’s going, I might 

add. 

 

Thirty-five dollars an acre, when it costs me 13 or $14 an acre 

to put fertilizer on, 18 or $19 an acre to spray it, not to mention 

all the other costs involved. Those two costs alone nearly add 

up to the dollars that I got off that land. 

 

But the Premier of the province is a farmer, and he knows the 

needs of farmers — that is a myth. He sits on south Albert, 

sometimes sits in the legislature, most of the time flying to 

Washington or points south. That is a myth, Mr. Chairman, that 

this leader of this government is a farmer and knows the needs 

of farmers. 

 

I know, because I have to live on that farm. And I know, like 

every other farmer out there, the costs of production inputs and 

the return from that production. And he can stand up with all his 

degrees in economics, with all his flair, with all his supposed 

charisma, and say yes, I’m a farmer like you. That is a myth. 

 

Then there’s the Premier of this province — another myth — 

the defender of family farms, the defender of family farms. 

Another myth. The government, the leader, the Premier saying 

he’s the defender of family farms; he’s  

going to keep us. We have lost about 1,000 farmers a year in the 

last few years. Also we have the fuel rebate cut in half, but he’s 

defending family farms. Yes sir, we’re going to defend you, but 

we’re going to cut your fuel rebate in half. Oh, I know, this is 

the formula where the price of fuel, the gas, goes down or up; it 

relates accordingly,. So what? So what? The farmers need the 

help. The government isn’t delivering. 

 

And there’s the travel cuts for veterinarians and clinics, and 

there’s the weed control program and the rat patrol program, but 

I’m defending the family farm. You will be there, although 

you’ll have to dig into your pocket a little deeper to keep the 

services that you have — a pocket that’s empty for many, many 

farmers. 

 

And he’s going to eliminate funding for soil testing and feed 

testing and poultry extension and agricultural societies and 

fairs. But I’m defending you. I’m going to make sure that 

you’re there, says this Premier of our province, trying to 

propagate this myth — I’m going to make sure you’re there. All 

the while you dig into your own pocket, a pocket that’s empty 

for many farmers in this province, to come up with money to 

keep their agricultural fairs; to keep their programs so that the 

rats don’t infest the country; to keep their programs so that the 

weeds are controlled on road allowances and ditches. But he 

says he’s going to keep it, keep the farmers. And yet he’s 

saying, dig into your pockets, boys, because I’m not going to 

keep on these programs, because I got to be responsible. 

 

How can any farmer in this province believe that type of 

rhetoric? It’s incredible. No credibility. And I say he cannot be 

trusted. 

 

And then there’s another myth. There’s the myth of the Premier 

of this province, the great ambassador — maybe the travelling 

salesman — going around saying that we’re going to be forced 

into trading with the United States whether you like it or not. 

Going down to Ottawa and listening to a Prime Minister who is 

trying to negotiate a trade agreement with the United States but 

doesn’t know what’s in it. Say yes, yes, yes — a great hand 

puppet. 

 

And Brian Mulroney knows, and I hope you know, that this 

deal is not the best deal for Saskatchewan farmers. You know 

that this is not the best deal for Saskatchewan agriculture, and 

yet you’re still going ahead, and you’re still trying to put out a 

myth that you’re the ambassador. 

 

And then there’s another myth, the myth that this government 

led by this Premier — the Minister of Agriculture — is a 

competent manager. Well, boy oh boy, if there ever was a myth, 

that’s a myth. 

 

In 1982 we have a Premier coming in saying, we’re open for 

business. Open the borders, folks. Come on into Saskatchewan 

and rape the province of all its resources and moneys that 

should be going to the people of this province. 

 

And what he was saying is this — he was saying that we 

couldn’t do it on our own. He was saying, we’re opening the 

doors; come on in folks, we can’t . . . the people of this 

province can’t manage it, so we want people to come in  

  



 

October 21, 1987 

3416 

 

and do it for us. That’s what he is saying, all the while 

propagating this myth of a competent manager. 

 

Giving Peter Pocklington $20 million in grants and guaranteed 

loans. Nobody in Saskatchewan could do it. Look far and wide 

folks, nobody could do it. So we brought in Peter. Peter will do 

it for us. If there’s any profit to make, Peter will make the 

profit, not the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Or bring in Weyerhaeuser. We can’t imagine our own forest 

industry. Obviously this government couldn’t, so they bring in 

Weyerhaeuser. Looked far and wide in Saskatchewan; nobody 

could do it. That tells me that we have a Premier of this 

province who doesn’t trust the people to be able to manage their 

own affairs in this province. And I tell you that mistrust is equal 

from the people to this Premier. The competent manager; what 

a myth. 

 

(1500) 

 

And here we come to another myth — fair and compassionate. 

The Premier is a fair and compassionate man. And I hear some 

of his Tory hacks saying, well he’s doing the best he can in 

these times, these troubled times we’re having. Doing the best 

he can. It’s a global problem. Can’t do anything about it. I say 

that’s a myth. 

 

How fair is it? How fair is it I ask when the people in rural 

Saskatchewan and the farmers, along with all the other people, 

have to pay more money for their drugs, money that many of 

them don’t have. Is that fair? How fair is it when I see my 

neighbours and people around this province having to take their 

kids out of school for a day, load them in the care, lose a day’s 

work on the farm, travel to a centre where there’s a dentist, with 

gas taxed 7 cents. Oh yes, you’ll get it back. If you’re a farmer, 

you’re lucky. 

 

And I hear him saying, that’s fair. Where does that money come 

from, I ask the Premier? Oh but it’s saving the government 

money — taxing the people. Tax them one way or tax them 

another, it makes no difference to me; and the farmers of this 

province, no, it makes no matter to them either. It’s money 

coming out of their pockets. Is that fair, I ask? Is that fair? I say 

no. 

 

Fair and compassionate — what a myth. We had a program put 

in by this government saying that they had a farm purchase 

program. And how many years later did they knock it out? 

Leaving a gap — we have a gap now that there is no program in 

place for people who want to transfer their land — and I might 

add that the average age is 56 years for farmers. And I would 

say that they are soon going to be looking at transferring their 

land to their sons and daughters or to their neighbours — 

whoever they sell it to. And there’s no mechanism in these 

trying times and hard-pressed times to assist that, to ensure that 

that land is not gobbled up by speculators and banks and large 

corporations. 

 

And so now we have the situation where there’s nothing in 

place to assist the transfer of land. And that was one of the 

major promises of this government in 1982. And we delivered 

for a while. Not so bad if you change the program to something 

better, but this great myth of being  

fair and compassionate from this Premier has taken it away. 

And I say to the people of this province, do not trust someone 

who does that. They do not feel that person would be competent 

to run this province. But that all falls in line, I think, Mr. 

Chairman, with this vision that this government has. 

 

We have seen this Premier, in his days of university, writing a 

paper saying that there should be . . . eliminate a number of 

farmers’ land because they’re inefficient. And I tell you, Mr. 

Chairman, this Premier of this province has not lost his vision 

of eliminating a number of farmers in this province. 

 

And I say he got that because of his close ties with the United 

States, Mr. Chairman. We can look south of the border in 

Montana and North Dakota and we can see populations of 

500,000 people. I’ll ask: why do you think, why do the people 

of Saskatchewan and all members here think that we have a 

million people in this province? And when you look south of 

the border, when nothing changes much, and they got half the 

population. 

 

We have a Premier who has the American vision of large 

corporate farms, and I can tell you all the reasons why: not 

standing up for the Crow rate; not standing against variable 

rates; standing in line with the rail companies and the 

multinationals, all the time saying, I’m going to save the 

Saskatchewan family farms — what a myth! 

 

There’s a reason, Mr. Chairman, there’s a reason why we have a 

million people in this province. And the reason is that we have 

had governments in the past who have said, we can do it 

ourselves inside this province, all the while trading with every 

country in the world, because we all know how important trade 

is. But we can do it. 

 

We don’t need “open for business” bringing in the other people, 

the multinationals and large corporate figures, to run our 

province. We don’t need American investment in our land, 

which is so scary with this trade agreement because I want to 

see one million or more people in this province for many, many 

years to come. And my vision is just that — the family farm, 

average size, supported by a government so that their cash 

flows can be counted upon, so that they know from one month 

to the next whether they’re going to commit their bills; a 

long-ranging program, not ad hoc programs that can be 

implemented on the whim of a government in trouble or the 

whim of an election. 

 

We need those kinds of types of programs to ensure that the 

family farmers of this province, their wives and children, know 

that they’re going to be there next year — so that they know 

that they have a place in this province. And what do we have 

now? We don’t have that — insecure. 

 

But that is my vision. Let’s carry it a little further. When that 

family farmer knows that he’s going to be hear a year from now 

because there’s a good, long-range program, he’s going to 

spend his money on whatever he needs, to his level of spending, 

to support the small town, to support the dentists and the 

doctors and the teachers and the lawyers and the business 

people. And when he spends, in turn they spend, and in turn the 

economy goes  

  



 

October 21, 1987 

3417 

 

round. 

 

And that’s my vision, a populated province. And what we have 

is a government and a Premier who are propagating a myth — 

who are propagating a myth in this province that they’re going 

to defend the family farm when all the while, policy after policy 

is undercutting them and costing them money. 

 

We can see . . . I’ll just use one more example, beef . . . the 

beef, $125 beef loan. This cash advance has been cut back 

because they feel that the beef industry is doing fairly well. And 

I say, sure, some parts of the beef industry have picked up. 

That’s good. But if I’m a feeder and I have to pay $500 for a 

calf and I have to feed it for eight months and then hope the 

market stays up to a certain degree that I can make some money 

on it, it’s okay, but it’s not very great yet. But what are we 

doing? We’re cutting back. Instead of maintaining it and 

helping them get back on their feet after years of trouble in the 

industry, they’re cutting it back. the same with the hog program. 

 

Why not leave it there for a while and let the people get 

re-established and wipe out some of that debt that they’ve 

accumulated? Why not leave it there because we know the grain 

side of their industry has fallen flat on its face? Why cut it 

back? But no, the Premier says, I’m defending you, and I’ll 

make sure you’re there as my hand dips in your pocket. 

 

So I think, Mr. Chairman, in summation, I see a government 

trying to propagate a myth, trying to tell the farmers that they’re 

going to do good for them, and it’s all smoke and mirrors; it’s 

all advertising. Keep repeating it — they’ve got lots of money 

to advertise the programs, and I see them and other costly 

advertisements. 

 

But I say the people of this province know it’s a myth. I’ve 

been out around, and I see the tide turning. I can feel it, and so 

can the people of this province because they know that we need 

a Premier in this province with a vision of population, not a 

vision of a province run by someone else. 

 

I thought I’d let the Premier respond. I see him taking notes 

vigorously there, but I don’t wonder why he wouldn’t respond 

because he knows it’s the truth. 

 

As I said, we have some expensive advertising. 

 

I would then carry on, Mr. Minister, by asking some specific 

questions, some of the regular questions that are asked. I 

assume that you would make available to me the name, title, 

salary of each one of the minister’s personal staff; and has any 

of them had a pay change in the last 12 months, and if so, what 

is it; and have there been any leave of absences in the last 18 

months? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I will provide as I usually 

do, the Minister of Agriculture’s staff, and when they began 

work and any changes that they have had with respect to their 

salaries and the salaries they receive, as I usually do. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Will the minister be sending that information 

over? 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, I will, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — I have one other specific question I’d like to 

ask. In 1986-87, what costs did your department incur for 

polling; who did the polling; for advertising, how much with 

Dome Advertising or Marketing Den; what costs were incurred 

for aircraft charter or lease? And in each case could I have the 

dates, the purpose, the firm and the costs and the destinations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the information that the 

hon. member wants is in Public Accounts, and the ’86-87 

Public Accounts will be out in the future, and he will be able to 

have all that information in the typical detail that is available in 

Public Accounts. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Is the minister refusing to provide that 

information at this time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the advertising and the 

information that the hon. member wants, except for charters — 

and I might be able to dig that up for him, but I don’t have it 

with me — any additional charter expenditures will be in Public 

Accounts for ’86-87, for the end of March of ’87, this year. And 

it’ll be coming out in the near future, and that will be all 

documented there as it’s normally done, Mr. Chairman. 

 

I will endeavour to get for the hon. member, as quickly as I can, 

information with respect to any charters that the department 

had, and we’ll send it across. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Yes, it seems to be a little late when you say 

it’s going to be available. I was particularly curious with regard 

to the polling that you have done and the advertising. And I 

assume that you saying you’ll get it to me as soon as possible, 

that will mean within the next day? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to any 

charters, I believe we can have that to the hon. member maybe 

later today. We’ll just go find it. I’m advised, and we’ll check, 

but I don’t believe the department has done any polling at all 

under this particular year. I could be wrong there, but my advice 

here is that we haven’t done any. We’ll check that, and if there 

is, it’ll be made available. And you would normally find that 

kind of information in the public documents. 

 

So yes, we’ll get you the charter information as quickly as 

possible. I don’t believe there’s been any polling done at all. 

And the other promotional things like financing this book, and 

the various kinds of things that goes to farmers are in detail in 

the Public Accounts. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Could you also dig up, as you say, the 

information on advertising because I think it’s very important 

that I have this information so that the public knows what 

money has been spent in this year, in this budget, or was 

planned to be spent on advertising. And specifically I would 

like to ask the cost of the publication Saskatchewan 

Agricultural News for the period in question. Could you get that 

information to me in a short  

  



 

October 21, 1987 

3418 

 

period of time as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, we’ll try to get the cost of 

that specific agriculture publication to the hon. member as 

quickly as we can, maybe within hours, or as fast as we can dig 

it up. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

I would like now to go again in a little more detail into 

deficiency payments. You are aware that there were some 

problems last year in deficiency payments with the farmers 

because they didn’t really know what they were getting. And 

this year as well we still don’t know what we’re getting. I have 

seen figures from the government saying from 1.6 billion to $3 

billion. I would like to ask you, Mr. Minister, what is your 

specific figure that you’ve been asking the federal government 

for, how did you come up with that figure, and when do you 

expect that amount to be paid? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I asked for the 

support of the western premiers at the western premiers’ 

conference in Humboldt, and I said that we would need from 

1.6 to $3 billion. The 1.6 would keep us at a comparable level 

for ’87-88 compared to ’86-87, and the $3 billion would allow 

us to compete more closely with U.S. subsidies. And I asked the 

federal government to support that, and I asked the other 

premiers and the ministers of Agriculture across the country to 

support it, and they have. 

 

We received the payments for the last deficiency payment this 

spring. I believe most of the payments were received in June. I 

would expect that you are likely to see the payments for the 

following year to be in June again. So if you have one year’s 

payment in June, then about 12 months later you’ll likely see 

the other payments. 

 

If I could, Mr. Speaker, I want to record here for the hon. 

member’s interest, the support on the deficiency payments as 

received from an awful lot of people, and I can list several. The 

wheat growers, for one, but one that might be of more interest 

to the hon. member is . . . This is a letter dated May 28, 1987. 

It’s from Mr. Gil Pedersen, region 6 co-ordinator of the 

National Farmers Union. Mr. Pedersen says the following, and I 

quote: 

 

Dear Mr. Devine: I want to commend you for pushing 

your fellow premiers for a commitment to Canadian 

farmers at the Humboldt meeting of the western premiers. 

With continued leadership from you, I am sure the 

Canadian farmers can count on some much-needed 

assistance, either from the federal or provincial 

governments, or a combination of both. Thank you again 

for your efforts on behalf of Canadian farmers. Yours 

truly, Mr. Gil Pedersen. 

 

I believe that reflects, Mr. Chairman, a sincere thank you, and a 

sincere appreciation of the fact that a billion dollars was 

allocated to farmers across Canada, and the lion’s share of it 

came to western Canada, and the lion’s share of that came into 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I have encouraged others to support it, and it has been 

appreciated. I have the endorsement, and we have the  

endorsement in this province of every minister of Agriculture 

and every premier in the country. And finally, if I could say, 

with the payment in June I would expect — and as much as I 

can give the hon. member — the next payment will be probably 

about the same time. You know, every 12 months you would 

expect to see it. I don’t think it would be fair to say that you 

could see two payments in the same year. 

 

While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, and we look at payments 

— and I know the hon. member mentioned the lower priced 

grain . . . Today the federal government has announced that 

they’ve raised the initial payment for feed oats and designated 

oats by 39 cents a bushel, and it will be effective Monday. An 

adjustment payment of $25 a tonne will be made to farmers for 

all 1987-88 deliveries of oats to the wheat board before October 

26 of this year. After that the initial payment for feed oats will 

be $80 a tonne, for the designated oats of $125 . . . and for 

designated oats, $125 a tonne. I just make that statement in case 

anybody is watching or listening to the concerns with respect to 

initial payments and higher prices. 

 

There are some signals of good news on the international front 

with respect to commodity prices and particularly grains. The 

sustained crop failures in the Soviet Union have gain resulted 

in, I guess, and from what I understand, the worst crop they’ve 

had there in some time. It has an impact on world grain prices. 

 

I believe that we will continue to be successful, certainly our 

market share indicates that. And I’m happy to be able to receive 

the solid endorsement from the farmers’ union on the deficiency 

payments, the rise in prices of grain as exemplified by the $25 a 

tonne increase on oats, by the minister responsible for the wheat 

board. 

 

And I will, along with the hon. member, encourage and 

continue to encourage the federal government to support 

farmers as we face these unfair — and I emphasize, these unfair 

— international subsidies that the U.S. Treasury, European 

treasuries are applying to their commodities and in their export 

markets. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I have a real 

problem with the deficiency payments as it came out last time 

because I believe in order to have a deficiency you first have to 

sell your product to find out what that deficiency is. And the 

payment that was made last year, I maintain, should have been 

for the ’84-85 crop year because the crop year was over; we 

knew the deficiency; there was a great shortfall and we needed 

money then. 

 

But what did we get? We had it held over till just before the 

election, to be paid on the following year, over two payments, 

when much of the grain wasn’t even shipped. So I’m sure that 

you would like all the people to say, yes, our Premier got the 

deficiency payment, but what I maintain is he should have had 

it for the year before. We’re one year behind now. 

 

And so I ask you: why did you not maintain to the government 

that the first payment should have been for the previous crop 

year instead of the present crop year when it was paid out? 

  



 

October 21, 1987 

3419 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the whole argument 

for the deficiency payment is based on unfair export subsidies. 

and it’s linked to the years that the United States, and the 

Europeans particularly, have been applying the export subsidy 

to the grains that they market internationally. That’s where the 

whole argument started. If they’re going to play this game, then 

we’re going to have to play a corresponding game so our people 

don’t suffer without any help at all; as others are having their 

treasury defend them on the export market. 

 

Now it is one of the arguments, for example, that we used so 

that we wouldn’t include, for example, potatoes in the 

deficiency payment. Because we said those commodities that 

face export subsidies from out of the treasury should qualify. 

And therefore when we looked at this major increase in export 

subsidy business by Americans and Europeans, that’s when we 

said to the federal government, you now have to stand behind 

the farmers and help us in this export business. 

 

Now that isn’t to say that the domestic subsidies in the United 

States are very much liked by us either. I mean they’re not. The 

decline in the market price is entirely because of government 

subsidies. The United States government this year will spend $1 

billion just on storage of surplus grain. They are paying their 

farmers to grow too much, and then they’re paying their farmers 

to export. They’re providing huge subsidies, in many cases into 

our markets. 

 

What we want them to do is back away from those subsidies. 

And that’s clearly the answer internationally, is to get the 

governments out of the commodity business. Now in the 

interim, as they are going to subsidize their people on the export 

market, we have encouraged our federal government to defend 

our farmers. So those export subsidies are in corresponding 

years. As you see that subsidy, you apply that corresponding 

subsidy here. 

 

So I know, and the hon. members knows, $1 billion isn’t 

enough. It’s not. I mean you need billions and billions of 

dollars. To compete with the Europeans we’d need 5 to $8 

billion more out of the government treasury from the taxpayers. 

And it . . . I agree with you. It’s not enough. But let me say in 

fairness, it is a tremendous amount of money, and more than 

we’ve ever had from any administration. And I think he would 

say that that’s true. 

 

So I will continue to lobby with him, and I’ll be his ally, and he 

can be mine on behalf of farmers, to get as much grain into the 

. . . and as much grain marketed at as high a price as possible 

and as much money, deficiency money, into the hands of 

farmers. 

 

And if we can receive large payments . . . I believe in June the 

average payment, when you put the deficiency together along 

with grain stabilization, something like $10,000 cash into the 

hands of farmers. Now that’s They didn’t have to start a 

combine or a tractor of anything else to get $10,000 cash. And 

if you have an average size farm, you got $10,000 in cash if you 

participated in that. 

 

Now you say, well it should have been $20,000. Well it’s true. 

We need as much as we can get. I just make the point  

that it probably will be paid on an annual basis. The last 

payments were in June. And it will be linked to export 

subsidies, and that’s why we can exclude some other 

commodities. 

 

And in terms of how it’s paid, I’ve already agreed with you and 

other — because on my farm, for example, I grow specialty 

crops like lentils as well as wheat — it should be paid on an 

acreage basis. Let the farmer decide what he wants to grow. 

Let’s pay him, and not distort his decisions. And particularly 

those that move out of wheat or move out of the areas where 

there are surpluses, they shouldn’t be penalized. And I’ve 

agreed with you on that as well. 

 

(1530) 

 

So I agree we want to get as much money as possible. I agree 

that we want to provide that deficiency payment as quickly as 

you can. And I agree that we should work internationally to get 

governments to stop subsidizing and wrecking the market price. 

I don’t think there’s any problem with that. 

 

And I think you could agree with me as well — this is the 

largest amount of money in the history of the West, in the 

history of the country, going to farmers during difficult times. 

 

We’ve seen $1.50 a bushel wheat before, but you have never 

ever seen money coming from governments, particularly the 

federal government, like you have recently. I think to be fair we 

can at least acknowledge that it is a tremendous amount and an 

historic amount of money. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — That sounds quite nice, except my question 

was, why did you not push to have the deficiency payment for 

the year ’84-85? Are you saying that there was no shortfall 

caused in ’84-85 because of American subsidy? Is that what 

you’re saying? 

 

And again in your co-operative spirit, why did you not vote for 

the deficiency payment almost a year earlier when we brought it 

forward? What I’m saying is, we’re a year behind. I want to 

hear you explain to the farmers of this province why we’re a 

year behind. I know all the reasons about the subsidy programs 

and how it works. But what I’m saying is we are a year behind 

with the deficiency payment because you didn’t go for it when 

we brought it up, and we, the farmers of this province, are now 

suffering because of it. 

 

So my question is: are you saying that there was no shortfall in 

the Canadian prices because of American and European 

subsidies in 1984-85? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, to be fair to the hon. 

member, when farmers here were really hurting, we had 

requests, for example, from the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool to 

provide access to money for farmers to help them at 7 per cent 

interest rates. They said interest rates were too high. And I 

won’t go back into the arguments of the 20 per cent interest 

rates. But obviously interest rates have hurt farmers, in many 

cases much more than the export subsidies, and certainly in the 

early ’80s that’s the case. 

  



 

October 21, 1987 

3420 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, what we did in the recommendation of major 

elevator companies maybe, or farm organizations, is take a 

billion dollars of our own in this province, a billion dollars, and 

said to farmers — and I would suspect you’re one — said, we 

would help you and we would lock in interest rates at 6 per cent 

money at $25 an acre for farmers right across the province. A 

billion dollars at 6 per cent money. 

 

Now wheat pool and others said 7 per cent money. We said we 

can lock it in at 6 because the province has the ability to protect 

it. And I know philosophically that doesn’t sit well with you. I 

mean, when interest rates were 20 per cent, you had the land 

bank and you’d buy their land, but you wouldn’t protect them. 

 

In the early ’80s, when interest rates were high, we said we 

would step in and we would help you. And that was the answer 

at that time. As the export subsidies increase, Mr. Chairman, we 

have sustained our 6 per cent money. We’ve even postponed 

payments of the principal of the 6 per cent money, and many 

farmers from across the province and municipalities will tell 

you that without that billion dollars in credit, at 6 per cent 

locked in, they wouldn’t be there today. They’ve told me that. 

I’m sure they’ve told the hon. member that. 

 

And then as the export subsidies start to increase from the 

United States and Europe, we were capable, along with others, 

of then getting huge deficiency payments to compensate for the 

export subsidy. I would just briefly say, as you see the problems 

coming up, you should address the problems head on. If it’s 

interest rates, address it. If it’s export deficiency payments, and 

subsidies, address that. If it’s an international problem in 

dealing with treasuries supporting agriculture, and wrecking 

prices, you should address that. And that’s precisely the pattern 

that we have addressed these problems. 

 

Again to be fair to the hon. member, you’ve never seen another 

administration in this province go to the wall for farmers like a 

billion dollars, 25 bucks an acre, 6 per cent, just like you can 

pick it up at the elevator with your cash advance, just the same 

way. You trust farmers. You trust them. You don’t go picking 

them one by one and drawing lines around. You say, I believe 

in farmers and I will back them up, and then you be prepared to 

do that. The same applies to deficiency payments. I believe in 

farmers and I’ll back them up. 

 

The same with the livestock industry. They have never had a 

cash advance mechanism until this administration came in. And 

they have access to $100 million and more in terms of cash 

advance. So the interest doesn’t cost them anything as they put 

in their livestock on to feed, whether it’s in the dairy business or 

the hog business or the livestock . . . the beef business. 

 

I say to the hon. member, you use the appropriate tools to face 

the appropriate problems as they come up, and you meet those 

challenges head on. Where it’s been interest, where it’s been 

cash advance, where it’s been access to credit, and where it’s 

been out and out subsidies from under international treasuries, 

you pick those tools to address them. And that’s precisely what 

we have done,  

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think the only argument could be that it isn’t enough money, 

and there isn’t a farmer in the country that likes to farm for the 

government. There isn’t a farmer in the world in a dry area who 

wouldn’t say, no subsidy in the world can match a two-inch 

rain. That’s true. But from time to time they need help, and 

when it’s drought or when it’s grasshoppers or when it’s high 

interest rates or when it’s international export subsidies, then 

you have to be there to help them — not own their farm, but 

help them stay on the farm, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Chairman, just take the hon. member through the history of 

that in agriculture to let him know that in fact when you face 

those particular problems of drought, grasshoppers, high 

interest rates, the lack of credit, or international export 

subsidies, you have specific programs to address each one of 

those at the right time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I hear you 

propagating the myth again. And you said a couple of things I’d 

like to respond to, saying that the $25 production loan is the 

same as a cash advance. Well it’s not the same as a cash 

advance, and every farmer knows that because he has to have 

grain in his binds when he takes his cash advance. 

 

You took $25 an acre and threw it out irresponsibly. And at the 

time the farmers were quite happy, quite happy at the time. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s the quote we want to hear. Say 

that again. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — I’ll say it again, the government threw the 

money out irresponsibly. And I can tell you that there’s farmers 

out there who say that to me, because now they’re saying to 

themselves, gee, you know, maybe I shouldn’t have taken it 

because how am I going to pay it back? I’m in worse trouble 

now than before. 

 

So we have your government throwing money at the problem 

again. Sure they need money, but let’s, for Pete’s sake, have 

some management and some competence behind the 

distribution of that money. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Farmers are saying, when is the government 

going to ask for the repayment? When am I going to have to 

pay it back? How am I going to pay it back? And then they say, 

even if I had a deficiency payment or knew when it was 

coming, at least I may have some money to pay the government 

back when they call my loan in January. But right now they 

don’t even know if they’re getting a deficiency payment to 

cover that loan to the government. You haven’t given them any 

indication whether they’re going to have to pay back or whether 

they’re going to have pay the interest or what they’re going to 

have to do. 

 

So I ask you again, and maybe you should reimplement the 

hearing aid program because my question was this: I want to 

know whether or not you agree that there was a  

  



 

October 21, 1987 

3421 

 

deficiency in ’84-85 for which the farmers of this province 

should have been paid? All the while many of them, I think 

most of them, were thinking that that’s where the deficiency is 

going to be put toward that year, and now we’re a year behind. 

Do you agree that there was a deficiency caused by subsidies in 

America and in the EEC (European Economic Community) in 

those years; and you agree that we’re a year behind in our 

payments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I will try to be as 

brief as I can. The 1985 U.S. farm Bill came into effect in June 

of 1986, and most of the export subsidies that have come on to 

the market have been tied to the U.S. administration with their 

latest farm Bill. And the ’85 farm Bill was effective early in 

1986. 

 

I will also say to the hon. member . . . I mean, if he wants to 

make the argument that we will go back for years and find out 

when there was U.S. commodity storage or U.S. assistance or 

U.S. subsidies or U.S. export subsidy, he can probably go back 

to the turn of the century. And I suppose that wouldn’t help his 

argument because you had never seen a CCF or an NDP 

government or a Liberal administration ever provide support 

under those difficult times, and he knows that. 

 

Secondly, if I could make the point. He says you can have a 

cash advance on grain because you have grain. Okay. The loan 

program that we put together was on land. Now land is as good 

as collateral, I would think that he would see the land is there. If 

it’s based on $25 an acre, on per farmer . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, and he says that it’s not based on 

anything. When you have wheat, you can get a cash advance on 

wheat; when you have land, we said $25 an acre. 

 

Let me point out the third thing. Under the NDP administration, 

and under his program, I guess that he would want us to . . . he 

says, you should be more careful with this universal program. 

All right, cash advances are universal, and I believe they should 

be. This program is universal. 

 

He says, no, you should pick and choose the farmers. You know 

what the farmer doesn’t like? He doesn’t like government 

officials picking and choosing between neighbours — that this 

farmer was a pretty good farmer and this one was not a pretty 

good farmer, and this young fellow didn’t do this and this 

fellow did that. You know the problems with that. But that’s the 

philosophy. I know that you’re a little hidebound by that 

philosophy, that only the government knows best. 

 

Well farmers believe that if they want to borrow the money, 

they can pay back the money. If they don’t want to borrow it, 

they don’t have to. They had the opportunity at 6 per cent to 

lock it in at $25 an acre. Some chose to use it, and some did not. 

And you know that as well as I do. Some choose to use the cash 

advance at the elevator system, some don’t. Some used to use 

the cash advance system for livestock, some didn’t. But it’s 

available for everybody, as it should be. 

 

Now if you were the minister of Agriculture, or one of your 

colleagues were the minister of Agriculture, there  

would be no cash advance in the livestock industry; there would 

be no production loan program at $25 an acre; you would be 

picking and choosing the farmers that got the benefits, as you 

did before when you were in your administration, and 

everybody knew that. And that’s one of the reasons that . . . if 

frankly bothers people. 

 

So let me just say in summary, the key expenditures in the 1980 

farm Bill . . . 1985 U.S. farm Bill have kicked in primarily in 

1986, and we know the export subsidy’s going to pay. If you 

want the argument that there were subsidies prior to that, they 

probably were back to the turn of the century, maybe even 

before that. But if that’s the case, then some of your 

predecessors could have helped in many of those very difficult 

times, and obviously they didn’t, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chairman, you’ve just outlined that in the 

cash advance system, to pay the cash advance back you take 

your grain in. In a $25 production loan system — you say based 

on land, I thought it was a promissory note, but I guess you 

know what you’re saying. So in order to get that back, if I can’t 

pay it, you’re going to take my land. It’s what you just said. Is 

that your policy? 

 

I think the farmers of Saskatchewan right now will be trembling 

in their boots — saying, here, $25 an acre, take it. And if people 

out there were suffering, sure they’d grab at stuff like that, and 

they needed it. But now you’re saying if they don’t pay it back 

you’re going to take their land. 

 

And you accuse us on this side of picking and choosing people. 

Well no, we don’t pick and choose people. We know everybody 

needs help, but we need management of our money, of our 

taxation dollars in Saskatchewan in order to make sure that 

everybody is helped. 

 

(1545) 

 

I’ll ask, have you and your department done any study as to 

what percentage of your production loan went to what size of 

farmers? You understand that? Let me give you an example. 

Did, let’s say, 50 per cent of the $1 billion go to 50 per cent of 

the farmers, which would be equal for everybody, or did the 

large percentage to go a small percentage? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, 95 per cent of all the 

farmers, 95 per cent of all the farmers took out the production 

loan. So that’s obviously the majority of them. And so the 

distribution of that loan would be like the census distribution; it 

would be a normal curve, if you will, so that it would be an 

average distribution, and some would be large. But when you 

include 95 per cent of them, it would be a normal distribution, 

bell-shaped curve that would represent the majority of farmers. 

 

Like, say to the hon. member that when he talks about, you 

know, providing assistance to farmers, that it’s probably fair to 

criticize deficiency payments, and to criticize cash advances 

when they weren’t there before, and to criticize interest rate 

productions like 6 per cent money. That’s fair ball. But 

compared to what was there, I  

  



 

October 21, 1987 

3422 

 

think that he would, to be fair, would have to acknowledge it’s 

an awful lot more than they’d ever seen before. And it’s 

something that the farmers understand. They do — and we all 

are in coffee shops and at kitchen tables — understand that you 

can improve programs. But they’ve never seen $10,000 cheques 

come out before just like that. And it’s helpful — may not be 

enough, but it’s helpful. And I’m glad the hon. member 

acknowledges that. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Being a little more specific, do you . . . I 

would ask the question: what portion of the dollars spent went 

to holdings of over 1,000 acres? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, the 

average farm is 1,000 acres, about that, in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And the . . . so the average . . . if 95 per cent of 

them took it out it would be pretty close to $25,000 that would 

go out. I think it was 24,000 or something, the average. And it 

was capped at maximum of $100,000. So if you had at the far 

end of the distribution those that might have had, you know, a 

10,000 acre farm or something that was extremely large, they 

wouldn’t be eligible for any more than, say, a 4,000 acre farm. 

 

So if his argument is that it is . . . that is . . . any way that it’s 

skewed, it’s just not the case. Every farmer was eligible. 

Certainly every smaller farmer could get the maximum. The 

only people that would be constrained would be the very large 

farmer, because of the maximum of $100,000. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Yes, perhaps I didn’t explain my question. 

What percentage of the billion dollars — if you want to give me 

a dollar figure, that’s fine — were paid to farmers with holdings 

over 1,000 acres. Do you understand that? Was that $600 

million paid to farmers over 1,000 acres, or was it $400 million 

paid to farmers over 1,000 acres? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I’m not sure that the hon. member knows 

or fully understands it. If you have 95 per cent of the people 

participating, and the average is 1,000 acres, then about half the 

farmers below 1,000 acres would receive money and half the 

people above 1,000 acres would receive the money, because 95 

per cent of them got the money. 

 

So if the average is 1,000 acres, there are many farmers below 

that. To make the average 1,000, you’d have to have a 

corresponding number on this side of the curve to equal the 

corresponding number on this side of the curve, because the 

average is 1,000. And it’s a normal distribution. 

 

Now the average farm size in the province is about a section 

and a half — that’s average. On the high side there was some 

limitation, so that if you had an inordinately large farm you 

couldn’t get a million dollars; you could only get a maximum of 

100,000. So it’s a normal curve. The average payment would be 

about 24,000 and something or other — 95 per cent of them 

took advantage of it. 

 

So just as many people below 1,000 acres took advantage of it 

as those above 1,000 acres, and those above 1,000 acres at the 

far end were cramped in their ability to get the  

maximum because it was capped at 100,000, where all those 

below 1,000 acres would get the maximum. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chairman, I think the minister knows 

exactly what I’m talking about, and that’s not the answer. 

 

We know that in the U.S. a large proportion of their subsidy 

goes to a small amount of their farmers — about 80:20 if I’m 

right. In Manitoba about 70 per cent of the subsidy programs to 

go about 30 per cent of their farmers. And that is wrong, and 

that’s the point I’m trying to make here with our deficiency 

payments, or your subsidy programs. 

 

My question was, what proportion of that payment goes to 

people above average sized farms? I don’t know what I have to 

do to ask that, or if maybe you just don’t have the answer, but 

the point is, we have to maintain the numbers. And we’re 

putting subsidy programs out there, of taxpayers’ dollars, to 

increase the size of farms, which is the direction we’ve been 

going. I think that’s wrong. I think we have to aim our 

programs at keeping as many people out there as we can. So I 

would encourage you and ask you again: do you know what 

percentage was paid to above 1,000 acres? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well maybe this will help the hon. 

member — 49.3 per cent of the money, the billion dollars, went 

to farms over 1,000 acres, which means 50.7 per cent went to 

farms below 1,000 acres. So it’s just as I described a normal 

curve — it’s 50-50. I mean to get the average, 49.3 per cent of 

the billion dollars went to farmers over 1,000 acres. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, I want 

to go back to the production loan, and you clearly indicated that 

it was to address high interest rates in the farming community. 

That’s what you said. 

 

Now we had a range of people and farmers in the farming 

community, and certainly all farmers were not in the same 

economic condition. And I think at the time that the production 

loan was put out, a rough breakdown is about one-third of the 

people, the farmers, were in serious trouble. That’s the record of 

the wheat pool and the farm credit corporation — a third were 

relatively sound, and a third were in very good shape. 

 

Now you said that you were addressing an interest problem, and 

you gave it to all farmers across Saskatchewan — equal amount 

in access. And if you have one-third of the farmers with no 

debt, how were you addressing the interest problem faced by 

that one-third of the farmers which didn’t indeed have debt to 

carry. How was it equally distributed to address the problem of 

interest, as you indicated to my honourable friend? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well the hon. member from the Quill 

Lakes and I have had this discussion several times. It is exactly 

the same as a cash advance mechanism. Every farmer is 

eligible. It’s a universal program. And universal program, that 

means people can opt for that cash advance or opt for that 

interest rate break. And a cash advance is just that. You don’t 

have to borrow the money. You can get it from the elevator, 

interest free, and pay it back. Now that’s a universal program. 

  



 

October 21, 1987 

3423 

 

Just like health care, Mr. Chairman — universal program. 

When you go into the hospital, Mr. Speaker, to have your 

appendix out and you are a millionaire, they do it for nothing. 

They do it for nothing. They don’t charge the individual. And 

it’s available to everyone. You don’t line them up and say, have 

you got some income? — therefore I’m going to charge you for 

this. They say, no, it’s a universal program. Right? That’s the 

case. It’s a universal program. It’s a universal program. 

 

So when you decide that you’re going to pick and choose 

people, you are playing the classic role where only you know 

best and you don’t allow people to take advantage of the 

programs and judge for themselves. You’d say to farmers, no, I 

don’t think those that have over 1,000 acres should get a cash 

advance. That’s what he’d say. No you can’t, because you have 

your farm paid for . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well if you’d 

listen to my answer, maybe I could finally get you to agree. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You don’t say what I’ve said. You are 

putting words in my mouth. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, it would be very difficult 

for me to put words in the hon. members’ mouth. 

 

Mr. Chairman, if I could just say clearly to the hon. member 

that if you want to see a universal program for farmers like we 

have with the wheat board system, you don’t say to farmers that 

have no debt, you don’t say to farmers that are aged 65 years 

old that have the farm paid for, you can’t have a cash advance. 

You don’t say that. Correct? That’s right. You don’t say that. 

You say, you have every right to get a cash advance the same as 

everybody else because we have a universal program and we 

don’t discriminate. 

 

But do you know what can happen? The hon. member has said 

this before. He said all those farmers who have their debts paid 

will take the cash advance from the elevator, put the money in 

the bank and collect interest on it. Well that’s been going on for 

years, and the NDP have what, been for it or against it? That’s 

what they do. A third of the farmers, the big farmers, all those 

people who have all that money and have all their debts paid 

and have all this stuff . . . They go to the elevator, get a cash 

advance, doesn’t cost them anything, no interest, put it in the 

money and draw interest, and you’ve watched that for years. 

 

But when I do a program, when the Government of 

Saskatchewan and the PC government does a program and says, 

we’re going to help you because you’ve had production 

problems, you face interest rate problems, you’ve had 

grasshopper problems — well, to come out and say, I will 

provide you with the opportunity for low interest money, you 

say, oh, but it isn’t fair because you didn’t pick and choose the 

farmers. 

 

Well, my friend from Quill Lakes, you can’t have it both ways. 

If you’re against universal programs, then come out against 

universal health care, universal cash advance by the wheat 

board, and universal programs for anybody else. 

Mr. Chairman, universal programs that allow people to choose 

for themselves were good when the CCF were around, and 

they’re good when we’re around. They’re not good enough for 

the NDP, but that’s their problem. We’ve had this argument 

many, many times, and I would say that when you get into 

picking and choosing who can have health care and who can 

have access to cash advances or who can have access to 

production loans, you’re into a completely different argument, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

And I will just say this in summary. I won’t put words in the 

hon. member’s mouth; he can speak for himself. But you will 

have a long time, it will take you a long time, hon. friend, to 

change my mind whether we shouldn’t have universal programs 

for farmers or whether we should decide to pick and choose 

which farmer satisfies the government’s expectations and which 

ones do not. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — It’s not a question of universality versus 

helping farmers. That’s where you and I disagree. And I’ve 

indicated to you before that many farmers out there participated, 

did not, as I indicated to you — they were in an economic 

condition that they didn’t require the 6 per cent money. In the 

face of the fact that there were young farmers going broke — 

going broke. A thousand farmers a year have left since your 

administration took over — and in the height of that condition, 

with the realization that one-third of the farmers were in serious 

economic conditions, with the polls indicating today that 29 per 

cent of the farmers expect to leave the land if conditions exist as 

they are in Saskatchewan, my friend . . . And if you want to get 

into it, fine, but I’ll carry on now without your interruptions. 

 

(1600) 

 

That is the situation, Mr. Premier. And you’re saying, yes, 

universal program. Well I’m saying to you that you deserted 

young farmers out in the communities, because there’s young 

farmers in circumstances that needed some debt adjustment. 

That’s what they needed. And there were farmers who took the 

$25 production loan — and I know you’ve talked to them — 

that did stick it in the bank. And you say, whoopee, we had a 

universal; that is great — as farmers, young farmers are leaving 

the land. So what conclusion can you draw? 

 

You’re saying you have a universal program, but you have no 

program which will address that one-third of the farmers that 

are in serious economic conditions. I ask you, Mr. Premier: are 

you unconcerned? Have you no concern, at that time when you 

put the production loan in, that perhaps you could have taken a 

look at a program and used that billion dollars for some 

restructuring of debt of the young farmers? Did you ever 

consider that? Or was it because of an election and it was much 

more popular to satisfy and to give it to all? Because, after all, 

you were down in the polls and you needed to address all of the 

farmers. 

 

It takes courage, Mr. Premier. It takes courage and it takes 

administrative capacity to deal head on with problems that are 

confronting agriculture today. And I’ll tell you,  

  



 

October 21, 1987 

3424 

 

you’re not doing it with a production loan. And ask the young 

farmers whether you solved any of their problems. You delayed 

the situation for them, perhaps, to put a crop in. But at the same 

time those one-third of the farmers that had no debt, Mr. 

Chairman, received exactly the same benefits under the 

production loan program as those that were in financial trouble. 

 

So I ask you, have you no concern for those young farmers, 

particularly, who are started up and have had this crisis thrown 

upon them? What is your solution? You took a billion dollars in 

production loan; you set up a universal program, and you say 

it’s great. I ask you: what is your program for those that are in 

deep financial problems? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if we followed the 

hon. member’s logic, then big farmers would get a smaller 

quota from the wheat board than small farmers. That’s what 

he’s saying because it wouldn’t be a universal program based 

on your acreage. It would mean the big farmer is big; therefore, 

we should give him less help and less quota than somebody 

who was on smaller acreage. Or the big farmer shouldn’t have 

access to the cash advance because he might have some bills 

paid, and therefore we’d have to change the wheat board system 

of the cash advance. 

 

I mean, the member from Quill Lake, who I believe is a lawyer 

by training, I don’t believe understands how farmers feel about 

the wheat board and about cash advance and about the quota 

system. Because he will expect that large farmers would get less 

of a quota, because he doesn’t believe in universality. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I can only say the wheat board mechanism that 

allocates equal quotas to people of all farms is universal. The 

cash advance system for farmers at the elevator is universal. It 

has been for some time. The member from Quill Lakes has 

always been against that universal type of program. 

 

And the cash advance system for the livestock industry, is he 

against that? Some livestock industry . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Look at, look at, don’t put words into 

my mouth. I just asked . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — The member from Quill Lakes has argued 

this way for years. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I’m not going to take that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well you’ll have to take it because you’re 

sitting there, and I’m on my feet. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You put words in my mouth, I’ll tell 

you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I will put words . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Don’t say what I said. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — You don’t agree with universal cash 

advances. You don’t. And you don’t agree with the cash 

advance for livestock, and we got the livestock industry  

all over the province saying it’s the best thing that they’ve seen. 

And you wouldn’t give it to those that had some money because 

it would be unfair; you’d have to only choose those that got a 

cash advance. Now with your argument, you can’t have it both 

ways. 

 

Let me also say, Mr. Chairman, just for the hon. member, Mr. 

Chairman, the hon. member mentions the loss of farmers, the 

loss of farmers. If I could just draw his attention to this, because 

I don’t want to put words in his mouth, so that he has the facts. 

From 1971 to 1981, the loss in farmers was 9,652 or 965 farms 

a year — average over a 10-year period, 965 farmers per year; 

1981 to 1986, the loss was 3,887 or 777 farmers per year. Under 

the good times — the province lost more farmers under the 

NDP administration than they have with $2 wheat in recent 

times, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I just want to point out to the hon. member when 

he stood as a cabinet minister and saw farmers face 20 per cent 

interest rates and didn’t do a thing, he shouldn’t even have the 

courage to stand in this legislature and condemn a program that 

helps farmers across the province. How could he do that? 

 

All he had was the program that said, I will go out and buy your 

land for the government. And then he would go around and say, 

and we bought it for $100 an acre and we can sell it for 300, 

and they speculated with the farmers’ land. That’s what he did. 

And he said, the land bank and succession duties and death 

taxes and 20 per cent interest rates was the legacy for the NDP. 

and they thought they were going to win every farm vote. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, I think farmers would rather have 6 per 

cent interest rates locked in. They would like a counselling and 

assistance program for farmers. And the majority of that 

assistance goes to farmers averaging 1,400 acres; and young 

farmers, Mr. Chairman, that we have helped, young farmers, 

with the farm purchase program — interest rates locked in. 

 

Mr. Chairman, let me point out: billions of dollars in deficiency 

and western grain stabilization and interest rate protection is 

something that they have seen in recent years. And yes, it has 

been universal. And they didn’t see anything like it under the 

NDP administration. And that’s why, Mr. Chairman, year after 

year the average was 965 farmers leaving the land under the 

NDP administration, 1971 to 1981, and in our case, Mr. 

Speaker, 777. And they know the reason why. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Premier, I asked you a simple question. 

You support your universal program. I ask you: have you got a 

program, or did you consider a program to address those 

hard-pressed farmers, that one-third that were in serious debt? 

Or are you going to allow them under very tough economic 

conditions to only receive the same benefits as the top third 

under the production load and say, survive? 

 

All I’m asking you: do you have a program which is addressing 

. . . at the time that you put the production loan program into 

effect, were you aware that there were about one-third of the 

farmers in serious financial problems? And I ask you: how did 

you address that problem,  

  



 

October 21, 1987 

3425 

 

particularly to the young farmers that got established? What 

program did you put into effect to address those who are having 

financial difficulties? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, two replies. The first is 

that in general economic expenditures by the Department of 

Agriculture we have spent $519 million in the last three years, 

Mr. Chairman, and that is more than the NDP administration 

spent in the last 10 years of their administration, which was 489 

million. And this excludes, Mr. Chairman, the production loan 

program. 

 

So more money to all farmers in three years than they spent in 

10 years, Mr. Chairman, just to put the record on the table here 

this afternoon — $519 million in three years under our 

administration, 489 in a 10-year period when the member 

opposite was a cabinet minister and was not supporting 

agriculture. And this does not include the production loan 

program. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the counselling and assistance program 

that we have brought forward now — the counselling and 

assistance program — addresses those kinds of problems 

associated with people who have debt problems, and, Mr. 

Speaker, we have provided money and backed up loans. We, 

the Government of Saskatchewan, have backed up loans by 

farmers, through the counselling and assistance program, to 

make sure that they can have another crack at it. 

 

Now that was not in place before, Mr. Chairman. What was 

there was the land bank which says, I won’t help you stay alive; 

I won’t back your notes. I’ll go in and take your farm. 

Significant difference, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Isn’t that a tremendous statement to a simple 

question. One-third of our farmers on the verge of disappearing, 

and clearly what you’re indicating here, just as you did in the 

university, you said small farms had to go. That was your 

philosophy. that is the direction that you’re going today. The 

small farmer has to go. The young farmer that has established 

himself, started up; the one-third of the farmers that are in 

heavy debt. Do you know what he says, what we did? He said 

we backed up some loans. He backed up some loans, he says, to 

those that were in difficulty, and he gave to the top third, who 

had no debt, 6 per cent loan. That’s what he did, whether they 

needed it or not. No debt adjustment, no restructuring of debt. 

 

I’ll tell you, Mr. Premier, when I talk to the young farmers in 

the Quill Lakes, they say that they need some restructuring of 

debt. And they say they don’t need an equity corporation where 

they have outside investors come in and start buying up the land 

and become tenants rather than landowners. 

 

Young farmers today, what they want, Mr. Premier, is a 

government with a program that will give them the opportunity. 

It’s not their fault that the price of the commodities have fallen. 

And these are efficient young farmers, a new generation. And 

I’ll tell you, Mr. Premier, if you don’t do something, you’re 

going to lose that generation. And I’ll tell you where the farm’s 

going to go — it’s going to go to the real estate agents; that’s 

who is looking at it now under your . . . (inaudible) . . .  

corporation. It’s going to go to the banks and the trust 

companies. 

 

And under your free trade government I’ll tell you where it’s 

going to go, because I’m going to get into that specifically, 

where you’re going to abandon the foreign ownership 

restrictions in Saskatchewan farm land and the Americans and 

the Japanese and the East . . . and the West Germans are 

looking at the cheap land here in Saskatchewan. And here are 

people that homesteaded here, and are sons and daughters of the 

pioneers, and you say you’re not going to help save those 

family farms. 

 

That’s really what your program indicates, Mr. Premier. That’s 

what the farmers are saying — they’re saying that we cannot 

survive. Surely you must have looked at the recent poll which 

indicates that 29 per cent are saying, we’re out of business in 

two years time. And you say, well I want a universal program 

because I’m fair; that’s what you said. And you gave to those 

with no debt, and they walked over to the bank, deposited it, 

and gained 10, 12 per cent return on that money. And isn’t that 

a great agricultural policy when one-third of our farmers’ 

survival is being threatened? 

 

And you sit there and say, no government strings. Well why, 

why, why, Mr. Premier, when you deal with seniors and the 

heritage grants, why did you put on a criteria? Why isn’t it 

universal? Because you’re paying it to those who need it most; 

that’s what you’re doing with the heritage grant, but when it 

comes to the farmers, you don’t want to take a look and see 

whether there’s a group of farmers that need assistance. 

 

(1615) 

 

And I’ll tell you society is prepared to see the family farm 

survive — there’s no doubt about it. You can talk to the farmers 

that receive production loans that didn’t need it. They say this is 

a ridiculous program; there is no criteria whatsoever. You walk 

into an elevator, sign a promissory note, and you get a cheque 

whether you need it or not. And they say, you can’t build 

agricultural community that way. and the farmers that have 

made it aren’t asking for your hand-out, that’s in respect to the 

production loan. They weren’t asking you for it, because you 

were going into an election, and you didn’t want to make the 

tough decision of addressing the problem that was there. You 

said, here’s 25 bucks an acre for every voter in the province. 

We’ll make them all happy. 

 

And what you did is desert the young farmers that are in 

financial trouble, and you don’t have a program, Mr. Premier, 

to address it. Because the next step that you’re to do is to allow 

the buy-up of this land through your so-called equity finance 

corporation, if the farmers of Saskatchewan don’t turn against 

you and prevent it. And the polls indicate that 60 per cent — 60 

per cent of the farmers in Saskatchewan re saying, we don’t 

want an equity corporation where U.S. and Japanese and 

German money come in and we become tenants. 

 

You talk about share-croppers. That’s what you’re turning 

Saskatchewan young farmers into. Setting up an equity 

corporation so that the multimillionaires can come in and buy 

up the depressed price of land today in  

  



 

October 21, 1987 

3426 

 

Saskatchewan. And boy or boy, they are going to have a right to 

lease it back. Now isn’t that a tremendous future for the young 

farmers. And you walk around and pretend that you’re the 

friend of the farmer. 

 

All you did with the production loan, Mr. Premier — let’s be 

fair. You were down in the polls; you had no credibility . . . was 

decreasing in this province and you said, I’ll throw out a billion 

dollars and see if I can buy some votes. And you made it 

universal. You didn’t have the integrity nor the decency nor the 

competence to deal with the problem that’s confronting 

Saskatchewan farmers today, and that’s the young farmers who 

are under crushing debts because of low commodity prices. 

 

And you say, it’s wrong to target to those that need; give it to 

all of them. That’s your philosophy and it can lead to only one 

place, one result, and that is a failure of many of our young 

farmers who are strapped at this time. 

 

And so I ask you, those are the polls, those are the statistics. 

Are you going to be addressing it to help the young farmers 

through this difficult period? All of them are getting their 

deficiency payment if and when it comes. Another election — I 

suppose we’ll have to wait for another Tory election to get 

another deficiency payment. 

 

But what I’m asking you, have you in fact got a program in 

mind in which you’re going to address that problem of 

one-third who are virtually going to have to leave the land? 

Twenty-nine per cent. And I ask you, what proposals do you 

have to address those problems, or do you have another 

universal program? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, during the early 1980s, 

late ’70s and early ’80s, farmers in the Quill Lakes have told me 

this several times, and they’ll tell you this now. They said if the 

NDP administration had helped them at 20 per cent interest 

rates, they wouldn’t have half the problem that they have today 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the hon. member from the Quill 

Lakes doesn’t like to hear this, but it’s the truth. The young 

farmer got into trouble when interest rates went over 20 per 

cent. And if the young farmer could have had some help when 

the interest rates went to 20 per cent, he wouldn’t have half the 

problem he’s got today. And they know that. 

 

And they said there was absolutely nothing that the government 

of the day . . . And the deputy premier at that time was the 

member from Riversdale, and he said, we can’t interfere in 

interest rates. It’s an international problem. The province 

shouldn’t be involved. The province shouldn’t do anything. 

And interest rates went over 20 per cent, and farmers’ payments 

went from $3,000 to $6,000, from $10,000 to over $20,000, and 

the NDP did nothing. Those payments to the banks doubled, 

and in some cases were more than that. And the NDP did 

absolutely nothing. 

 

And you go ask farmers who are in trouble today in the Quill 

Lakes area, and you ask them, how was it under 20 per cent 

interest rates? And they’ll tell you it was awful. What did the 

socialist government do for them? Zero!  

Nothing! Nothing for home owners, nothing for seniors, 

nothing for farmers. All it was was rhetoric. No, what they said 

they’d do is they’d go and buy their land from them, and put the 

land into government. That’s what they said. 

 

The member from Quills, the member from Quill Lakes who 

says that he doesn’t like universal programs is saying the 

following. I’ll tell you what he says, and this will go into his 

farm communities, verbatim, from the legislature. 

 

He doesn’t like universal programs like the products loan 

program. He doesn’t like universal programs like the wheat 

board quota system. He even thinks that some farmers should 

pay a higher freight rate than some other farmers. The bigger 

farmer that has no debts and no loans should obviously 

therefore pay a higher freight rate because, right, he doesn’t 

believe in universal programs. So he must be believing in 

variable rates. Okay? 

 

So he says the wealthy farmer that doesn’t have any debt should 

obviously be able to pay higher freight rates. He shouldn’t get 

access to the production loan program, he shouldn’t get equal 

cash advances, and he shouldn’t have equal ability to market his 

grain; therefore he shouldn’t get equal quotas. That’s what the 

member from Quill Lakes is saying. 

 

He’s also saying on the deficiency payment that those that don’t 

have any debt shouldn’t get the deficiency payment. Now wait 

till the farmers hear the new NDP agriculture program. No help 

on interest rates and not having universal programs with respect 

to deficiency payments or cash advances or quotas or freight 

rates, any of that. That’s what he’s saying. 

 

The proof of the pudding is in the eating. You go back and look 

under the NDP administration, and over 200 farms more per 

year went down under them under good times than recently. 

Well how in the world under those conditions did we lost more 

farmers in an average year than we do now? 

 

What he would say is — I’ll tell you what he’s saying. This is 

what he’s saying. You have a deficiency payment, so what 

you’ll do is that you cut the deficiency payment in half and only 

give it to those that have debt and don’t give it to the rest of the 

farmers. So we’ll have a half a billion dollar deficiency 

payment. Is that what he’s saying? 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, he can’t have it both ways. He’s against 

universal programs. He wants to make sure only some farmers 

receive the help. When we do provide specific programs, 

counselling assistance and other financial packages for people 

on low income, then he’s against that as well. 

 

Our interest rate protection program, just for the hon. member 

so that he can have this as information, the average age of 

people who are helped by our interest rate protection programs 

is 27 years of age; 39 per cent of those are families — 39.9 per 

cent; 40 per cent are family farms. The average age is 27 years 

old. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, that’s exactly what it’s 

targeted for, for those young people, for those family farms. 

That’s why our record of maintaining family farms  

  



 

October 21, 1987 

3427 

 

is better than the NDP’s administration. And that’s why farmers 

all over Saskatchewan will say, if the government in 1980, in 

the early ’80s, had helped us with high interest rates, we 

wouldn’t be in half the trouble we are today. And thank 

goodness somebody locked in interest rate protection like we 

have at 6 per cent and got cash into our pockets, like the 

deficiency payments like we’ve never seen before, or we’d 

really be looking at some severe economic conditions that 

would be worse than they are today. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I say to the hon. member, he had his chance. He 

had his chance, Mr. Speaker, to help farmers and to show them 

how to do it. He had succession duties, he had death taxes, he 

had land bank, and he let them suffer under 20 per cent interest 

rates. He had no cash advances, and he had no deficiency 

payments. And he’s standing up here and saying, do as I do in 

the NDP. 

 

What he did for the NDP, Mr. Speaker, was give every rural 

riding in the province a very good reason to say no to the NDP, 

because they didn’t care. They don’t care. They talk, but they 

don’t care. It’s like health care. They talked a lot about it, but 

they didn’t build the hospitals and the nursing homes. They 

didn’t spend the money. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, their leader-to-be stands up and says, 

ration, okay, ration that new technology for senior citizens. 

That’s what he says — ration them. And they laugh, Mr. 

Speaker, but the people will know the truth. The truth is, they 

didn’t spend in agriculture; they didn’t spend in health care. All 

they do is talk, Mr. Speaker. And when they just talk, people 

across the province say, no, I want to see action. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, if you look at the number of farms, you 

look at the money going into farmers’ pockets, you look at the 

assistance from provincial and federal governments, it will 

compare favourably to any time in history that the NDP or the 

CCF were ever involved in agriculture. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Obviously, Mr. Premier, you didn’t hear the 

question. I’m going to ask the question again, 29 per cent of the 

farmers in Saskatchewan, many who are young, are saying 

they’re going to have to get out of farming if the commodity 

prices stay where they are. They can’t handle the debt load. And 

young farmers have the debt loads, as you can appreciate. All 

I’m asking you, have you any plans for addressing that, and do 

you believe that the production loan was the method whereby 

you addressed it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Let me just say, Mr. Chairman, we have 

initiated a large number of programs for beginning farmers, for 

farmers in debt. Farmers today, as we speak, are getting 

guaranteed loans, they’re getting their loans restructured, 

they’re getting their farms restructured financially, and we’re 

backing them. We’re backing them and that’s what they want to 

see. They want to be able to come in and get some assistance, 

get some counselling, and have people be able to say, yes, we’ll 

restructure that. And indeed the government will back up this 

new restructuring and this new financial system. Well, Mr. 

Chairman, that’s precisely what they want. 

Now the hon. member wants more cash, and I’m saying the 

biggest deficiency payment, and the only one we’ve ever 

received, was this year, and we’re on record of supporting 

another one. So both in terms of restructuring, and in terms of 

loans, and in terms of interest rate protection, and in terms of 

cash advances, and in terms of just straight cash and deficiency 

payments, all of them are available to farmers in this province 

today, Mr. Chairman, and they weren’t in the early 1980s or the 

late ’70s when in fact they really needed the help. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Premier, you put out a production loan in 

the spring of 1986 — that’s when the payments came out — 

and what I want to ask you this: do you consider that the 

problems of the farmers today have intensified or have 

decreased? Would it be appropriate to have had a production 

loan program this spring, because in my view the farmers are 

worse off this spring than going into the election. And I ask 

you, if a production loan was necessary in 1986 to get you 

elected, why not a production loan in 1987? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member from 

Quill Lakes forgets that farmers received cash this year, not a 

loan — cash deficiency payment which was not to be repaid, a 

direct payment. And the western grain stabilization payment 

provided another direct payment because it’s linked to 

international commodity prices and subsidies. Farmers received 

on average, $10,000 cash in this province, this spring, that they 

didn’t have to repay. They have never received that under the 

NDP. That’s cash, my friend, dollars that you don’t have to 

repay. 

 

And you sit there, I mean, in a pathetic fashion, telling this 

administration to provide cash to farmers. You never came 

close to paying them $10,000, ever. You took their land. You 

took their land so that they could farm for the government and 

you didn’t give them one single dime of help against high 

interest rates and no cash. They got $10,000 cash this year and 

you forget that all the time, Mr. Chairman. The hon. member 

could at least acknowledge that when they receive cash that it’s 

cash and they don’t have to pay it back. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Well are you saying, Mr. Premier, that the facts 

are not right, that we’re about to lose one-third of our farmers, 

that those cannot survive on the deficiency payment? Are you 

going to do anything for them? That’s the simple question. 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I have just said time and 

time again to the hon. member that cash in the form of 

deficiency payments is the thing that farmers are after. They 

don’t want billions of more loans. They want some 

restructuring of loans. They want protection on the interest rates 

and they want cash. The federal government provided a 

deficiency payment and there was a western grains stabilization 

payment which they contribute to, and the governments do as 

well, that amounted to $10,000 this year per farmer — $10,000 

cash, no interest or anything, cash in their pockets. 

 

Now you’re saying that isn’t enough with $2 wheat. Well he 

knows the answer to that. The answer is to get the  

  



 

October 21, 1987 

3428 

 

United States and the Europeans away from subsidies. We have 

provided a deficiency payment in co-operation with the federal 

government, with their support, and we have got the support of 

all the provinces and all the premiers and all the ministers of 

Agriculture for another deficiency payment. And he says he 

wants it as large as possible. I agree. 

 

So let’s agree. We want as much cash as possible going into the 

hands of farmers. I agree. You agree. It wasn’t there before but 

it’s there now and we want more. I’ll be glad to differ with you 

or agree to differ or just agree that your program in agriculture 

were very . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You think they were 

fine. I say mine are at least competitive and as good as yours, 

and we can argue that till Christmas, if you like. But you want 

more cash. The deficiency payment and the grain stabilization 

mechanism have never provided as much cash. It may not be as 

much as we’d like, but it’s large, and the request, Mr. 

Chairman, is even for more. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, I think the young 

farmers in Saskatchewan know where they’re headed for. No 

support from your government to prevent their losing their land. 

I take a look at articles here in respect to what you had in mind, 

in respect to the sale and accessibility of farm land, of 

Saskatchewan farm land, and what you have indicated and what 

your deputy has indicated. The Saskatchewan deputy minister 

of Agriculture said: 

 

The restrictions are not as essential today because many 

younger farmers are willing to lease farm land instead of 

buying it. 

 

And that’s taking off the restriction of foreign ownership of 

land in Saskatchewan. That, I guess, is your policy because it 

comes from your deputy. And the Saskatchewan government 

confirmed in a discussion paper this summer that its restrictions 

might be relaxed. And this article goes on to say: 

 

Saskatchewan and Alberta governments are considering 

just that move. 

 

Take off the restriction — right at the worst time. Prices of land 

have fallen 23 per cent. Farmers are hanging on, and he says, 

open the doors to outside investors; farmers want to be tenants, 

not owners. 

 

Have I got news for you, my friend. You set this into motion 

and I’ll tell you, you won’t be Premier very long. You sell off 

the birthright of family owning farms to outside investors and 

that’s what you’re heading for. And I’ll tell you, you won’t be 

around very long. 

 

Any changes in Saskatchewan legislation would be linked 

to a scheme for encouraging private investors to buy 

equity in farms, and just such a plan to allow non-resident 

investors to become shareholders is expected to be 

unveiled. 

 

That’s what our young farmers, I guess, have prospect of 

looking forward to from you plan — not to be able to get to 

some assistance, to restructure their debt to carry them through 

this difficult time. 

You say, you know, we could get more in deficiency payments. 

Well if the United States government and the European 

government can, I suspect that if you were doing your job you 

would get sufficient deficiency payments. But I want to stay on 

this and I want to ask you — it says here: 

 

The Premier has already said his government is thinking of 

offering tax credits to investors in Saskatchewan farm 

land. 

 

Now isn’t that nice. Sell the farm to the money men and make 

share-croppers out of our young farmers. That’s where you’re 

heading. That’s exactly what this article is indicating. 

 

The real estate association, yes, they’re interested: 

 

Is urging that the federal-provincial government guarantee 

a fixed rate of return for the investors who put money into 

farm land. 

 

So you’re going to give them a tax credit to buy the land, and 

then you’re going to give them a guarantee return. That’s the 

proposal; that’s what it says. And you have nothing to help out 

that desperate 29, 30 per cent of young farmers in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This is what you’re offering to them. And I’ll tell you, Mr. 

Premier, you won’t get the support of the farmers of 

Saskatchewan to take their land from them and to give it to the 

real estate brokers in order that they become the landlords and 

the farmers — the peasants working the land. That’s what . . . 

that’s where you’re heading. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Premier, is this article accurate? That you 

want to restrict foreign ownership of land? Are you intending to 

remove the restriction in respect to ownership at this very 

difficult time in the history of the farming community, so that 

investors and money men can lap it up when it’s down 23 per 

cent? Is that your plan? Is that your new approach now to the 

. . . Can I tell the young farmers who are desperately looking for 

help that that’s the answer that you’re going to give because 

that’s the symposium that you’re coming forward with? You’re 

trying to get the credit unions to put it forward for you, but 

they’re running into problems because the credit unions have 

boards and there are young farmers on there. And they’re 

saying, we don’t want an equity corporation owning our land 

and we become share-croppers and tenants. And you’re having 

difficulty. 

 

But I know the federal government has a proposal, and the 

Farm Credit Corporation is looking at a proposal, and I’m 

asking you, is that the intended solution — to have an equity 

corporation? Is that your plan, so that outside investors, 

subsidized to invest, guaranteed a return on their investment, 

can take over the land and make tenants out of our young 

farmers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member speaks 

about share-croppers, and he wrote the book on it. Because, Mr. 

Chairman, when the NDP administration decides to buy land 

under the land bank program, they take the power of 

government and they go out there to the  

  



 

October 21, 1987 

3429 

 

farmers and say, I will take your farm, and you can be the 

tenants and you can be the land leaser. You can be the fellow 

who is going to be the share-cropper for long, because the 

government will own the land, and the government will take the 

responsibility for it, and the government will have all the capital 

gain. And it did it for years, and it was rejected — absolutely 

rejected — by farmers across the province. 

 

The hon. member talks about debt restructuring. And he says, 

well would you help the people restructure their debt? Well 

they people not only want debt restructuring — and I’d like him 

to explain how he would restructure it — they not only want it 

restructured, but they want some equity in there and some cash 

in there, as opposed to just debt. That’s the problem. 

 

I mean if he wants to look at the problem, the problem is that 

the banks are owning more and more land. And he says, no, just 

keep it the way it is because all that debt’s there and the 

financial institutions own the farms. And he’s only got . . . the 

member from Quill Lakes says, either the government owns the 

farm or the bank owns the farm. That’s his answer. He says, oh 

look, the financial institutions, they can have all that land. 

Right? And the financial institutions are saying, now they’re 

going to have more and more and more of it. He says, oh that’s 

fine, just restructure the debt — just restructure the debt so the 

banks and the credit unions can own more and more farm land. 

 

Mr. Chairman, what the people are telling me and the credit 

union is telling me, is that there are hundreds of millions of 

dollars, and billions of dollars in savings in Saskatchewan — in 

pension funds, Mr. Speaker — in pension funds, billions of 

dollars in Saskatchewan that is now invested in the 

stock-market in New York, invested in the market in Toronto, 

and not allowed to invest in farm land in Saskatchewan because 

only the banks can own the land. 

 

And he is afraid to face the fact that maybe Saskatchewan 

people could invest in Saskatchewan farm land — and he’s 

afraid of that. Because he knows, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. 

Chairman, that in fact if people were allowed to help farmers 

here by reducing the debt, putting equity and cash into 

agriculture, that in fact it would make it more profitable, and it 

is a very viable way to restructure some farm problems. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the hon. member knows that his solution is land 

bank, the government own it or the banks own it, and he’s all in 

favour of restructuring and let the bank own 10 million acres of 

land. 

 

In fact the NDP people, sitting across, will defend the banks in 

court — defend the banks against farmers. They do it all the 

time. NDP lawyers will defend the banks against farmers, time 

and time again. They know it. It’s on the record, and an awful 

lot more people will know it. 

 

And he’s saying here, as NDP lawyers will defend the banks 

against farmers, he’s saying only the bank can have equity — 

only the bank can have that. They’ll own the land, or the 

government will own the land. And he says, no, all this pension 

money and all this other money  

should not be allowed to replace some of that debt. Sure, he 

says, fine. The union leaders’ pensions can go to New York and 

be invested in equity instruments — fine. All the pensions from 

teachers and the pensions from the wheat pool and the pensions 

from government can all go to Toronto and be invested in the 

stock market. Right? But he wouldn’t allow them to be invested 

in Saskatchewan agriculture. He says, only the financial 

institutions can hold the land — or the government. 

 

Well he’s got a lot of waking up to do, Mr. Chairman, if he’s 

going to think he’s going to restructure farm land and help 

young farmers and deny them the right to have access to cash 

— equity. Cash — not borrowing it. And at the same time NDP 

lawyers defend the banks against farmers. 

 

And more and more people are finding out, Mr. Chairman, that 

when the NDP speak out of both sides of their mouth — one, 

want to buy the land for the government; two, take the farmers 

to court on behalf of the banks — then this hon. gentleman from 

the Quill Lakes, who is a lawyer, will understand exactly what 

I’m talking about — that if you want to get cash and investment 

money and pension funds from Saskatchewan people into 

agriculture to help, that in fact you have to have the courage to 

address that and not just hide behind his arguments that, indeed, 

either the bank has to own the land; or the credit union has to 

own the land, or the government does. Because the farmer 

wants to own it. 

 

And if there’s anything that we can do to make sure that he has 

access to cash, as well as credit, we’re going to do that, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I hope you keep clapping, and I hope you keep 

selling that program, because you won’t be around very long 

with it. 

 

I want to indicate here what the . . . 

 

Ralph Ashmead, research director of the federal Farm 

Credit Corporation, (Who also, not just with the deputy, 

who described the Saskatchewan restrictions archaic) has 

spearheaded a fight for a new financing system. He is 

convinced that a large number of private investors are 

willing to become minority shareholders in prairie farms. 

 

Despite the slump of the past five years, the value of farm 

land has risen faster over the past 25 years than the 

average stock market. (And he goes on to say) A number 

of private investors of quite significant magnitude have 

become very interested in agriculture. They see that it is at 

or near the bottom of the market. Potential for upward 

capital appreciation is good. Mr. Ashmead has been 

approached by trust companies and other investors who 

have access to funds from Hong Kong, Japan, and other 

countries. They see Canadian farm land as a safe 

investment over the next 10 to 25 years. They’re talking 

big money, 50 million, 100 million and more (he said). 

And some investors believe the  

  



 

October 21, 1987 

3430 

 

booming stock market will eventually slow down. 

 

And I guess that’s it. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I don’t think that’ll ever happen. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I think it happened. And they don’t want all 

their eggs in one basket. 

 

This is the new Tory policy. The federal Farm Credit 

Corporation is promoting it, the federal government is 

promoting it, and the Premier of the province is. And he’s 

ducking around and saying it’s going to be Saskatchewan 

money. Yes, there’ll be Saskatchewan money, there’ll be Hong 

Kong and German and United States money. And I’ll tell you, 

our young farmers will be driven off like they’re never been 

driven before, and that’s where it’s heading. 

 

And I asked you simply whether you had any program, and 

obviously I can tell the young farmers that you don’t, that 

what’s there is there, that you don’t have, and you’re not going 

to address it. The only way that you’ll address it is to get them 

off the farm, and they might be able to lease it back. 

 

Now I ask you, Mr. Premier, as a tenant leasing land on a 

voluntary program under land bank — voluntary, which you 

failed to mention — do you think that the farmers, the young 

farmer, under this proposal that you’re going to be putting 

forward, are going to feel a lot better renting from a Hong Kong 

investment company, or from the government of the province? 

Do you think they’re going to be better off renting, tenants for 

Hong Kong investors or for the United States? Do you figure 

they’re going to be better off under that proposal? That’s the 

direction that you’re heading for. 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member has been 

exaggerating all afternoon, so I guess it comes as no surprise 

that he would exaggerate on this point. I make the . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well would you just listen? I mean, 

I was quiet when you were talking; why don’t you . . . They 

can’t stand the truth, Mr. Chairman. They’ve got to talk when 

I’m talking. Why don’t you . . . You will all get a chance to 

stand and speak, so at least you can have the courtesy to listen 

to the truth and to the facts. Just listen to the facts. 

 

When, Mr. Speaker, farmers are in debt, they want some cash. 

And we have cash in Saskatchewan by billions of dollars, of 

people who have money, and they invest it in all kinds of 

things. And right now, Mr. Chairman, it’s impossible for them 

to invest in agriculture. The financial institutions like banks and 

those that own the land. And farmers are saying, I want control. 

They want to be the people that have control. They want to have 

the last right to make sure that they can buy the land, that they 

can own the land, that they can have the final say as far as the 

family farm. But they’d also like some cash in there to help 

reduce some of those long-run interest rates payments. 

So I’m just saying, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member will run 

around and say that all the farm land is going to be owned by 

the Chinese, and he’ll run around and say all the farm land is 

going to be owned by somebody in South Africa. And he’s just 

blowing through his hat. 

 

What farmers want is cash. They want restructuring, and they 

want the ability, Mr. Chairman, to get through this difficult 

time. They appreciate the deficiency payments, they appreciate 

restructuring, and they appreciate the fact that maybe some cash 

in the province of Saskatchewan could be available to them, not 

just available to the New York stock market. And I make that 

point to the hon. member. 

 

He is still burning, and he is still hurting, as all of them are, 

over their land bank policy, and they’re trying to get out from 

under it. Well it’s part of their legacy, Mr. Chairman. It will 

always be part of their legacy. And it’s clear. It fits their 

philosophy as it does with their trade philosophy, that the 

government will own it and the government will control it; the 

government will decide who gets the land; the government will 

decide exactly what’s going on because they believe the 

government should be in control. 

 

We don’t believe that. We back up farmers. They backed up the 

government. I mean, clearly rural people can see the difference, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chairman, I heard a similar speech on 

Saskoil. We’re going to put all the share out to the people of 

Saskatchewan. And all of the little people will be a controlling 

partner in the great oil company of Saskoil, which it was. And 

we’ll have control of Saskatchewan dollars on our oil, and we’ll 

have control by the people. And where are the shares held now? 

Seventy per cent are held in eastern Canada. The share are 

flowing out of the hands of the people of Saskatchewan into 

large corporate firms. 

 

And this Minister of Agriculture and Premier of this province 

wants to do the same thing with agricultural land. He wants to 

take the land from young people and give them cash. And I’m 

sure that’s very alluring to the many young people out there 

who need cash. And he’s going to try to sweet-talk them into 

saying, here’s a good deal, we’re going to have investment from 

people in Saskatchewan, and you’re going to be able to sell off 

part of your land, and rent it, and buy it back when things get 

better. 

 

Who will own the land? Who will own the land when he’s 

done, is the question? What will the population of this province 

be when he’s done, is the question? Drawing in money — says 

from Saskatchewan — we know better. And so do the young 

farmers out there. 

 

How secure do they feel when large corporate interests who 

invest in their land — and I ask why will they invest in this 

land? They’ll invest in this land for one sole reason, and that is 

to gain from this land. And I maintain, Mr. Premier, that any 

money coming off that land has the full right to stay on that 

land and be in the pockets of that farmer, not in the hands of 

some investment corporation from some other country or some 

other part of this  

  



 

October 21, 1987 

3431 

 

country. 

 

And you promote the young farmer. You’re saying, trust me, 

we’ll make it better for you. Here goes the myth again. Trust 

me, we’ll make it better. And they’re supposed to sit back and 

say, okay, when they can see the angle of this government and 

the direction it’s going. First of all we want to put the hands 

into large farms, then we want outside investment to come in 

and control that land instead of the people of this province 

controlling it. 

 

That’s what you’re telling them. Do you think they’ll believe 

you? No, they won’t. They won’t believe you because they’ve 

seen the history of this government. They won’t believe you 

because we just heard a few minutes ago you saying that the 

NDP don’t want cash advances or the wheat board. And that is 

such garbage! Because check the record on supporting farmers, 

supporting the wheat board, supporting of freight rate 

transportation system, supporting equal opportunity and equal 

access to freight rate s- check the NDP record. 

 

And you’re out here today saying that the NDP don’t support 

these programs. Well I’ll tell you, I hope you keep saying that 

because the farmers of this province know the record. The 

farmers of this province know the importance of the wheat 

board. They know the importance of an equal access and 

equitable transportation subsidy. They know how important it is 

for each one of them to be able to haul their grain to that 

elevator of their local choice and have that grain moved at the 

same rate as it is from another point. But no, your government 

says no. 

 

And we hear the Premier talking about universality of 

programs. You were saying we were against universality — 

sure, here we go, we were against them. That is such utter 

garbage, and the people know that. They know that because we 

have a situation here where universality has become a football, 

a little football that the government can kick around at their 

discretion. They can say, you don’t want universality because 

you don’t support us throwing money out to every farmer, 

without any thought of how it was going to be repaid, without 

any thought of need, without any thought at all. 

 

And they say, you say, we are against universal . . . like health 

care, going into health care. Well let me tell you, you can use 

the term “universality” and kick it around, and manipulate it, 

and use it to what you think is your best advantage, and try to 

distort the image in the minds of the people, but it won’t work. 

It won’t work. I’ll tell you why it won’t work. Because the 

people of this province are competent in their decision making, 

and they know that they can be led down the garden path when 

they’re struggling. 

 

Like someone said, when someone’s drowning you throw him a 

net, and he’ll grab on to it. But there are some lead weights 

around the net, and that’s what you’ve done. You put people in 

a desperate situation; you try to confuse them; you try to 

smudge the facts; you try to manipulate the people of this 

province for one reason — and that is for Tory power. 

 

Here we have farm subsidy, a little quote, a little article, “Farm 

subsidy poorly distributed”. And this is a study  

done at the University of Saskatchewan, and the study, I’ll 

quote. The study does a master’s thesis by Ian McCreary 

saying: 

 

Low income farmers receive a small portion of 

government payments based on crop production, while 

farmers with high incomes reap the bulk of the benefits. 

 

Goes on to say: 

 

The study showed that land payments and deficiency 

payments based on production provide no more than 15 

per cent to the poorest group of farmers, while granting the 

wealthiest 20 per cent about one-third of the public funds. 

 

And that’s what you’re doing. You are telling the people of this 

province that you’re not going to look after their debt, that 

you’re not going to look after the subsidy programs and handle 

them efficiently so that all farmers can get enough to keep them 

on the land. But you’re promoting a system whereby the small 

farmer and the poorest farmers get the least benefit, and the 

wealthiest farmers get the most benefit. 

 

And where’s that leading us? That is leading us to a situation 

whereby the Premier of this province, as he said a few years 

ago: we’re going to get rid of a third of the farmers. And he’s 

following through on his promise, and I’ll say that’s the only 

promise that he’s ever followed through on, getting rid of a 

third of the farmers. 

 

We have a situation where a deficiency payment — a deficiency 

payment, you say, is a universal program. We have to have 

universal programs and the NDP are against it. Well let me tell 

you, Mr. Premier, the members on this side of the House know 

that there has to be some changes to the way money is flung out 

in this country for political gain, and that’s the problem that we 

run into time and time again. 

 

Don’t have a long-term program where we can keep a third . . . 

the third of the farmers that are in trouble. Change the programs 

so that they can be implemented at a time when needed; that’s 

your program. And when is it needed? It’s needed before every 

election that the Tories run in because they don’t know how to 

manage this province in a manner that will help the people and 

the farmers to maintain their viability on the land. 

 

They don’t know how to talk to the large multinational 

corporations on behalf of farmers, because they’re not talking 

on behalf of farmers, because they’re talking on behalf of the 

Tory government who’s propped up by large corporations. 

That’s their program. 

 

And they’re still trying to confuse the issue. They’re still trying 

to confuse the issue by saying the NDP are against universal 

programs or on the wheat board. How can the . . . how can a 

person in this province believe that? How can they believe that? 

They say to me: you are the only party, the NDP, who was 

fighting for the wheat board? and they know it. They don’t 

believe it for a minute, but this is the example, this is the talk 

coming from the Tory party. 

  



 

October 21, 1987 

3432 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 

 


