


















































November 2, 1987 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 November 2, 1987 
 

3795 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with great pleasure to 
introduce to you, and to the members of this Assembly, a 
15-year-old exchange student from Tampico, Mexico. His name is 
Fernando Saldena; he is sitting in the Speaker’s gallery. Fernando 
is accompanied here today by the Lyle Knutson family of Elbow, 
Saskatchewan. Fernando is in grade 10 and is living at the 
Knutson home while living in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to say welcome to Fernando, 
to all people from Elbow, Saskatchewan, and all of Canada; and 
also say congratulations and thanks to the Knutson family for 
participating in this program. Now I would like to ask all members 
of this Assembly to welcome them in the usual way. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the gallery this 
afternoon, your gallery, sir, the Speaker’s gallery, two young 
ladies are visiting us: one is a constituent of mine from Regina 
South, Shireen Meggitt, and with her is Karena Taylor. Karena is a 
business administration exchange student from Manchester, 
England. I’m sure that’s she’s enjoying her visit to Canada and, I 
expect, Regina. Welcome to the Assembly, and I hope you enjoy 
the afternoon. Would you please greet them. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Provincial Government Bond Issue 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the 
Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, my question deals with yet 
another example of how your government’s incompetence and 
mismanagement of our financial affairs is hurting Saskatchewan’s 
reputation on the world’s money markets. Can you confirm, Mr. 
Minister, that just before the stock markets across the world 
collapsed, you agreed to a new $125 million provincial 
government bond issue which tied the bond’s yield to the 
performance of the New York Stock Exchange; and can you 
confirm that hardly any of those bonds have been sold, and the 
chief underwriter, Wood Gundy, has had to withdraw them from 
the market? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, again we have further evidence 
that the hon. member doesn’t understand. The bonds were issued 
at an all in cost to the province of 41 bases points below the cost of 
Government of Canada borrowing, Mr. Speaker, which is a 
dramatic saving for the taxpayer of Saskatchewan. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the agency that brought them forward, the 
investment house, of course, Wood Gundy, is required, when it 
takes an issue like that on their advice  

— they believed they could place it — they have to hold that 
particular issue. So of course the Government of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, gets its money at, in effect, an interest rate of 5 per 
cent. Mr. Speaker, I suggest that that is a good deal for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Once, if the hon. member understood, the investment house has to 
take those bonds, Mr. Speaker, and they are holding them. There is 
some expectation that they’ll be placing them back, but that’s their 
problem. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
before you can get any benefit, you have to be able to sell them 
first. Clearly, this risky arrangement, Mr. Minister, has again made 
Saskatchewan the laughing stock of the financial markets, and you 
know it. You can try to shift the blame all you want, or explain it 
away all you want, the fact of the matter is that Wood Gundy 
made a recommendation to you; you had a choice to either accept 
it or to reject it. Can you explain, Mr. Minister, what possessed 
you and your cabinet colleagues to agree to a provincial 
government bond issue with the yield tied to as volatile an index 
as the New York Stock Exchange? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Again the hon. member doesn’t understand 
that when the investment house takes the bonds . . . They take the 
bonds, Mr. Speaker. We get the money. We’ve got the money. 
we’re getting the moneys at 5 per cent interest rate, Mr. Speaker. I 
doubt very much whether any other government anywhere has got 
5 per cent interest rate, Mr. Speaker. I strongly suggest that the is a 
good deal. It is a good . . . They have to pay us anyway. That is 
their hook. That’s not our hook. That’s what you don’t understand, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
He simply doesn’t understand how the investment of moneys and 
the placement of moneys through the investment houses works. If 
he was under the mistaken assumption that we don’t get the 
money because they couldn’t sell the bonds, he’s wrong. The fact 
is that we got this at a very preferred interest rate. I have indicated 
41 basis points below what the Government of Canada can 
borrow. I suggest that’s an indication, Mr. Speaker, to everyone, 
of the reputation and the ability of this province and this 
government to raise funds. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
I want to ask you this, and I think the taxpayers deserve a clear 
answer to it. Can you assure us that the decision by Wood Gundy 
to eat this bond issue is not going to result in the Government of 
Saskatchewan somehow having to bail them out with higher 
underwriting fees, or some other arrangement, on future 
Government of Saskatchewan’s bond issues? Will you make that 
clear to this House, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well certainly. We put the borrowings out for 
proposals, and we get the best deal at each case that we possibly 
can for the taxpayer of the province; as a  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

3796 
 

matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, the transaction that looks like may 
well enhance the reputation of the province because it looks, to the 
bond markets and those looking at the market opportunities, that 
his province saved millions and millions of dollars as a result of 
this issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Television Advertising Campaign 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to the Minister of Economic Development and Trade. 
Friday you took notice of a question saying that you would answer 
at the next sitting. You took notice of a question with respect to 
the cost of some television ads that are patently nothing more than 
an attempt to bail out the floundering Progressive Conservative 
Party. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister is: what is the cost of those television 
ads? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I don’t have that information with me 
today. I’ll undertake to have it tomorrow. I will undertake to have 
it tomorrow, and I will stand up in the House tomorrow and give 
you that information. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, it’s difficult to believe . . . A 
new question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, it’s difficult to believe 
that you would authorize an expenditure of this magnitude on such 
a frivolous purpose, and it is frivolous, without any idea of what 
those ads are going to cost you. 
 
Are you telling this Assembly that you don’t know what the ads 
cost you; you didn’t bother to find out before you commissioned 
them. It was good for . . . What is good for the PC party is good 
for the province of Saskatchewan — is that your motto? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated to the hon. 
member last question period that I did not want to give him the 
information unless it was absolutely correct and specific. Okay? 
And I will undertake to get that information. 
 
Usually when they ask a question, they carp on our case when we 
stand up to answer it. I will . . . And that’s usually three to four 
days later. I will get the information, and I’ll bring it to the House. 
 

Cost of Furniture in New York Trade Office 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Economic Development and Trade. While your 
government, Mr. Minister, is preaching restraint to everyone else, 
it continues to squander the taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
Last week it was millions of dollars on television ads which were 
little more than PC propaganda, and now we’ve got this cabinet 
order dated October 14, which authorizes your department to 
spend $25,000 to buy  

furniture for your New York trade office. 
 
Can you explain why, Mr. Minister, in a period of restraint, you 
approved the expenditure of $25,000 to buy furniture for a trade 
office that we don’t need? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I disagree with the hon. 
member, and I disagree with him to a great extent, that we do not 
need a presence in New York, or that we do not need a presence in 
Japan or in Hong Kong or in Europe. 
 
The members opposite sit and carp on their case that we should 
not make a deal with the United States, that we should walk away 
from the United States, and that we should deal with other 
countries of the world, or we should be specific with where we sell 
stuff. 
 
Now you cannot sell stuff by simply staying in Saskatchewan, 
remaining in Saskatchewan, and have everybody else come here, 
because other people are not coming here. 
 
Today the Premier of Manitoba, along with four of his cabinet 
colleagues are in Japan. And they are going to go into Japan and 
into Hong Kong and into China and other places. We must do that 
as well as Manitoba, as well as Alberta, as well as British 
Columbia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important, it’s important that we have a presence 
in the United States and in other trading areas of the world. That’s 
how we’re going to trade; that’s the way the world is trading 
today. And if we don’t trade, that means our industries in this 
province don’t flourish, and that means there’s no jobs created. I 
apologize for none of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister, perhaps you 
didn’t understand my question. And you may think that $25,000 is 
a pittance, but I’m telling you that that’s as much money as a lot of 
families have to live on. 
 
And what I want to say is that they’ve got a right to know how 
their tax dollars are being spent and how they’re being wasted. 
And I want to ask you again: why would you approve an 
expenditure of $25,000 to furnish a trade office in a period of 
severe restraint, and an office that we don’t need? You’re 
duplicating a service. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, we have a presence in New 
York, and that covers the eastern seaboard. And I’m sure the hon. 
member would not suggest that we have a wooden chair and a 
home-made desk and an abacus to add stuff with and an 
old-fashioned typewriter. 
 
The reality is that a modern office takes money to furnish, whether 
it’s in the province of Saskatchewan, in New York City, in 
Ottawa, or any other place. I dare say if you looked at your office 
in the Legislative Building or in your office back in Prince Albert, 
you’ve got a fair amount of money in furniture and equipment to 
furnish that, and  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

3797 
 

you should have. The modern world is that way, and that’s exactly 
the way you have to do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question to the same minister. Mr. 
Minister, even though this office has been open for a number of 
weeks now, we’ve asked you questions regarding the costs of 
operating this, and you pretend not to know the full cost of that 
trade office. 
 
Can the minister tell us today: how much of the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers’ dollars are being spent to rent or lease space for this 
trade office in New York city? and I want to know how many staff 
people you’ve hired to work there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I would refer the hon. 
member back to the estimates, where a lot of those questions were 
asked and a lot of those questions were answered, Mr. Speaker. So 
I would refer him back to the estimates of about a month ago, and 
that’s where he would find that. 
 
But let me say this to the hon. member, coming from Prince Albert 
as you do, the New York trade office has been very successful in 
selling into the U.S. market, wild rice. Now wild rice is produced 
in northern Saskatchewan. I would have thought that you 
supported that. 
 
The New York office will be of assistance in producing and in 
selling paper that is being produced out of a Prince Albert new 
paper mill. And I thought that the member opposite might like to 
see that, Mr. Speaker, where we can take our product . . .  
 
And the New York office is involved now in the sale of pork — 
processed pork and processed beef. And the member up there has 
people in his own riding that grow hogs and grow beef, and I 
thought that the member opposite would like to see that being sold 
into the U.S. markets. I don’t think he should be always criticizing 
when we want to do something like that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tax on Propane Gas Supplies 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Minister of Finance. Last Thursday, in your absence, the Deputy 
Premier took notice of a question about the collection of the 32 
cent-a-gallon tax on propane. Effective yesterday your department 
requires propane wholesalers to collect a 32 cent-a-gallon tax on 
all the propane they sell to retailers, even though propane used for 
lighting, heating, and cooking is exempt from the tax. 
 
To get their money back, retailers have to keep track of how much 
propane they sell for non-taxable purposes, then claim a credit 
from the wholesaler. Can the minister explain how this change is 
designed to reduce the red tape burden for small-business people 
who sell propane? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, as the Assembly and the press 
gallery knows, this was the same questions asked the other night 
in estimates by the hon. member, further evidence . . . I believe it’s 
the third time, Mr. Speaker. And the answers were fully given in 
estimates the other night that this proposal was at the request of 
the Canadian propane gas association, Mr. Speaker, and worked 
out in conjunction with them. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister 
refused to answer the questions in estimates, and he refuses to 
answer the question in question period. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — The minister may wish to down play the red 
tape created by this propane tax collection system, but the propane 
retailers disagree very strongly. 
 
As one of them told the news media, it’s clear this change was 
designed by someone who doesn’t know the first thing about how 
the propane business works. Will the minister at least sit down 
with the small-business people who sell propane in this province, 
and not the suppliers alone, listen to their concerns and revise this 
red tape nightmare you have created? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well as I indicated on several occasions 
during estimates the other evening, when the same question was 
asked by the hon. member, that my officials in Finance did sit 
down with the industry, Mr. Speaker, and it was of the view that 
the industry’s Saskatchewan branch, that this was the way that 
they wanted it done. It was with the approval of the industry in the 
province of Saskatchewan, after consultation, Mr. Speaker. And 
they advised me that their retailers are on 30-day terms so that 
they shouldn’t be out of pocket as a result, and that it was in 
conjunction with the propane industry that this was done, Mr. 
Speaker. It wasn’t done in isolation or unilaterally by the 
government; it was done with consultation. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the 
retailers that I have spoken to have not been consulted about this 
nightmare. Between 50 per cent and three-quarters of the propane 
sold in this province is non-taxable . . . sold for non-taxable 
purposes. 
 
And I want to know, Mr. Minister, under this procedure the 
propane retailers who are paying a 32 cent a gallon tax on 
non-taxable items such as these, why they have to apply for a 
rebate of tax that they shouldn’t have paid in the first place? And 
can the minister explain the legal foundation for the collection of a 
tax on a non-taxable item, and is this a legal foundation or 
principle that you plan to apply elsewhere in other areas? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I can only repeat for the third time to the 
hon. member what I’ve repeated, I think, seven or  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

3798 
 

eight times the other night in estimates, that this proposal was 
done . . . I gather there were many retailers that were not collecting 
the tax, even on taxable items, and there was dissatisfaction within 
the retailers because some were collecting the tax and some were 
not. And so a workable system that was worked out in conjunction 
with the propane industry, Saskatchewan branch, Mr. Speaker, 
was worked out, and that resulted in the notice that went out to 
them. 
 
If the hon. member has some retailer that is not a member of the 
association, perhaps he would be prepared to give us the 
information, and we will give him the explanation and see if 
there’s a particular difficulty. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this was worked out in consultation and in 
conjunction with the industry. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — New question, Mr. Speaker. First of all, the 
retailers are not members of this association. They’re the ones that 
have to carry the red tape burden for this government. Secondly, 
most of the retailers in this province, Mr. Minister, are on a load 
for load basis, or a COD basis, or they pay on a weekly basis. 
Very few of them have a net 30 days. 
 
What I want to ask the minister is that the red tape industry in this 
province is the only growth industry under your government. No 
wonder your department officials forecast right in the budget that 
fully one-third of the people eligible to claim rebates on this gas 
tax would not apply for rebates. You’ve made it confusing enough 
for the customers and the small-business people trying to serve 
them, that there are bound to be many people who just throw up 
their hands in disgust and refuse to apply. 
 
Is that what this red tape nightmare was designed to do, to 
discourage people from claiming rebates? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, we can’t, and I don’t think the 
public expects the government to, make people apply for rebates, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what the hon. member advocates. 
 
Again, and I can only repeat now for the, I believe fourth time this 
afternoon, and I think it was five times the other night — for the 
ninth time, Mr. Speaker — that this was done in conjunction with 
the industry, Saskatchewan branch, and they advised us that most 
of the retailers, if not all of them, were on 30 days, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If the hon. member has a specific example of someone who is not 
a member of the association, then we’re prepared, as we have 
done, Mr. Speaker, with other retailers with regard to fuel tax, to 
assist them around the province, as we have done with bulk fuel 
dealers around the province to assist them. Mr. Speaker, we are 
more than prepared to meet with them and try and address their 
needs, but we have met with the industry and this was done with 
the approval of the industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Request for Returns to Questions 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — My question is to the House Leader, and it 
deals with your arrogant refusal, Mr. House Leader, and your 
government, to detail the spending of your government. Now, last 
year, almost a year ago, my colleagues and I put a series of written 
questions asking you to detail how you spend money on 
out-of-province travel, on polling, advertising, and patronage 
appointments. That’s information that any well-managed 
government should have on its fingertips. And here we are, almost 
a year since we asked for these questions, and there’s been no 
answer. 
 
My question is: will you table this information this week, or will 
we have to wait till spring? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the member is right. They 
did have, oh, probably, 5 or 600 questions on the order paper for 
the period of several months. And I believe that it was maybe two 
months ago, possibly three at the very outside . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — A month and a half. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m told a month and a half by my 
colleague — that those returns were actually ordered, Mr. 
Speaker. And the information naturally couldn’t even begin to be 
gathered until the form of the order was final, and as we all know, 
as we all know there were very major amendments to those orders 
for return. They were different than they first showed up on the 
order paper when they were finally ordered. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
answer quite simply is that they will be tabled in due course, Mr. 
Speaker, as they are ready. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Minister, two months to answer the questions is, I think, ample 
and I would like to have a more specific answer. I believe your 
government is stalling, and with your record of incompetence and 
mismanagement and patronage, I can see why. 
 
How can you justify keeping this information from the public, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, here we are in day 
109, I believe, of the Legislative Assembly . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — . . . in day 109 of the Legislative 
Assembly. During this period we’ve had officials sitting in this 
House, hour after hour after hour, answering questions for the 
members opposite, repetition after repetition after repetition, when 
they could have well been over in the departments digging up 
some of the answers that they’ve put on the order paper, asked for 
on the order paper, that in most cases they’ve already go through 
estimates, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if we’re sitting now on day 108 when we’ve got issues like 
trade, bilateral and multilateral trade, and the  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

3799 
 

finance situation with our agricultural community, and the potash 
situation, and the list goes on; and that is the most compelling 
question, Mr. Speaker, that they can come up with; I wonder what 
we’re doing here on day 108 or 109. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I 
too am wondering what we’re doing here at day 109, because we 
have asked for these questions. We have asked you these 
questions in estimates, we have asked for these questions on the 
order paper, and we ask for them now in question period, and we 
still don’t get it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Are you ashamed to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan how much you’re spending on out-of-province 
trips, how much you’re spending on patronage, how much you’re 
spending on advertising, and how much you’re spending on 
polling? I want to know: are you willing to tell the public about 
how much you’re spending to hire people like Paul Schoenhals 
and Tim Embury and George Hill? 
 
Mr. Minister, why are you stalling? Why are you stalling and not 
willing to give us a specific date on when these things are going to 
come? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I think maybe what we 
should do to save the members opposite from their daily 
embarrassment is to send some questions over to them and make 
them look a little better than they look. It’s apparent to everyone 
that is watching, Mr. Speaker, that they’ve simply run out of 
steam. There’s nothing new over there — there’s nothing new 
over there. We’re still . . . I mean . . . and I can understand that 
because we have been here for 108 or 109 days — 108 or 109 
days, Mr. Speaker, and I can appreciate that they’ll be running out 
of original material. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, to answer the question, those returns will be 
tabled in the ordinary course of events. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Environmental Pollution at Old Wives Lake 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Minister of the Environment and minister responsible for the 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation. The minister will know from 
media reports, and most particularly from inquiries which I made 
of him some weeks ago, that a serious environmental problem has 
developed in the Mossbank district of southern Saskatchewan with 
the drying out of Old Wives lake and the resultant creation of a 
huge salt flat and the blowing alkali salt that comes off of that flat, 
literally covering farms and communities and farm lands for many 
miles around. 
 
I would like to ask the minister if he can give us today a very 
up-to-date status report on that serious situation,  

including how it came into existence and what specifically is 
being done by the government on a day by day basis to monitor 
the situation to determine exactly the kind of environmental 
damage that that very serious situation is creating. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, the question that the hon. 
member is asking is a serious question in the area near Old Wives 
Lake. I believe that the answers that I gave the hon. member about 
two weeks ago should have answered his question. However, I 
will go through it again, and perhaps even a look at today’s paper 
would be beneficial for you. 
 
We’ve been in a drought period since approximately 1981, and 
Old Wives Lake has been steadily declining in its water level from 
that time until now. We’re looking at a lake that covers something 
like 115,000 hectares. That’s a very large water body. But when 
we have low rainfall, then eventually the lake goes dry. this cycle 
has repeated itself throughout history in our province. We’re at the 
lowest ebb that the lake has been now for about 20 years. Likely as 
the rainfall pattern change, the lake will again get water. 
 
The complaint that we’re hearing, that the Ducks Unlimited 
project and the mine at Chaplin is taking away a large amount of 
the water, is not exactly accurate. Those two projects would take 
less than 1 inch of water from that lake area in any given year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 55 — An Act to 
provide for the Division of Saskatchewan into Constituencies 
for the Election of Members of the Legislative Assembly be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
few words that I want to address on this legislation. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s the last refuge of every government that gets itself into serious 
difficulty to try to rewrite the rules so that, notwithstanding the 
lack of popular support, they’ll still be government anyway. And 
that’s what this government has done. You know, when a 
government’s in serious trouble, when they’re floundering . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I’d ask hon. 
members to please lower the noise level so we could hear the 
member from Regina Centre. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It’s the last refuge of a government that’s in 
trouble to try to rewrite the rules. And that’s precisely what this 
government is doing. There’s no, I think effort made to justify 
some of these changes. Some  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

3800 
 

of them are a straight attempt to give the members opposite a leg 
up. I say to members opposite that I think it’s all for nought. 
 
I think the day is long since past when the public will tolerate 
abuse of office by a gerrymander. I do not think the public in this 
day and age will tolerate it. I don’t know if they ever did, but they 
certainly don’t today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, within the period of time in which I was active in 
politics, there was one other gerrymander. In 1970 the Liberal 
government under the leadership of Ross Thatcher was, as you 
are, way down in the polls. It looked hopeless. So he 
gerrymandered — brought in a set of boundaries which suited his 
government. I think most fair-minded observers, including many 
Liberals who got swamped under the tide of the Allan Blakeney 
NDP, did so . . . I think many Liberals admitted that the 
gerrymander was a factor in their defeat. It was the only thing that 
no Liberal could justify. Standing up in the town hall in Southey 
or Saskatoon, if someone asked you to justify it, there is no 
justification for it, and you can’t do it. It’s the one where you have 
to say, well, and you shrug your shoulders in the time-honoured 
Canadian fashion. so it’s what members opposite are going to be 
doing. They’re going to be shrugging their shoulders without any 
defence to this. 
 
Now I want to go over the . . . I want to spend some time — I want 
to spend a few moments, rather, going over the way in which this 
gerrymander has taken place. It’s worth while recalling how the 
commission heretofore was set up. 
 
As a result of the public distaste over the gerrymander in 1970, the 
new government passed a Bill, called The Constituency 
Boundaries Commission (Act), which remained virtually 
unchanged from its passage in 1972 until today. That Bill was the 
epitome of fairness. It set up that, in section 6, the chairman was a 
judge either of the Court of Appeal or Queen’s Bench court in 
Saskatchewan, appointed by the chief justice. The Clerk of the 
Legislative Assembly was the second member, and Mr. Speaker 
appointed the third. The latter, I recall, caused some questioning 
when it was done, it was wondered how . . . if the Speaker would 
maintain this independence. There were no female Speakers 
during that period. However, they did; the system worked very 
well. The Speakers of the day, which one is in the Assembly now, 
exercised their discretion with a good deal of fairness, and there 
were no complaints form a partisan opposition. 
 
What do we have in place of that? Well we have in place of that a 
judge — and the government has given themselves the option of 
appointing a judge or a supernumerary, so the government gets to 
choose the judge. 
 
As I read this legislation, it’s in the discretion of the government 
whether they appoint the judge or give the chief justice the option 
of doing it. But they retain unto themselves the option of 
appointing the judge which is one member. 
 
The second member — and I want to spend a few  

moments commenting on this — the second member is appointed 
by the chief justice of the provincial court. Mr. Speaker, I was — 
if not shocked, I don’t think anything that the member from 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden would do would ever shock me. But I was 
disagreeably surprised when he appointed his own executive 
assistant as chief justice of the province court. It would have been 
a highly questionable appointment if he’d simply been a judge of 
the provincial court, but to make his own executive assistant, Pat 
Carey, the chief justice of the provincial court was a gross abuse of 
the power which the Justice minister has to appoint judges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that individual went into that office, that 
all-important office, seriously compromised. He now further 
compromises the office in this legislation because that, his former 
executive assistant — he’s now chief justice — chooses the 
second member. I think anyone with a passing familiarity with the 
facts would expect that that will be someone who will view things 
the way the government does. It’s most unlikely that a judge 
appointed prior to 1982 will find his or her way on to the 
commission. 
 
The third member is a straight political operator; it’s the chief 
electoral office. In other provinces and in Canada the chief 
electoral office is an independent office. It has never been so here 
— not under the Liberals, not under the NDP, not under the 
Conservatives. The Chief Electoral Officer is a political operator. 
It’s the equivalent of the member from Souris-Cannington 
appointing his own executive assistant. That’s the political 
equivalent of appointing the Chief Electoral Officer. The office 
has no tradition of independence, and indeed the tradition is 
precisely the opposite. The Chief Electoral Officer in this province 
is a political operator. That is your commission. That, I think, 
gives no one who isn’t a conservative any sense of fairness. 
 
Clearly, the members of the commission were appointed so that 
they would be responsive to the government’s wishes. What does 
the government want them to do? Well, we find that out in a 
subsequent section . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That may well 
be. But I don’t have . . . One of my colleagues says the map’s 
already drawn. That may well be, but I don’t have any hard 
evidence of that. 
 
What I do have hard evidence of is the scope for abuse. In the 
former legislation, which as I say no one has criticized as being 
unfair, I’ve never hear that argument made that that legislation 
was unfair to anyone. In that legislation ridings could vary by up 
to 15 per cent to take into account growth areas or other 
circumstances. In this case, that difference has been increased to 
25 per cent, and the result can be fairly startling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the area I represent has been sending CCF and NDP 
members to this Legislative Assembly for over five decades. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — Anyone can get elected there. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That’s right. That’s right, virtually  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

3801 
 

anyone, so the member says, can get elected. 
 
One might expect that the area represented by the member from 
Regina South, which has a very different history, will be 25 per 
cent smaller, the area . . . the part of town I come from will be 25 
per cent larger. The difference in the two ridings will be 50 per 
cent, because you can vary them 25 per cent down and 25 per cent 
up, but the total is 50 per cent. It can mean a gross difference in 
the ridings. It’s a gerrymander. it is nothing but a gerrymander. It’s 
nothing but an attempt to draw the map without any sense of 
fairness than in a fashion with suits the government members best. 
 
The third item I want to refer to is the differential which exists 
between rural and urban areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the principle of one person, one vote, is recognized 
throughout democracies on several different continents — one 
person, one vote. That’s not what this government has done. In 
rural areas the rural ridings are statutorily defined to be smaller. 
I’ll be interested in hearing what the minister’s calculations are, 
but I did some calculations. Rural ridings start, when the map is 
drawn, they’ll be 13 per cent smaller. On the basis of the 1986 
election . . . of the 1986 electors, they’ll be 13 per cent smaller. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been a phenomenon in Saskatchewan for 
several decades, the declining rural population. Every government 
has come into office promising to bring it to a halt, and nobody’s 
found out a way to do it. But it’s continued relentlessly at a more 
or less steady pace. 
 
The current boundaries were drawn up in 1977, if I recall 
correctly. At that point in time the boundaries . . . the rural and 
urban ridings all had the same number of people. By 1982 urban 
ridings on the same boundaries were 13 per cent larger . . . were 
18 per cent larger. Between 1982 and 1986 the margin increased, 
so that in 1986 the urban ridings were 25 per cent larger. You’re 
going to exacerbate that problem by starting with urban ridings 
which, by my calculations, start out at 13 per cent smaller. 
Imagine how grossly out of proportion they’re going to be if 
there’s no redistribution done for another 10 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in three important ways, both by appointing a 
commission which are government appointments favourable to the 
government, support the government and will do the government’s 
bidding; by a 25 per cent differential which is far too large — far 
too large, unnecessarily large; and by making rural ridings smaller, 
this government is gerrymandering. They are drawing up the rules 
to suit themselves. They violate every sense of fair play and justice 
that exists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of other comments which can and 
should be made about this legislation. I, therefore, beg leave to 
adjourn the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1445) 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 56 — An Act to amend The Litter Control Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of the amendments to The Litter Control Act. the 
amendment to this Act that we are considering today will enable 
implementation of a new beverage container policy in the 
province. This new policy will respond to public demand for 
greater flexibility in beverage container use by allowing 
non-refillable containers on the market. At the same time it will 
reduce litter and waste by ensuring that these non-refillable 
containers are recycled to the greatest extent possible. 
 
The principal objectives of the proposed amendments are to: (a) 
provide the authority for approved non-refillable containers; (b) 
provide the authority to withdraw container approval; (c) provide 
the authority to require container handling and record keeping that 
could benefit recycling and allow evaluation of recycling 
performance, and enable effective enforcement of the Act by 
removing the requirement that the minister approve each beverage 
container offence prosecution, and provide enforcement officers 
with the protection of the criminal code in administering and 
enforcing the law. In addition, amendments are proposed that will 
clarify wording and correct minor deficiencies in the Act. 
 
Carbonated soft drink and beer containers are regulated under The 
Litter Control Act and regulations. Each container must be 
approved before it is used in the province. Until now only 
refillable glass bottles have been approved. However, the use of 
unapproved containers has increased dramatically in recent 
months. Unfortunately, a litter problem is being created. 
 
My department is completing the development of a plan that will 
rectify the current chaotic beverage container situation in the 
province. The basic thrust of the plan is to allow non-refillable 
containers, while ensuring that these containers are recycled to the 
greatest degree possible. Aluminum cans are expected to be the 
first non-refillable container approved, because they have a high 
scrap value, and as such, form the basis for a recycling system. 
 
In closing, let me emphasize that the new beverage container 
policy will respond to a strong public demand for non-refillable 
containers, principally the aluminum can; reduce litter by 
controlling the use of non-refillable containers; and reduce waste 
by encouraging recycling and non-refillable containers. 
 
The amendments proposed The Litter Control Act are necessary to 
implement this policy and then develop appropriate regulations. I 
invite the support of all members for these amendments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Litter Control Act. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
and Mr. Minister, I rise today to make some comments on this Bill 
and its effect on two particularly important aspects for the people 
of this province. 
 
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

3802 
 

The first aspect I would like to speak about, in fact, is the effect of 
this Bill. Now while there are certainly many improvements in this 
Bill over the present Litter Control Act, and which I’ll 
acknowledge, there are certain provisions that we think, in fact, 
could enhance the powers of the minister when it comes to dealing 
with litter control. 
 
There are two major side-effects of this Bill that, in fact, we think 
will pose some very serious and grave problems to the people of 
this province. The first of these problems, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
deal with is the whole question of jobs and what happens to those 
people who work in the bottling industry in this province, both the 
soft drink bottling industry and also the brewery industry, the 
makers of beer products. 
 
One of our concerns, one of our major concerns in dealing with 
this new Act, Mr. Speaker, is the question of what is going to 
happen to those people who work in those industries in the 
province when in fact this Bill will be passed, as it will, and the 
introduction of cans and the introduction of beverages contained in 
those cans comes to Saskatchewan. There is nothing in this Bill, 
Mr. Speaker, there is nothing in this Bill which addresses that 
problem. 
 
Now the minister knows very well that there are probably in the 
neighbourhood of a thousand jobs, direct and indirect, in this 
province which depends on the brewery industry, and on the 
canning industry, and on the trucking industry which delivers 
those cans or, pardon me, delivers those bottles and distributes 
those products here in Saskatchewan that rely on that particular 
industry. The minister, in this Bill, has made absolutely no . . . a 
suggestion, has introduced no amendment, or has introduced no 
method of dealing with the jobs which will be lost here in 
Saskatchewan through the introduction of this Bill. He has made 
absolutely no attempt to deal with that very serious question. 
 
And when this Bill is passed, which it shall be, what then will the 
minister have to say to the brewery workers in Regina or the soft 
drink workers in Saskatoon or in Prince Albert or in Swift Current 
or in Yorkton or in those towns, North Battleford, those places 
where people are employed in the soft drink industry? What will 
he say to them when their jobs are abolished, when their jobs 
disappear by the importation from other provinces of soft drinks? 
 
I’ll give you an example, Mr. Speaker. Already, the person who 
owned the soft drink . . . major soft drink bottling operation in the 
city of Prince Albert has divested himself of that ownership to a 
person from Winnipeg in anticipation that, with the passage of this 
Bill, cans of soda pop will be shipped from Winnipeg into the 
Prince Albert area, and the jobs in Prince Albert will be lost. 
 
The same thing can be said of every other bottling and bottling 
operation in the soft drink and brewery industry, but primarily at 
this point in time in the soft drink industry in this province. There 
is nothing in this Bill, and there is nothing been done by the 
government opposite to suggest that the problems of the 
displacement of those workers — i.e. those workers who will lose 
their jobs — the  

government has said nothing about what they will do with those 
workers. They have said nothing, absolutely nothing at all, have 
not given them one guarantee or shred of evidence that in fact that 
they, those workers, will be maintained at the standard of living to 
which they’re accustomed, or that they will be retrained in another 
occupation, or they will be provided with some financial 
compensation for the loss of their jobs — not one thing has that 
government said. And this Bill, Mr. Speaker, says nothing in that 
direction either. 
 
The second issue that’s before us, raised by this Bill, is the whole 
question of litter control and the whole question of environmental 
damage that the introduction of cans will bring about in this 
province. The minister has said, and I listened very carefully to his 
statement, he has said nothing about the recycling of these cans, 
with one little exception —he said that hopefully there will be 
some recycling activity undertaken as a result of this Bill. 
 
It seems to me that that question, in terms of the minister 
. . . coming from the Minister of the Environment, that what he 
should be laying before this House is some kind of plan of action 
to deal with the question of recycling of the cans. If he, as he 
wishes to win the support of each and every member of the 
Assembly, it seems to me he owes that to the Assembly, that he 
puts forward either by way of regulation or in his statement that, in 
fact, there will be some kind of plan of action set up in this 
province to do with what the minister has already admitted has 
become a problem — and that is the problem of littering of cans. 
 
And as the minister knows that problem is not, and will not be, 
confined to Saskatchewan. The problem of littering of cans, in 
fact, is a problem that we find throughout this continent whenever 
cans have been introduced, and various jurisdictions have made 
greater or lesser progress in dealing with that kind of litter 
problem. But the minister in his wisdom has not laid out any plan 
of action, to deal with what he knows to be that problem, before 
us. 
 
And just on that for a minute, Mr. Speaker, the minister said, well 
we’ve developed a problem because there’s been a major 
importation of cans. Well, if, in fact, if, in fact that is a problem — 
and the minister said it’s a problem — it’s a problem of his own 
making. He has the power to tell the Minister of Justice to go 
ahead and prosecute those who, in fact, were breaking the law on 
this matter, and he decided not to. And he decided not to, because 
he had it in his mind that, in fact, he was going to introduce 
canned beverages in this province, and so he decided to allow 
those who flouted the law just to go ahead and flout the law. It 
does not seem to me to be a very responsible action on the part of 
the Minister of the Crown. 
 
Be that as it may, Mr. Speaker, be that as it may, I want to see 
from the Minister of the Environment before I would support this 
Bill some plan to do two things. One, what is your method of 
operation to develop a recycling process for canned beverage in 
this province? And secondly, what is the government’s plan to 
deal with those workers who have lost their jobs as a result of this 
bill? And until those two criteria are met, Mr. Speaker, I certainly 
am not going to give any kind of carte blanche, or blank cheque,  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

3803 
 

to the minister to pass this Bill. It seems to me it’s incumbent upon 
him to satisfy those two very serious questions before this Bill 
becomes law of this province. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I 
rise to speak to this Bill, I would like to indicate to the minister 
that in my consultations with the business community and 
members of my constituency, I find that the desire to have allowed 
in this province soft drink containers and other beverage 
containers in the can form to be very much acceptable. I’m sure 
the business community supports it. I would want to indicate that I 
personally support it, and I have a couple of reasons why I would 
like to see this legislation enacted. I know, number one, it would 
take a lot of burden off of the small-business community. In terms 
of handling containers, glass containers, it’s a bit of a nuisance, 
and I know that the business community would welcome the 
removal of glass containers. I think, as well, the fact that we’re 
losing some sales to other jurisdictions is deemed to be a problem 
by the business community as well. 
 
But I have to indicate, as did my colleague from Regina 
Rosemont, that the minister has allowed some flaws, one of those 
flaws being that the possibility of job loss has not been addressed 
in this Bill. And I would want to say, Mr. Minister, that as 
legislators I think we all would understand we have a 
responsibility to protect people and to protect the jobs of the 
hundreds of people who work in the bottling industry in this 
province. I don’t see any protection in this legislation for them. 
 
The other aspect that I have problems with is the fact that although 
you have spoken about litter control, nothing in Bill 56 can I see 
that will prevent a problem with litter from these containers. And I 
ask, Mr. Minister, what method of recycling have you proposed in 
this Bill? I’ve seen none in here, and you may have some ideas. 
But I have to say, Mr. Minister, that we don’t know what they are. 
And in order to support this kind of legislation I think it’s your 
responsibility to address that issue before we put it to a vote. 
 
And I mentioned before that I didn’t see anything in this Bill that 
would protect the jobs of the people that work in the bottling 
industry. My colleague has already indicated that in my home 
town in Prince Albert one of our major bottlers has been sold to a 
Manitoba company, and I believe it was sold in anticipation of this 
legislation. 
 
And it would be my fear that Prince Albert, who has already . . . 
the community of Prince Albert, that has already been suffering 
under the hands of this administration, will find further pain 
because of job losses from that community. And I say, Mr. 
Minister, if you have any ideas or if you have any way of 
protecting the Saskatchewan people from job loss through this 
legislation, we would like to know what it is. 
 
I would find it hard to endorse legislation that would in fact put 
more and more people out of work. I would think you would 
understand, as I said before, that it’s your responsibility when 
you’re enacting legislation to protect the people in this province. I 
said before that we can understand that the implementing of 
canned beverages in  

this province is widely accepted by the people of the province. 
 
And another issue I would want to say is that I believe it’s safer in 
the North in terms of forest fires and controlling damage through 
that environment. I think we all know what broken glass will do. 
A reflection from sunlight has caused many thousands and 
thousands of jobs and many thousands of dollars worth of damage 
to our forests n the North, and so I see this to be a very positive 
move in that regard. But I say again, Mr. Minister, you haven’t 
addressed the issue of the jobs. 
 
I will be waiting for your remarks and your response to our 
remarks, in anticipation of some kind of answers to the questions 
that we have posed. And as I say again, we have been consulting 
and I’ve been consulting with people of the business community, 
and those are the concerns that they have addressed to me. 
 
And so I will ask, Mr. Minister, that you respond to those two 
issues, and it would make it an awful lot easier for members on 
this side of the House to endorse and support this legislation. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just wanted to 
participate briefly in the debate and indicate that I understand why 
the member from Regina/Riversdale is not with us. But it’s one of 
those where I think the press, I know, will be interested to note 
that the division in the New Democratic Party as to their position 
on this particular Bill, and I intend to watch the member from 
Regina Rosemont with a great deal of interest, as he opposed the 
Bill during his speech, and what he’s going to do in the vote. 
 
(1509) 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 46 
 
Muller Martens 
Duncan Baker 
Andrew Gleim 
Berntson Saxinger 
Lane Britton 
Taylor Blakeney 
Smith Brockelbank 
Swan Shillington 
Muirhead Koskie 
Maxwell Tchorzewski 
Hodgins Rolfes 
Gerich Simard 
Hepworth Solomon 
Hardy Kowalsky 
Klein Anguish 
Meiklejohn Goulet 
Pickering Hagel 
Martin Lyons 
Sauder Calvert 
Johnson Lautermilch 
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

3804 
 

Hopfner Trew 
Petersen Smart 
Swenson Van Mulligen 
 

Nays — 00 
 
The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 
Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 57 — An Act to repeal The Scrap Vehicles Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise this afternoon to move 
second reading of The Scrap Vehicles Repeal Act. 
 
The Scrap Vehicles Repeal Act, which we are considering today, 
will repeal the existing Scrap Vehicles Act of 1973. You will 
recall that on June 8, 1987, I announced that the provincial 
government would phase out the operation recycle program and 
turn it over to the private sector to operate. Repealing The Scrap 
Vehicles Act is required to make these changes possible. 
 
By allowing the private sector to totally run this program, our 
government will be saving about 350,000 of the taxpayers’ money 
annually. At the same time this change will ensure that our 
environment is still protected. The program . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. The noise 
level is so high in the House that the Minister of the Environment 
couldn’t even hear me call for order. I ask all hon. members to 
please allow him to continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The program, which began in 1972, is 
designed to collect old, abandoned automobiles from the 
environment and recycle the metal scrap at Ipsco in Regina. Ipsco 
has indicated that the scrap metal is still needed and the company 
is willing to make arrangements directly with a private contractor 
to bring this scrap to the steel mill. Consequently we see no further 
need for government involvement in this program. 
 
I move second reading for The Scrap Vehicles Repeal Act. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this Act represents the kind of idiotic lack of planning that one has 
come to expect from the members of the government opposite — 
absolutely no forethought, Mr. Speaker, as to what happens if and 
when Ipsco or the private contractors or those, who he says, in the 
private sector are going to look after scrap vehicles, don’t. 
 
(1515) 
 
What this Act does is repeal The Scrap Vehicles Act. It does not 
replace it with anything. And let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, if I 
may, what that means. 
 
The Scrap Vehicle Act sets out in its provisions that it will be the 
provincial government or another body designated by the 
provincial government, such as a municipality, which will have 
control over the disposal of scrap vehicles. With the repeal of this 
Act, nobody, nobody of any level at all, in terms of elected 
officials in this  

province, will have any control as to the disposition of scrap 
vehicles —not a person. 
 
Who does the minister think will then be responsible for looking 
after scrap vehicles, if, in fact, the arrangement between Ipsco and 
the private contractors breaks down? If the private sector finds that 
it’s not profitable for them to take away the scrap vehicles, if the 
private sector finds that maybe this isn’t such a good idea after all 
and they don’t want to be involved in the collection of scrap 
vehicles, who then — who then — becomes responsible for the 
littering of our landscape by rusted-out, old hulks of vehicles? 
 
Is it going to be the municipalities? No, they’re not going to be 
able to take responsibility for that. Is it going to be the provincial 
level of government? No, because there’s no Act, no mandate 
which gives them the right to deal with scrap vehicles. Is it going 
to be the federal government? No, because in order to have the 
federal government involved in some kind of collection process 
like that, there has to be joint co-operation between the federal and 
provincial government. And with the provincial government not 
having a mandate in that area, then the federal government will not 
have the jurisdiction to try to deal with this problem. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, it shows the kind of non-planning — the 
lack of planning, the lack of foresight in terms of dealing with 
problems as they arise. The introduction of The Scrap Vehicles 
Act was caused by the fact that there were no collection of scrap 
vehicles and that at one time it was up to the private sector to try 
and go around and collect them if they saw that, in fact, it was 
profitable for them to do so. 
 
And they didn’t, they didn’t see it was profitable for them to do so, 
so they didn’t collect the scrap vehicles and consequently the 
Government of Saskatchewan, in a forward . . . and I may say that 
it was an NDP government, in a forward-looking move, said that 
the littering of our countryside is not acceptable to the majority of 
citizens in this province and that we’re going to have to deal with 
it, and come in and deal with scrap vehicles and their littering of 
the landscape. 
 
The minister in his statement, failed, failed to answer the 
important question: if the private sector doesn’t deal with it who’s 
going to? And why, and why, if it’s not the provincial 
government, then who? Will the municipalities be then expected 
to deal with it? Will it be the municipalities who will then be 
expected to pick up the costs of taking away the junk cars? 
 
Well you know, Mr. Speaker, I think that that’s precisely what this 
government intends to do. If their so-called . . . allowing the 
private sector to deal with scrap automobiles doesn’t’ work they 
will then turn to the municipalities, put the cost for the collection 
of those scrap vehicles and the onus for their collection on the 
backs of those same municipalities. 
 
Because of this kind of ill-advised, ill-planned, mismanaged piece 
of legislation, Mr. Speaker, I won’t be voting for it. 
 
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

3805 
 

Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and, by 
leave of the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later 
this day. 
 

Bill No. 62 — An Act respecting the Saskatchewan  
Property Management Corporation 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, the Assembly, as you know, 
dealt with the property management corporation in Committee of 
Finance just a few days ago, so I think the discussion is quite . . . 
what took place is familiar to all in the House. So I just want to 
briefly elaborate on the activities and the mandate of the new 
corporation. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I plan to keep my remarks 
brief for this reason. 
 
The legislation before us is required to formalize the corporation 
and ensure its activities are conducted with proper authorities. Mr. 
Speaker, there has been very little change from the former 
Department of Supply and Services. The organization, functions, 
mandate, and operating principles are primarily as they were under 
Supply and Services. The corporation still has the mandate to 
centrally provide accommodation and other required services to 
departments, boards, agencies, and commissions. 
 
The corporation will also have the mandate to provide funding, 
financial and management services for third party construction 
projects. As well, the corporation will provide, upon request from 
third parties, actual design, construction, and delivery services on 
a fee-for-service basis. 
 
The property management corporation, as a centralized provider of 
space and necessary services to government departments and 
agencies, will introduce greater cost efficiency and effectiveness 
than was provided by the Department of Supply and Services. The 
property management corporation will charge for services, 
allowing for increased utility and accountability by departments. 
 
And, after all, Mr. Speaker, as you know, when you pay for 
something rather than getting it free, you watch how much you use 
it and what it costs you. This process was not previously 
happening to the extent we would like to have seen it. 
 
It will permit reduced costs of construction and enhance 
maintenance of facilities. The property experts in the corporation, 
whose job is facility management, will be responsible to make this 
happen. These people are not delivering other government 
programs. They are facility managers, and their accountability is 
therefore also increased. 
 
It will allow for the rationalization of the capital construction 
process by naming the government to pay for the cost of projects 
over the life of the facilities. 
 
It will provide a banker role for third party capital construction. 
This will enhance the ability for increased cost control and third 
party accountability. 
 
It will demonstrate to the public and industry that the  

government is taking a common sense, business-like approach to 
the delivery of government capital projects, space, and services. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure I move second reading 
of The Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation Act. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, it’s long recognized that 
second reading of a Bill is an opportunity to discuss the important 
principles of the Bill so that all members may acquaint themselves 
with what is being proposed. It’s very interesting to note that the 
minister’s comments in support of this Bill are rather threadbare. 
 
We’re in this particular Bill, 62, to create the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation. We’re not dealing with some 
nickel and dime operation, Mr. Speaker; we’re dealing this year, in 
this current year, with a budget of $151 million — $151 million. 
We’re dealing with what this government has done — namely to 
shift $69.8 million of debt out of the Consolidated Fund into the 
property management corporation. So they have the cosmetic 
effect, within the public, that the Consolidated Fund debt is $69.8 
million lower than it actually is. Now the auditor dealt with this 
question at some length in the auditor’s report this year, so it’s 
unnecessary for me to go into it further. 
 
In the proposal of going to the property management corporation, 
some time ago the Minister of Finance in the budget address of 
March 1986, said that this was a necessary move and that it was 
modelled on a number of other jurisdictions, being British 
Columbia, Manitoba and Quebec. And I’m quoting directly from 
the budget address of March, 1986, Mr. Speaker, and it mentions 
Manitoba. 
 
At another time in this House I compared the province of 
Manitoba and how it handles this operation in Manitoba compared 
to the province of Saskatchewan. It happens that the equivalent 
organization with regard to funding in the province of Manitoba is 
the Manitoba Properties Incorporated. And it says that the 
government, through its 100 per cent ownership of Manitoba 
Properties Management Incorporated and Manitoba’s Property 
Leasing Incorporated, has complete control of Manitoba 
Properties Incorporated and the buildings which have been 
transferred to it. 
 
The entire administration of Manitoba Properties Incorporated is 
provided by the government through the Department of Finance. 
So what in effect occurs in the province of Manitoba is merely a 
transaction in Minister of Finance’s office, and it’s not what the 
Government of Saskatchewan proposes to do here in this 
legislation. 
 
If you look at the annual report of the government services 
department in Manitoba, you’ll see what kind of functions are 
carried out in the Department of Government Services, and they 
are as follows: under administration they have finance, budgets, 
personnel, management support system, EMO (Emergency 
Measures Organization), internal audit. Under supply and services, 
Mr. Speaker, they have fleet vehicles — that would be equivalent 
to our central vehicle agency;  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

3806 
 

purchasing — equivalent to our purchasing agency in 
Saskatchewan; material supply, office equipment services — 
equivalent to a similar function in Saskatchewan; 
telecommunications and postal services, equivalent to what was in 
the Department of Supply and Services in Saskatchewan. 
 
Under project services they have such functions as land 
acquisition; design — architect, engineering, interior design; 
project management, project managers, planning, leasing, 
construction, contracts, and project control. 
 
Under property management, Mr. Speaker, they have physical 
plant; they have the four districts of Manitoba; they have grounds, 
life safety and health, property support, security, employee 
housing, contract services, lease properties, and so forth and so on. 
 
All of these functions are there in the annual report of the province 
of Manitoba, government services, for the public to see and 
observe and understand. None of that is provided in the proposal 
that the minister puts forward in this House to create the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, something else that is missing in consideration 
of this particular Bill is the timely provision of information. That’s 
a prerogative of the Legislative Assembly of any province, and 
Saskatchewan is not excluded form this, the provision of timely 
information to the members of the Assembly in order for them to 
understand what the government is doing and examine the 
financial operations as well. 
 
This particular government has not brought forward an annual 
report for the Department of Supply and Services for the province 
of Saskatchewan for 1986-87. There’s no report — no report, and 
the department was still operating. This government has not 
brought forward a report, a Crown corporation report, for the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, which has been 
operating in this period of time. 
 
(1530) 
 
Now the minister said that the first report will be brought forward 
and will deal with a year and one day — a year and . . . oh, pardon 
me, a year and five days of operation of the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation. 
 
But the facts of the matter are that the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation’s year end cut-off is March 31, and 
therefore the report for the last five days in 1986 and the first part 
of 1987 is due and should be tabled in this Assembly if the 
minister means what he says in the Bill, that the year end of the 
corporation is March 31. That information is not before the public. 
It’s not before the public. 
 
The minister did not elaborate on why the enabling order in 
council could not accommodate that which was necessary to 
accommodate. It appears to me, Mr. Speaker, that there is an 
unusual haste to begin this particular operation, so much so that 
the government brought in an order in council which the property  

management has existed under since 1986. It appears that that 
order in council does not satisfy the government as to the powers 
that are required for the property management corporation. 
 
And the question arises in my mind, why did it take this 
government so long to bring forward Bill No. 62 which creates, by 
legislative basis, the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation? Well I suspect the government was mapping out its 
plan, and I think that these actions, Mr. Speaker, dovetail with one 
of the professed goals of this government, is privatization. 
 
Now it would appear to me, Mr. Speaker, this government has said 
some time ago that they didn’t want to create Crown corporations; 
they wanted to get rid of them. Well I believe it is convenient for 
this government to create Crown corporations, at the same time to 
pursue their goal to get rid of Crown corporations. We’ve seen that 
in a number of instances up to this point, and I suspect when this 
legislature concludes its business we will see some more moves in 
this area to privatize Crown corporations. 
 
What are the powers that are attributed to this particular Crown 
corporation by Bill 62 which were not present and evident in the 
Saskatchewan Supply and Services department. Well there’s a 
number of things. The Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation can create its own corporations to perhaps facilitate 
the sale of parcels of land or contracting out. It has borrowing 
powers for the corporation which are very extensive, very 
extensive, Mr. Speaker. They may sell bonds, they may raise 
funds, they can sell these bonds anywhere in the world, Mr. 
Speaker. The Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 
may charge rent for all other services. 
 
There’s a function in the Bill to provide borrowing for the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation — this will 
allow all public institutions, as long as the obligations to repay is 
not conditional upon the payment by the Crown. The 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation may act 
somewhat as a bank. Transfers of Crown interests and rights — 
the minister didn’t say anything at all about that particular section 
of the Bill, and I’ll certainly have some questions for him in the 
committee on this particular Bill. 
 
These expansive powers to incorporate, to borrow, to lend, to sell 
shares, to expropriate, to transfer Crown interests and rights are a 
great expansion of the powers that was available to this 
government under the Saskatchewan Department of Supply and 
Services, which the province of Manitoba, the minister cites as an 
example, retains in, within the government as a government 
department. But here the minister says it must be a Crown 
corporation. 
 
We suspect, Mr. Speaker, that what the government will do is to 
pursue its goal of hiding from the public many of its transactions 
in this area which deals with a lot of money and a lot of property, 
over $150 million in this year. A good example of that, Mr. 
Speaker, was the recent disclosure of the government upon 
questioning in estimates, and at that time it was disclosed that the  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

3807 
 

property management corporation has increased the cabinet office 
size in Saskatoon by 50 per cent. They’ve ceased advertising that 
they’ve got a cabinet office there. They’ve ceased telling the 
public that the minister of property management corporation or the 
Minister of Finance or the Deputy Premier will be in Saskatoon, 
but they need a 50 per cent larger office to do that in. At the same 
time this government is telling the people over and over again that 
tough times are before us and everybody has to sacrifice, except 
the Premier and the cabinet office. 
 
So as you can see, Mr. Speaker, the principle of the Bill and what 
will be accomplished by this particular Bill were not dealt with 
very extensively by the minister in his presentation. That is 
unfortunate, but that is not unusual because the minister has been 
very hesitant to bring forward information of any kind about the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. He continues to 
not make information available to the opposition, and thereby to 
the public. 
 
And obviously, Mr. Speaker, when the time comes we will oppose 
the imposition of this Bill and the consequential Act on the people 
of Saskatchewan because we think it contributes toward secret 
government, it contributes towards more power for the 
government in a Crown corporation, and we know not at this time 
what the ultimate effect of this Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation will be as regards privatization. 
 
And until such time as the minister provides suitable explanations, 
we are going to have to oppose this legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 
referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 77 — An Act to amend The Power Corporation  
Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to speak to the 
amendment to The Power Corporation Act, and more specifically, 
the intentions and the benefits that will arise from the amendments 
proposed. 
 
The first point I would like to address is the adoption of the 
abbreviated name, Sask Power, to legally represent the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation. The name Sask Power has been 
generally applied by the people of the province for a number of 
years and was taken and was the most commonly used form of 
reference in a survey undertaken a few years ago. We are therefore 
proposing that this name be adopted as legally meaning the full 
name of the corporation. 
 
The next few points I would like to address, Mr. Speaker, are in 
reference to section 8; the amendments deal with the powers of the 
corporation. 
 
We are asking that the corporation be granted the authority to 
purchase electricity for use when required. Currently the 
corporation only has authority to sell electricity, necessitating 
cumbersome arrangements to obtain electricity when urgent need 
arises. This  

amendment will help streamline business operations for the 
corporation and will assist in guaranteeing electricity for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Another amendment, Mr. Speaker, deals with the limitations 
placed on the corporation’s ability to react to unforeseen 
circumstances. We are proposing that the corporation be given the 
ability to react to certain circumstances such as technological 
breakthroughs or changes in the way that the business community 
conducts its transactions. Unforeseen circumstances such as these 
could affect the corporation’s operation in a major way, Mr. 
Speaker, and we feel that the corporation needs that flexibility to 
react. 
 
We are also proposing that the corporation be responsible for 
setting various rates pertinent to their operation, subject to the 
approval of the Lieutenant Government in Council. 
 
Continuing, Mr. Speaker, we are proposing a new subsection 
which will give Sask Power the authority to perform gas and 
electrical inspections presently carried out by the Department of 
Environment and Public Safety. A Bill to change this 
responsibility . . . change the responsibility for this inspection 
process has already been tabled or introduced by my colleague, the 
Minister of Environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are also proposing that Sask Power be given 
authority to arrange financing with a lending agency rather than 
requiring the vendor to be responsible for the guarantor’s 
arrangements as is now the case under current legislation. This 
change will simplify the purchasing transactions undertaken by the 
corporation which require financing, thus saving time and money 
in the day to day operations of their business. 
 
The next point I would like to speak to, Mr. Speaker, in this 
amendment, has specific . . . pardon me, is in reference to section 
6. This amendment has no specific intention other than to bring 
the corporation’s Act up to date with that of other corporations. 
This change, Mr. Speaker, will allow Sask Power to operate like 
any other business in the community and should help the 
corporation realize its potential. 
 
Section 9 deals with the subject of surcharges. In the amendment 
for this section, we are suggesting that an exemption be granted 
for industries when requested by the industry from cabinet. This 
would include such companies as Saskatoon Chemicals and Ipsco, 
which will be specifically mentioned in this legislation, and other 
similar industries as may come up from time to time. 
 
And this legislation, or this particular part of the legislation, has 
been around for a long time, and there’s already been some 
discussion between the players, the cities, and the Leader of the 
Opposition and myself in a previous legislature. 
 
This exemption would allow the industries to deal directly with 
the municipalities for taxation. The flexibility would assist in 
stimulating industry in the municipalities and would encourage 
expansion, development, and job creation in a fashion similar to 
the  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

3808 
 

expansion undertaken by Inland Cement Limited as a result of the 
gas deregulation. 
 
The next amendment I speak to, Mr. Speaker, falls under section 
10. As a result of deregulation in the gas system, Sask Power has 
undertaken the responsibility of transporting natural gas, as well as 
distribution and sales. This added responsibility needs to be 
recognized through legislation, and the conditions of operation 
need to be clarified. 
 
Continuing, Mr. Speaker, the following section you will find that 
we are proposing legislation be changed to allow Sask Power to 
take advantage of longer terms on borrowing. Current legislation 
has restrictions on time which have eliminated the opportunity use 
long-term money at preferred rates. We are suggesting that this 
change would help the corporation relieve some of its current 
financing burden and help to build a stronger financial base form 
which it can operate. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, to those amendments, there are two new 
sections. The first new section deals with a redefining of the term 
"energy" which will be left restrictive in reference to the 
corporation’s operations; the second deals with a situation already 
recognized by SaskTel as being in need of specific legislation, that 
of underground distribution lines — in Sask Power’s case, both for 
electrical and gas. I won’t go into detail on those two points; 
perhaps they’re best dealt with in committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, suffice it to say that this legislation is based on the 
legislation passed by SaskTel under section 45 of The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act, and that it outlines 
specific responsibilities of the parties involved. 
 
I would like to conclude my remarks on the amendments to The 
Power Corporation Act by saying that the changes already 
mentioned, along with some of the more basic housekeeping 
changes which I did not mention, are intended to assist Sask 
Power in becoming a more efficient and more viable Crown 
corporation. These changes will help the corporation to conduct 
their business with the people of Saskatchewan in a better and a 
more efficient way, and to continue the quality of service that has 
been given in the past. Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of a 
Bill to amend The Sask Power Corporation Act. 
 
(1545) 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Bill 77 is 
a very important piece of legislation. It’s a fairly major piece of 
legislation, and I must say that I am rather surprised that a 
government who complains about the length of the session would 
bring in a Bill of this nature at such a late date. 
 
The copies of this legislation were available for MLAs for the first 
time on Saturday and, I must say, that for a government that wants 
to expedite matters in this legislature and move quickly on things, 
for them to have mismanaged this House in such a fashion that 
this legislation is not forthcoming until now says something about 
the way they run their operations. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — In taking a look at this legislation, Mr. Speaker, 
which is entitled The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 1987, I 
would like to point out that this is a misnomer for this particular 
Bill, Mr. Speaker. I think we should rename it as "The 
Weyerhaeuser Welfare Bill." 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, what this legislation does is, it says 
that large users of electrical energy will no longer have to pay the 
5 per cent or 10 per cent tax on the electrical bills, which 
amounted to a payment to the municipalities as a grant in lieu of 
taxes. It was, in effect, the government’s way of compensating for 
facilities, for the use of facilities. 
 
And what this piece of legislation says, Mr. Speaker, is that 
Weyerhaeuser, for example, will no longer have to pay that 5 or 
10 per cent. And I say that’s a very substantial give-away to the 
Weyerhaeuser corporation, and it’s a further erosion of the tax 
base for municipalities, a further erosion of the tax base. 
 
And I will be very interested in seeing, Mr. Speaker, whether or 
not agreements will, in effect, be made between the government 
and the municipalities to compensate them for any loss of revenue 
that this may mean to the municipalities. And I will also want to 
know just what it means in terms of lost revenue for 
municipalities; I will want to know what it means in terms of lost 
revenue. 
 
But earlier on in the fiscal year there was quite a flurry because the 
president of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, Mr. George 
Hill, had indicated that Saskatchewan Power Corporation may be 
doing away with grants in lieu of taxes, or made statements that 
created this impression in people’s minds, Mr. Speaker. And there 
was quite a flurry over that. 
 
And in Crown corporations I asked the minister whether this was 
going to happen; and the minister told me that, not in the 
foreseeable future. But what is happening, what is happening now 
is they’re attempting to come in through the back door, Mr. 
Speaker, by giving a corporation like Weyerhaeuser a relief from 
this particular section. 
 
And in terms of dollars and cents, there hasn’t been time for us to 
calculate it, but I will be asking the minister in Committee of the 
Whole what this means to municipalities, and I will expect him to 
have the figures available at that time. 
 
There are a number of other provisions in the Bill that causes us 
some concern, and we will certainly want to look into it further. 
For example, the borrowing power of the corporation is increased 
from 3.5 billion to $5 billion, Mr. Speaker. And this is the 
corporation that already has a $2.5 billion deficit — a deficit that 
jumped some 104 per cent, 1.1 billion, I believe, to 2.5 billion, 
from ’81 to 1986. And so we will want to know why they are 
increasing the amount that they’re going to borrow, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ll be asking questions to that effect. 
 
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

3809 
 

They’ve also given themselves the power to borrow, or given the 
corporation the power to borrow, over an unlimited period, an 
indefinite period. There had been a limitation of 30 years before. 
Now the minister has said that that will open up different avenues, 
and there’ll be more flexibility in borrowing. I would like to point 
out that that will also allow them to amortize the debt over a much 
more substantial period of time, which will make their books look 
a little better for the time being. 
 
There are a number of other problems, Mr. Speaker, that I have 
with this Bill, but because of the short period of time under which 
we’ve had to look at, I’m going to beg leave to adjourn debate so 
that we can look into these matters further. I’d like to move to 
adjourn the debate, please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 53 — An Act to amend The Uniform Building and 
Accessibility Standards Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, The Uniform Building and 
Accessibility Standards Act was given Royal Assent in 1984 and 
provided for the adoption and enforcement of standards for 
building construction in this province. It provided for the 
administration of these standards through local authorities who 
were given powers to appoint building inspectors, and for a 
number of other related matters. 
 
During the development of the regulations for this Act a number 
of deficiencies in the Act came to light. The most notable was that 
the Act did not provide the proper authority for the writing of 
regulations as was intended. Furthermore, if regulations had been 
written without the needed amendments to the Act, they would 
have been of limited scope. This Bill, therefore, provides the 
proper authority for the writing of regulations and the needed 
scope for all fields of building construction. 
 
Relating to the development of the regulations, a large number of 
interest groups including the Saskatchewan Association of 
Architects were contacted. From these consultations the 
regulations have moved to the point where they will soon be 
considered by government committees. 
 
This Bill also provides for the inclusion of the operations of repair, 
renovation, demolition, relocation, removal, and change in 
occupancy in the accessibility standards. These are fields of 
operation covered by the national building code of Canada which 
we are adopting provincially and which is in use across the 
country and in nearly all medium to large centres in this province. 
 
Change of occupancy is a term used and defined in the national 
building code. Occupancies are divided into distinct categories 
ranging from assembling occupancies such as schools, to 
industrial occupancies. An example of change of occupancy is the 
conversion of a warehouse to an apartment building, which would 
be a change from the industrial to the residential category. 
 

The Bill further permits the exemption of certain buildings, or 
classes of buildings, by regulation, to allow for special cases 
which may develop and which cannot be foreseen at this time. 
Flexibility in this area is needed to avoid placing any undue 
hardship upon the public. 
 
The Bill also clarifies and delineates the powers of a building 
inspector to write orders requiring compliance with the building 
regulations. As well, it clarifies the responsibilities of an owner 
regarding compliance with such written orders, together with his 
obligation to provide the needed building plans and material test 
results where appropriate. Authorization is also now provided for 
building inspectors to order the elimination of an unsafe condition 
in a building or a safety hazard that develops. 
 
Much of the material in this Bill was originally intended to be 
replaced in the regulations, but a decision was made by this 
government for its inclusion in the Act to ensure more appropriate 
limitation of powers by regulation. 
 
Other amendments contained in this Bill are primarily 
housekeeping matters. Much of the material embodied in this Bill 
is now covered by local building by-laws that will be repealed 
when this Bill comes into force. 
 
Furthermore, not all local authorities have building regulations in 
place, and provincial building regulations are needed to protect the 
interests of the public in the design, construction, and the materials 
used in buildings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in 
somewhat of a perplexed state in terms of dealing with this Bill — 
in terms of dealing with this Bill. 
 
Despite the Minister of Education’s constant chirping from the 
back of the hall over there, the matters that the Minister of 
Environment is raising are some serious matters when it deals to 
accessibility to buildings for those who need those accessibility 
requirements — those handicapped people who for so long in our 
society have been denied accessibility to a whole wide range of 
buildings. 
 
As the handicap organizations throughout this province have said 
time and time again, there is a need. There is a need for 
government leadership in this area that will force the builders of 
classes of building, to use the language of the Bill itself, to force 
those owners and constructors to comply with what are reasonable 
requirements for access to those buildings by handicapped, by 
those who are confined to chairs or other ambulatory devices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am not — given this government’s record, given 
this government’s lack of progress, given this government’s 
refusal to deal with questions such as accessibility and given this 
government’s record on plain, straight and narrow human rights 
— I don’t know precisely what to make of this Bill. Because it’s 
an enabling piece of legislation, those things which will affect the 
everyday life of people who come under the jurisdiction of this 
Bill, those things will be contained in the regulations. 
 
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

3810 
 

Mr. Speaker, I’m not ready to give carte blanche or write a blank 
cheque to the Minister of Environment on this Bill until we see the 
regulations that he has promulgated in respect to this Bill. And 
when it comes to a clause-by-clause reading of this Bill in the 
committee of the House, I expect the minister to grant the courtesy 
to this House to put forward those regulations which are already 
prepared. Because those regulations, Mr. Speaker, are the heart of 
the matter. Those regulations will determine whether those with 
handicaps in our province have, in reality, a new vehicle for 
accessibility to those buildings for which they have, for so long, 
demanded. 
 
Until, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is dealt with by committee and until 
those regulations are presented to this House, I have no further 
items to comment. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this day. 
 
(1600) 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 51 — An Act to Provide for the Imposition of Taxes 
on and the Collection of Taxes from Certain Purchasers of 

Certain Fuels and to Provide for Rebates of 
Taxes to Certain Purchasers 

 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I have with me, Mr. Chairman, Jack Vicq, 
acting deputy minister of Finance, Len Rog, executive director, 
revenue division, and Doug Lambert, director of fuel tax, 
Department of Finance. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m pleased once 
again to have an opportunity talk about the most ludicrous tax 
that’s been placed on the people of this province since the 
inception of Saskatchewan in 1905 as a province. 
 
We see here, Mr. Chairman, this gas tax, Bill 51 — An Act to 
provide for the imposition of Taxes on and the Collection of Taxes 
from Certain Purchasers of Certain Fuels and to Provide for 
Rebates of Taxes to Certain Purchasers. It’s a gas tax. It’s a tax, 
Mr. Chairman, that the Premier indicated very clearly in May of 
1982 that as long as there was a Conservative government in this 
province that they would never reimpose this gas tax. 
 
They went around the province and they said that the gas tax is 
totally unfair and we will never have a gas tax in this province 
again. Well there’s a new definition of "never." Never is never, 
never is now — four short years later. That’s the definition of the 
conservative’s word "never." And what we have seen, Mr. 
Chairman, is not only a laying on of tax of 6, 7 cents a litre, but in 
fact we see it as an increase. It used to be 6 cents a litre, 28 cents a 
gallon; the Conservatives have jacked it up from 6 cents to 7 cents 
a litre or 32 cents a gallon. 
 
And it wouldn’t be so bad, Mr. Chairman, if the revenues that 
were earned from this tax were used to inject money  

into our economy, to provide for a decent drug plan, to provide for 
a dental plan which helped young people in this province, or 
indeed, even made some efforts to use that money to create jobs so 
people could work and could afford to pay taxes that this 
government has increased. 
 
It’s also part of the largest tax grab in the history of this province, 
along with the E&H tax — a 40 per cent increase from 5 per cent 
to 7 per cent. We see an increase in the flat tax which in total is a 
28 per cent increase in personal income tax. But when you look at 
that, Mr. Chairman, we have seen since 1982 in the personal 
income tax range, not an increase of 28 per cent, but an increase of 
47 per cent of personal income taxes just on the personal and flat 
income tax rate alone — 47 per cent increase. 
 
On top of this big tax grab in this budget, Mr. Chairman, we see a 
major increase in tobacco tax, a major increase in the corporation 
capital tax, and other hidden taxes. A total of $300 per person, 
$1,000 per family of our; that’s about $250 per person of tax 
increase at the provincial level in this budget alone. That’s $1,000 
this year alone in tax increases for a family of four living in this 
province. 
 
And I don’t think the people of this province would be as wildly 
upset about that as they are, if that money was used for 
constructive purposes — for creating jobs, for providing decent 
health care services in this province. What we’ve seen this 
government do is squander the money that the people of this 
province have contributed to the treasury. They have mismanaged 
our economy. We have the fastest growing debt in North America, 
the fastest growing deficit in North America. 
 
This is the legacy the Conservatives leave, along with their new 
definition of the word "never" to reimpose the gas tax on the 
people of this province. 
 
We have seen all the rhetoric. We’ve seen the rhetoric from the 
Conservatives saying they will do away with patronage. But what 
we’ve seen from this government is a patronage system that is 
second to none. We have seen friends of the Conservative Party 
and members of the Conservative Party digging deep in that 
delicious pork-barrel of patronage. And what we have seen, Mr. 
Chairman, is the people of this province paying for this patronage, 
this incompetence, this mismanagement. 
 
They promised fiscal responsibility. We have seen the most 
irresponsible government with respect to finances in Canada. 
They’ve gone on, Mr. Chairman, and they’ve promised all these 
wonderful things. They’ve promised — and you will recall this — 
conservatives throughout the land have promised that we will cut 
through this bureaucratic red tape nightmare of government and 
ensure that small businesses and ensure that individuals have less 
red tape when they deal with this government. 
 
And this Bill 51, with the consequential Bill 52, Mr. Chairman, 
provides the most phenomenal growth in red tape that any 
government has laid on the backs of taxpayers in this country. Six 
hundred and forty-one thousand licensed vehicle operators in this 
province will generate on average, if they purchase gas once a 
week, 34 million gas receipts — 34 million gas receipts. The red  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

3811 
 

tape of including 641,000 more individuals in this government 
bureaucratic nightmare is just incredible. This is a government of 
efficiency; this is a government that they believe that they’re 
efficient; they believe they do away with red tape. 
 
Whatever they promise, Mr. Chairman, they totally disregard. And 
I think the people of this province have had enough. I think they’re 
fed up with regards to this government’s failed commitments, the 
double-crosses on the people of this province. 
 
We have seen as well, Mr. Chairman, an indecent move by this 
government with respect to the gas tax by applying taxes, extra 
taxes, to taxpayers as well through school board, increased costs 
for buses, transportation. We have seen as well a passing on of a 
tax increase through this system to residents in urban centres that 
have urban transportation facilities. 
 
And we have seen, I think, an unfair request of this government 
through this Bill, to the people of this province, that they want the 
taxpayers to carry $100 million in debt up front so that the 
government can get interest free, $100 million, approximately, this 
year alone. And who’s going to pay for this? Well ultimately the 
taxpayer of this province pays for this incompetent move. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And they’re taking money and paying no 
interest. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — They take money from the taxpayers of this 
province, $100 million . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Use it. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — . . . use it for their purposes of patronage and 
mismanagement and all sorts of other things that are questionable, 
and they hand the bill to the taxpayers. I think that’s an indecent 
form of government — very indecent. 
 
Mr. Chairman, what we have here is a very unfair tax, one that is 
wide open to abuse. Anybody that has had any kind of experience 
with gas tax receipts will tell you that this is one of the most 
loosely run programs, that gas receipts are floating around this 
province. There’s no planning on the part of the government. 
 
We’ve had comments from propane operators and gas station 
operators and small-business people that deal with this tax that 
would burn the ears of the government. They are disgusted with 
the way this red tape nightmare has been forced upon them. 
 
And I could go on, Mr. Chairman, for a long time about what this 
government has done, but I want to ask a few questions of this 
government; I’ve got 40 or 50, and I’m sure that they’re anxious to 
stand up . . . the minister’s anxious to stand up in this House and 
deny the fact that this Tory government has been the authors of the 
most expensive patronage system in this country. 
 
I know he wants to get up and say that, no, no, this is not a 
massive bureaucratic red tape nightmare. I know he  

wants to say that, and I’m interested to know what his explanation 
is that, no, 641,000 licensed vehicle operators who will generate 
34 or 35 million gas receipts over this fiscal year is not a 
bureaucratic nightmare. I want to get him on record on that. 
 
And I want to know as well what some of the costs involved are, 
so perhaps I’ll start by giving the Minister of Finance an 
opportunity to explain to the people of this province whose idea 
was this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP have repeated the 
arguments several times, and unfortunately all I can do is repeat 
what I have said probably 25 times in this session since June, 
except that I will bring some new information to the hon. 
members’ attention, and that is if the NDP gas tax had of remained 
on over the last five or six years, it would be up to 8.3 cents per 
litre, Mr. Chairman, or 37.7 cents per gallon. 
 
Secondly, if the NDP’s sliding scale gas tax had of remained in, it 
would be 11.6 cents per litre on diesel or 52.7 cents per gallon, Mr. 
Chairman. So the hon. members seem to want to forget that. The 
hon. members seem to want to forget that they didn’t have just a 
gasoline tax, Mr. Speaker, they had one that went up, a sliding, 
ever-increasing gasoline tax. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the hon. member doesn’t listen, as we’ve indicated, 
how the process will work. The process will work that people will 
be getting a form early in the new year, and they will be . . . the 
form will have a deadline on it whereby the public can submit 
their gasoline receipts. And I’ve indicated that that deadline will 
give people ample opportunity to be able to get their receipts in. 
The only reason for the deadline is we want to be able to use 
summer students, that we would normally be using anyway, Mr. 
Speaker, during the course of the summer, to process the claims. 
 
For some reason the hon. members don’t like the concept, Mr. 
Speaker. I would like to see the hon. members, if they were fully 
committed to opposing the gas tax rebate, to stand up in their place 
and say, I undertake, Mr. Minister of Finance, not to submit an 
application for a rebate. If you’re really, really sincere, really 
sincere in opposing the rebate because you think it’s too much 
bureaucracy, I would suggest that the NDP put their money where 
their mouth is. 
 
And I know as well, Mr. Speaker, that if they don’t stand up in the 
House and say that, that the public will expect me, Mr. Speaker, 
the public will expect me to report back as to how many NDP 
have applied for the gas tax rebate. I hope that they’re going to 
give me permission to do that, Mr. Speaker, because we will find 
out how sincere the NDP really are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the . . . yes, there is a rebate. But the hon. member 
again didn’t listen to what I said the other night. He has taken two 
positions. He said, one, we’re not taxing business high enough. 
And then he objects to the gas tax with a rebate because it’s 
business that primarily pays that tax. So he can’t have it both 
ways. Then the other night he says, but you’re taxing business 
with your corporate capital tax, and of course your corporation tax 
is too high  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

3812 
 

because business is just going to pass it back to the consumer. 
 
That’s exactly what the member from Regina North West said. So 
on the one hand, on the one hand he says, don’t tax business 
because they’re going to pass it on to the consumer. On the other 
hand he says, you’re not taxing business high enough, and you’re 
putting too much tax on the individuals. Now that’s the conflicting 
position that the hon. member has taken. 
 
Having said that, I’ve indicated how the process will work. We 
estimate the cost of recovery will be in the range of about $2 
million, and we have indicated that before. And again, it’s quite 
easy to pull out from the process those that are above what the 
average rate would be for someone using a vehicle for personal 
use. So I suggest to the hon. member that it’s not anywhere near as 
difficult as the hon. members have indicated, and we’re quite 
confident that it will be done over the course of the summer, as 
we’ve said since June 17. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well it seems, Mr. Chairman, that when the 
Minister of Finance has nothing to say, he misinterprets remarks 
of the members of the opposition. 
 
The minister has a very serious credibility problem. This same 
minister is the one who signed a personal guarantee that said, 
when we become the Conservative government, we will do away 
with the prescription drug plan deterrent fees. He didn’t probably 
read it or remember it, but what he’s done, he’s done away with 
the whole program. He’s privatized it. That’s credibility? 
 
He’s a member of the same government that promised in 1982 to 
never reimpose the gas tax. That’s credibility? And what do we 
see here? The new definition of the word "never." Four years — 
that’s the new definition of never. 
 
He’s a member of the same government who promised to do away 
with the E&H tax — do away, to eliminate. What does that mean? 
Increased 40 per cent, from 5 per cent to 7 per cent. 
 
He’s a member of this government who made a commitment to 
cut personal income taxes by 10 per cent. What do we have now in 
Saskatchewan in the last five years? We have a personal income 
tax of 47 per cent increase from 1982 — 47 per cent more taxes 
are collected from individuals in this province than before 1982. 
That’s credibility? That’s garbage. The guy’s full of garbage when 
he’s talking about credibility. I can’t believe this. Then he expects 
people to believe anything that he says. 
 
I don’t know if I believe the $2 million figure. I don’t know what 
he’s going to say when I ask him the next question. Is it going to 
be relevant to the truth? But I’d like to ask him, Mr. Chairman, 
could he please break down the $2 million for us, and what he’s 
going to spend it on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I’ve indicated what we estimate the cost 
will be. Obviously we’re going to be hiring summer students, and 
we look upon that being the  

biggest cost. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Can you please give us a breakdown of how 
much you’re going to spend on labour, how much you’re going to 
spend on additional bureaucratic red tape like paper and files and 
all that sort of thing, office expenses? Could you also give us an 
indication as to what your postage cost is going to be? And can 
you give us an indication of how many students you’re going to 
hire, for what duration? And I’ve got other questions I’ll ask you, 
if you can answer any of those. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We estimate roughly 500,000 in terms of 
paper, postage, systems development, and the balance would be in 
salaries. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Can you give us a breakdown on the number of 
people you’re going to hire, for what duration, and at what rate, 
roughly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well obviously this is next year’s budget. The 
hon. member doesn’t understand this . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . No, it’s not. It is not. The hon. member knows full well that the 
cost of the program going to next year’s budget, the rebates, after 
April of next year. Now surely that doesn’t take a genius, 
obviously — I know there’s none over there — to figure that out. 
 
But having said that to the hon. member, we’ve given you the 
estimate. One of the things that we are considering, an option we 
are considering, is a proposal to the private sector — and I know 
you don’t like privatization — to manage and deliver the program. 
So that proposal could be going out if we make the decision to go 
with the private sector for delivery of the program. 
 
An Hon. Member: — So you don’t know what the cost is going 
to be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ve given you what the estimate of the 
program is. Now you’ve . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order! Order. Order. Order. I’d ask members, 
if they have questions . . . everyone can enter the debate. I would 
ask them to stand and be recognized, so they ask their questions 
and so they’re recorded. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ve asked . . . I’ve indicated to the hon. 
member on several occasions already what we estimate the cost of 
the administration of the program will be, and I’ve given you that. 
You can dispute those; you can argue those till you’re blue in the 
face. The fact is, those are the estimates that we have, and we 
expect to meet the objectives. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, this is another 
clear indication of the total lack of planning that this government 
has, the total inefficiency with respect to taxpayers’ money and 
programs and services which affect the people of this province. 
We want some answers on this side of the House, Mr. Minister. 
 
Can you please give us what you can plan at this moment, or at 
least try and sell to the people of this province? What is the plan? 
Can you take us through the scenario of when the applications can 
be received; who is going to be  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

3813 
 

doing all this; whether it’s going to be government or whether 
you’re going to have D-Mail do it, or Dome Advertising, or one of 
your other political operations; and what the costs are going to be? 
You must have some idea of the process. I’d like to have some 
answers with respect to that process, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And I’ve now repeated it now for the seventh 
time. I have indicated on seven different occasions that 
applications will be going out in the new year to the people of 
Saskatchewan. The application form will encourage them to 
include their receipts with the requisite information on it. Once 
those are in, by a determined time, then we will have summer 
students begin to process the applications, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That summer-time is a time of the year, the hon. members may not 
know, often the sun is shining and it’s warm. And if you’re 
specifically asking me when summer-time is, I think your 
questions . . . You’re not listening to the answers to the hon. 
member. And during the course of the summer we will have the 
summer students process and get the rebates out to the people of 
the province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Will you do it, or the private sector? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Now the hon. member from Regina North 
East asks, are we going to do it or is the private sector going to do 
it. We are considering the option of the private sector doing it. The 
private sector proposal would include the use of summer students 
doing it over the course of the summer. And we haven’t decided 
whether or not we’re going to do it in-house or with the private 
sector. Now you may object to the private sector, but we are 
considering the option. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — What we’re hearing here is absolutely amazing. 
We hear a minister who’s trying to put this Bill through the House 
with respect to the fuel tax increase, and he doesn’t have a grip on 
how the program is going to work. Does the minister understand 
what he’s saying? 
 
If he says he’s going to privatize it, to whom in the private sector 
are you going to give the names and addresses and all the other 
pertinent information from the health services cards so they can 
check against those that are there? So you’re now going to be 
turning confidential government statistics and information, which 
has been confidential since it’s been accumulated, to a private 
sector corporation. how do you explain that one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That’s one of the areas that is of some 
concern as to whether we use the private sector. No, no, but there 
is an option to deal with that, and that option is whether the 
application form for the rebate will include a waiver of the 
pertinent information for the purposes of the fuel rebate, so the 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The hon. member says you can’t do 
that. The fact is you can waive the information and the right to 
access the information. So you ask how it can be done? That’s 
precisely how it can be done. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, this is becoming more incredible as the 
story unfolds. The minister is standing up here designing a 
program off the top of his head, like he designed the budget. It’s 
the same process. Grab some  

figures here, throw them in there, grab some figures from over 
there and plug them in another spot. And who cares if they 
balance, or who cares if he’s within $848 million of his 
projection? If he’s that far off on this one, there’s going to be some 
very serious financial implications to respond to. 
 
But I want to ask the minister. You’re talking about transferring 
this program now to the private sector. The private sector is going 
to have information on each of the 641,000 licensed vehicle 
operators, if they all happen to apply, with all kinds of tracking 
information with respect to where they buy their gas, when they 
buy their gas, and they’re going to have access to a confidential 
list of health services plan. 
 
Which is it? Is there going to be a program that people can have 
confidence in, or is it another one of your instant programs that has 
not been thought out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well again the hon. member doesn’t 
understand that all that the health services file is to confirm the 
name, address, and whether they’re a Saskatchewan resident. 
Okay? So that’s the only relationship with the health services file. 
 
So you ask whether or not the private sector can do it in 
confidentiality. We foresee no difficulty on that in that whoever is 
successful, if that’s the way we go, would obviously have to 
maintain what limited confidentiality there is, although we don’t 
see it as a particularly big problem. 
 
And to argue that the private sector can’t keep confidences . . . 
Obviously doctors out in the private sector and many others do. So 
to argue that there is any great difficulty with that proposal; again I 
think the hon. member is not listening. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well I’m listening, and I’m shocked at what 
you’re saying with respect to how this program’s being 
administered. How can you make available a confidential list that 
is controlled by the Government of Saskatchewan? Under what 
regulation and law can you do this? And how often have you done 
this in the past? I want to know to whom you’ve given those lists 
already. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Understand that the information being 
requested is the name and the address. And we want to make sure 
as well that the rebate is going to Saskatchewan people; it’s not 
designed for people out of province. And that information, I 
suggest to the hon. member, I think that most people applying for 
the rebate would have no difficulty accepting that there should be 
a confirmation that the individual is a Saskatchewan resident and 
that they are eligible to get the rebate. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well the problem I’ve got, Minister, is: who is 
going to have access to this list? If it’s going to be a private 
company — I’m sure there are companies and organizations in 
this country that would pay handsomely to have . . . especially in 
the auto parts after-market, to pay handsomely for a list of 641,000 
licensed vehicle operators, with their addresses. I think that would 
be a delicious list to get if you were in that kind of business, and 
people would pay very, very high prices for that. 
 
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

3814 
 

And so I want to know what the minister is getting at — please to 
tell us whether this has been the practice of the government to date 
with other programs. If so, I’d like to know where and to whom 
these lists were given and provided; and if not, please tell us as 
well. I’d like to know the answer to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well if the hon. member is saying that the 
public will not want to give that information — and remember the 
information that we’ve indicated, which is name and address — if 
they’re not prepared to give that to prove that they are a 
Saskatchewan resident eligible for the tax, I’m frankly very 
surprised. 
 
It’s very interesting that it’s all right for the public to have to give 
that waiver to access that information if they want the mortgage 
interest protection plan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — To the government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well if they want to get a mortgage interest 
protection plan. And . . . well they have to access that information. 
 
(1630) 
 
And so I suggest to the hon. member, and if now you’re arguing 
that it’s all right to administer it within government but it 
shouldn’t be done in the private sector, again, again we suggest 
that — I have one — I have little doubt that those applying for the 
rebate will be quite prepared to identify their name, address, and 
residency, and, secondly, it’s quite easy to obtain the 
confidentiality on those processing the forms. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well I don’t think people who are applying for 
the rebate would be concerned about waivering that information to 
a government agency that is protected by statute in terms of that 
information which is private and confidential. 
 
The problem we have here is there may be some concerns, and I 
certainly would be concerned as an individual, about that kind of 
information getting out — 641,000 licensed vehicle operators and 
their addresses — to companies that we’re not sure what they’re 
all about. There’s no legal protection there. And I think what 
you’re doing here, if you’re now making this up that they’re going 
to have to sign a waiver, that the people that apply for these 
rebates sign a waiver to have that information provided to this 
private company. You’re discouraging . . . Again putting another 
road-block and discouragement in front of people so they won’t 
apply for these rebates, because there’ll be some who don’t want 
that information made public. 
 
I think it’s scurrilous to provide that kind of information, the 
health services plan information, to a private organization or 
company unless there’s some valid reason. And I’d like to know 
why you would want to do that. Is there a problem with dealing 
with it from a government point of view, or is there some other 
reason we’re not aware of? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — All that the applicant for the rebate will  

have to do is that they have to declare that they are a 
Saskatchewan resident eligible for the rebate, as they do under 
MIRP (mortgage interest reduction program), and that the 
government or whomever can verify that they are, in fact, 
Saskatchewan residents on a . . . and the release of the information 
for that purpose. 
 
So I would indicate to the hon. member, I doubt very much 
whether any one applying for the rebate would have any objection 
to a confirmation as to whether they’re a Saskatchewan resident 
and eligible for the rebate. And that’s all it does. And as I say, we 
do it for the mortgage interest reduction program, etc., etc., so it’s 
not uncommon. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Will you then explain, Mr. Minister, who will 
be doing the verification? Will it be somebody in the government 
sector, or will it be somebody in the private sector? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The government would be the one sending 
out the application forms. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So the government would send the application 
forms out. And who will verify that those people who are applying 
are on the health services plan — government or private sector? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The government will. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — This is again an incredulous situation. Here we 
have now a duplication in the name of privatization. You’re going 
to have a private sector operation put all the information together 
and do what has to be done in terms of the confidential 
information of taxpayers of this province, then you’re going to 
have government people hired to verify all the information that’s 
been processed. Why? Will you please tell us why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We’ve already indicated that this is not an 
uncommon practice and that we do it for the mortgage interest 
reduction program. And I doubt very much, as I say, that any 
applicant for the rebate would have any objection to a verification 
that they are eligible. Now keep in mind . . . The hon. member on 
the one hand doesn’t understand that there will be forms coming 
in, and those forms, once approved, will be processed, and that 
process will require, as we have indicated, the summer students, 
etc. So I mean, you can’t have it both ways. On the one hand you 
talk about the volume, and then when you have a system to get up 
to deal with the volume, even if it may be private sector, you have 
some objection to it. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — The mortgage interest reduction plan, I would 
venture to guess, and please correct me if I’m wrong, does not 
have 641,000 individuals applying and providing 34 million 
receipts attached to it. Can you confirm that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, of course, it’s less. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Then what you’re saying is a joke because you 
are providing confidential lists, that is the health services plan 
information, and you are proposing that you provide it to this 
private organization or  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

3815 
 

company to do the job that you’ve been saying all along the 
government’s going to do. You know, what kind of consistency is 
that? 
 
But what I’d like to ask you is — you think about that one for a 
second — what’s the turn-around estimate from your officials in 
your best position from the time the letters are sent out to the 
licensed vehicle operators, to the time this organization receives 
the gas tax receipts, to the time the cheque is in the hands of the 
licensed vehicle operators who apply for the rebate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the objective is to use the summer 
students to reduce dramatically the need for permanent 
bureaucracy to do that, so we will try and have them done, and we 
expect to have them done, by the end of August. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So the letters are going to go out in the new 
year, the students will be hired, I’m assuming, after the university 
break — end of April, first part of May — and cheques will be in 
the hands of these licensed vehicle operators, all 641,000 or those 
that apply, by the end of August. Is that what you’re saying, 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Those that are eligible. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — It seems to me that you’re either applying for a 
rebate or you’re not; and you’re either eligible as a citizen of this 
province and a licensed vehicle operator, and you’ve got the 
appropriate receipts, or you’re not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — You said that all 640-some thousand. I mean, 
one of the things we have to go through are the eligible, and that’s 
one of the processes. 
 
Now if . . . let me come at it this way. All of the ones who are 
eligible for the rebate, our objective is to have it all done by 
August, the end of August. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — What is your estimate as to the numbers? I’m 
using a figure of 641,000 licensed vehicle operators in the 
province. I’m assuming that the majority of them will apply. What 
are your figures, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We estimate somewhere around 350 to 
400,000. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Three hundred and fifty thousand to 400,000 of 
the 641,000 licensed vehicle operators in the province — that’s 
almost half. How much money (a) do you expect the program to 
raise in this fiscal year, gross; and (b) how much do you believe to 
be the rebate in the next fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If you check your tax expenditures at the back 
of the budget speech, we estimate this fiscal year to raise roughly 
142 million; next year the rebate — keep in mind that the rebate 
will only be for half year — $26.2 million. That’s on page 58 of 
the tax expenditure accounts. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So you’re going to raise 142 million, and the 
rebate will be around 26 or $27 million. So the net effect is 117 
million to the treasury. Can you estimate the  

savings to the government as a result of this $142 million 
interest-free loan from the taxpayers of this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If the hon. member is talking that taxes are an 
interest-free loan to the people of Saskatchewan, then I suggest to 
the hon. member that that’s never been a tenet that’s been accepted 
by anyone. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Minister, you said in the advertisements 
that this was a saving to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, not a tax. 
Can you tell us what the saving is? Could you define that, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Of the 142 million that we estimate on fuel 
tax revenue, 59 million will come, in our estimate, from 
Saskatchewan private vehicles. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So you get $59 million as a result of the 7 cent a 
litre, or 32 cent a gallon tax, up front from licensed vehicle 
operators that may be eligible in this province for a rebate. And 
you’re rebating 26 million, 26.2 million? Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes for the half a year. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — What you’re saying now, Mr. Minister, is that 
you are rebating, and you are expecting through this complex 
system of tax rebate for the fuel, only half of what the taxpayers 
have provided. If you were going to raise $59 million from 
Saskatchewan licensed vehicle operators, and you’re going to 
rebate 26.2, that’s less than half. So you have figured into your 
planning here, or you’ve guessed, one or the other, that you are 
going to keep, as a government, not just the 59 million 
interest-free, but you’re only going to rebate less than half. That 
sounds like theft to me, not taxes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — But the hon. member — if you did it on a full 
year basis, okay, instead of the half year, if you get 58 million on a 
full year basis and you rebate it 52, okay. I mean, the 26 million is 
because it’s half a year. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Twenty-six is half a year, from June 21 to 
March 31 is half a year. That’s almost $848 million off your 
forecast of the budget deficit. That’s a little more than half a year. 
Maybe the officials could help him with a calendar. I have a 
calendar he could borrow and count the months. That’s more than 
half a year. 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Keep in mind that the estimate we’ve given 
on the revenues, which we’ve set out, is for the period from the 
time the tax came in until the end of the fiscal year. 
 
An Hon. Member: — March 31, ’88. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Right. So you’ve got January, February, 
March, three months in addition, whereas the rebate will start 
because it’s going to be done on an annual basis. It will go through 
until December 31. The following year the rebate will then be for 
the full annual year. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So what you’re saying, Minister, is that the end 
of the rebate system on an annual basis is  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

3816 
 

December 31, ’87. People can claim starting in the new year, but 
they’re not going to get their cheque till August which is eight 
months down the road, so some people will be carrying the 
government for up to 20 months. Do you think that’s a fair system 
for the taxpayers of this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the argument over the fairness of the tax, 
you have two questions to deal with. One, is a fuel tax fair? You 
obviously believed that it was — you put one in for some time. 
Secondly, whether a rebate system is fair is the question. 
 
Now assuming that a rebate system is fair, then how do you 
administer a rebate system at the least cost? Our view that the least 
cost proposal is to do it in the manner we have set out, which is to 
send the forms out during the new year and early spring and to do 
the program rebate system over the course of the summer and use 
summer students. The alternative to do that so that your rebate 
becomes instantaneous is, of course, a fair number of people 
permanently hired to man the rebate system and do it directly — 
and it’s a lot more costly. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — You are saying that this is the least cost rebate 
system that you can possibly design. You’re asking 641,000 
licensed vehicle operators to send in each — in a total — 34 
million gas receipts. That’s going to cost these taxpayers 
somewhere around $240,000 in postage — one way. It’s going to 
cost you at least that amount to respond the first time. There’s half 
a million dollars right there on the taxpayers’ backs. 
 
You’re saying that it’s going to be more efficient, and it’s going to 
involve fewer people in a rebate system. You’ve got the most wide 
open, abused, bureaucratic, red tape nightmare that you can 
contemplate anywhere. You’ve designed it to discourage people 
from applying. 
 
Have you been saving your gas receipts? I’ve got a file of gas 
receipts here. Since June 21 I’ve got 70-some receipts, and as I go 
through them . . . when you start looking at them, the gas station 
operators in 80 per cent of them haven’t put my name, or my 
licence plate number on them. So now I’m going to go through 
this, as are the other 641,000 licensed vehicle operators, to go over 
their 50 or 100 receipts every year to reduce the cost and red tape. 
You start factoring in the hours spent doing this of each of the 
licensed vehicle operators, the cost is out of sight. I think your $2 
million estimate is way, way low. 
 
But I want to ask the minister, you’ve been advertising this 
program as such a wonderful program around this province, could 
you please tell the taxpayers what you have spent advertising this 
wonderful program to date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The rebate advertising would be 
approximately $250,000. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Is that part of the cost that you estimated, that 
$2 million, or is that in addition to the $2 million estimate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — In addition. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Could you please tell us whether that  

advertising contract was tendered or whether it was appointed, and 
to whom it was awarded? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We found the best agency that we 
approached, and it was Dome Advertising. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — You have just spent $250,000 advertising to the 
people of this province what a wonderful program that you have 
with respect to the fuel tax — a quarter of a million dollars. This is 
the same attitude that you displayed last fall, that where in a 
three-week period, in the first three weeks in September, you spent 
through Dome Advertising, $221,000 to advertise what a 
wonderful home program that you were having, that you were 
putting into place to help the Tories get re-elected. 
 
Do you think this $250,000 on the gas tax advertising is going to 
be of some benefit to your government? I don’t think it will. What 
I’d like to ask the minister: what do you have proposed in the 
budget to spend on advertising for this program for this coming 
year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We don’t expect any additional this year. 
Remember that the criticism the hon. member gave early in the 
session was that the government wouldn’t tell anybody about the 
rebate program, trying to keep it secret. So we went out and 
advertised the program, and now you’re criticizing us for 
advertising it. so I just refer the hon. member back to early in the 
session when he was strongly critical of the government keeping 
the program secret. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Mr. Minister, you have clearly not 
thought out this program. You don’t know how it’s going to look 
or who’s going to deliver it or who’s going to have access to 
information. You don’t really know what’s going on with the 
program. 
 
Now you’re saying you’re hiring Dome Advertising, which is the 
Conservative firm, contributes greatly, in terms of dollars, to the 
Conservative party. You’ve given them a $250,000 contract to 
explain to the people and the taxpayers of this province what the 
fuel tax is all about. But you didn’t explain how it works. 
 
You didn’t explain to all these gas station operators and their staff 
how to do the receipts. Because if you look at your own receipts, 
you’ll find that probably half or more are not filled out completely. 
So you’re passing on your incompetence and your inefficiency 
and your mismanaged attitude towards planning on business 
retailers, the gasoline retailers, onto the taxpayers and licensed 
vehicle operators in this province. I think it’s disgusting. 
 
I think you guys should get your act together. If you’ve got some 
students in mind in terms of running this program, you should 
maybe go out there now and hire them so they can help bail you 
out of this red tape nightmare that you’ve gotten everybody into. I 
think you should try and do that, and do it soon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the hon. member obviously isn’t too 
concerned, because he is keeping his rebates. If he was that 
pessimistic about it, I’m sure that he wouldn’t  
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

3817 
 

have bothered. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Chairman, I would . . . because of the fact 
that the minister doesn’t seem to know how the program operates 
or how it will function, I’d like to move . . . And he can’t supply 
with this House and the people of this province with information 
regarding questions. He can’t answer any of the questions with 
very much precision. 
 
I move that we rise and report progress and ask for leave to sit 
again. 
 
(1701) 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 17 
 
Blakeney Kowalsky 
Brockelbank Anguish 
Shillington Goulet 
Koskie Lyons 
Tchorzewski Lautermilch 
Rolfes Trew 
Mitchell Smart 
Upshall Van Mulligen 
Solomon  
 

Nays — 26 
 
Duncan Meiklejohn 
Andrew Martin 
Berntson Toth 
Lane Sauder 
Taylor Johnson 
Smith Hopfner 
Swan Petersen 
Muirhead Swenson 
Maxwell Martens 
Hodgins Baker 
Gerich Gleim 
Hepworth Saxinger 
Klein Britton 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
  



 
November 2, 1987 

 

3818 
 

Corrigendum 
 
Due to a typesetter malfunction, a portion of the verbatim from the 
Hansard No. 108A, Saturday, October 31, 1987 was omitted at 
the end of page 3784. The following should be inserted: 
 
. . . credit unions and people from across the country. We brought 
them together and said, could we explore these opportunities? 
 
Now I don’t know how you could knock that. You were interested 
enough to attend yourself. So you may give it credit by showing 
up and saying, well here’s some good ideas; this wasn’t; 
combinations of these may be helpful for some people. So that’s 
why we do it and, I mean, that’s how we initiated The Farm Land 
Security Act, the 6 per cent money, the deficiency payments, the 
drought payments, was go to the farmers and ask them. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I’m saying that if we hold a symposium to 
provide new kinds of money to agriculture, the NDP’s against a 
symposium. I don’t know why you’d be against it. We had people 
there exploring all the possibilities. If we can get investment 
money, if we can get savings of other people, or retired farmers to 
invest in agriculture so that young people have less debt, and if 
they can get a reasonable return, that would be a good idea if there 
are ways to do that. We’re trying to get new money into 
agriculture to replace the debt. 
 
The NDP’s against that because they’re philosophically bound to 
the fact that it can only be banks. Well it doesn’t have to be just 
banks. It could be people like you and me, other farmers, people in 
the community — invest in agriculture. Well, Mr. Chairman, 
we’re prepared to look at those alternatives. And that’s how we’ve 
come up with the other programs that are popular and useful, by 
talking to people. That’s why we held the conference, that’s why 
we’ll hold hearings with farmers all across the province, to get 
their views and their suggestions how to design the programs. 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, I think . . . (see top of page 3875) 
 
[NOTE: The online version has been corrected.] 


