


















































July 10, 1987 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 July 10, 1987 
 

1091 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, you’ll recall a few days ago I had 
the pleasure to introduce to you, and to the members of the 
House, a number of students from the province of Quebec who 
are at the University of Regina. Well today we have another 
group of students, adult students, from the province of Quebec 
who are at the University of Regina, doing the bilingual studies 
program. And, Mr. Speaker, with them are Robin Ross, the 
teacher; Estelle Wilcott, Sandra Butel, and the bus driver, Preston 
Parker. 
 
I want to say to you that we are indeed welcome for you to be 
here. Bienvenue á Saskatchewan. Amusez-vous bien. And I’d 
like to ask the Minister of Culture to speak to you in your first 
tongue. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Merci, Monsieur le président. À nos 
visiteurs, en effet nos amis de la belle province, bienvenue à la 
législature et à Régina. C’est un plaisir pour moi, au nom du 
premier ministre et du gouvernement, de vous accueiller ici 
aujourd’hui. Et, Monsieur le président, puis-je dire que j’aime 
beaucoup l’accord Meech Lake. Bienvenue et bonne chance. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I join with the members on 
the government side of the House in welcoming our guests from 
Quebec. I feel very much attached to the folk who come from 
Quebec and study at the University of Regina. My daughter 
graduated mention bilingue from the centre bilingue at the 
University of Regina. My wife has studied there. 
 
One of the students lived at our house . . . stayed on and lived at 
our house for some time, a student from Disraeli, down by 
Thetford Mines, and we have had many happy relationships with 
the students from Quebec who were studying at the University of 
Regina. And I join in welcoming them here to Regina and to 
Saskatchewan. Bienvenue a Regina; bienvenue a Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan Prescription Drugs Plan 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct my question to the 
Premier, in absence of the Minister of Health, and it has to do 
with the dismantling of the Saskatchewan prescription drug plan, 
and the kind of hurt that this decision has inflicted on thousands 
of Saskatchewan families. 
 
Mr. Premier, I have here a letter from a Regina family with 

a three-and-a-half-year-old daughter who has to take drugs four 
times a day to overcome a serious allergic reaction to a number of 
different foods. Without medication the child is very vulnerable 
to serious infection and has been hospitalized a number of times. 
 
Under the drug plan as announced, this family will have to pay 
out about $1, 700 a year up front for their daughter’s medication. 
And I ask the premier: are you able to say to that family that the 
changes in the drug plan which you have made are fair, just, and 
compassionate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows that 
under the drug plan in Saskatchewan, if there are unique 
situations, that they will be covered, as they are in the province of 
Manitoba, which I understand is the best drug program anywhere 
in Canada, next to ours, which will be the best. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly, if there is a unique drug situation where 
children, or anybody else for that matter, has a situation that 
means it’s going to be long-term or chronic care, has been dealt 
with in another jurisdiction quite fairly. And the hon. member 
probably knows better than to just frighten people in saying it’s 
going to be a $ 1,700 bill because you have a child, for example, 
that is going to have a drug problem, and now they’re going to 
have to pay it all. He knows better than that. I mean he can go 
ahead and frighten people if he likes, but the program is sensitive 
to specific needs, and I would be very happy if he could give that 
specific example to the Minister of Health, as they have in the 
province of Manitoba. And they address specific needs if in fact 
they are long-run or chronic or unique, and it’s worked very well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I did nothing to frighten this person. This person wrote 
to me, and I have never heard of this person before she wrote. Mr. 
Minister, she outlines . . . Mr. Premier, she outlines that she’ll 
have to put up $ 1,700 up front. One hundred and twenty five 
dollars of that is gone; that’s her deductible. Beyond that she will 
get back at some point in the future, presumably, 80 per cent. But 
20 per cent of $ 1,700 is $315. So she’s got $440 a year that this 
woman is going to have to pay out for her child. 
 
Now those are the hard facts which come from the figures you 
have announced. How can you call that an improved drug plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask the hon. Member to 
give me the name of the pharmacist; give me the name of the 
individual. I mean, if he was sincere about it, Mr. Speaker, he 
could have provided me with the information before question 
period. All he’s doing is grandstanding. If he wants to give me 
the information — I have asked for letters — I’ll call him on it 
today. I’ve asked for letters from the opposition. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. I’d like to 
ask the members to please not interrupt the Premier  
  



 
July 10, 1987 

1092 
 

when he’s answering the question. He was on the topic and trying 
to answer the question, but I’m sure . . . Order. I’m sure nobody 
could hear him. So just please restrain yourselves. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I just say to the hon. members, I asked him 
to forward names to the Minister of Health or names to me, and 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask the member now to give me the child’s 
name, give me the pharmacist’s name, and we will deal with it. 
But I haven’t received them. All I get from time to time is people 
standing up trying to frighten people. 
 
Now, if you’re really concerned, provide the information. Provide 
the information so we can deal with it. Rather than just frighten 
somebody, bring the information here and we can examine it, and 
then we can both deal with it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 
propose to traipse names of citizens who were in trouble in this 
legislature. 
 
But, Mr. Premier, with respect to the information which I have 
already provided to the Minister of Health — not on the issue 
because this is a new one, but on other similar ones — will you 
see that the Minister of Health or his deputy replies, giving us 
what your proposal is to deal with these exceptional 
circumstances? Because I haven’t had any answer yet and I ask 
you. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — My question to you, sir, is: have you 
seen a single answer, in writing, sent by the Minister of Health to 
anybody who has brought forward a so-called unique situation 
respecting the drug program? Just one — just one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member brings a 
case before the public today, and then he says that he won’t give 
the information to me because it’s in the legislature. He said you 
wouldn’t put it in the legislature . . . (inaudible interjections). . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order, please, 
order. Once more we are getting vociferous interruptions and 
nobody can hear what the answer is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, maybe we can calm the 
opposition down a little bit, okay? We’ll calm them down a little 
bit. 
 
All I want from you, and all you want from me, is the following 
. . . (inaudible interjections). . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Just order, please. Order please. 
I’m sorry to have to interrupt again, but once more the Premier in 
this case is being interrupted, And we’re trying to hear the 
answer, but were having difficulty. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Let me reinterpret the question. If the hon. 
member wants assistance and response to these individual cases, 
which I assume that he does, if the members opposite or anybody 
else in the public will give us the names of the individuals, we 
will examine  

cases and we will deal with them, as they have in Manitoba, as 
quickly as we can determine all the circumstances around their 
health care problems. 
 
And if the minister has not responded to occasions that the 
opposition has brought forward, I would encourage him to 
respond as quickly as he can. Obviously they have to talk with 
the medical staff and with the pharmacists, and with the 
individuals. They’ll do that as quickly as possible. Our intent is to 
deal, in all sincerity, as quickly as we can with unique 
circumstances, and we will do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if 
the Premier would outline the policy which you have with respect 
to so-called unique cases. There are a goodly number, and I’ve 
had a significant number. What principals will be applied? What 
tests is the Minister of Health using so that we can advise the 
constituents and others who asks us whether they likely qualify as 
unique? 
 
Obviously you can’t be totally definitive. That’s the essence of 
unique. But you certainly can outline the general principals. I am 
asking — and I am asking my constituents — is their income 
relevant? Is the amount that they spend for month relevant? What 
are the relevant criteria? What information do we need to send in 
order to get an answer? — none of which we’ve received to date. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of observations. The 
hon. member knows now that people on social services and low 
income are covered. I mean he knows that. So he shouldn’t raise 
the fact that there is no income consideration. It’s already been in 
and designed. 
 
People in nursing homes, Mr. Speaker, are the same. People in 
nursing homes have the same. But if you are on welfare, if you 
are on welfare in this province, you are covered. If you’re a 
senior citizen in a nursing home you are covered. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m sure the hon. member knows. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, 
please. The Premier is attempting to answer the question. He’s on 
the topic. He’s being continuously interrupted, again, and I’m just 
asking the members to please refrain and allow the answer to 
come forth to the people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition behaves as it 
usually does, particularly when children are here in the 
Assembly. They can’t seem to sit and listen to a response. I will 
say it again. 
 
People that are on welfare are already protected, and he knows 
that. People that are . . . senior citizens in nursing homes are 
protected. Under the Manitoba program where we’re getting 
advice — and you can certainly monitor if you like and maybe 
even a phone call would get you the information. 
 
You look at alternatives, lower cost alternatives. There  
  



 
July 10, 1987 

1093 
 

may be generic alternatives that would be provided to people. In 
the Manitoba situation, they’ve examined a whole range of things 
that they could do under unique circumstances. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, the opposition . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Listen to 
them, Mr. Speaker, they talk and they talk and they talk, because 
they can’t stand to listen to an answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. Order, please. Obviously there’s a great uneasiness 
about the answer to the question and some question of whether 
it’s on the topic or not. But, I believe, in essence, the Premier is 
on the topic, and I believe the records will show that the 
supplementary covered a fairly wide range of areas to answer, 
and possibly that combination is causing the problem. So I would 
just like to ask the Premier to quickly now finish his question, to 
answer his question, if he wishes, or else we’ll move on to the 
next question. I recognize the member for Saskatoon Westmount. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Saskatoon, Nutana, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Minister, for your information, Mr. Premier, this family has 
called the Minister of Health’s office. And what did the Minister 
of Health’s staff say to this family? Let’s listen. They said if 
things are a little tight at the end of the month, shop around and 
maybe some pharmacy will give you some credit. Is that your 
response? Is that your response, to turn corner drug stores into 
loan companies and sick people into beggars. Is that the response 
. . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will not take at face value 
the information that the hon. member provides. I will review it. If 
the hon. member will give me the names of the family, the child, 
the pharmacist, and the doctors, then we’ll review it. But if she 
stands up in here and makes it up — if she stands in here, Mr. 
Speaker, and will not provide it to the public, will not provide it 
to me, but just grandstand and stand there so that she can put 
herself on television, as opposed to really dealing with the issue, 
then that’s unfair to the people, Mr. Speaker. That’s unfair. 
 
If she wants to provide us with the information, then we will 
respond, Mr. Speaker. And if they’re afraid to provide it because 
they’d rather just make an issue in the House, that’s their 
problem, and they’re going to have to deal with it in the public. 
 

Reimbursement Through Drug Plan 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Premier, I’m not grandstanding. There are 
hundreds of people in the same situation. 
 
New question. Mr. Premier, about two weeks ago, or about three 
weeks ago, a number of pharmacists received a document from 
your officials, and that document said the drug plan would try to 
reimburse families their prescription drug costs within 25 to 30 
days. However, there have been some suggestions that 
reimbursement won’t occur for maybe three or four months. 

Do you expect people to go to their druggist and beg for credit 
while they wait anxiously for repayment of their drug bills under 
the plan? And why can’t you advise people who can’t afford the 
money up front what they should do? Why don’t you come clean 
with the population of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I really believe that the hon. 
member should come clean with the public of Saskatchewan. 
And if she’s concerned about the various kind of things that she 
has raised, then she could provide the government with 
information, and we would respond. And it’s not true that it’s 
going to be months and months before the response will come 
back. It’s not the case, Mr. Speaker, and she has raised it. 
 
We will make every effort to make it as quick a reply and 
responsive repayment as possible, as they have, Mr. Speaker, in 
other jurisdictions like Manitoba. Now if it works in Manitoba 
under a NDP administration, what’s wrong with the NDP over 
there saying, well, my gosh, it’s been quite a healthy program in 
the neighbouring province? 
 
Why are they standing here trying to frighten people when 
they’re not over there frightening people in Manitoba? Do you 
know why, Mr. Speaker? Because they don’t care, Mr. Speaker. 
All they are is being partisan. They don’t really care about the 
people — just like high interest rates; just like farmers, they don’t 
care at all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, this is not the imagination of the 
opposition. This is not a minor problem; it’s a major problem. 
Your own material admits that over 72,000 senior citizens and 
senior citizen families will be affected; that over 128,000 other 
families will be affected; that they will purchase more than the 
deductible in terms of prescription drugs. That’s tens of millions 
of dollars out of people’s pockets. And yet, what does your 
government do? You spend $20 million a . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. I 
believe that the preamble to your supplementary is getting too 
long, and I would like to ask you to shorten your preamble. I 
think you’ve gone on long enough, frankly, and put your 
question. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Premier, you’re prepared to spend $ 20 
million on political advertising, $10 million on political hacks for 
your cabinet. Why don’t you cut your expenditures and 
reintroduce the real drug plan of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite would 
just have to respond and look at the record of the previous 
government here to know that she is completely unfair when 
she’s making her allegations. 
 
This month, Mr. Speaker, to senior citizens, 106,000 senior 
citizens are receiving up to $40 million in cheques  
  



 
July 10, 1987 

1094 
 

that they never received under the NDP — $500 to every senior 
citizen, $700-and-some to couples. Now the NDP never provided 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me point out as well: under the NDP low-income 
people paid a gas tax. They paid tax on utilities. They paid tax on 
clothes. They even paid, Mr. Speaker, in terms of fees for extra 
billing. The members opposite didn’t remove the fees for extra 
billing. They didn’t have a heritage program. They taxed the 
seniors in retail sales. Mr. Speaker, again I say, they don’t care at 
all; it’s all rhetoric. The real people that care are on this side of 
the House, and that’s why were elected and they’re over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Youth Unemployment in Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Martin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, order, please. Order, 
please. Order, please. The members know full well that any 
member in the House has the right to ask a question. I recognize 
. . . Order, please; order, order. I recognize the member for 
Regina Wascana. 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please; order. Order. All members, even 
though they’re objecting, know the rules of the House. And all 
members know that every member in this House has the right to 
ask a question. I recognize . . . Order, please; order, order. I 
recognize the member for Regina Wascana. 
 
Mr. Martin: — I appreciate that, Mr. Speaker, and besides, I’m 
one of the new guys in the House. Mr. Speaker, accuracy and 
fairness are words that are unknown to the members of the 
opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, Order, please. Order! 
Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. Now 
we’re having a little difficulty here this morning, but I’m sure we 
can get through it if we all try to co-operate. I would like to ask 
the member from Regina Wascana to get on to his question. 
 
Mr. Martin: — I will get to the question. Like everyone else in 
this country, I’m concerned about unemployment, particularly 
youth unemployment. I have a question for the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker. Is it true that the actual unemployed youth in the 
province of Saskatchewan is 13,000 people, and if so, what are 
you doing about it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m . . . I am . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order! 
Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, please. 
Order, please. Order, please. I’d like to caution the member from 
Regina North that I hardly sat down — or, Moose Jaw, yes, I’m 
sorry — Moose Jaw North. Order, please. Order, please.  

I’d like to caution the member from Moose Jaw North that I 
hardly sat down and already he was hollering. Now I’m just 
asking for the co-operation of the members. Just be quiet a little 
bit. That’s all I’m asking, and let the Premier answer his question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, today the unemployment 
statistics come out for not only the province of Saskatchewan but 
indeed the whole country. I’m happy to respond to the hon. 
members question, with respect to unemployment locally and for 
the youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan now has the second lowest 
unemployment in all of Canada, and we’re very proud of that. As 
a result of difficult economic conditions our unemployment now 
is 6.4 per cent actual and adjusted to 7.3. 
 
With respect to youth, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to point out that there 
have been 6,000 new jobs created in the province of 
Saskatchewan for young people — 6,000 more people working 
today than there was a month ago. And I’m very proud of that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what I’m particularly proud about is the 
following: is that unemployment rate among women is 7. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 
please. Please finish your answer. Order. Order, please. Order, 
please. 
 
I would like to ask the members to stop interfering once more. 
Unfortunately, I’ve had to do that a number of times this 
morning, which I don’t particularly like to do because it’s using 
up question period. 
 
I would like to ask the Premier to finish his answer, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I hope that the 
opposition would bear with us as we review these important 
information statistics. Mr. Speaker, I just want to reiterate that 
unemployed youth . . . new jobs for youth are up to 6,000; 6,000 
more young people are working in Saskatchewan among young 
people than a month ago, which is very positive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me make the point where I’m very proud, is that 
the lowest rate for unemployment for women any place in 
Canada is in the province of Saskatchewan at 7.1 per cent, ahead 
of Ontario and Manitoba. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Policy Regarding Prince Albert Regional Community College 

 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister 
of advanced education and manpower, and my question is, that in 
view of your reputation of slashing education, are you willing to 
give this House a commitment in respect to the staff at the Prince 
Albert Regional Community College? 
 
The administrator, the director of administration says that  
  



 
July 10, 1987 

1095 
 

the staff and the board have been treated with scorn, disdain, and 
with untruth, and that they’ve been told over and over again that 
they would be consulted with and they would have a part to play 
in this, they were not listened to, and that you have no intention 
of listening. 
 
Will you give this House today a commitment that the jobs of the 
staff at Prince Albert Regional Community College will be 
protected, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, we have given the same 
commitment to the staff, the management, and the board at the 
Prince Albert Community College as we have given to the boards 
and staff of community colleges in the other three urban centres 
— Moose Jaw, Saskatoon, and Regina. 
 
As I said in the House earlier this week, for the most part the 
process there in terms of the amalgamation has gone relatively 
smoothly. It’s unfortunate that such was not the case in Prince 
Albert. But certainly, when it comes to the staff, that’s one of the 
reasons why we must continue to move on with this, Mr. 
Speaker, is because we do not to see them placed. 
 
And secondly, and perhaps equally important, if not more 
importantly, we want to proceed, Mr. Speaker, to get the new 
institute up and running because it’s the students as well that we 
have great concern over in terms of having that programming 
ready for this fall, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minster, 
if your commitment to the staff at Prince Albert Regional 
Community College is the same commitment that you gave to the 
people who were fired from the technical institutes, it’s just 
simply not good enough. My supplementary is this: are you 
aware that because of your power grab, you’ve created one big 
deal of uncertainty in that area, and that caught in the middle are 
the students? 
 
And are you also aware, Mr. Minister, that right now due to your 
power grab, over 50 per cent . . . there’s only 50 per cent 
enrollment in terms of the university classes that were available 
to the students in that area? What kind of an answer can you give 
to those students who’ve been calling and asking for answers in 
the past few days as to what programs you’re going to be 
delivering from that college? What answer have you got for those 
students, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — We are absolutely committed, Mr. 
Speaker, to having the institute up and running for this fall. 
Programming will be on schedule as much as it can possibly be 
on schedule. And secondly, Mr. Speaker, I object to the use of 
“power grab” because certainly it is not a power grab by the 
department. In fact, we want to give . . . we want to set up a 
separate board of governors for this new institute and get it out of 
the department, Mr. Speaker. Now that doesn’t sound like a 
power grab to me. And secondly, Mr. Speaker, I did not ask for 
their  

resignation. They resigned. I did not ask for their resignations. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. With your 
typical arrogance, you haven’t been consulting with these people. 
And the former chairman indicates that you’ve been stepping on 
the college and on the community and on the principals that 
they’ve been fighting for over the last 20 years, and that your 
government is financially, morally, and it’s ethically bankrupt. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I want to know what it’s going to take to 
make you understand that this take-over of the community 
college in Prince Albert and in other cities doesn’t have the 
support of the students, of the cities, or of the staff. What’s it 
going to take you to understand that what you’re doing is wrong, 
morally, ethically? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In terms of designing the blueprint for 
the future, Mr. Speaker, relative to post-secondary education, 
over the past winter we have consulted with some 550 
associations, individuals, and groups. 
 
And I would say to the hon. member, Mr. Speaker, that time and 
time again we have heard about these kinds of things: (a) there 
should be a different form of governance for our institutes; that it 
should no longer be an arm of the department, and that we should 
have a separate autonomous body to allow for better interaction 
with the needs of the business community; to identify and to act 
on where the jobs in the future are; to eliminate duplication; to 
eliminate out-of-date courses; in fact, Mr. Speaker to make sure 
that we have the tools in place to respond to the needs and the 
opportunities of the adult learning population as we move 
towards the 21st century, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My resolve continues and will not be abated in that regard, 
because I will not let the people of this province down, and the 
adult learners in this province down, for the next two decades, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would just like to 
refer all members to resolution no. 12. And in light of the 
resignation of the former member from Saskatoon Eastview, I 
would now like to declare that resolution no. 12 is dropped. 
 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 
 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders of 
the day, I rise on a question of privilege in accordance with rule 6 
of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan. This morning, within the prescribed time, I served 
you written notice of my intention to do so, as well as providing 
you with the matter and conclusive information pertaining to it. 
 
My question of privilege deals with the remarks made by the 
member from Athabasca, July 7 in this Assembly. And  
  



 
July 10, 1987 

1096 
 

I refer to page 1013 of Hansard, where the member stated, as he 
referred to myself: 
 

I have a letter that I wrote to him four months ago, and he still 
has not answered the letter. That’s the type of minister that we 
have in Sask Housing. 

 
Later that same say, he had the page deliver a copy of this letter 
to me while I was speaking in debate. Mr. Speaker, as you are 
aware I provided you with a copy of that letter. I also provided 
you with a copy of my response to the minister’s letter, dated 
April 2, some two weeks following receipt. This, at least in my 
mind, becomes more than simply a dispute between two members 
— and I believe is a question of privilege. Based on the evidence, 
I will ask you to find a prima facie case of breach of privilege at 
the conclusion of my remarks. 
 
The member from Athabasca did not provide the courtesy of 
saying he did not receive my response. Or he could have spoken 
with me privately. But he didn’t. Rather, he chose to use this 
Assembly to strongly indicate — much to the delight of the 
opposition benches at the time, Mr. Speaker — that, in fact, I did 
not respond at all, and for the added comments, designed to 
disgrace and embarrass me concerning my role as minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe most people, including some Hon. 
Members of this Assembly, know I take my obligation as 
minister very seriously. I discharge my responsibilities to the best 
of my abilities, regardless of the number of hours that that may 
take me to do. The remarks made have cast aspersions at my 
credibility to all members in this legislature. And it is also clearly 
recorded historically. 
 
In my opinion, Mr. Speaker, shamefully, many times bordering in 
similar circumstances, members opposite seem to have stated 
inaccuracies, make claims that they don’t . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. I’m sorry, I 
must intervene at that point. You must stick strictly to your 
grievance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member may 
have used poor verbiage. However, as for me, when a definite 
misleading remark is made to this Assembly about my integrity, I 
feel morally obligated, Mr. Speaker, to challenge that statement. 
And I will not be intimidated by anybody. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I raised this question of privilege for your decision, 
and will send a copy of my response to the member in the event 
he replaced the original. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I would like to thank the member for Regina 
South for the notice which was received in my office this 
morning in accordance with rule 6. 
 
Privilege, as all members know, is a very serious and very 
important issue. The essence of privilege or breach of privilege, 
has to do with the ability of a member to fulfill his responsibilities 
as a member. Members will also be aware that according to 
Beauchesne’s, citation 19: 
 

A dispute rising between two members, as to  

allegations of facts, does not fulfill the conditions of 
parliamentary privilege. 

 
I find this matter appears to be a dispute over fact. That can be 
settled . . . Order, please. Order! I find that this matter appears to 
be a dispute over fact which can be settled in the ordinary course 
of debate, and that it does not interfere with the member’s ability 
to do his duty. And therefore I find that it does not constitute a 
prima facie case of breach of privilege. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Environment and Public Safety 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 9 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Chairman, a question to the minister. 
Yesterday, Mr. Minister, you made no long-term commitment 
whether or not . . . you made no long-term commitment to the 
creation of jobs in the area of the transmission line versus the 
possibility of the use of sprays on the transmission line. 
 
A lot of people, as you know, and you implied that yesterday in 
your reply, that people in northern Saskatchewan, with a high 
unemployment rate, are very, very much interested in getting 
those jobs in the long run, not only the short run, in regards to the 
transmission lines. 
 
And a lot of them are very worried about the impact that the use 
of chemical spraying would have in regards to the transmission 
lines project, because many of them have had experience with the 
effects on the transmission line on the Island Falls-Flin Flon line. 
The utilization of chemicals there has created a lot of damages 
and have killed a lot of animals and also have knocked off berry 
picking, you know, that was done along side those roads, and so 
on. 
 
When people received that information, they were very 
concerned then about whether or not you would make a long term 
commitment. Yesterday you did not make a long-term 
commitment. What I want to know is whether or not you will 
make a long term commitment to go for jobs rather than chemical 
spraying on those transmission lines. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe I answered your question 
yesterday. I advised you that we did not authorize anyone to 
spray along the transmission line, nor did we have a request to do 
so. Instead, the government and Sask Power have opted rather to 
provide jobs for northern people to clear the right of way for that 
particular transmission line. 
 
As it relates to the roads, I think you would be better to ask  
  



 
July 10, 1987 

1097 
 

your question when the Department of Highways is up. We 
haven’t authorized anyone to do spraying from our department. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — You neglected to answer my question. My 
question was: is there a long-term commitment to the policy that 
you’ve started where you will hire people to clear off the lines? 
Will you do it in the long-term? Is this a long-term commitment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — This department doesn’t hire anyone to do 
that work. That’s strictly under the power corporation. They have 
made no request to our department for the right to spray. Rather 
they have opted to go the other way. And I can’t give you long 
term commitments because we are not the people doing the 
employment. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — But you are the people who give the determining 
regulations as to whether or not they would be using sprays on 
those transmission lines. Is there any long-term aspects in regards 
to utilizing the sprays? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — In our department we don’t have that kind of 
authority to write long-term agreements. What we do as a 
department is respond to written applications and requests for 
permission to do certain things. we have had no request for that 
kind of permission. And so therefore we have given no 
permission. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Another question in regards to the transportation 
of hazardous chemicals, especially on the northern route on 
highway 105 and up to 905 that goes up to Southend and 
Wollaston. I would like to know what type of hazardous 
chemicals are being transported on that particular stretch of 
highway? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That would fall under the Dangerous Goods 
Act, operated by the federal government, and we would have no 
access to information that would tell us what goods were 
transported on those particular highways. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — So you have absolutely no information of what is 
transported on Saskatchewan highways — on 102 and 905 going 
to the North? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, our department would not have that kind 
of information. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I suggest maybe that you should get your 
research staff to make sure that you know what’s going on that 
highway, basically because a lot of people are complaining that, 
especially Highway 102 north of La Ronge, which is in terrible 
shape, will now be transporting a lot of these other chemicals, and 
that the department, Minister of Environment, should at least 
know exactly what is being transported and make 
recommendations, possibly to the fellow minister, about 
improving the road conditions on that highway. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The only time that our department would 
have any involvement is if there are spills reported. We’ve had no 
other way, really. of accessing that information that the member 
is talking about. That information is controlled under the federal 
Dangerous  

Goods Act, and we really have no way of controlling it, and no 
way of gaining that knowledge. 
 
If a spill occurs, then we’re responsible to see that the spill is 
cleaned up properly, and we take responsibility. 
 
(1045) 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Then the question is: when you take the 
responsibility of clean-up on those highways, how many 
clean-ups have you done in the past year or two? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We don’t have that kind of information here. 
We could achieve the retrieval of that through our computer. It’s 
not a simple process. It would take a considerable amount of 
time. If the hon. member is really anxious for it we could attempt 
to do that, but it would require a considerable amount of research 
by my staff. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Because of the tremendous concern that people 
have, you know, form my area, I would appreciate if that research 
information was forthcoming. Could you provide that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, we will, but it won’t be in the next day 
or two. It will take some time to get. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Could you give me a more precise time on it, 
then. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would estimate within two to three weeks. 
It’s pretty hard to put an exact day. It depends on the work-load 
in the department. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Okay. Another question, and this has to do with 
more of an interprovincial arrangement with Manitoba on a mine 
which, underground, falls into Saskatchewan territory. And that 
mine is in Namew Lake — or Sturgeon Landing, you know, is 
the closest community. It is just 25 miles north of Cumberland 
House, and that a shaft has been sunk there in the past while. 
 
A lot of the people raised this issue with the Minister of 
Highways over this winter. They raised the issue of jobs, but they 
specifically also raised the issue of environment. Basically, 
because the people of Cumberland were very concerned because 
the dams upstream had created a lot of environmental damage for 
people at Cumberland, and the basis of their livelihood, which 
was fishing, had been stopped, you know, at periods of time in 
history. 
 
And they were very concerned now that the only clean water that 
they would get into Cumberland House came in from the North, 
and that river system is the Sturgeon-weir River system into the 
Tearing River at Cumberland. A lot of people were very 
concerned that the last clean river that — water that reaches 
Cumberland may now be jeopardized by the fact that this mine 
shaft that is just on the other side of the Manitoba border digs 
right in and goes into the Saskatchewan side of the lake. 
 
And what people are worried about is this: many of the lakes 
have underground currents, and more especially when these lakes 
are deep in the . . . because it’s at the  
  



 
July 10, 1987 

1098 
 

edge of the shield. Some of the lake — the lake in there is over 
200 feet deep, and the people are very worried that some of the 
wastes and some of the hazardous chemicals or anything like that 
may be seeping into the lake system and would then be hazardous 
for the people, not only downstream in Cumberland House, but 
also to the people in sturgeon Landing. I might add that Namew 
Lake or Sturgeon Lake is one of the more beautiful and rich lakes 
that we’ve seen in the past. 
 
So a lot of people are really concerned about that, and nothing 
really has been stated, you know, from this Department of 
Environment to work in close harmony with the Manitoba 
government to make sure that effects of any type of pollution 
from that mine, you know . . . to make sure that there are 
assurances that there is no hazard, you know, to the people 
downstream in regards to their drinking water. I was wondering 
whether or not the minister had any information in relation to any 
environmental research that may be taking place in regard to the 
Namew Lake project that is going on right now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe the mine that the member is 
referring to is Manitoba. The stage that it’s at in their 
environmental process I’m not sure of whether it has received 
permission to go ahead or whether it hasn’t. But when it does go 
ahead, with it being right on the border we will expect it to 
operate under the same environmental conditions as we would 
expect a Saskatchewan mine. 
 
If it affects the area in any way on the Saskatchewan side, then of 
course we’ll step in. We will, on an ongoing basis, be monitoring 
the water in that area to be sure that no pollutants are being 
allowed to come into the water. But at this time there are no 
pollutants, and the mining hasn’t proceeded to the point where we 
really would have any information. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — My advice then to the minister is, because you’re 
unsure of whether or not there are pollutants there, that maybe 
you may want to direct your research staff to make a more careful 
analysis of the situation, basically because you seem to imply that 
existing research and that type of thing may be inadequate. I was 
wondering whether or not you will be following up on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — All that’s happening at this time is a 
beginning test operation. It’s in Manitoba. The control of that 
mine will be under Manitoba, not under Saskatchewan. We have 
really no opportunity to control what happens in Manitoba unless 
it’s causing an effect on Saskatchewan. It hasn’t gone far enough 
yet that there is any way that they could have an effect on 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In the future, it will be monitored very closely and the lakes will 
be monitored. If there ‘s any problem, even a glimmer of a 
problem shows, we’ll deal with it at that point. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I might add that people in Cumberland are used 
to hearing that there would be no problem. They were told there 
would be no problem in regards to the dams that were being built 
upstream. They were told there would be no problems in regards 
to the sewage that  

was being dumped upstream, you know, from Cumberland. Yet 
the fishing was stopped in regards to the mercury, you know, 
pollution that took place there. 
 
And people as such also recognize that the trout, you know, has 
disappeared form the lake. And they’re very concerned that 
increased pollution may harm the other fish, that have already 
harmed the trout, and are therefore looking more and saying look, 
it’s going to be happening on the Saskatchewan side; the effect is 
going to be on the Saskatchewan side. we are looking at solutions 
and maybe an EIS (environmental impact study) may be in order, 
you know, at this stage. Will you do an EIS if something directly 
is forthcoming from Cumberland House and residents? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, our province will not be doing an 
environmental impact study, and it will be under the Manitoba 
government and their department, not ours. So it’s out of our 
jurisdiction. We cannot do the environmental impact study here. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — But you mentioned that you could do 
interprovincial type of studies if the effect is on the Saskatchewan 
side. And I was wondering if you will be proceeding to work in 
co-ordination with the Manitoba governments to make sure that 
the concerns of the residents of Cumberland House are addressed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — During the environmental assessment period 
when it’s open for public review, we would have the opportunity 
to make our concerns known to the Manitoba government. And if 
any areas show to us that we have issues that we should be 
raising, we will raise those. 
 
If the hon. member knows of things that are of grave concern to 
his area, I would ask simply to send it in letter from to the 
department, and we will see that your concerns are looked at and 
registered with the Manitoba government during that 
environmental impact assessment period. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I’m 
going to be discussing public safety for a time. My first question 
is whether the item “public safety” in your department is the one 
that we have known for many years as the technical safety 
services branch or the safety services branch in the Department of 
Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, that branch was transferred to the 
Department of Environment in November. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — In November of 1986? You’ve indicated, yes, 
Mr. Minister. And I can confirm with you that it came intact and 
that all of the programs that were included in the technical safety 
services branch in the Department of Labour came over, and 
those include the electrical inspection service, the elevator 
inspection service, boiler and pressure vessels, fire safety and gas 
inspection? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes. It came intact with all of those. I might 
tell you that we still feel that the Minister of Labour kept most of 
the money, but other than that it came intact. 
  



 
July 10, 1987 

1099 
 

Mr. Mitchell: — And can I also ask you to confirm that each of 
these units — and I’m going to be using the term “units” to 
describe the subdivisions of the branch that I’ve just mentioned to 
you — can you confirm that each of these units have the same 
program responsibility and the same functions as they had when 
the branch was in the Department of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, they have the same function and the 
same responsibilities as they had under the Department of 
Labour. 
 
(1100) 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Now, Mr. Minister, will you be able to answer 
questions today about the activities of these units, during the year 
1986-87, in terms of numbers of inspections and numbers of 
orders issued? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I believe we can, yes. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Well, I’d like to begin then with the electrical 
and elevator safety unit. Now the first question that I have, Mr. 
Minister, is to confirm the shape of the program of this unit as it 
now exists, and I want to frame my question on the following 
way. Does the functions and responsibilities of this unit remain 
the same as they have for, say, the last three years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — They’re essentially the same. We have 
added the inspection of amusement rides to the elevator safety 
division. That was a new piece of legislation that came in, and so 
that responsibility would be in addition to what has been normal 
over the past three years. But other than that, functionally the 
same. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Just one follow-up question on that. I asked the 
question in terms of a three-year period and you answered it. You 
were responsive to my question. Can I cast it a little wider and 
ask whether apart from the amusement rides addition, there have 
been any substantial changes to this program, and I would like to 
know specifically what changes have occurred since the days 
when I had some responsibility for that program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m afraid I can’t go back 10 years because 
we were not government that far back. It’s essentially the same, 
but there may be some minute difference that I wouldn’t even be 
aware of. My director tells me essentially it is the same. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Fair enough, Mr. Minister. May I ask you the 
number of inspectors that were employed in this unit, the 
electrical and elevator safety unit, during 1986-87, permanent and 
temporary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — There would be 25.5, and that includes the 
chief inspector in the branch, who also does some inspection, but 
not as much as to the others. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — During that year, 1986-87, I’d like to ask you 
some questions about the volume of work being done in the unit. 
And I would like to know how many permits  

were issued for new electrical installations or additions and 
alterations during that year. How many permits? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — 31,308. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — And are you able to tell me, Mr. Minister, how 
that compared with the previous year, which would be 1985-86? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We don’t have that figure for ‘85-86 here. 
My director indicates that it likely would be within a couple of 
thousand of that number, but he said he doesn’t really have the 
number here. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Is there any reason, minister, why you would 
expect that number to be either smaller or larger in the year under 
review — ‘87-88? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It’s, for the most part, the same as the year 
before. There was a little bit of a surge with renovations because 
of the government’s home program. But because the economy is 
down, there are other offsetting factors. So it’s essentially the 
same from one year to the next there. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I want to cast this question in a little broader 
and more general terms, Mr. Minister. I want to ask you, what is 
your philosophy with respect to electrical inspections? And I’ll 
take some time to ask the question, and I think you may want to 
consult with your officials before answering. 
 
You’ve told us, and I think it’s perfectly accurate, that there were 
in excess of 31,000 permits issued during 1986-87. And that 
figure is about the same as it was the year before. And within a 
thousand or two, it’s likely to be the same for the year under 
review. And I know, and I put it to you, that there is no possible 
way in which 25.5 person years of inspection service in your 
department can possibly follow through on those permits. And I 
put this to you, not in any contentious way, because I’m familiar 
with the problem; it was a problem that existed during my years 
to the department. 
 
But I would like to hear from you, I said philosophy — not 
philosophy so much as your priorities or your plans with respect 
to discharging your responsibilities under the legislation, so far as 
the inspection of these installations are concerned. 
 
Now you will know from your legislation that the unit has a 
number of responsibilities with respect to new installations, 
alterations to . . . I should say, installation of electrical equipment; 
installation of electrical wiring and distribution systems within 
buildings; alterations and additions to existing installations; and 
the examination and inspection of all electrical equipment 
intended for distribution in the province, which is an even larger 
sweep then the 31,000 permits we’re talking about. And there is 
no way in which you can discharge all of responsibilities that 
seem to be placed upon you by the legislation. 
 
So I’m aware that you must, of necessity, have an approach to 
this problem. You must have prioritized it and you must have a 
policy with respect to inspections. 
  



 
July 10, 1987 

1100 
 

Now that was a very long question, Minister, and if it’s not clear 
enough, I’m prepared to keep talking. But I’d like you to respond 
to it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The hon. member has raised a considerable 
area of concern to all of us. It’s been an ongoing problem, I think, 
in this branch for some period of time. I know when I was in 
opposition we raised questions on the same subject area, so it 
hasn’t just surfaced. 
 
I would tell the hon. member that when we have owner permits 
we try to do 100 per cent of the inspection. If we have a fully 
qualified electrical contractor putting in a couple of plugs in a 
bank, or something of that nature, we don’t place that on a high 
priority list because the contractor and the electrician will be well 
qualified people in the trade. So we prioritize the inspections to 
quite a degree where contractors have a proven track record and 
we’ve inspected time after time and have had no need for change. 
 
Now you asked me about philosophy. I think that what needs to 
be done is to have a method of sampling put in place that will be 
impartial and will go through the permits and call out a certain 
number out of a given area and we’ll do those inspections. 
Because I don’t think it’s possible to do every one of the 31,000. 
 
Another area that we’re thinking about, and when I say thinking 
about, that’s all that’s happened to it at this point. But we have 
discussed it at some length with the construction industry; that is 
the idea of generating a master certificate to license contractors, 
which would enable them to do the actual inspection of their own 
work that their men are doing. I mean the master contractor 
himself could go on site and do the inspection and sign the 
release. 
 
(1115) 
 
I believe it’s an area that has been overlooked for some times. We 
don’t have someone following around on the heels of every 
medical doctor to see that he did his job right. I think, in some, in 
some ways, fully qualified and people licensed by examination 
through the department could be given the license to do much of 
that type of inspection. Now we do very serious inspections of 
most of the hospital type of construction or remodelling, because 
there is affects individuals — many people involved. 
 
I don’t know just how far to go. The member is familiar with 
much of this, but our philosophy is to inspect the serious ones, 
inspect those done by private individuals who have very limited 
electrical knowledge, but for those with good qualifications, with 
a good track record, to inspect at a lesser rate. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Minister, one can’t help but notice in 
looking at your estimates, the huge reduction in person years in 
this particular branch, in the public safety branch. It’s a reduction 
of 32.8 person years of employment which is a reduction of fully 
25, 30 per cent of the work-force in this public safety area. My 
question is: how many of these 32.8 person years that have been 

cut are being cut from the electrical and elevator safety unit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The budget shows a big change, and I might 
indicate to the hon. member that there is a big change coming. 
We are proposing the transfer of the electrical and gas inspection 
to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. The budget that you see 
here is basically a one-half year budget. 
 
So there is a big change coming. But the inspection procedure 
that I outlined to you would likely be similar. It’s still in the 
negotiation stage. There are many unanswered questions, so I 
couldn’t give you the exact figures of what will end up in Power, 
how many people they’ll put in place to do the job. 
 
But that is the anticipation, that this area, the electrical and gas 
inspection, will be transferring to the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation. And that is the method that’s used in many 
provinces in Canada, that the utility companies have taken on 
much of that inspection role. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Now I want to be clear, Minister, on what you 
told me. I think I should approach it with respect to the unit that 
we’re discussing, electrical and elevator safety. Do I understand 
from your answer that there will be no staff reductions in that 
area while they remain in your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The electrical division, three inspectors took 
the retirement offer, and because of the proposed transfer of that 
unit across to Saskatchewan Power Corporation, we do not intend 
to refill those positions. We’ll leave that hiring process to Sask 
Power once they have the branch in place. The elevator side is not 
expected to transfer. It’s expected to stay within the Department 
of the Environment. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — The idea of transferring the inspectorate 
services in electrical and gas to the power corporations is, of 
course, not a new idea, and I think you’re aware of that. It’s been 
around the system for . . . been around the provincial system in 
Saskatchewan as an idea for oh, 12, 14 years that I know of. And 
it has in the past been rejected, and at least one of your officials 
will know this very well, on the basis that there are many 
situations in which the power corporations, the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation and the inspection service are at odds about 
particular points. 
 
In a sense, Minister, you encounter a conflict of interest situation 
on the gas side, most definitely, because of the way in which 
natural gas is distributed in Saskatchewan, as well as on the 
electrical side, depending again on circumstances. 
 
Now I won’t take the time of the House to go into that level of 
technical difficulty, but I would like to hear from you as to how it 
is now that in 1987 we are able to brush aside these substantial 
problems that will be encountered if the electrical and gas utility 
is at once supplying the product, supplying the distribution 
system, as it does to a very large extent, and also inspecting the 
equipment and installations that are involved in bringing that 
power and  
  



 
July 10, 1987 

1101 
 

gas into your business, into your apartment block, into your 
hospital, or into your home. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — In the negotiations with the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation — and there have been negotiations for some 
time; the negotiations are proceeding into the final stages — we 
haven’t had a great deal of difficulty in dealing with this concern. 
As the member will know, because he was involved a number of 
years close to this particular branch, the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation electrical work at the power pole and the line level 
has never been inspected by the branch. So the line service 
basically was left to the power corporation to do its own 
monitoring up to now. 
 
When we come to the connection at the home, its immediately 
then the electrician and contractor that are involved, so I think we 
sort of have an arm’s length. The electrical contractor takes the 
power from the industry or the home and connects it to the main 
power transformer provided by the power corporation. So you do 
have, to some extent, an arm’s-length arrangement. 
 
There will be an ongoing monitoring availability within our 
department. I think that’s a requirement. And just the number of 
people that will require, I’m not quite prepared at this time to put 
a figure on it. We’re doing a lot of looking and a lot of 
considering. We will have need to have some supervision. We 
will still license the electrical contractors and a number of areas 
like that. So there will still be monitoring and administration of 
the legislation within the department. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Minister, my recollection of the way in 
which these inspectorate services work is that when a permit is 
obtained it is paid for by the person who takes out the permit. 
There is a fee involved. And I remember, when I was deputy 
minister in the department of Labour, making that argument — 
and I thought, and I still believe it to be a very sound argument — 
that an inspector more than pays for himself or herself in the 
work that is done in performing his or her duties in the 
department. 
 
That was particularly true as I recall it, and I must admit to being 
a bit hazy about the details. I think that was particularly true in 
the case of gas inspectors, where we could actually prove that an 
additional gas inspector would generate enough revenue to pay 
for all of the salaries and benefits that were involved in hiring that 
extra person. 
 
Now two questions, Minister, based on the advice that you’re 
getting, particularly from the gentlemen behind you: is my 
memory correct that that is the case? And if my memory is 
correct, is it still the case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Of course, that can be the case. The fee 
structure and the wage structure and the number of inspections 
that an individual is able to do, all of those questions, of course, 
come in to whether or not it is self-sufficient. We do have the 
authority, through regulation, to set the fee structure. Sometimes 
it has been out of line to some extent with current costs and didn’t 
cover completely, but for the most part it has been set so that it 
did cover the cost. 

Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Minister. That was certainly my 
recollection and a great deal of frustration involved in not being 
able to push that idea through the various levels of approval that 
exist within any government, and this one as well. 
 
But I come now to the question that I want to ask in relation to 
this plan, to hand these services, or to contract these services, 
over to the power corporation, Minister, why is that a good idea? 
Minister, why is the idea of the power corporation taking over 
electrical and gas inspections a good idea? Why is it a better idea 
than continuing to perform this service as we have for so many 
years, from a department of government and at arms length from 
the electrical and gas utility. 
 
I would think this — if I may speak to it before you answer, 
Minister — that there is a reality of conflict of interest,. which I 
think you partially acknowledged in your answer. And there is 
certainly a perception that must be taken into account, as well, of 
the independence of the inspector at service, formerly provided 
by the Department of Labour, now provided by your department. 
 
I mean, people respected the inspector when he came on site. The 
inspector had a great deal of power. The inspector could issue, 
and did issue, hundreds — thousands of correction orders every 
year requiring installations to be brought up to standard, and 
performed what I thought was a very, very valuable service. And 
performed it clearly at arms length from everybody involved in 
the electrical, generating, and distribution system, as well as the 
gas distribution system. 
 
(1130) 
 
And as you’ve agreed, I believe, Minister, it is an expenditure 
which is covered by the people involved, the consumer or the . . . 
I think the consumer is the best way to describe it. Whether the 
consumer is residential, an individual, or whether the consumer is 
industrial or commercial, they’re paying the freight. And they 
will pay the freight whether you’re doing it out of your 
department or whether the power corporation is doing it out of 
the power corporation. 
 
And I wonder, in these circumstances, why it makes sense to 
move those services from a department of government, where it 
has functioned so well for so long, to the very utility that is the 
main actor in the electrical and gas distribution system in the 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — You’ve asked a number of questions, 
basically. It’s not one question. 
 
To begin with, it’s a decision that is made to try and improve the 
effectiveness of our inspection service. You, yourself, and I have 
both experienced the frustrations of the great backlogs that have 
been in place for a number of years. 
 
We also . . . And as much as I appreciate the nice handwriting of 
the lady who kept the book that had something like 300,000 cards 
that detailed all of the inspections over the years — and it’s all 
handwritten, hand-filed, a very, very labour-intensive system — 
and I  
  



 
July 10, 1987 

1102 
 

appreciated the work she did, but in this day and age I think we 
have to move beyond that. 
 
The power corporation, because of its present state of 
computerization for billing of power bills, can move that type of 
system into their operation and, with the expertise of the people 
in place, handle it very effectively and much more efficiently than 
we can within the department without spending a considerable 
amount of capital dollars to put computerization in place in our 
department. I think the estimates that have been in place would 
exceed $1.5 million, to just look at that side. 
 
I don’t see the real concern of conflict of interest. Every time that 
there has been a gas connection to a home or to an industry, the 
person from the Saskatchewan Power Corporation that turned the 
gas on always did the initial inspection. So I don’t see that letting 
him go on to inspect the balance of it . . . That initial inspection 
inspected the furnace hook-up mostly. So in many homes, all you 
have is the furnace and the water heater. 
 
So we’re not changing much. And if we, as a department, 
maintain the right to do the monitoring that we feel is necessary, 
then we can go and take a look at what each one of those 
inspectors is doing and whether or not he’s doing that job 
effectively. You wouldn’t have to make many stops in a year to 
see that 25 or 30 or whatever number of inspectors they have are 
really doing an effective job. 
 
as far as the idea that the inspector can now order somebody to 
make a correction, the inspectors under the power corporation 
will be given the same authority to make that kind of an order. 
It’s an absolute must that they have that authority, otherwise our 
system would fall apart. So the order will still be available to that 
inspector, and it must be obeyed. So I think, in that respect, there 
should be no problem. 
 
I would say there’s what I would call almost an arm’s-length 
conflict of interest. The power corporation has an interest in one 
way. The inspector will be an employee of that corporation, but 
will not be the same person who puts the line in place. So it’s an 
arm’s-length kind of a conflict that could appear, but not a very 
serious one really. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Now of the 25.5, now 22.5, person-years in the 
electrical unit, how many of those will vanish from you 
department and reappear on the Saskatchewan Power Corporation 
payroll? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — As I indicated to the member earlier, we are 
anticipating maintaining some monitoring capability. Those 
numbers are not firm at this time. The elevator safety division 
will not transfer. So that drops us down to 23 and one-half 
inspectors. I’m not just sure how many of those . . . The majority 
of them will go, but I couldn’t tell you the exact number. There 
might be 20; there might be 18. You know, there will need to be 
some maintained, and we haven’t really reached the point of 
finalization where I could give that figure. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Now I need clarification with respect to one 
statement that you made, Mr. Minister, and that is  

that those figures in your estimates under vote 5 are for 
approximately half a year? And you indicate yes, and I would ask 
you to expand on that because you show 87 person-years for the 
year under review, and that compared to 119.8 in the previous 
year which, as I pointed out, is a reduction of 32.8 person-years in 
this branch. 
 
But I’d like you to reconcile the figure of 87 person-years with 
your explanation that part of this reduction acknowledges the fact 
that there will be a transfer to the power corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would draw to the member’s attention that 
the only part that’s being proposed to be transferred is electrical 
and gas, so it’s not a half a year for the whole of the public safety; 
it’s just for those people concerned, that part of it. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Yes, I know my question didn’t make it clear 
that I understood that, but I did. And what I want to get at, and I’ll 
get at it directly now, is how you calculated it. Just how did you 
arrive at the conclusion that you were going to require 87 
person-years of employment in this branch during the fiscal year 
under review? 
 
You have talked . . . you have just told me that you plan to 
transfer 18 to 20 person-years to the power corporation, about six 
months into this fiscal year, or six months down the road or 
sometime in the future, and that would be part of the answer. But 
I am now looking for the answer with more precision as to how 
you arrive at 87 person-years in this branch? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — If I understand your question correctly . . . 
we are kind of disputing what you’re asking. But if we’re wrong, 
you’ll ask again I’m sure. 
 
What we basically have here is the total number of the people that 
were here last year, then we had 11 people take early retirement 
in that department, and the number that are anticipated may 
transfer. If you add them together then that . . . if you take the 87 
that we still show and you add on the people that were proposing 
to transfer out, you’ll come back to the figure that we had last 
year. That’s the route that we used to make the calculation of 87. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — With respect to the owner permits, and I’m 
nearing the end of the electrical part of the questions I have for 
you today. Mr. Minister, with respect to the owner permits, 
you’re talking here about a situation where I want to wire my 
rumpus room, and I go to the department and I obtain a permit, 
and that’s called an owner permit. And I think it has some other, 
some more technical designation — a form of some kind or 
another, or a permit of some kind. 
 
You told me that one of your policies or one of your objectives is 
to inspect 100 per cent of these permits. I’ve got some questions 
with respect to that. The first one is: have you been achieving that 
objective? Have you been satisfying that policy; have you been 
inspecting 100 per cent of the owner permits? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The form that you’re looking for is form J. 
And yes, they have been achieving 100 per cent of  
  



 
July 10, 1987 

1103 
 

those, as the member would be aware 
 
When you issue an owner permit, you have a very amateur 
electrician. I’ve done some myself, so I speak from experience. 
But many times when our people go out and do the inspection, 
they almost have to give instructions on how to redo, and to 
correct the errors, because there are many times that dangerous 
circumstances would occur if you did not inspect. 
 
So we take it extremely serious and try to do them and do them 
fairly quickly, because of the lack of experience of the people 
doing the work. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Now the reason why I’m focusing on owner 
permits is of course that the work is naturally done with less 
professionally qualified people, as a general rule, as compared to 
work that a contractor undertakes. 
 
I’m also concerned about it because it is widely know, and indeed 
I’m referring to the Saskatchewan Labour annual report for 
1985-86 — which your officials had some hand in drawing — 
which indicates that of the 2,797 fires recorded in 1985, 
electricity was the largest single cause of fire, accounting for 30.4 
per cent of the total number of fires, or 850 fires, in 1985 can be 
traced to electricity as its single cause. 
 
(1145) 
 
Now my understanding is that most of those electrical fires take 
place in private dwellings, and in some unknown number of 
those, minister, it will be with respect to wiring that was done by 
the owner or pursuant to a form J permit. Now I don’t think . . . 
you may have some explanation with respect to that, and you can 
give it when you answer the question that I’m about to put to you, 
and it is this: my experience, and the experience of people that I 
have spoken to about this, is that the inspection that’s done of a 
form J permit is normally done when the work has been 
completed. And the inspector, on doing the inspection, is limited 
because the inspector can’t see what’s there, except what’s 
obvious. 
 
In other words, if the permit was to install new wall plugs, all the 
inspector sees is the exterior of the wall plug. Now granted he can 
go down in the basement or somewhere and maybe see some 
other parts of it, but generally he can see the exterior of the wall 
plug; he can’t see behind the wall plug or along the way. And the 
kind of inspection that can be carried out at that stage is so very 
limited that in many cases it amounts, I submit, to no inspection 
at all. 
 
If these owner permits must be inspected — and I agree fully 
with anyone who says they must be — then my point is that they 
must be inspected at a time when the inspector can actually see 
something, and not be inspected when all the inspector can see is 
what a nice rumpus room I have and how fine the plastic fittings 
on my wall plugs actually line up with the horizon, if you know 
what I mean. 
 
So I want to summarize that long question, Minister, and ask you 
first of all if you agree that it’s a desirable for those particular 
permits to be inspected at a stage when the inspector can actually 
see something; and what you think  

or what you plan should be done about clearing that situation up, 
in light of the fact that electricity is such a major cause for fires in 
this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Let me respond to the hon. member in a 
number of different areas. There are a number of electrical fires, 
and it’s become fairly serious over the last number of years as 
homes and businesses have increased the number of electrical 
appliances and variety of equipment that is used within the home. 
 
At the time that many of our homes were wired 30 years ago, a 
60-amp entrance was probably adequate to meet the demand. 
Today you may find the same homes with close to 200-amp 
entrance. But the wire in the wall is the same wire. So in many 
cases it’s an overloading of the system that was put in place. 
Sometimes it’s extension cords that are strung all over the houses 
because there weren’t enough outlets provided, and several 
appliances plugged into the same extension cord, causing 
overheating and hence fire. 
 
So there are a number of causes. It’s not just home-owner 
permits. We take the home-owner permit as a very serious issue, 
and so follow it with more detail than we would with a contractor 
permit. 
 
In the cities we insect on a home-owner permit at the completion 
of the rough-in stage, and then once the job is completed, an 
inspection of the finished job. So it overcomes the concern you 
raise with all the work being hidden. It’s all exposed at the time 
of the inspection, and I think that that is a very important part of 
the whole process of home-owner inspection. 
 
In the rural part of the province we still try to do that, but because 
of distances it’s more difficult to achieve. So we do it as much as 
possible, but at times we cannot do the double inspection in their 
circumstances. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — That leads me to the question of just where you 
have inspectors and where you don’t at the present time, 
particularly in light of the fact that three inspectors have been laid 
off. It used to be, Minister, that the province was divided into 15 
inspection districts — Regina, Saskatoon, Estevan, Moose Jaw, 
North Battleford, Prince Albert, Swift Current, Tisdale, and 
Yorkton, with some of those having more than one area. 
 
Now I don’t want to get you involved in a long detailed answer, 
Minister, but my concern is that with the number of inspectors 
that you have now, compared to what had in previous years, and 
particularly after the lay-off of these three people, which parts of 
our province do not now have electrical inspectors working? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Let me correct the member in one area. 
There were no lay-offs. The three people who left us were due to 
retirement. The retirement occurred in Saskatoon and Regina, in 
locations where we had a number of inspectors in each point. So 
all points are covered, and the list that you read, it’s the major 
cities, plus Tisdale, that have inspectors in place. And you read 
the list right down. It is the same list today. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, I’d like to direct a few  
  



 
July 10, 1987 

1104 
 

brief questions to you about the area which you’ve just been 
discussing with the member from Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s brief? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I’ll try and be brief. You said, I believe, 
Mr. Minister, that you have added a function to the public safety 
sector, namely the safety and amusement rides inspection. If so, 
how many person-years do you anticipate that function will 
require? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — As the member will realize, most of those 
inspections occur just in the summer months during the season 
when amusement rides are operating. We anticipate the addition 
to be approximately one person-year. But during the summer 
period three people will do that work as required, and will 
continue to do the elevator safety as well. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, you stated that the number 
of electrical permits that were issued last year were 31,308, 
within that neighbourhood. Can you give me an indication of how 
many permits were not inspected, and if you have a rural-urban 
breakdown? And I’m particularly interested in residential 
rural-urban breakdown. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — In the last year we cleared 22,600 and some 
odd permits, but I don’t have a break out of the rural/urban split. 
That would take a tremendous amount of work to pull that out. 
You know, as the permits come in, they come in and they’re put 
in place by number. It would take a lot of detailed work, and as I 
indicated to the former member, at this time all of that work is 
hand catalogued and hand filed. It’s not like going to a computer 
and calling for it. It would be strictly a very manual process, and 
it would be hard to come by. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, could I get you to 
clarify. . . .give me the figure again, 22 thousand and something? 
Was that the number of residential permits, and if so, how many 
were actually inspected? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The total was 22,686 that were completed 
last year. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Okay. You’ve stated that the department 
will maintain a monitoring function in the area of gas and 
electrical inspection. How many person-years do you expect to 
use in monitoring that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — As I indicated to the former member, that 
figure is not finalized yet. We’re working on it. Because it’s a 
new area, it’s a little bit difficult to arrive at the number that we 
may need. So I would hesitate to give you a firm figure at this 
time. We’re still working through that process. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — You said that . . . I want to get the number, 
Mr. Minister, of gas inspectors and electrical inspectors in ‘85 
and ‘86, the two previous, the one just closed and the one before 
it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — There would have been 20 gas inspectors in 
both years, in 1985-86 and ‘86-87, and the  

23.5 in electrical in both of those years. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, I’m going to ask you once 
more to try and give me a figure on the number of inspectors, gas, 
and the number of inspectors, electrical, that you will require to 
monitor in this estimate that’s before us. And I realize what you 
said, and I appreciate what you said, that there’s some difficulty 
in finalizing a figure there. But can you give me an unofficial 
guestimate of how many you expect in each of those areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — If the member will take it strictly as a 
guestimate, because I certainly don’t have a firm figure and I’ve 
told you that, but approximately two people in each area — two 
gas, two electrical would likely be sufficient to do that. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I just want to get 
a figure so I can see how correct you were next year, how 
accurate you were next year. With regard to the number of 
permits issued — if I can just go back to that — there were a total 
of 31,308 of which you said 22,686 residential were inspected. 
How many of those were inspected? Were they all inspected? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — There were 22,686 permits completed. They 
were inspected and completed. But they were not all residential, 
like that’s . . . of the total 31,308, 22,686 were inspected and 
completed. 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — All right then. Let me clarify. Of the 
31,308 permits, they’re all permits; they’re not just residential? I 
see. Okay. And of those — all of them — 22,68 were completed 
and inspected? Yes. Did you have a J permit when you were 
doing your wiring? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That was a long time ago, long before I was 
in this business. Yes, I did have. Yes, it was inspected, and it even 
passed. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I had one of those too, and it passed — 
which is really not necessary for you to answer the question, Mr. 
Minister. Mr. Minister, how many correction orders were issued 
in the residential area, or do you have it just as a general figure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The correction orders would be for the 
overall inspection. There were 2,244 correction orders issued. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Consequently this would require a further 
inspection, and I gather there’s an additional charge for a further 
inspection. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We issue the correction order and then we 
go back and inspect that, and on that first call-back there would 
be no additional charge. But if we have to go back a second time, 
like a correction order, then a reinspection, and if a second 
reinspection is required, then there would be change. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — You said, Mr. Minister, I believe, that 
there were three inspectors took retirement in the year closed, just 
closed, and they were not replaced. Is  
  



 
July 10, 1987 

1105 
 

that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, they were not replaced because we are 
intending to transfer to Saskatchewan Power Corporation. We 
thought it would be better to leave it open and let them do the 
hiring. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, after having 
listened to the questions raised by the member for Fairview and 
some questions raised by myself; and in view of the fact that 
there were thousands of electrical permits that were issued, that 
were not inspected; and in view of the fact that three inspectors 
have retired, which will not be replaced for upwards of 6 months; 
and in view of the fact that the number of correction orders will 
probably continue at the level which they’re at, if not exceed that; 
and for the reasons which the member for Fairview brought to the 
attention of the Assembly about transferring of inspection staff to 
the Saskatchewan Power Corporation — and the question that is 
automatically raised about conflict of interest — I feel that 
estimates are not sufficient. 
 
There has been a drastic reduction in the number of person-years 
under the area of public safety. The member from Fairview has 
demonstrated adequately that there is a serious problem with 
regards to electrical fires, which has not been satisfied at this 
point; therefore I don’t feel that the provisions within the 
estimates here are satisfactory. And I know the minister will 
disagree with me; I can rest assured that he will rise and disagree 
with me. 
 
So, in assuming that, I will move on to the next brief subject 
which I wanted to deal with, and that is the question that I raised 
earlier, Mr. Minister, with regard to further elaboration on the 
figures related to the property management corporation and a 
more detailed examination. You said that at the time you would 
attempt to provide me with more detailed figures, and I wonder if 
you have those figures. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We went back through to the property 
management corporation and they couldn’t give us a detailed 
breakdown because they said they basically don’t have it yet. 
This is an estimate, as I told you, and at the end of the year we 
hope to have it that much more firm. 
 
The property management corporation is also new. They take a 
look at the space that we occupy and they make an estimate of 
what that space is now . . . what they are now paying. They make 
an estimate of what our postage costs have been in the past year, 
what our furniture costs have been in the past year, and those are 
the figures that are included in that overall figure of 987,000, I 
believe is the figure; I just don’t have the book open to it. 
 
But they were not able, when my staff contacted them, to give us 
that breakdown yet. It’ll be available some time this year, but it 
isn’t available at this point. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, what kind of an agreement 
do you have with the property management corporation to protect 
yourself from them gouging you? I want to know because I’m 
sure that the minister who’s in charge of that is going to be 
charging as much as he possibly can to the different departments, 
knowing that  

minister. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well that minister will have his reasons, 
and the philosophy of this government provides the reasons why 
that will occur. It’s related with the philosophy of this 
government which has previously been discussed in this House 
and which I won’t get into at this time. 
 
I want to know how the minister is going to protect himself. How 
does he know he’s not being charged too much? You must have 
some way of assessing it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I suppose that I could tell you that I’ll watch 
the hon. member that’s in charge of the property management 
corporation very carefully to see that he doesn’t overcharge me 
for anything. As we mail letters we keep track of what the cost is. 
Whenever we need furniture — and we haven’t needed very 
much — we’ll keep track of what the cost is. During the course of 
negotiations, we’ll put a figure on what the rental cost is per 
square foot is. And when we add it all up at the end of the year, if 
it hasn’t come to as much as this 987,000, then we just won’t 
agree to pay it. So that will be the balance. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — In dealing with that minister which is 
going to provide his government with new efficiency and 
effectiveness in the administration of public buildings, I wonder 
if you could, at the first opportunity you get, crank him up a bit, 
because quite frankly, for an effective, efficient operation I’m not 
impressed at this point. And I’m sure that it’s causing you some 
problem, and I can understand if you don’t want to discuss it 
here, because you don’t want to put that minister on the spot. But 
I’ve asked the minister for information months ago and haven’t 
received it yet. I’m sure your having the same problem with him 
that I’m having. 
 
I’m not prepared to accept the fact that you’re telling me that you 
cannot provide more detailed information. I’m going to continue 
to seek that information. I’m not prepared to accept that at this 
time, for whatever lengths of time it takes to acquire that 
information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think I gave you the only answer I could to 
that question, and I think I’ll just leave it there. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I want to come back Minister, to tour apparent 
plan to transfer services to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 
And I’m glad that the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation shares some of my concerns, I think. 
 
And I’m not surprised, because this is an idea that’s been gone 
over and over and over again in these past years and has always 
been rejected for what were considered, by officials and ministers 
at the time, to be very valid reasons. I want to ask you, Mr. 
Minister, when this latest consideration of the subject began? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think the decision was taken in late ‘86 to 
proceed to investigate and follow it through. And because the 
system has been in place a in a number of other governments 
across Canada and seems to have worked  
  



 
July 10, 1987 

1106 
 

reasonably well, we feel that we can put it in place and that it will 
work reasonably well. We’ll watch it carefully and make 
adjustments, where necessary, to see that it works right. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Minister, can you tell me in what jurisdictions 
the electrical inspections are carried out by the utility with the 
monopoly over that system, as well as in what jurisdictions the 
gas distribution system is inspected by the utility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Different provinces have varying degrees of 
this. But two provinces that have gone that route fairly standardly 
are Manitoba and Ontario. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Are you telling me that in Ontario the natural 
gas distributor is responsible for the inspection of gas 
installation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — In Ontario the electrical is with Ontario 
Hydro. Their gas inspection is with Consumers Gas. So it’s a 
very similar idea, not both with the power corporation as it would 
be in our case, but both with deliverers of the product. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Are you arguing that we should sell off 
the gas facilities? 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — No, I’m not arguing. I’m going to respond to 
the Minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation. I’m not arguing we should sell off the gas facility. 
 
What I’m going to ask you, Mr. Minister, is simply this: because 
this is an idea that you agree has been considered in the past — 
and I’ll tell you it’s been considered a number of times in the past 
and has been rejected on more than one occasion for what were 
considered good and valid reasons — and because I submit we 
haven’t uncovered any new reason for doing it this morning, but 
nothing’s changed out there that would now make what was a bad 
idea into a good idea, I come to the conclusion that what were 
doing here is, in part, cooking the books. 
 
We’re making it appear that the size of the Saskatchewan Public 
Service has been reduced, which we all heard or read the 
statement, the really incredible statement from the Minister of 
Finance on March 5 of this year in which he boasted that, or in 
which he said that there was a plan to cut the size of the public 
service of Saskatchewan by 2,000 people. I think that this is your 
contribution to that. And I want to put that to you. You looked 
around your department and you saw, well, the easiest thing that 
you could do was to dust off this old discredited plan of 
transferring these units over to the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation and that would be your contribution to the 2,000 
person target of the Minister of Finance. 
 
And while your answering that question, answer it in the light of 
this comment. It lacks reality. The service now isn’t costing the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan any money, in the sense that you 
obtain enough revenue from these inspections to more or less 
cover the cost of the service.  

If you increased gas and electrical inspectors into your 
department, the increased revenue that would be generated would 
more or less cover the increased cost of those people. By taking 
them away from your department, removing them as employees 
in the public service, and by giving them off to the Crown 
corporation, the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, you’re not 
reducing the cost to the people of Saskatchewan, you’re not 
affecting the costs of the people of Saskatchewan. All you’re 
doing is cosmetic. Just on the surface you make it look like 
you’re doing your share to contribute to the objectives, the 
objectionable objectives of the Minister of Finance. I’d like your 
comment on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, I guess the hon. member is entitled to 
his opinion. I don’t happen to agree with the opinion. To begin 
with, last year in electrical inspections we covered approximately 
73 per cent of the costs that our department experienced. So there 
are some very real costs. Approximately 27 per cent of the cost 
was borne by the tax payers. The reason for the change, I think, is 
so that we can avoid a lot of duplication. 
 
When you come to the gas inspection, I think it’s fairly 
straightforward. Every time that there is a connection at a 
business or at a home, the gas side of Sask Power has to send a 
person to that sight to make that final connection, to turn the gas 
on. The same person can be qualified to do the inspection. So you 
wouldn’t have Sask Power running somebody to the site and then 
our branch sending an inspector to the site. The same person can 
be trained and qualified to turn the gas on and to do the actual 
inspection. 
 
So we’ll save duplication of service in that respect. It should cut 
considerable cost for the government and still do every bit as an 
effective and safe job as we had in the past. 
 
On the electrical side, I don’t know whether we can have quite 
the same savings. But Sask Power has fairly qualified people in 
many areas and they may choose to use them. The method they 
use to put the inspectors in place will be entirely their method. 
 
But where I did indicate to you that there could be significant 
savings in Sask Power was in the processing, the administrative 
side where you handle all of those bills. They have the billing 
process in place. So they can handle it in their computers without 
spending quite a few dollars to achieve it. 
 
I believe that the decision is a good decision. The reason that it 
likely wasn’t made before is that you didn’t have the courage to 
step out and make a change. I think that we have the courage to 
step out and make change. We’re doing that and time will tell. 
And I believe when we’re back in the House a year from now, it 
will likely show that the change was a good change. 
 
The former member asked a question and, if I may, I’d like to 
answer it. He indicated that the retirements were going to be for 
six months before we put any inspectors in place. The retirements 
basically took effect on June 1, and likely the figure, time wise, 
will be about a three-month period when we will be short those 
three people. After that the  
  



 
July 10, 1987 

1107 
 

power corporation can hire three, or they can hire six, or whatever 
they feel they need to do the job. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I want one last question in respect of this 
debate that we seem to be having about whether this makes any 
sense or not, and it has to do with the way in which you intend to 
implement that decision, if that is, in fact, what you decide to do. 
 
How will it happen? Is this something that will be brought to this 
House for discussion and debate, or is this something that will 
just be slipped through under the expanded powers that the 
cabinet has to make these kinds of changes, under the legislation 
that was passed in December? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that it will require legislative 
change, and that would come back before this House for debate. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Well, I’m glad to hear that, Minister, because if 
I may say, with respect to you and your officials, it is a 
wrong-headed idea. I mean, it is not enough to just pass it off by 
saying you hope to avoid some duplications with respect to the 
people who look at gas installations in residences. It’s a much, 
much, much more complex area than that, as your own officials 
will advise you. 
 
And the fact that the Minister of Finance wants to reduce on 
paper the size of the public service is not a reason for doing this 
thing. There has to be a more rational reason for making the 
change. And I’m glad that you’re bringing this legislation before 
the House so it can be debated. And again, with respect, I would 
just implore that you review very carefully the implications of 
this decision before you decide to bring that legislation here. 
 
I would also urge you to consult widely in the community with 
respect to these changes in the electrical community, if I can use 
that — the contractors and the groups involved — and similarly 
in the question of gas. Because it’s my impression, based on my 
experience, that the community is not with you on this idea. 
 
And I realize as I sit down that I have not left you with anything 
to respond to because I just made a representation to you. 
 
I have one more question and that concerns your inspection of 
amusement rides. How many person-years are you devoting to 
that inspection service, and will you describe to the House how 
that service works? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well I did answer that question for the 
member from Saskatoon Westmount. You may have been out of 
the Chamber for a minute. 
 
There will be one extra person added to the elevator and safety 
division. The three people involved in that division then will do 
the inspections during the period in the summer when those 
amusement rides are involved. We estimate the cost will be 
approximately one person-year, but it will be divided among 
three people who will do the work. And we have sent people 
away for special training so that they are qualified to do the 
inspection of  

amusement rides. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, I would like to ask you a few questions with respect to 
environmental matters relating to uranium mining and uranium 
transport. 
 
One of the concerns that I have and that our party has is the 
problem of handling radioactive tailings in northern 
Saskatchewan, a problem which I think all politicians a decade 
ago underestimated in terms of it’s seriousness, over 30 million 
tons of radioactive mill tailings in northern Saskatchewan that 
have not been properly disposed of, and frankly, today in many 
cases are still not being properly disposed of. 
 
My first question is a very non-partisan question, in the sense that 
all political parties during their term in office didn’t resolve the 
problem, but it’s clear today that it needs to be resolved. And that 
is that we have two abandoned uranium mines in this province 
that were abandoned at a time when the problems associated with 
mill tailings were not sufficiently recognized that the difficulties 
were dealt with seriously. 
 
At both the old Gunnar uranium mine and the Lorado uranium 
mine, there are large quantities of radioactive tailings on the 
surface, and in some cases, in lake waters that have never been 
covered over or properly disposed of in any way. These pose a 
long-term hazard to the environment. 
 
As you will know, Mr. Minister, the result of mining uranium 
brings to the surface radioactive materials like radium and 
thorium, with very, very long half-lives — radium with a half-life 
of 80,000 years. In other words, in 80,000 years, half the amount 
of radium will still be on the surface and will still be radioactive. 
Radium, for example, is a carcinogen. It can cause genetic 
damage to people who are exposed to it. 
 
My question to you is: what action is your government now 
prepared to take to clean up the Gunnar uranium mine site, the 
tailing site there, the tailing site at Lorado, to make sure that those 
tailings are properly disposed of and properly covered over? 
What action are you contemplating to resolve that problem now 
that the long-term hazards and the health risks associated with 
radium and thorium spreading into the environment are now well 
known? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that the national mine tailings 
commission has done a fairly major study identifying many of the 
problems on the sites that the hon. member is raising. As well, 
our own department has done some studies on the same general 
area of mine tailings. The branch in the department is now 
working putting together the ideas from those different studies. 
The actual solution that we will use is not being projected as yet. 
They’re still working with it. It’s a very complex matter, as the 
member knows, and I’m advised that they are working on it now 
with the view of coming forward with the process that will be 
used to help to eliminate the problem that now exists. 
  



 
July 10, 1987 

1108 
 

Mr. Prebble: — I wonder if the minister could give the House a 
commitment that during this coming term of office of your 
government, you will take some concrete steps towards resolving 
the problem, particularly in three areas. One, there is an obvious 
need to cover over the radioactive tailings that are now laying on 
the surface. 
 
Second, you’ve got to do something about fencing off the area so 
that people don’t have easy access to the tailings and take 
unnecessary health risks by wandering over them. 
 
And third — and I want the minister to very specifically 
comment on this matter — I’m very concerned about the fact that 
for far too long radioactive tailings have been left in Langley 
Bay, a bay of Lake Athabasca that for a long time during the ‘70s 
and early ‘80s was fairly heavily fished. You’ve got to either 
remove the radioactive tailings from the bay, Mr. Minister, or 
alternatively, you’ve got to dam that bay off from the rest of Lake 
Athabasca so that the tailings don’t continue to allow 
radioactivity to leach into the lake. 
 
Will you give the legislature a commitment that you’ll deal with 
the problem of Langley Bay during this upcoming term of office, 
during the next three years in other words. And will you also give 
a commitment that you will take action over the next three years 
to stop the spread of radioactive tailings at the abandoned Gunnar 
and Lorado sites and cover them over? 
 
(1230) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that Langley Bay is also in the 
studies that have been completed and will be part of the area that 
will be looked at. The member realizes that these mines and the 
tailings have been there and deserted for a long time. This didn’t 
happen in the last short while; it’s been there for probably 20 to 
25 years. 
 
We are looking at it. I suppose we’ve all learned a considerable 
more about the dangers to the environment from tailings over the 
past number of years, more than they knew in 1950 and so on. 
But the solutions are not available yet and I can’t give the kind of 
guarantees that the member is asking for. We’re certainly 
working towards that, but I can’t give guarantees. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well the solutions, Mr. Minister, are not as 
vague as you suggest. And I’m not raising this in a partisan 
manner, as I said, because as you’ve pointed out, every 
government, every government, every political party has been in 
office at some point since those mines were abandoned. But what 
I’m saying to you now is that it’s becoming clear, a lot more is 
known about the health risks of radiation than was known 25 
years ago. It’s clear that this problem has got to be resolved. 
 
And what I’m saying to you is there are two or three fairly simple 
things you can do. One, you can dam off Langley Bay so that the 
radioactive materials will no longer work their way from Langley 
Bay into the rest of Lake Athabasca. That’s something concrete 
you can do. Secondly, you can make arrangements to have the 
tailing piles that are left behind at Gunnar and Lorado  

covered over in the way you’re now requiring that to be done at 
other uranium mines. And thirdly, you can fence the area off. 
 
Now will you give the legislature a commitment that you’ll take 
action along those lines in the next three years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that my staff are looking at the 
issue very seriously and I’ve given the member that information. 
For us to begin to resolve the issue without looking at all the 
facets of it would not be wise. We’ve done many, many studies. 
The studies were done by people with expertise in the area and I 
think we should draw on all of the information we have so that 
when you do make the necessary corrections, we do it to the best 
of the ability that we have as a government and as a department. 
 
It’s certainly an issue that we want to resolve. But we want to 
resolve it in the best possible manner, and that’s what we’re 
approaching and I hope that we will achieve it in the next short 
while. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Further on this question of these abandoned 
tailing sites. I wonder if the minister would consider this. We are 
approaching this, as my colleague from Saskatoon University 
says, in a non-partisan way, and you didn’t create the problem, 
Minister. You just happen to be the minister now at a time when 
it’s clear to everyone that something has to be done about it. 
 
You fly over these tailings areas, one of them in particular in a 
plane, and you see the erosion lines directly from the tailings area 
right into Lake Athabasca and you can . . . it’s coloured, and a 
very dramatic sight, and it’s obvious that water is going from the 
tailings area directly into the lake and something has to be done. 
 
My colleague says that it should be covered, and it should, 
because it’s water that leaches radio-nuclides from the tailings 
area into the environment, into the water system. It’s water 
running through there. It’s either surface water running along the 
top or it’s surface water that becomes ground water that carries 
the radio-nuclides out into the water system, or it’s underground 
water passing through. And of course there’s underground water 
everywhere, but in northern Saskatchewan there is a lot of it 
running quite near the surface. 
 
And what I want to ask you, Minister, is whether in light of the 
things that my colleague and I have said, you or your department 
are prepared to share with us these studies that have been done 
and the reports that have been made to you. 
 
We come to this, Minister, we come to this subject with some 
level of experience and expertise, and we would like to think that 
we could make a contribution to your consideration of this 
problem, particularly considering that our approach to it is 
non-partisan. And we are as anxious as you, and we assume that 
you are as anxious as we are, that there be a solution to it. Can I 
ask you whether you would be good enough to do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that these studies are public 
studies and we could provide you with a list of the  
  



 
July 10, 1987 

1109 
 

names of the studies and possible sources where you could access 
them. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — That would be very good, Minister. And can I 
also ask you that if there are internal studies or studies done for 
the department that are not publicly available, whether we could 
get copies of these studies, if that’s feasible, or at least very 
detailed précis of these studies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would think that there would be no 
problem in giving the reports that have been done within the 
department. Now they’ve done a number of studies. I hope that 
they don’t miss one in picking them up because it’s over a long 
period. But we’ll do the best we can to give them to you. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to 
ask the minister a question with respect to the present actions that 
are being taken by Amok to handle leach tailings at Cluff Lake. 
The minister will be aware of the fact that there has been some 
controversy surrounding whether or not an environmental impact 
assessment ought to have been done before Amok embarked on 
their latest plan to remove highly radioactive uranium mine 
tailings from several hundred — in fact, 3,000 — concrete vaults, 
process them, and release the radioactive materials into the 
regular tailings pond that’s operated by Amok. 
 
The question that I want to ask the minister is: every plan that 
Amok implemented up to this time, with respect to this problem 
of these very highly radioactive leach tailings, has been 
unsuccessful. I can remember in 1977, when the Cluff Lake 
board of inquiry hearings were on, and Amok assured us at that 
time at those hearings that the radioactive vaults that it was 
designing, that the waste, the radioactive waste, would be placed 
in these concrete vaults, would be secure for hundreds of years. 
That’s what they promised. And every plan that they’ve 
undertaken to handle those radioactive vaults since putting the 
radioactive materials in them has been a dismal failure, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
And now what Amok is essentially doing is they’re undertaking a 
disposal plan that they originally promised the public, the 
Saskatchewan public, they’d never undertake. They’re putting the 
radioactive tailings into the regular tailings pond where they said 
they’d never go. 
 
And my question to you is: what assurance do you have from 
Amok and what assurance has your department arrived at that this 
tailings disposal plan that Amok is now embarked on is going to 
work any better than all the other plans they’ve tried in the past 
that have all failed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member has followed this issue for 
many more years than I have, and so I would say, for the most 
part, your facts are correct. However, the decision to put the leach 
tailings into the concrete barrels was a temporary storage 
position. That was not the original decision that was made in 
1977, but that was the temporary. And it was part of the 
responsibility of Amok to look for a solution for the disposal of 
those leach tails. They have looked for that method until now, 
and have finally come to a position where they’ve added a fair 

addition to their plant, through their processing system, and are 
able to take these leach tail barrels, dump them in, mix them with 
other ore to reduce the concentrations, and they are reprocessing. 
 
I think really what Amok has done is to find a solution to a very, 
very difficult problem that has been facing them and the province 
for a number of years. Personally, I’m glad that that’s the route 
they are taking, and that gradually we’re going to get rid of those 
barrels, because they’ve been sitting out in the environment. 
They’ve been very difficult to control the run-off from that site. 
Some of the barrels were starting to crack from frost in the 
winter-time, and the problem was getting worse, so that it was 
time that we did deal with it. 
 
Amok has found a method, and it seems to be working as well as 
that kind of a problem can be handled. At the time they’ve 
processed something over 900 of those barrels. They’re working 
towards it by the end of this year. Likely the majority of them 
will be gone — hopefully all of them. It will likely be much 
better environmentally for the people in that area and for the 
whole province. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, the minister simply hasn’t answered my 
question, which is: what assurance does your department have 
that this proposal will be any more successful than all the other 
proposals Amok came up with in the past, that have all been 
dismal failures? 
 
The point I want to make to the minister is that this whole Cluff 
Lake uranium mine operation, from the point of view of waste 
disposal, is one giant experiment. And you, sir, consciously made 
a decision, and your predecessor made a decision, not to require 
an environmental impact assessment to be done before this new 
waste disposal plan was put into place. 
 
And you made no provision for public hearings into this waste 
disposal problem, even though the wastes involved are going to 
be radioactive for the next 150,000 years. And future generations, 
if the problem hasn’t been handled properly, are going to have to 
sit down and try to figure out how to dispose of it. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, my question to you is: first, will you answer 
my original question? And secondly, will you explain, in light of 
your inadequacy to answer the first question, why you didn’t 
require an environmental impact assessment, and why you didn’t 
make provisions for public hearings before this waste disposal 
plan went ahead? 
 
(1245) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think I’ve answered that question many 
times, and the hon. member just asks it again. Let me tell you 
that, under The Environmental Assessment Act, that processing 
was not deemed to be a development and therefore did not 
require an environmental impact assessment. 
 
I can tell the hon. member that I took my mine pollution staff; we 
went to the site and reviewed the whole processing equipment 
and plant that was put in place. My staff did the necessary 
research to be sure that what they  
  



 
July 10, 1987 

1110 
 

were telling us was right. I’m advised that the levels of emissions 
going into the leach-tail area now is exactly what was predicted. 
And my staff have monitored, and they advise me that they were 
predicted and that’s what’s happening. So I think maybe you’ve 
had some concerns with what Amok has promised in the past, 
and it wasn’t to your liking. But I believe that what Amok has 
done in this circumstance has been exactly as predicted, and it 
seems to be working reasonably well. 
 
One of the staff member, the union local president, Gord Bedient, 
said that as long as there’s plenty of fresh air and ventilation at 
the mine that there should be no problem with the handling of the 
leach tails, and they’re reasonably satisfied that radiation to them 
as a staff will not be a problem. 
 
I don’t know what answer other than that that I can give to the 
member. I believe that we reviewed it very carefully. We 
followed the legislation that is written down. We gave the 
necessary permission and permits to amok to proceed with the 
processing of the leach tails. The project is going ahead, and I 
really believe that at the end of this year the environment in that 
area is going to be better, not worse. So those are the answers I 
would give you. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, I guess my only comment 
would be that I believe all you’re doing is shifting the problem 
from a problem on the surface where, albeit it’s an eyesore but at 
least it’s readily accessible and can be easily studied, to a problem 
that’s going to end up being in the tailings ponds, which leads to 
my next comment. 
 
That is, the policy of your department so far has been, with 
respect to the handling of tailings ponds and radioactive tailings, 
to require only a covering of six-tenths of 1 meter of gravel, 
coarse rock, and other materials, over something that is 
essentially going to be radioactive for the next 150,000 years. 
That’s all you required at Uranium City — six-tenths of a meter. 
I’ve read dozens of studies that recommend as much as 20 to 30 
feet minimum of covering over radioactive tailings. And my 
question to you is: when are you going to start following the kind 
of recommendations that are coming out of a lot of U.S. reports, 
as an example, that require covering over tailings ponds of 20 to 
30 meters to reduce radiation emissions, instead of just six-tenths 
of a meter? Why didn’t you require that at Uranium City, and 
why aren’t you going to require that at a uranium mine like Cluff 
Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — You can quote from American figures, but 
every tailings area has different circumstances. At Beaver Lodge, 
where you say that they are using six-tenths of a meter, that is an 
area where the tailings are wet. And the emissions of radon gas 
from wet tailings will not be as serious as they would be in dry 
tailings. 
 
If it were dry tailings, there may e need for heavier cover — that 
I’m not sure of. But because the tailings are wet, it is deemed that 
the cover that is now provided is adequate in that area. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, I want to say that in my 
view I think you’re making a very serious mistake. A  

future generation of Saskatchewan residents is going to have to 
go back and handle this whole problem of tailings disposal again, 
because of the failure of your government to handle it properly. 
Six-tenths of a meter of coverage over millions of tons of 
radioactive materials at different mines in this province is never 
going to stand up to changes in weather conditions and to all the 
changes that are going to take place over the next 150,000 years. 
Not a chance, Mr. Minister, and you know that, and your 
department knows that. This is just a . . . You’re just undertaking 
a very, very temporary disposal solution to what is a very 
long-term disposal problem, and another generation is going to 
have to come back and do the work all over again after the 
uranium mining companies are no longer around to cover any of 
the costs involved. And I think you’re making a very serious 
mistake. 
 
I want to ask you another question, because time is short, and 
shift over to the Collins Bay B-Zone Uranium Mine and ask you 
two specific questions. One is: how in the name of God, did you 
ever come to justify, Mr. Minister, allowing a uranium mine to 
open and mine millions of tons of radioactive ore within 100 
meters of one of the richest and most valuable water resources 
that we have in this province, Wollaston Lake. How could you 
ever justify opening a uranium mine within 100 meters of a lake, 
closer to a lake than most cottages in this province are to a lake? 
 
And in addition to that, while you answer that question, could 
you explain to me why, at the same time as you allowed that 
uranium mine to go ahead, you watered down the lease 
agreement, dramatically, between your government and the 
uranium mining company involved, so that most of the major 
provisions that were in the lease agreement between the Key 
Lake Mining Corporation and this government were taken out of 
the lease agreement between your government and Eldorado? 
Can you explain why you watered down the lease agreements, 
that had been signed by the previous NDP government, so badly, 
when you signed the lease agreement with Eldorado? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well the hon. member has made quite a 
speech and covered a lot of areas. 
 
To begin with, when you got up, you told me you were going to 
be non-political, and I think I just detected a note of politics in 
that last speech. Let me also have a little note of politics. 
 
The Beaver Lodge situation, to begin with, was left in a very, 
very poor condition when your government was in office, and 
we’ve moved in and we’ve improved the situation considerable. 
I’m not saying it’s perfect, but it is certainly much better than it 
ever was at the time that you were on the government side of the 
House. 
 
As it relates to Wollaston Lake, our department doesn’t directly 
put in the lease arrangements — that’s done with a different 
department. The pit at Collins Bay is much lower than the lake 
level, and water naturally runs downhill, so you’re not going to 
have seepage going from the mine into the lake. Rather, the 
seepage will go the opposite way, will go from the lake into the 
mine. And any waters that go into that mine are handled through 
the  
  



 
July 10, 1987 

1111 
 

normal process, and it runs through the mill. 
 
So you don’t have a very serious problem there at this point. 
Even though it was situated close to the lake, it is at a lower level 
than the lake. The water is running away from the lake, and all 
tests of lake water show that there has been no contamination of 
Wollaston Lake. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:59 p.m. 
 
 


