


















































June 22, 1987 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 22, 1987 
 

609 
 

 
EVENING SITTING 

 
SPECIAL ORDER 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the amendment thereto 
moved by Mr. Tchorzewski. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I was in 
the midst of saying prior to supper recess, I think it’s time that 
the people of Saskatchewan began to truly examine the nature 
of the hidden agenda put forward by the Conservative 
government. And they’ve seen the secret agenda of cuts, of 
slashes, of hacks brought out of the closet after the last election 
because they didn’t have the political courage to put their secret 
agenda forward to the people because they knew they wouldn’t 
get elected. 
 
But there’s one part of that secret agenda, Mr. Speaker, that 
they left in the closet, and that part of the secret agenda is the 
reason for doing what they’re doing. And it is not, as we have 
shown and we will continue to show to the people of 
Saskatchewan, it is not the fiscal fantasy land dreamed up by 
the Minister of Finance. It has absolutely nothing to do with the 
statistics put forward, the twisted and insidious statistics put 
forward by the member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden. 
 
There’s another reason for what they’re doing, and that reason, I 
submit, is one which this government has put openly and has 
put on the table for the people of Saskatchewan, and that’s the 
reason of free trade. Because we are seeing, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, what free trade really means to Saskatchewan, in the 
slashing of health care, in the slashing of education, in the 
slashing of social services. We are looking into the future of our 
country and our province. 
 
I refer the members to a good booklet written by Mr. Ed Finn, a 
researcher, well-known Canadian researcher. It’s called “The 
Free Trade Delusion.” And it’s a very, very apt title, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, because of the kind of delusion that the 
members opposite are living in, the kind of deluded world, 
deluded reality and extremist visions that they have. And it talks 
about in this little booklet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, something that 
the Premier of this province is very fond of using — a buzz 
word, a quotation, a phrase — and those are the so-called non-
tariff barriers to free trade. 
 
This is what Mr. Finn has to say about those non-tariff barriers 
to free trade. First of all he asks the question: what are non-
tariff barriers? And the answer that he gives is this: 
 

They are government measures designed to discourage or 
block imports, mostly by giving preferential treatment to 
goods or services produced in Canada. They cover a broad 
range of  

policies, from setting quotas on foreign-made products to 
subsidizing exports, from giving domestic firms tax breaks 
to fixing price levels through marketing boards. Even 
Canada’s superior social programs . . . 

 
Now I want you to pay attention to this Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

Even Canada’s superior social programs such as medicare 
and unemployment insurance are considered unfair 
subsidies by some Americans. 

 
Those “some Americans” happen to be the people who sit on 
the negotiating team for the American government at the free 
trade talks in Ottawa. And they asked another question: well 
how do they reach that conclusion? And the answer that Mr. 
Finn gives is: 
 

They argue that to the extent that our more generous social 
services interfere with market forces, they give our 
producers and workers an unfair competitive advantage. 
Our fishermen, for example, unlike those in the United 
States, are entitled to unemployment insurance benefits 
which the Americans claim puts their fishermen at a 
disadvantage. And they see medicare as an indirect 
subsidy to firms and workers who don’t have to finance 
their health care from their own pockets so as to have . . . 
(as so many have to do in the United States.) 

 
So the Americans want us to get rid of these programs and 
policies to bring our social security system down to their level. 
 
The term for this process is harmonization. And you know, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I heard that word. I heard “in tune,” I heard 
“harmonization,” I heard “bringing in step with.” Those phrases 
were contained in the budget of the government opposite 
because that’s what they’re talking about. They want to bring 
our social services — and I’m talking about social services in 
the broad sense — they want to bring them into harmonization 
with those of the Americans. Because the American masters are 
putting pressure on the government opposite for the reasons that 
Mr. Finn has outlined in this booklet, because they see it as 
non-tariff barriers to free trade. 
 
And that’s what free trade brings. That’s what free trade will 
bring to this province. We see it in the government’s . . . in the 
agenda of the government opposite. We see it in this budget. 
We see it in their actions. They are leveling the playing field. 
That’s what they call it, a level playing field. And they’re 
leveling medicare and they’re leveling education and they’re 
leveling social services and they are leveling all those hills of 
progress that the people of Saskatchewan have built up since 
1944, since the election of the first socialist government in 
Canada. The mountains of progress that the people of this 
province have built, the Tories are leveling. 
 
You know in North Dakota, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they have 
along the sides of the highway: welcome to North Dakota, 
mountain removal project completed. And I  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

610 
 

predict that in four years we’ll see similar signs up on the sides 
of the highways in Saskatchewan: welcome to Saskatchewan, 
the mountains of social progress removed compliments of your 
friendly Conservative government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province don’t want that. 
They don’t want that. They don’t want this budget, and they 
don’t want this government. They don’t want this government. 
They want a level playing field. The government opposite 
wants a level playing field, one that’s nothing more than a 
barren wasteland of rapacious capitalism, of rapacious free 
enterprise. That’s the kind of level playing field that these 
people are interested in, and in the process they are intending to 
level the social progress of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Free trade is their hidden agenda. Free trade is behind the kind 
of things that this government did in its budget and before the 
budget, and the kind of slashing and hacking that’s taking place, 
we’re going to lay that on the doorsteps of free trade, because 
they’ve been talking about it and they mean it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to conclude with a few words as 
to the future of this province and the future of certain members 
opposite. The people don’t want you, gentlemen and ladies. The 
people don’t want you. The 7,000 people that were out front of 
this legislature were saying, we don’t want you. We don’t want 
your social programs. We don’t want your free trade. We don’t 
want the kind of hacking and slashing that you’ve done. We 
don’t want you, they say, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They say, we 
don’t want you because you lied to us. They say, we don’t want 
you because you didn’t tell us the truth in the election. They 
say, we don’t want you because you don’t keep your word. And 
they say, we don’t want you because you don’t have the 
strength and courage of your convictions. You were afraid to 
put forward what you really intended to do. And we don’t want 
you, and we’re going to get rid of you. 
 
I made a prediction after the last election that the people would 
be speaking in the streets of this province, and that prediction 
came true. 
 
I want to make another prediction. These members here talk 
about how they’re going to last for four or five years, this Tory 
wrecking crew; how they will live on for that length of time. 
And I predict that they’re not going to do it. I predict that 
they’re going to be gone before that period of time. Because the 
people of this province are beginning to rise, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. They’re beginning to rise — workers and farmers, 
young people, senior citizens. All those people, the real people 
that make this province tick, they’re beginning to rise, and 
they’re going to continue to rise and they’re going to continue 
to mobilize and to organize to drive you people from this 
legislature, to drive you people from the province. 
 
The people of this province don’t want you and they’re going to 
get rid of you. That is my prediction; that is my prediction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if people think  

that’s an idle boast, well I want to put it to the test. I see that the 
Minister of Finance is in the House tonight, and I’m glad to see 
he’s here, because I issue the following challenge to him. Put 
your seat up. Put your seat up and let the people of Qu’Appelle-
Lumsden decide whether or not they want you, or whether or 
not they want your government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m willing to put my seat up. I’m willing 
to put my seat up. I’m willing to put my seat up if the minister 
opposite puts his seat up. But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . 
. (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, oh, I think we’ve got a 
response. I think we’ve got a response! I think that we’re maybe 
flushing them out from behind the bushes. Are you going to put 
up your seat? Will you put up your seat? I’ll put mine up if you 
put yours up. 
 
Let the people decide; let the people decide who’s lying to 
them. Let’s call an election, a mini referendum. Let’s call that 
mini referendum, Mr. Minister. Your seat versus mine — your 
seat versus mine. You put it up if you’ve got the guts, because 
the people of Saskatchewan are saying to the Minister of 
Finance, you lied to us. You lied to us; you lied to us in your 
budget; you didn’t tell the truth in the election. And they don’t 
want you. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re saying that he’s a liar, and that he 
should resign. Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It gives me a 
great deal of pleasure to rise today and join in the 1987-88 
budget debate. 
 
I believe this budget represents a crucial step along the road to 
future opportunity and prosperity for the people of 
Saskatchewan. The economic realities of today have made it 
apparent that if we wish to ensure our future prosperity, we 
must take decisive action now. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the past few years our province’s 
economy has been severely shaken by forces beyond our 
control. Droughts, flooding, and agricultural trade wars have 
hammered the farmers of Saskatchewan who are the backbone 
of this province. To repeat an old phrase, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
when the farmers suffer, we all suffer in Saskatchewan. 
 
But I’m proud to say that our Progressive Conservative 
government has worked to protect our farmers like no other 
government in Saskatchewan’s history. We reacted swiftly and 
effectively when drought and flooding struck, unlike the 
previous NDP government, who all but ignored drought-
stricken farmers in ’80 and ’81. We acted immediately. We did 
not sit and squabble with the federal government as others had 
done. We acted. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we knew that we had to protect our 
farmers when we introduced the farm production loan program. 
We also knew there was a cost to this protection, just as there 
was for our mortgage interest reduction program. But our 
Progressive Conservative government believes it is our 
responsibility to protect Saskatchewan people. 
  



 
June 22, 1987 

611 
 

The members opposite certainly didn’t when people were losing 
their homes and their farms at 20-per-cent-plus interest rates. 
They also let our health care system slip into despair, all the 
while telling about how much they had done. Certainly they had 
done a lot. They put the moratorium on nursing homes. They 
ignored our seniors. And just to take and add something here, 
that they say we’re tearing apart our medicare system; we’re not 
looking after our seniors. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to say to you and to this 
House, and I hope these people across the way will take notice 
of this. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government’s commitment to 
health and well-being to a citizen is strong indeed. The people 
of my constituency know this to be true, and the people of 
Canwood and district especially so. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m proud to say that a new 30-bed special 
care home is being built in Canwood right now— concrete 
evidence, Mr. Speaker, of our government commitment to 
Saskatchewan and seniors. And I really want to thank the 
former minister of Health and today’s Minister of Health, that 
have gone with me there and seen the need and certainly have 
reacted to it. And this is the kind of reaction that our 
government has been famous for. We’ve gone out there, talked 
to the people, seen what their need is, and then we have made 
commitments and followed through. And this is what’s really 
important. 
 
I’ve already went through this, but I wanted, I really wanted to 
bring it to their attention that we are committed to the seniors 
and to the health care system of this province. If we are to have 
the flexibility to protect people in the future as we have done in 
the past, then we must deal with the fiscal realities of today. 
Difficult decisions have to be made as well as significant 
changes to the way government spends its revenue. Since prices 
of our province’s main commodities have declined, and with 
them government revenues, we have been forced to reorder our 
spending priorities and streamline government structure in order 
that we might deal with the issue of deficit management. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government is working to make itself 
as effective and efficient as possible. The taxpayers of this 
province expect, and rightly so, that we first get our own fiscal 
house in order before asking them to help. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we are doing just that. We have been streamlining and 
consolidating government departments and programs. This has 
meant that we have had to let some people go. That is never an 
easy or a pleasant thing to do. But I believe we have been fair 
and humane in doing so. It would not be fair to the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we did not act 
immediately to control government spending. 
 
(1915) 
 
The people of this province realize the situation we are in and I 
believe they support us in our efforts to reduce the deficit. This 
includes our efforts to rationalize how government spends 
money. This has meant changing the way government funds 
third parties and the way it delivers social programs. 

If I might, Mr. Speaker, I would like to touch upon how 
changes to the education system and welfare reform have 
touched the people of my constituency. 
 
This budget has more fully fleshed out the direction we as a 
province are taking for our education system. Previous 
initiatives such as the education development fund and the 
university renewal and development fund have gone a long way 
to building our province’s educational system. The core 
curriculum study is another example of our government’s 
commitment to the future of education. This study of the 
kindergarten to 12 system is a major building stone in our 
educational structure, one that will complement and enhance 
those changes announced in this budget. Our government’s new 
education initiatives are based on three sound principles: 
excellence, accessibility, and efficiency. 
 
When we speak of excellence, Mr. Speaker, we are talking 
about things like the new $35 million Northern Institute of 
Technology in Prince Albert. This is a world-class institution, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it was one of the first in our 
province’s technical institutes to really specialize in programs it 
offered. It is special in that it offers courses in areas such as 
forestry and tourism, which are so vital to northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It is an important example of how concentrating our resources 
on specific programs at each institute is the most efficient and 
effective way of delivering educational programs. By 
combining our province’s four technical institutes and four 
urban community colleges into the super institute, more 
resources can be put into programs through the savings realized 
by the elimination of duplication of programs and 
administrative overhead. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to gear 
our adult institutions to educate people in the skills necessary 
for today’s world economy. If we are going to diversify our 
province’s economy, we must first train the people who will do 
the diversifying and the building. That is what our education 
system must be able to do. I think we all agree that we must 
change the adult education system to meet these challenges 
even if that change causes some disruption. If we do not see 
those changes through, we would be failing in our responsibility 
to the people of Saskatchewan to build the future. 
 
Having touched upon education, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
say a few words about our welfare reform. Our government 
inherited a welfare system that was not accountable, was 
complex, and one that failed to provide hope for the future of 
those people on social assistance. The system, Mr. Speaker, 
invited abuse, and encouraged dependency on welfare. 
 
Our government made immediate and effective changes that 
have gone a long way to breaking the welfare cycle. We have 
made sure that those who really need it, the single mothers, 
were given more support. We encourage those who could work 
to upgrade their skills and education, through programs like the 
Saskatchewan skills development program and the 
Saskatchewan employment development program. Thousands 
of people have received valuable training and work experience 
through these programs. We have also reduced  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

612 
 

numbers of cases of welfare abuse and streamlined the delivery 
system. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the part of welfare reform that I’m 
most excited about is the new work training initiative taking 
place in my constituency. I’m talking about the program being 
run by Par Industries. In this program, welfare recipients are 
offered a chance to participate in bush operation training 
programs. They learn valuable skills and at the same time make 
a valuable contribution to the community. This program gives 
them a chance to break out of the welfare system, and if the 
people I have talked to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Valuable skills cutting bush. 
 
Mr. Muller: — Ah! The member from Regina Centre makes a 
comment. If he would wait until I’m finished, maybe he’d learn 
something. 
 
This program gives them a chance to break out of the welfare 
system, as I’ve said. If the people I’ve talked to in the program 
are any indication, it gives them back a sense of self worth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know of people who have found work thanks to 
the skills and experience they have gained at this program. I’ve 
talked to employers who say they have gone to Par Industries 
looking for people trained in bush work because they know the 
people there want to work, and they are trained to do the job. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the forest industry has never been so 
strong, thanks to the efforts of our Progressive Conservative 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: — And I am, of course, referring to the new paper 
mill being built in my constituency of Shellbrook-Torch River. 
There’s a lot of people in this House fail to realize that that’s 
where it’s being built. But it isn’t in Prince Albert, it’s in the 
seat of Shellbrook-Torch River, one of the greatest places in 
Saskatchewan. This quarter-billion-dollar-plus paper mill, along 
with the modernization of the P.A. pulp mill by Weyerhaeuser, 
means thousands of jobs for people in my constituency and 
through the province. It means orders for Saskatchewan 
suppliers and it means continued economic stability for the 
area. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, economic diversification is the future of 
our province. We must continue to develop projects like the 
new paper mill, for without them we will remain vulnerable to 
the boom and busy cycle of agriculture and resource 
commodities. That is why this budget is so important, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. This budget will give us the flexibility to take 
advantage of future economic opportunities, and give us the 
ability to further diversify and strengthen our province’s 
economy. 
 
That is why I will be voting against the amendment and for the 
main motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy  

Speaker. I’m very pleased to rise in the Assembly today to 
participate in this budget speech debate for my constituents 
throughout the Athabasca constituency, and for Saskatchewan 
people all across this province. 
 
This budget before us is a budget of betrayal, a budget of 
betrayal, Mr. Deputy Speaker. First, it betrays the Devine 
Conservative election promises of tax cuts. I’m sure that all 
members remember quite clearly those Conservative election 
ads, those PC election promises. And they said, a conservative 
government will totally eliminate the gas tax. And I’m sure 
you’ll remember that one. I’m sure the member for Shellbrook-
Torch River remembers that one, and I’m sure the member for 
Turtleford remembers it also, for that was the promise they put 
in their election ads in 1982 — to totally eliminate the gas tax. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, my constituents are asking: did the 
Conservative Party know at the time that they were 
campaigning or did the Conservative Party only decide later to 
institute gas taxes? I suspect they knew all along that they were 
going to do this. 
 
And there are other promises. A Conservative government will 
totally eliminate the sales taxes in their first term of office. 
Remember that promise? I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that you 
probably remember that promise pretty clearly. And now what 
do we have? They haven’t taken off the sales tax that we had, 
but they’ve now added two more percentage points to that and 
we now have a 7 per cent sales tax in Saskatchewan. A tax, a 
betrayal, and a tax that your party, sir, promised to remove 
totally in their first term of office. 
 
And the Conservative promises that they would reduce the 
provincial income tax by 10 per cent, now they’ve increased 
that another 50 per cent, the flat tax, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
one and one-half per cent, and that totally flies against the 
Conservative promises. 
 
Conservative promises made, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
promises broken — a betrayal of Saskatchewan people. But the 
biggest betrayal of all is the Devine Conservative government’s 
betrayal of medicare — dental therapists, the destruction of the 
children’s dental program. Dental therapists, nurses and 
assistants, equipment that has been set up in our school system 
across this province for preventative care to the children of this 
province — and that is eliminated. Now what we see, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is what they’re going to do. They’re’ going to 
sell all that dental equipment that has been set up and been set 
up in every school system in this province. 
 
Arbitrary limit on insured chiropractic visits, Mr. Speaker. The 
destruction of the prescription drug plan. Mr. Speaker, that most 
certainly is what is causing many hardships and is going to be a 
bureaucratic nightmare in this province, as you see line-ups, as 
you go down to the drug stores now, trying to get their 
prescriptions filled. And as you know, Mr. Speaker, your 
government has put a two-month limit on that. But there has 
been big line-ups. The attack on medicare by this Conservative 
government . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, with leave I would like to introduce a guest. 
  



 
June 22, 1987 

613 
 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Thompson: — I would like to introduce a former 
colleague of mine, and a seat mate, who is sitting in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, and I speak of the former member of 
Redberry, Mr. Dennis Banda. Welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the amendment thereto 
moved by Mr. Tchorzewski. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Speaker, since this Devine government 
took office it has deliberately and consistently attacked the 
services of northern people, the people of my constituency. The 
betrayal of the North is continued in this budget. And one has to 
take a look at the Estimates, Mr. Speaker. Funds for northern 
health services, that has been cut. The wildlife branch of the 
Department of Parks, that’s cut. The fisheries branch, that’s also 
been cut. And the forestry branch, cut by 42 staff and $1 
million, an important industry in our province. 
 
This is the same Conservative government that made a 
sweetheart deal with the Weyerhaeuser corporation and gave to 
the American firm control of our northern forest — now cuts 
back sharply in provincial forestry resources and development. 
One just has to take a look at what has taken place in the 
nursery program in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And you 
see that they have cut back some of the nurseries. Satellite 
nurseries have been totally eliminated. Jobs in the two 
remaining nurseries, they have also been cut. And this is what 
we need — we have to continue to renew the forestry that we 
have in this province. And since Weyerhaeuser has come into 
this province, we now see that those nurseries are gone and 
reforestation is not a priority any more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget brought in by the former Liberal 
member is bad news for Saskatchewan people, and I say it very 
clearly shows there is absolutely no difference between a 
Liberal and a Tory. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — It’s a budget of dishonesty; it’s a budget of 
deceit; it’s a budget without heart; it’s a budget without hope. I 
will therefore watch with great interest the participation of the 
PC members in this debate. Which ones among them will 
defend their broken promises? 
 
(1930) 
 
Now I ask the Premier and I ask the ministers, take a look  

at northern Saskatchewan as a region of Saskatchewan that 
needs extra attention. One only has to go into northern 
Saskatchewan to realize the isolation that we live in up in 
northern Saskatchewan, and the higher cost of food. And what 
do we get from this government? 
 
We had a food transportation subsidy, $250,000 a year, and 
they cut that off. That, Mr. Speaker, is something that the back-
benchers of this government, I don’t think, can defend when 
they can hand out money to other large corporations that I will 
get to later on in my speech. 
 
Medical services. They’re cutting back in medical services. Up 
in our region we had eight psychiatric nurses; seven of them are 
gone — totally wiped out. And I tell you, in times right now 
when things are hard, that was a very important part of medical 
services, and it’s just about totally eliminated. 
 
We know what’s happened to the dental programs. They talk 
about hat the dental program in northern Saskatchewan is not 
going to be touched, that they’re going to leave it the way it is. 
But I say to me, Mr. Speaker, and to the ministers across, that 
that’s not exactly the way it is, because the day after it was 
announced there was a dentist into the schools taking a look at 
the equipment that we have in our schools. When they were told 
that it wasn’t for sale in northern Saskatchewan they said, well, 
we’re going to be setting up here in the North. 
 
So to say that the North is exempt from the dental cuts is 
absolutely not true. What you state in your budget is that where 
there is dentists, that the program will be gone. And that’s what 
‘s going to happen. They're going to buy all this equipment, not 
just in northern Saskatchewan. Dentists all across this province 
are going to be taking millions and millions of dollars of dental 
equipment out of our schools, including the North. And it’ll be 
fire sale. It’ll be same as the Department of Highways, what 
they done with the Department of Highways equipment. And, 
Mr. Speaker, you know what happened to that. 
 
It’s difficult living in northern Saskatchewan and I ask the 
ministers over there to realize that we are in a region of 
isolation. We’re a long way ways from dentists. When the folks 
up there have to go and get a tooth filled, it sometimes means a 
drive of 4 and 500 miles return. If I use La Loche, for an 
example, it’s a 400-mile journey down to get a tooth filled. And 
that’s pretty tough. 
 
Transportation. When you take the west side in the constituency 
that I represent, after you get past Meadow Lake, there’s 
absolutely no public transportation. There’s no bus lines, there’s 
no airlines. There’s very few jobs, and when we take a look at 
the hardships that are being encountered in northern 
Saskatchewan and we see that they’ve now put on 32 cents a 
gallon extra on the gasoline . . . And I might add that up in my 
constituency it’s not unnormal to be paying 50 cents a litre for 
gas, 52 cents in some of the towns. And if you get up into the 
very far north, then it’s even higher than that. Then you add the 
extra 7 cents on there and this is tough. 
 
I’ve written many letters to the ministers and I’ve written to the 
Premier, and I’ve asked them to go into northern Saskatchewan 
and spend some money to set up some  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

614 
 

small saw mills. We have millions and millions of board feet of 
timber up in northern Saskatchewan, over-mature timber, and 
it’s not being touched. And we could create many jobs by going 
in there and setting up small saw mills. 
 
I’ve asked for fish processing plants and that still hasn’t 
happened, and better health services and better educational 
services. What the Northerners are asking for is a fair deal. 
They ask you to realize that they live in an isolated part of 
Saskatchewan. And they want some security, the same as 
anybody else in this province, and they deserve that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take a look at the budget we’re debating 
here today, and I want to touch on just how we got into this 
mess. When you take a look at 1982 when this government took 
over from the NDP, we left them with $139 million in the bank. 
We left them with a Heritage Fund that the assets were worth 
over $1 billion. And if you just take a look, in five short years 
this government has taken a $139 million surplus and they’ve 
turned it into an approximately $3.5 billion deficit. Now that 
didn’t just happen by accident things haven’t got that bad. We 
have to take a look at how they accomplished this. And I 
imagine they’ve worked pretty hard at it. 
 
First of all there was massive give-aways and holidays and tax 
holidays to the oil companies of well over $1 billion since 
they’ve taken government. And if we had that $1 billion, Mr. 
Speaker, back in general revenue to build hospitals and to build 
schools — and I see the Minister of Highways sitting there — 
to build much needed highways, our deficit would not be that 
low. Because if we had people working, building the hospitals 
and building the roads and building the schools, then they 
would be generating taxes. But that has gone the other way. 
 
They started off, as I indicated there, $1 billion in the oil 
companies. They started off kind of small there in the coal-
mining industry. They got rid of the drag-line that was owned 
by the province of Saskatchewan. Another $30 million, and that 
went to Alberta, to Manalta Coal. It didn’t take long and they 
sold the whole coal-mine. That was over $300 million more. 
They sell the drag-line and they sell the coal-mine and then 
lease it back for 30 years. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you know very well, and you’re a business 
man, you’re a successful farmer, that that’s not the way you 
operate. You’re not going to sell your farm and lease it back. 
But this is what they did. 
 
And it goes on and on. Pioneer Trust, wages to political friends. 
Some of them, Mr. Hill, who is the president of Sask Power, 
$200,000 a year. That’s a lot of money. Dennis Ball, $95,000 a 
year, part-time job, compensation board. Now those are big 
bucks. And we take a look at Peter Pocklington, a millionaire 
from Alberta, $10 million, outright grant, $21 million signed for 
by this government. 
 
Then we get to the big ones. Then we get to Weyerhaeuser 
corporation of Tacoma, Washington. Then we’re talking in the 
big dollars. And this is how we  

got into this problem. This is how we got into the financial mess 
that we have in Saskatchewan. It’s mismanagement. 
 
One has to go back and take a look at the budget that was 
brought in here a number of years ago, I believe it was, the 
second budget brought in by the Conservative government. And 
the next day the minister of Highways, he gets up in the House 
and he announces that 220 individuals were fired, 220 families 
literally destroyed — didn’t know that it was coming. Then 
what do they do? They auction off our highway equipment, 
assets to this province, part of the assets — $40 million worth 
of equipment sold for less than $6 million dollars. Most of it 
went out of the province, and that’s why our highway system is 
in such a mess today. 
 
And it goes on and on, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t stop. They’re 
getting rid of our campsites, our public campsites. And citizens 
of this province and this country, and our neighbours to the 
South, have used these public campsites for many years. They 
are now gone. Many of them are closed up or given to political 
friends. 
 
The sales tax, the dental plans, the flat tax, the gas tax, which is 
going to create one of the biggest bureaucracies and nightmares 
that you’ve ever seen in the province, and it’s already starting 
when you go to the gas stations . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — What we need in Saskatchewan is more 
jobs, not less, Mr. Speaker. What we need in Saskatchewan, and 
the people are asking for it, is security, not fear. Families now 
in this province live in fear. Fear that they will not be able to 
provide a good education for their children; fear that the health 
system is going down the drain, the dental program; fear that 
they will not be able to send their sons and daughters to 
university; fear that the trade schools are closing down. And we 
have to just take a look at Kelsey where there’ll be 500 less 
students this fall, Mr. Speaker — 500 less students, 134 
teachers fired in one day. They didn’t know they were going to 
get fired. They walked in and went to work and they got their 
papers that they were gone. There’s a fear that their sons and 
daughters are going to be unemployed and that creates fears of 
drug abuse and alcohol. It brings all the problems out. Families 
are living in fear. They see no future. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and you know very well that it 
was not always like that. This province when this government, 
Conservative government, took over, took over a government 
with an unemployment rate of 4 per cent. And that’s just about 
zero when you consider 4 per cent and take a look at what it is 
today. 
 
I now want to turn to another item and I ask this government to 
take this very seriously, and it’s regarding, Mr. Speaker, a 
serious accident that happened in the Regina Agridome last 
winter, when young Brad Hornung was injured in a hockey 
accident — and it was a serious accident, and I’m sure that we 
all feel bad about that. It wasn’t three, four days later that the 
mayor of Regina made a statement, that had the goal at that 
arena been moved out a little bit farther, that accident would not 
have taken place. And he indicated he did not know that much  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

615 
 

about hockey, but he felt that the accident would not have 
happened. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the ministers, 
and especially to the Minister of Health and to the Minister of 
Finance and to the Premier, that that is true. If that arena had 
been the size of the European rinks, that accident would not 
have happened. 
 
I want to give you an example. The ice surface of the Agridome 
and most rinks in the NHL (National Hockey League) and 
around our province and around Canada are 200 feet long and 
85 feet wide. If you take a look at the European rinks, they 
average 210 feet long and most of them are 100 feet wide. So 
you have 15 feet wider and you have 10 to 20 feet . . . Some of 
the European rinks are 220 feet. 
 
And I think that Saskatchewan can be a leader in this area. I 
think that they have to put some money out. Saskatoon is a 
good example right now. This government has put $25 million 
in to that new arena, and I think that this government should 
take the initiative and meet with Saskatoon and meet with other 
arenas around the province, with the folks, and say that we will 
provide part of the money — or you could put it all in there — 
and let’s extend these rinks. Let’s extend these rinks to the 
European size, to the Olympic size. Let’s change some of the 
rules. We all know that in Europe, as I indicated, there’s very 
few accidents compared to the serious accidents that we have 
because their ice surface is longer and the goals are out farther. 
 
There’s also another very important part, and that is in the 
European hockey, they don’t ice the puck. Once that puck has 
crossed a red line, it’s automatically iced and it’s gone back. 
You don’t have two players racing to the end of the boards. And 
that’s where we’re getting a lot of our violence in hockey, is 
this rule. And I think Saskatchewan can be a leader in changing 
that. That’s something that we have to take a serious look at — 
99.9 per cent of the times the puck goes back to the other end 
anyway. But when they go to the end of the boards, it just 
causes an accident and it causes a lot of violence. 
 
And I ask this government, through you, Mr. Speaker, to take a 
look at this and act on it, put some money in there. It’ll provide 
jobs, it’ll provide a lot of . . . And the main thing is safety for 
our hockey players, young and old. And if we can be a leader, I 
think that’s very important, because when you take a look at 
hockey in Saskatchewan, it’s just so important. Some of the 
great, and as far as I’m concerned, the greatest hockey player 
that ever skated came out of Saskatchewan, and I speak of 
Gordie Howe. And I'm sure he would agree with that. 
 
(1945) 
 
We’ve got to stand up and we’ve got to fight. We’ve got to take 
a look at the officiating, and I would ask that we take a look at 
the officiating. And once we can expand our rinks to the 
Olympic size and the European size, and change some of the 
rules of the cross checking, I think that we’re going to be on the 
right track. And I ask, you, Mr. Speaker, and through you, to 
the Premier and the Minister of Health, and the member from 
Turtleford, the Minister of Culture, to take a serious look at that 
and go out and sell that. And let’s be a leader in Saskatchewan 
in that, and  

let’s not have any more of the serious accidents that we saw 
with young Brad Hornung. Let’s try and curb it. 
 
I also want to close off and indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that if 
you go from the north of this province to the south, and from 
the east to the west, everywhere in this province there is fear. 
Whether you are a farmer, a logger, a fisherman, young or old, 
sick or poor, and yes, even the well-to-do, have the same fears. 
There is a human disaster out in Saskatchewan. It’s a jungle. 
And I tell you, it’s getting worse day by day. And you just have 
to take a look at some of the programs that I spoke about. 
 
And I ask, I ask the private members, the Conservative 
members who sit in the back benches, I ask you to stand up and 
fight back. I ask you to get up in this House and say your piece. 
Don’t sit back and allow this type of a situation that’s taking 
place in Saskatchewan to happen. You did not campaign on the 
fact that you were going to increase the sales tax, and you were 
going to put the gasoline tax on. You did not campaign on the 
fact that we were going to have all these massive firings, and 
we were going to get rid of the dental plan. That’s not what you 
campaigned on. And I ask the private members to stand up, to 
stand up for this province and don’t let it be destroyed by huge 
give-aways and broken promises. It’s time for the back-
benchers of this government to stand up and be counted, and I 
ask you to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I have mentioned, I shall be opposing the main 
motion and I shall be supporting the amendment put forward by 
my colleague from Regina North East. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, since my first election to public 
office in 1974, I have witnessed many budgets, some in Ottawa 
and some in Saskatchewan; some of them Liberal, some of 
them NDP, some of them Conservative; some of them in good 
times, and some of them in bad; some of them by governments 
at the zenith of their power, and some of them by governments 
in trouble. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I have never ever seen any previous budget, 
or any previous budget process, so utterly devoid of those 
fundamental values which have until now been characteristic of 
the Saskatchewan way of life. With what I believe to be a clear 
majority of Saskatchewan people, I’m disgusted at this budget, 
Mr. Speaker, and at the government which presented it. 
 
The government and the budget have failed Saskatchewan in 
four critical counts. First, there’s the test of honesty. How as it 
honest, Mr. Speaker, for this government deliberately and 
cynically to miscalculate Saskatchewan’s pre-election financial 
position last year, not just by a little bit, but by a full 200 per 
cent? How is it honest now, Mr. Speaker, for this government to 
reverse itself 180 degrees on the propositions that it advanced in 
last fall’s election? 
 
On the day the writ was issued to launch that campaign, I laid 
out some of the facts, Mr. Speaker, describing in detail the 
financial mess Saskatchewan was in at that time. The Premier 
responded then, and throughout the  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

616 
 

campaign, that there was no big problem — not to worry, he 
said, the deficit is not an issue; everything’s just fine. He said it 
over and over again. 
 
But since the beginning of 1987 he’s been singing exactly the 
opposite tune. The deficit is now a crisis. It demands Draconian 
action. That’s what he says today. And when the Premier is 
asked to explain the obvious contradiction in that, Mr. Speaker, 
he just smiles and says, well, we’re all politicians; we only tell 
our side of the story; people wouldn’t expect us to tell the 
whole truth. That’s his answer. 
 
When this legislature resumed last Wednesday I asked the 
Premier if that was his official policy, and I invite 
Saskatchewan to read his answer with care. He specifically did 
not deny that misrepresentation was, in fact, the deliberate 
strategy. On the test of honesty, Mr. Speaker, this government 
has clearly failed Saskatchewan. 
 
The second test is competence. This government has been in 
office now for just over five years. They’ve presented six 
budgets. Every single one of them has been a deficit for a total 
accumulated sea of red ink now of $3.4 billion. How is that 
competent? How is that good management? 
 
They have caused five consecutive devaluations of 
Saskatchewan’s international credit rating less than two years. 
The prestigious world credit rating agencies have repeatedly 
panned this government’s weak and foolish management. The 
warning alarms have been ringing loud and clear for a long 
time, but this government chose to fiddle while Rome burned. 
They ignored the problem, and like a cancer, it grew and grew. 
 
The ultimate irony, Mr. Speaker, came last September on the 
even of the election. At that time Saskatchewan had just 
suffered its third consecutive credit rating tumble, and within 24 
hours, within 24 hours of that devaluation, the Premier was 
announcing a new and particularly profligate spending program 
— his so-called housing program adding hundreds of millions 
of dollars more to the deficit. 
 
That program, Mr. Speaker, was clearly a pre-election gimmick 
trotted out at the last minute to compete with the NDP housing 
promises that had already been made. It was part of that 
unconscionable bidding war between the PCs and the NDP, the 
spend now and the pay later twins. 
 
Every impartial analysis shows that that program — the housing 
program — has failed economically. It has not created new 
jobs, and it’s had a twisting and a distorting economic impact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not a fair program. If you rent or if you can’t 
cough up the matching dollars, you don’t qualify; and it uses 
public dollars to subsidize private luxuries like the hot tubs and 
the Jacuzzis. Further, the program was rushed into effect by 
dubious means from a legal point of view. And I’ll be very 
interested to see what the Provincial Auditor has to say about 
that. 
 
But most important, it’s going to add some $500 million  

to Saskatchewan’s debt load — half a billion dollars, Mr. 
Speaker, on top of the debt burden Saskatchewan already had. 
And what’s the government’s defence to all of this? Well they 
limply argue that the program is popular. That still doesn’t 
make it right. Clearly, on the test of competence, this 
government has failed Saskatchewan. 
 
The third test, Mr. Speaker, is fairness. Yes, I believe 
Saskatchewan people want a government that is, in fact, fiscally 
responsible. I believe they want a government that is lean and 
efficient. I believe they want that deficit brought under control. 
But at the same time people demand fairness and justice in how 
that job is done. What’s unacceptable is this government’s cruel 
double standard. 
 
Since the beginning of this year, look at their hit list. Look at 
the people that they have freely chosen to victimize — the 
elderly, the sick, children and young families, battered women, 
the handicapped, K to 12 students and their teachers, post-
secondary students and their teachers, nurses, doctors, dental 
therapists, hospitals, nursing homes, home care, school boards, 
municipalities, native people, and farmers. That’s just a partial 
list of the victims, Mr. Speaker. And while all these areas of 
vital human concern are being slashed, they continue to spend 
lavishly on patronage, on untendered contracts. On government 
advertising, on the biggest and the most expensive political 
support staff in the history of Saskatchewan, on the opulent 
government offices, on executive expense accounts, on travel 
junkets, and a host of freebie give-aways. 
 
Where’s the justice, Mr. Speaker, in these twisted and perverted 
priorities? On the basic test of fairness, again this government 
has failed Saskatchewan. 
 
And finally the fourth testis vision. There’s no evidence in this 
budget, or in the government’s conduct in the past six months, 
that they have any capacity to see beyond the ends of their 
noses. Their whole record since 1982 has been one of lurching 
clumsily from one crisis to the next. Without the ability to 
envisage the future, they are prisoners of panic politics. And 
their predicament is compounded by the tangled web of 
deception that they have chosen to weave for themselves by 
failing in the past to acknowledge the truth. 
 
What this government has done since the beginning of this year 
is enshrouded Saskatchewan in a pall of gloom — an 
atmosphere of pessimism and despair. Saskatchewan people are 
bewildered and frustrated and frightened. The conduct of this 
government has shaken Saskatchewan’s self confidence and our 
faith in our future. And this budget does nothing to relieve that 
anxiety. This government has no compelling blueprint or 
agenda for lifting Saskatchewan out of its malaise. There’s no 
game plan to pull ourselves up by our bootstraps. 
 
Within the discipline of fiscal responsibility, Mr. Speaker, there 
are many bold and exciting things we could be doing now to 
position ourselves for the 1990s and for the 21st century, but 
that would require a government with the foresight to see a 
Saskatchewan tomorrow as it ought to be, and that kind of 
government we simply do not have today. 
  



 
June 22, 1987 

617 
 

How can you soar with eagles when you are ruled by turkeys? 
Or to put it more grandly, Mr. Speaker, how can valid plans be 
laid for tomorrow by those who have no capacity to live or to 
cope with today? This government is shackling Saskatchewan’s 
future, and on the test of vision, it has again failed 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Honesty, competence, fairness, and vision. I believe they’re 
four vital tests, and on all four I believe this government has 
failed. 
 
The Minister of Finance has done for the Devine government 
what Jack the Ripper did for door-to-door salesmen. And make 
no mistake, Mr. Speaker, it’s the Finance minister who is very 
much in charge of this debacle. He’s the boss. He’s running the 
show over there. He has finally reached the top of the mountain. 
He doesn’t have the Premier’s title, but he might as well have, 
and that’s a thought that should make a few Tories tremble. 
 
I’m duty bound, Mr. Speaker, to offer some advice to my PC 
friends across the way. You’d better take charge and regain 
control again in a big hurry because this minister is going to be 
the architect of your destruction. Take it from someone who’s 
seen him operate. He’s well on his way to tearing you apart. For 
the moment he has absolute control over there, and that is a sure 
formula for disaster. 
 
At least some of the PC members know the danger they’re in, 
Mr. Speaker. I know they know because they’ve told me so, and 
they’re very uneasy. They were elected, Mr. Speaker, especially 
the new members, on a platform that was all positive, all 
sweetness and light. Everything was buoyant and upbeat. 
There’s so much more we can be; we’re going to be number 
one; give ‘er snoose, Bruce; don’t yell whoa in a mud hole; 
open for business; partnership for progress; keep on building— 
those were the slogans, or some of them. Never a discouraging 
word. And I can imagine, Mr. Speaker, how warm and how 
wonderful those new PC members must have felt on election 
night last October. They were on top of the world. Everything 
was going to be coming up roses, and what a job they were 
going to do for their constituencies and for Saskatchewan. 
 
(2000) 
 
Now it’s eight months later and some of these new members 
must be feeling like they were elected under false pretences. All 
that hope and that optimism is gone. Gone is all the upbeat 
rhetoric. Gone is all the confidence and that positive passion 
about the future. Everything the government has done since 
December has contradicted its election theme 
 
And it’s not the fault, Mr. Speaker, of those new members in 
the back benches. They’ve largely been shut out— everybody 
knows that. They’ve had to read the bad news in the media like 
everybody else. What’s been happening is not their idea 
because they weren’t consulted. But they are government 
members, and they have a special responsibility, Mr. Speaker, 
now, in stopping this government from destroying all that is so 
fine and so good about Saskatchewan. Those new members 
cannot be  

blamed for starting the carnage but they can, and they will, be 
blamed if they fail to stop it. 
 
At this very moment those new PC members are the most 
powerful people in Saskatchewan. They now control the fate of 
oh so many human lives. The hopes and the dreams, the faith 
and the trust of thousands of Saskatchewan people are in their 
hands, and it’s an awesome responsibility. What they do with 
that responsibility will affect the course of Saskatchewan 
history. 
 
Now they may choose to sit there and to do nothing, and I know 
the heat is on for them to do just that. The PC political press 
gangs have been hard at work, rough and tumble, trying to keep 
everyone in line. It takes a lot of courage to stand up against 
that kind of pressure. It’s not easy to resist. The pressure can be 
intimidating; it can be seductive. It’s so much easier and 
convenient to give in, to shut out the anguished cries of 
Saskatchewan people for help and to retreat behind the 
comfortable confines of PC party solidarity. That’s the easy 
choice, the comfortable pew, it’s the path of least resistance. 
Keep your head down, ignore reality, shut out the truth when 
the truth hurts and hope the pain that’s out there across 
Saskatchewan these days will somehow just pass away. 
 
Those new PC members may well choose that course. It’s their 
decision, but those who give in and fall in line for the sake of 
political convenience will forfeit their place in history. They 
will be remembered only as the faceless, nameless ones who 
went down with the ship — and make no mistake, my friends, 
your ship is sinking; it’s wallowing very low in the water. You 
can make history by standing up now for what’s good and 
what’s right for Saskatchewan or you can be the victim of 
history, forgotten as fast as Saskatchewan can eradicate the 
bitter memory of this administration. 
 
Some of these new PC members may well be saying to 
themselves: I’d like to stand up and speak out; I know the 
government is wrong; I’d like to do something about it; but 
what’s the use? What can one person do all by themselves? 
 
Mr. Speaker, may I quote for you General Andrew Jackson, a 
famous American patriot and solider and statesman. When he 
faced that question, this was his response: “One man with 
courage makes a majority.” It’s that kind of courage that 
Saskatchewan needs today, that kind of principle, that strength 
of purpose and personal conviction, that commitment to honesty 
and integrity, that sense of fairness and justice, that vision of 
what Saskatchewan ought to be. 
 
Never mind the numbers. With courage, one is enough and the 
majority will follow. Indeed that majority is developing right 
now. You could see it if you chose not to close your eyes. You 
could see it last Saturday when thousands of Saskatchewan 
people rallied around the legislature to voice their profound 
anxiety. It was the biggest demonstration of public outrage in 
the modern history of Saskatchewan. It reflects the deepening 
anger among ordinary Saskatchewan people. Only the most 
naïve would choose to ignore that message, and there have been 
other messages too. 
  



 
June 22, 1987 

618 
 

I know we all saw the tragic pictures, Mr. Speaker, on national 
television about 10 days ago — pictures of those sobbing dental 
therapists and assistants whose careers and lives had just been 
shattered by the dismantling of the dental plan. That pain and 
anguish are not what Saskatchewan should be all about. Neither 
is the deception inherent in the government’s announcement of 
the dental plan cuts for elementary school children. They say 
they will save money, Mr. Speaker, but we know by the 
government’s own calculations that that’s simply not going to 
be true. The changes they have made are going to result in costs 
at least as great as under the old plan. Savings will accrue, Mr. 
Speaker, only if those elementary school children in fact do not 
get the dental care that they need. And that’s what the 
government is banking on and the proof is in their own 
documentation. In the process, 400 dedicated, productive, cost-
efficient careers have been destroyed. 
 
I visited with some of those dental therapists and assistants who 
served so well in communities in my constituency of 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. I have seen how devastated they are, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have visited with senior citizens in Pioneer Lodge in 
Assiniboia, and I have seen them reduced to tears as their 
meagre fixed incomes have been confiscated by the massive 
rental increase imposed by this government. 
 
I have met with students in Regina and Saskatoon and 
elsewhere, and I have heard how their future have quite literally 
evaporated before their very eyes; how they can’t now get the 
classes they need and want; how they can’t afford the higher 
tuition; how they can’t find a job to help them pay for the 
higher tuition; and if they are in university and they do get a 
degree, how it may not be worth the paper it’s written on from a 
downgraded institution. 
 
I have met with the parents of young families in Humboldt and 
Unity and Melville and Melfort, and they’ve told me of their 
fears about the future for their children — a lesser quality of 
local education, lower standards in local health care and social 
services, and a general undermining of their local quality of life. 
 
I have spoken with battered women, Mr. Speaker, in Prince 
Albert and Moose jaw — women in the most desperate of 
circumstances. And I’ve seen the terror in their eyes as they 
may have no place to go for safety and security, thanks to this 
government. I’ve spoken with the parents of handicapped 
children who no longer have access to some of the care and the 
services they need. I’ve spoken with the mothers of diabetic 
children and others with special diseases who may be losing 
their doctors all because of this government. I’ve met with the 
elderly and the chronically ill and young families who will see 
their personal costs for prescription drugs balloon to hundreds 
of dollars or more, right up front, before they can get a 
prescription filled. 
 
These, my friends, are just some of the costs, some of the real, 
live, human costs of what this government has freely decided to 
do And those who choose to vote for this budget are voting for 
all these consequences. And you  

can’t escape that responsibility. And again I ask those PC 
members, especially the new ones, if that’s what their careers in 
public life are going to be all about. 
 
Last month, Mr. Speaker, I received a letter written to the 
Premier by a lady in Saskatoon. She started her letter by saying 
that she was very unhappy, very unhappy with the way 
Saskatchewan was going under this government. She said she 
was, in fact, a conservative, Mr. Speaker, but found it very hard 
to be proud of that. It was a plain letter, but a powerful one, as 
she documented her distress — an eloquent statement of 
personal concern from within the Conservative Party — and 
she’s certainly not alone. 
 
This former PC party member, in her letter, made reference to a 
speech delivered in this Assembly in 1981 by the PC MLA for 
Souris-Cannington, who is now the Deputy Premier. He was 
setting out the PC party manifesto for the 1982 election 
campaign. And I took the time, Mr. Speaker, to look up that 
speech in Hansard, and it’s no wonder that there’s concern and 
the sense of betrayal today among many well-meaning 
Conservatives. 
 
And let me refresh your memory of what the MLA for Souris-
Cannington said back in 1981 — December 1, 1981, to be exact 
— as recorded in Hansard, beginning at page 82. And I’ll just 
hit the highlights. Here are some of the things he suggested. 
Number one: 
 

Defeated . . . candidates and hirelings have become an 
elite (in government). They are the bunglers, while the 
honest, career civil servants are frustrated and powerless. 

 
Number two: 
 

. . . sophisticated, slick, expensive advertising campaigns 
(have) no other purpose except the purpose of 
brainwashing the people of Saskatchewan . . . The money 
spent on advertising is wasted . . . 

 
Number three: 
 

Look at what is happening to medicare . . . doctors are 
leaving. Nurses are dissatisfied and frustrated. Patients are 
not getting the treatment they need when they need it. This 
is politics at its worst, at the expense of human suffering. 

 
. . . Put your money where your mouth is and get your 
health care standards back up where they belong. 

 
Number four: 
 

. . . thousands of Saskatchewan citizens are not free to 
express their views openly. The people who in some way 
are dependent upon the (NDP) government are afraid. 

 
Number five, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . a Conservative government would remove the sales 
tax. 

  



 
June 22, 1987 

619 
 

This is the most regressive tax there is. It is a tax that falls 
heavily on the working person. 
 
Number six: 
 

We would have a 10 per cent across-the-board reduction in 
provincial income tax. 

 
Number seven: 
 

We must restore the human factor to government — 
people first. I give you my word that a Conservative 
government will always think in terms of human need. We 
cannot and will not tolerate economic policies that 
eliminate human dignity. 

 
Number eight: 
 

The . . . Conservative party . . . is committed to co-operate 
with the native people in northern Saskatchewan to 
develop their own future in a meaningful way and erase 
the dismal failures to date. 

 
Number nine: 
 

. . . In the field of education there are not enough funds . . . 
denying capable young men and women access to 
educational opportunities of their choice. The combination 
of denying students their first or their second choice of a 
field of study, and increasing the size of classes or sections 
of classes is hardly an acceptable response . . . 

 
And number ten: 
 

The senior citizens of our province have not received a fair 
deal . . . the Progressive Conservative Party stands for the 
rights of every elderly citizen. 
 
I find it simply unacceptable that senior citizens should 
have to pay a fee for prescription drugs in this province. A 
Conservative government would guarantee that no senior 
citizen would see his lifetime savings taken away because 
he decided, or needed, to live in a nursing home. 

 
That was 1981, Mr. Speaker, the speech of the hon. member for 
Souris-Cannington and now the Deputy Premier. 
 
There is more. There is so much more, Mr. Speaker, that I 
would like to review out of those 1981 remarks of the member 
for Souris-Cannington, but what I’ve just referred to should 
suffice. Since 1981 until now something has gone terribly 
wrong within this PC government. And I am prepared to bet 
that the MLA for Souris-Cannington really, in his heart, still 
believes what he said in 1981. 
 
I don’t think he’s changed his mind. What’s changed, Mr. 
Speaker, is simply this: he has lost the internal power struggle 
within the cabinet. He has lost to the Minister of Finance. The 
Minister of Finance has shouldered him  

aside like so many others, and it’s really no wonder the Deputy 
Premier is looking for a career change. 
 
But he Deputy Premier’s discomfort, Mr. Speaker, is minor 
compared to the pain that’s being inflected upon so many others 
in Saskatchewan by the government of which he is member. I 
referred a moment ago to that letter from a PC party supporter 
in Saskatoon, disappointed and angry as she was. It is just one 
of the dozens that have come into my office, Mr. Speaker, from 
Conservatives, and from others, to express their dismay at this 
government and this budget. 
 
(2015) 
 
Now I wish I could read all of them into the record. They 
constitute powerful testimony against this budget, just like the 
thousands who turned out to protest on Saturday. 
 
But I’ll refer, Mr. Speaker, to just one more — this one from a 
young woman, born and raised in Saskatchewan, and now 
completing her final education in Ontario. She has, or at least 
she had, every intention of returning home to Saskatchewan to 
pursue her career and her adult life here, to give back to 
Saskatchewan the best that she had to offer. Her letter 
exemplifies what the Premier used to talk about so fondly, in 
terms of the pride and strength of Saskatchewan families. They, 
he said, are the foundation of our very way of life. Remember 
what he sued to say? We’re going to bring our sons and 
daughters home to Saskatchewan, and we’re going to do it with 
education and careers and jobs and opportunity and hope. 
 
But after the last six months, Mr. Speaker, much of that is gone. 
The young women who wrote this letter will not now be coming 
home. She’s not alone. She represents hundreds, if not 
thousands of others, going from Saskatchewan for ever because 
this government has destroyed their enthusiasm and their 
idealism, because this government is saying no to their dreams 
and their hopes for tomorrow. What a colossal waste, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s what this budget represents, and that’s why it is 
so very wrong. 
 
I want to deal with the myth, Mr. Speaker, that rural 
Saskatchewan has somehow mostly escaped unscathed from the 
hurt of the past six months, because it’s just not true. It is a 
carefully cultivated misconception fostered by the government, 
but it’s not true. Look at the list of what rural Saskatchewan has 
suffered: a 25 per cent cut in the Department of Agriculture, the 
most, I think, of any department; the best people in the 
Department of rural Development are gone; support for 
agricultural societies is phased out, including the backing for 
the 4-H clubs; access to soil testing is being reduced; pest 
control programs have been cut; so has the support for 
agricultural machinery testing. 
 
There’s less backing for veterinary districts and for initiatives to 
protect the health of animals and poultry. The farm purchase 
plan is gone. Rural policing has been reduced; so have regional 
libraries. All municipalities and school boards have been cut 
back, increasing the pressure on local mill rates. The gas and 
sales tax increases are just going to add to that pressure. 
Reneging  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

620 
 

on the EDF (education development fund) fund for school 
programs will hit especially hard in rural schools. The 
combined impact of these factors means that schools like those 
at Rockglen and Coronach will have higher enrolments next 
year, Mr. Speaker, higher enrolments, but fewer teachers and 
thinner services. 
 
The cuts in post-secondary education mean that many rural 
students cannot now take the courses at university or technical 
school that they had planned and prepared for. Rural people feel 
the loss of accessibility and quality in community colleges. 
 
The slashing of the dental plan is especially hurtful in rural 
areas, even more so than in the cities. Good local careers have 
been destroyed, and children just won’t get the dental care they 
need. 
 
And for rural senior citizens the cuts are deep and broad. The 
rental increases in nursing homes, the higher cost of 
prescription drugs, the home care reductions, the pain, Mr. 
Speaker, is very real. 
 
This budget is not just an urban problem, it’s a Saskatchewan 
problem. And rural people are hurting too. One way or another, 
almost everyone in Saskatchewan is a victim, except the most 
privileged, who are the closest to the PC party. 
 
Is all of this, Mr. Speaker, what those new PC members came 
into public life to do? To scar and to disfigure the familiar, 
friendly face of Saskatchewan? I cannot believe that that was 
their intention. I cannot believe that this Minister of Finance 
represents their true feelings. That’s why the doubts and the 
anxiety across the way continue to gnaw, at least at some of 
them. 
 
And there’s another reason, too. Because this government is 
destroying the good reputation of free enterprise, they call 
themselves a business-like government. But they’re giving 
business a bad name. What they’re doing and how they’re doing 
it will send out the wrong messages to Saskatchewan about a 
non-socialist approach in government. The message from the 
Devine government about free enterprise is that it doesn’t work, 
and it cannot be trusted. Is that what you want to say to 
Saskatchewan about the free enterprise system? 
 
That system, at its best, should be the epitome of honesty and 
competence and fairness and vision. The message should be 
strong and positive. It should be bold and exciting. It should be 
bursting with hope and with optimism and high expectations 
about the future. 
 
But this government, Mr. Speaker, represents the opposite of 
that, and in the process, they’re demanding what free enterprise 
should be all about. 
 
And I invite some of those uneasy PC members across the way 
to consider that hard reality. By propping up a bad budget, by 
propping up a bad government, you’re hurting the free 
enterprise system. You’re giving a boost to the NDP. Is that 
what you really want? I think not. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s not a bad idea. 

Mr. Goodale: — And speaking of the NDP . . . yes, Herman, it 
is a bad idea. And speaking of the NDP, I was interested to hear 
the remarks on Friday of the NDP financial critic, the member 
for Regina North East. 
 
In the midst of his speech, he turned his attention to me and the 
Liberal Party, and he spent a fair chunk of his time attacking us. 
And I want to thank him for that. I’m grateful for the 
compliment. You don’t attack what you’re not concerned about. 
And his attack says loud and clear that Liberals are continuing 
to grow in stature in the eyes of Saskatchewan people I know 
that’s true, and the member for Regina North East has 
confirmed it in his remarks. He accused me in those remarks of 
being, I believe his words were, “less than honest.” Well let me 
remind him that in last fall’s election, the Liberals were, in fact, 
the only ones who were being honest with the people of 
Saskatchewan. The PCs and the NDP were pursuing a cynical, 
promise-them-anything mentality, and we said, in our party, no. 
 
Remember how it was reported in the news media? The Moose 
Jaw Times-Herald said: 
 

Goodale’s approach to the upcoming election is the most 
responsible of the three major parties. 

 
And the Regina Leader-Post said: 
 

The Liberal campaign has been a much needed jolt of 
reality. The Liberals have taken the high road. 

 
I won’t bore you with my whole clipping service, but that gives 
you the flavour of what was said. And in the result, we doubled 
our popular vote, we re-entered this legislature, and we dumped 
a New Democrat in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale: — The public opinion polls toward the end of 
that campaign were very interesting. They said our issue of 
fiscal responsibility moved way up — because of us moved 
way up — to be the second most important concern in the 
minds of voters. The polls said the Liberals had made the 
biggest gains during the campaign with respect to credibility 
and leadership. And 75 per cent of Saskatchewan people said 
this province would be better off with Liberals in the legislature 
once again. 
 
And since that strong stand on fiscal responsibility during the 
election, Mr. Speaker, we have been completely straightforward 
with Saskatchewan people, maintaining the importance of that 
issue and indicating how we would seek to achieve it in contrast 
to the cruel and the unfair choices that have been made by this 
government. 
 
The NDP take the view that, if you want to be compassionate, 
then you cannot be fiscally responsible. And the Conservatives 
take the view that, if you’re going to be fiscally responsible, 
then you cannot be compassionate. According to these two 
parties, the qualities of compassion and fiscal responsibility are 
somehow mutually exclusive. 
  



 
June 22, 1987 

621 
 

As a Liberal, I don’t believe that needs to be the case. You can, 
and you must, achieve both simultaneously. It all depends, Mr. 
Speaker, on your priorities. It depends on the choices that 
you’re prepared to make, and on your ability to spend, not just 
more, but to spend smarter, Mr. Speaker, in the best interests of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And it might be instructive for this Assembly to remember that 
the NDP do not come to this debate about the deficit and fiscal 
responsibility with clean hands. Remember that they were the 
ones in power in Saskatchewan during the bountiful years of the 
1970s, with good commodity prices for oil and for grain and for 
potash and for uranium, and they blew that bounty in its 
entirety. They socked it all into the playthings and the power 
trip of a big and arrogant government, and they left nothing as a 
cushion for the future. That was hardly a demonstration of 
prudent management. And remember too that in last fall’s 
election, the NDP actually managed — believe it or not, Mr. 
Speaker — they actually managed to out-promise the 
Conservatives. It was a struggle, but they did it. And if all their 
promises were to be implemented, this Devine deficit today 
would be a few hundreds of millions of dollars worse. 
 
The member for Regina North East would be well advised to 
remember those things. He’s also be well advised maybe to tone 
down the arrogance in his rhetoric. That’s an awful problem for 
the NPD. They believe they somehow have the market cornered 
on decency and compassion. They strut about with their noses 
in the air, secure in the knowledge that they, and only they, 
have earned the right to be self-righteous. A little humility and 
some common sense would do them a world of good. 
 
But the immediate concern, and the first challenge, Mr. 
Speaker, is to stop the harm that this government is inflicting 
upon Saskatchewan. This is a time for some real soul-searching 
on the part of those new PC members across the way. Do they 
hear, Mr. Speaker, what their friends and their neighbours are 
saying back home? Do they read their mail? Do they answer 
their phone calls? Do they see the hundreds and now, Mr. 
Speaker, the thousands who are protesting at public meetings 
and demonstrations? Do they hear the message that so many 
people are trying to send? I believe they do, Mr. Speaker. The 
question is, what are they prepared to do about it? Will those 
new PC members choose to ignore reality, and quietly vote for 
this budget and all its pain? Or will they rise to the occasion, 
demonstrating their courage and their integrity? 
 
This is their time, Mr. Speaker, to make their mark. For better 
or for worse, this is their time. This is their time to shape the 
Saskatchewan of tomorrow. Will it be a tomorrow of meanness 
and despair, as reflected in the images of those sobbing dental 
therapists on television and the silent weeping of this 
government’s countless other victims? 
 
Or will it be, Mr. Speaker, as it could be, a Saskatchewan of 
hope, a Saskatchewan of honesty and courage, a Saskatchewan 
of skill and competence, a Saskatchewan of fairness and justice, 
a Saskatchewan of vision and of destiny? Let them vote, Mr. 
Speaker. Let them vote surely for the latter and not the former. 
Let them vote not for this  

budget, but for a far better and a far higher road. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Britton: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased and honoured to 
participate in this debate because I believe in a sense it’s a very 
historical debate. 
 
First I would like to compliment our Finance minister on the 
budget, Mr. Speaker. And I was quite amused to hear the 
member from Gravelbourg giving our Finance minister a lesson 
in fiscal responsibility. When we remember when he was a 
member of the federal government, he was the party that left us 
with a $50,000 per capita debt for every man, woman, and child 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
(2030) 
 
I hope our minister doesn’t pay too much attention to that voice 
out of the wilderness. And I would suggest that he . . . Do not 
tighten your halo. Your halo will give you a headache . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
You’re welcome. We anticipate the battle. This debate, Mr. 
Speaker, is the fundamental principles of our province, and 
whether or not our province will have a future. I do not say, Mr. 
Speaker, what kind of a future it will have, but if it will have a 
future at all. 
 
And let me explain to you why I feel this so strongly. I do not 
have to repeat the economic conditions, and the serious 
economic situation we find ourselves in. some people, perhaps 
those opposite, would try to deny that we have serious times 
and the economy is suffering. But it doesn’t take much of a 
mathematician to figure out that when the prices of all your 
basic commodities go down, you are going to have fiscal 
difficulty. So that is a fact that I am not going to dwell on. What 
is important is what we should do about it. 
 
We could do as the members opposite suggest, which is to 
increase taxes even more, and try not to reduce the great 
demand the government places on its people. We could spend 
more money, borrow more money until, like the government in 
Manitoba, we could owe $10 billion, Mr. Speaker. We could do 
that, but we won’t. We won’t do that, Mr. Speaker, because it 
would be foolish. How can any thinking person suggest that by 
bankrupting this province we would somehow be able to 
improve services to our people? It can’t happen, and it is a form 
of madness to suggest it. 
 
The other option is to get our house in order, and in the process 
build a province and a government that is responsive to its 
people, that serves its people with the highest quality, that 
allows people to control their lives and encourages them to do 
so. 
 
The other option, Mr. Speaker — our option — is to face the 
economic challenge squarely, fairly, and with courage to see 
that our people are protected; to set about diversifying our 
economy so that we might not face the same crisis in the future. 
And to accomplish these we will exercise fiscal responsibility 
and sound management. 
  



 
June 22, 1987 

622 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I said this debate was an historic one. Let 
me give you some reasons why I think that is so. When this 
government came into office, it inherited a pretty sorry 
situation. They may complain on the other side, but, Mr. 
Speaker, the facts speak for themselves. They will complain 
loudly, but the facts are there if anyone wants to research them. 
No one was being protected in this province, and if you were 
protected, it was at a large personal cost. 
 
The NDP had imposed a moratorium on the construction of 
nursing homes and our senior citizens were left without 
protection. Sure, they gave them $25 a month under the 
Saskatchewan income plan, but how much protection is $25? 
 
The previous government had deserted the rural hospitals and 
the rural medical practices were almost non-existent, so the sick 
were left without much protection. 
 
The previous government had cut funding to our schools and 
the university buildings were rotting on their foundations, so 
our children were left without protection. If a student wanted to 
go to university, the sums available for bursaries were paltry 
and there was no Saskatchewan student loan program, and there 
was no provision for assistance to single parents or women, Mr. 
Speaker. So the students were left without protection. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if a day care was needed, there was a lot of 
difficulty getting that day care going and there was no funding 
for it anyway. So even our small children were left without 
protection. 
 
Interest rates, Mr. Speaker, were higher than ever before in the 
history of this province. For them, Mr. Speaker, there was no 
protection. There was just no protection for almost anyone in 
the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we came into office, this government came into 
office, and we immediately provided that protection. We, this 
government, built nursing homes; we put money into rural 
hospitals; we began to renew the universities; we protected 
people from high interest rates. We, this government, Mr. 
Speaker — and I’m sorry the member from Assiniboia has left 
us — this government increased seniors’ income plan by 300 
per cent. Yes, 300 per cent, Mr. Speaker. I think the member 
from Gravelbourg should take note of that. 
 
We went to the aid of farm families, Mr. Speaker, and let them 
have their land back from a government that was intent on 
keeping it. We, this government, created the Saskatchewan 
student loan program and dramatically increased bursaries. We 
made special provision for single mothers wanting to attend 
university — this government, Mr. Speaker. We created the 
Opportunities program to create jobs for young people over the 
summer, and just in my own constituency alone there was 350 
young people took advantage of that program, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we, this government, created the skills development 
program and the employment program to give social assistance 
recipients real jobs and real independence. 
 
And in hundreds of other projects and programs, Mr.  

Speaker, we set about trying to rebuild this province’s basic 
system of protection. And it cost a lot of money. Now I’d like to 
address that specifically, Mr. Speaker. The members opposite 
say no, it did not cost anything. They say we are responsible for 
the deficit and providing services to people, and falling 
government revenues had nothing to do with it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we, this government, knows that’s 
nonsense. However, let us say it wasn’t. Let us say it was all 
our fault. So okay, you say it was our fault that we had this 
economic problem and then you say, don’t do anything about it. 
You ruined it, but don’t fix it. That just doesn’t make sense, Mr. 
Speaker. They admit there’s a serious problem because they 
want to blame it on us. Yet they say, don’t do anything about it. 
If it weren’t so dangerous, Mr. Speaker, it would be laughable. 
They are dangerous because our elderly can be frightened, our 
sick can be confused, and our poor can be tyrannized; and those 
caring people on the other side are trying to do every one of 
those things. They’re trying to frighten the elderly, confuse the 
sick, and tyrannize the poor. But this government, Mr. Speaker, 
will not tolerate the abuse of the vulnerable in our society. 
 
And that is another reason, Mr. Speaker, why this debate is a 
historic one. The plan this government has is genuinely 
revolutionary in its content. At its most basic, the plan will 
provide protection for the people, development for the province, 
and sound government, fairly and with courage. 
 
Let me give you a few examples, Mr. Speaker. Today, because 
of the commitment of this government, disabled people have a 
much greater say in their own lives. How’s this, you might say, 
Mr. Speaker. Well I’ll let you know. Under the government of 
the NDP, disabled people were viewed as wards of the state. 
And if you were mentally retarded you were locked up, away 
from the community in a government institution, although you 
had committed no crime. This government said, no more. As a 
first step, we are developing the retarded to become part of the 
community instead of forcing them out of it. As well, the 
physically disabled will now control a substantial part of their 
own services through the Saskatchewan Abilities Council. 
 
I give you these two examples, Mr. Speaker, because they are 
fundamental to what this whole government is about. By giving 
people an opportunity to govern themselves we open up 
economic possibilities as well as personal ones. 
 
Part of the government’s plan, Mr. Speaker, is of course to gain 
control over spending. It is not our deepest desire to say to 
people, there is no more money. We do not take joy in reducing 
expenditures. It is a matter of pressing and compelling need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government is acting responsibly, fairly, and 
courageously. It has reduced government spending in a fair and 
open manner. We did not hid the reductions and wait until the 
budget was completely ready. We told the people every day 
what decision was made and what that decision was. The 
government has gone to great lengths to ensure compassionate 
dealings with its employees. 
  



 
June 22, 1987 

623 
 

And I ask you, Mr. Speaker . . . I ask you, Mr. Speaker, and 
those opposite, I will ask this question: how many people in the 
private sector would gladly take early retirement in these 
economic times? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right, 
gladly. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it just isn’t right nor fair for some people to 
claim that we have been unfair or cavalier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t intend to take up a lot of 
time tonight, and I would just like to end with an important 
observation. Those people on the other side might well listen, 
and also the member from Gravelbourg. They seem to be a little 
short of quality people on the other side, and they keep wanting 
us to come over and join them. And I can understand why you 
need a little quality and a little bit of an upgrading over there. 
 
But I came here, Mr. Speaker, I was elected in my riding as a 
Progressive Conservative member, because they support our 
plan and they support me as a candidate. And I will represent 
them, Mr. Speaker, to the best of my ability. And you can bet 
that includes supporting this government fully, completely, and 
supporting this budget quite loudly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from my remarks, you will understand that I will 
not support the amendment, but I will fully support the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have 
looked forward for quite some time to participate in this debate. 
We expected this debate to take place some time much earlier in 
the year, preferably in March or in the month of April, so 
there’s a lot of material that we wish to go over. 
 
And I was inspired by the member from Assiniboia-
Gravelbourg to deviate a little bit from some of the comments 
that I was going to make this evening. And I couldn’t believe in 
his own monotone hypocrisy when he started talking about 
fiscal responsibility. And I’m sorry the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg isn’t here. He had to depart, I suppose, 
to meet with the rest of the Liberal caucus. 
 
When he sat as a member of parliament in the House of 
commons under the Trudeau government, they invented fiscal 
irresponsibility, and which Canadians have had to suffer under 
ever since the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg was 
actually a member of the federal House of commons. And I 
think that the election time really portrays the hypocrisy even 
more, when the member went around the province preaching 
exactly what his Tory friends across the way are bringing into 
reality. 
 
If he really wanted to do something for the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, I think he should invite directly, 
not beat around the bush and namby-pamby  

about wanting some of the back-benchers over there to join his 
party; he should come right out and ask them directly. It would 
mean over $100,000 to him in his budget because he’d 
officially become a caucus. 
 
You see, the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg doesn’t have 
any official status, other than an independent member here, and 
I’m sure you’re aware of that, Mr. Speaker. He sits there as an 
independent member, speaks for himself and his constituents, 
which is justly so. But he would like very much to become an 
official party so that the Liberals could be represented in this 
legislature. And so, if he won’t do it, I’d invite some of the 
back-bench Tories — go over and join him; they’ll always take 
care of you; the Liberals always take care of their friends, just 
like the Conservatives always take care of their friends. So you 
move on over, move on over, make sure you get over there 
soon. 
 
And I’m sure that the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
has forgotten about when the Patterson government was in in 
Saskatchewan before 1944, and the economic state of the 
province at that time when we were virtually bankrupt and 
members of Tommy Douglas’s cabinet had to sign personal 
guarantees for the province of Saskatchewan to operate. And 
then he must’ve also forgotten, Mr. Speaker, about the period 
from 1964 until 1971, the seven long, lean years, as Allan 
Blakeney refers to them as, when Ross Thatcher ran the 
province into the hole. 
 
(2045) 
 
And I challenge any of the members opposite or the member 
from Assinioboia-Gravelbourg got sit down with a set of 
economic statements and compare who’s fiscally responsible in 
the Saskatchewan . The only party that’s ever been fiscally 
responsible has been the New Democratic Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — As I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, I’ve waited a 
long time to get into this debate, so have the people of 
Saskatchewan. I think they demonstrated that on Saturday, 
when there were 7,000 or it could’ve been 5,000 or 10,000, but 
several thousand people come out to demonstrate in front of the 
Legislative Building to make some kind of impact on the 
Neanderthals that are sitting on the government side of the 
House, because that’s almost how far we’re going back, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s been a betrayal to the people and the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What about election promises from 1982 and 1986 that most of 
you ran around the province campaigning on? You’re going to 
eliminate the gas tax — it was a road tax on gasoline at that 
time — and in fact, you did that. But the money at that time 
went into two funds; it went into the auto insurance fund and it 
went into building roads in the Saskatchewan. What happens 
now? The big betrayal? You’ve brought back in the gas tax, but 
where does it go? It goes to paying off your deficit. The deficit 
you’ve created over the years that you’ve been in power in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And every year from 1982 until 
present, you’ve created irresponsibly large deficits in the 
province. 
  



 
June 22, 1987 

624 
 

Well what are some of the other things that you’ve promised? 
You promised to reduce income tax by 10 per cent and to 
eliminate sales tax. Well in this budget on Wednesday, June 17, 
you increased the sales tax by 40 per cent — from 5 per cent to 
7 per cent — a 40 per cent increase on sales tax. 
 
What about income tax? Did you reduce it by 10 per cent? 
What’s the big betrayal? Well, you brought in the flat tax, the 
very unfair flat tax. One per cent last year, another staged 1 per 
cent coming in this year, Mr. Speaker. And the reasons it’s 
unfair is because it helps the wealthy more than it does the 
middle-income and the low-income people because the flat tax 
is taken off before the people even get to their basic exemptions 
on the income tax forms so you can deduct your tax shelters, 
your RRSPs (Registered Retirement Savings Plans), MURBs 
(Multiple Unit Residential Building) when they were in 
existence — very unfair. That’s a betrayal to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And the rural areas, well, when they came in in 1982 they said 
they had to have some sort of orderly transition of the family 
farm. They brought in the farm purchase program. Now that’s 
been eliminated. That’s a betrayal of Saskatchewan people, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well look to other things in agriculture. What’s the direction in 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker? What’s the direction in agriculture? 
It’s agri-business. There’s more and more and more agri-
business, and fewer and fewer and fewer farmers because the 
only farmers that can succeed right now are those that have 
been established for many years and have no debt, or those 
farmers who choose to work off the farm — either one spouse 
works in town teaching school or possibly the other spouse 
might drive truck during the winter or take on some other 
occupation. And combined-income farmers are the only real 
farmers in Saskatchewan that can succeed now, and certainly to 
get into farming they have to be combined-income farmers. So 
we don’t want agri-business. 
 
You have no plan for agriculture; you have no plan to save 
agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan, other than letting 
farmers go bankrupt and moving them into the cities and into 
the towns to further increase the unemployment problem we 
have in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s a betrayal of 
Saskatchewan rural people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What else did they say? They said things like they would 
expand the prescription drug plan. Well, as we know, they’ve 
virtually eliminated the prescription drug plan as we know it. 
Elderly people, people who rely on prescription drugs, have to 
now pay their money up front, submit their receipts, and then 
get reimbursed. What a sad state of affairs. Many of the people 
who have to rely on drugs prescribed by doctors . . . is that they 
don’t have the money to pay up front. Many, many people in 
Saskatchewan are very limited in their resources and they can’t 
take into account another 70, another 100, in some cases a 
couple of hundred dollars to buy their drugs as they need them 
to preserve and take care of their health. And I think that’s a sad 
state of affairs. So the biggest  

betrayal, Mr. Speaker, has been actually in the area of medicare. 
 
The one other promise that really rings a bell to me is the 
promise of free telephones for senior citizens. Remember the 
free telephones? Well — may she rest in peace — my 
grandmother died last August and when she passed away she 
was still waiting for her free telephone, just like every other 
senior out there is waiting for their free telephone. You lied to 
them — very well documented, a total lie to the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. But as I say . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, as a point of order. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Would the member 
state her point of order. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — The member obviously is using 
unparliamentary language. I must say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
the members opposite were cautioned earlier in the day about 
the use of unparliamentary language. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Well I would caution members not to 
use unparliamentary language. There’s lots of words in the 
English language to allow good, orderly debate, and I’m sure 
that all members here are educated well enough to use the 
English language in that manner. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I respect that, Mr. Speaker, but I felt I wasn’t 
referring to any individual member as a liar. And I won’t use 
that again. In most places a lie is a lie, but if a lie isn’t a lie in 
this Chamber, then I will not use that language again, Mr. 
Speaker, and I make that commitment to you. 
 
Medicare is under attack, Mr. Speaker, and when members 
opposite say there is no respect, how do you expect people to 
respect people like yourselves on that side of the House when 
medicare is under attack. The Tories have said, it’s a sacred 
trust; we would never touch medicare in the province of 
Saskatchewan. The sacred trust. Well, the sacred trust . . . On 
the 25th anniversary of medicare coming into place, Tommy 
Douglas, a pioneer in medicare; Woodrow Lloyd who actually 
brought it in; own leader, Allan Blakeney, who was at that time 
the Minister of Health — worked long and hard to develop that 
program that came in right across Canada. All Canadians then 
saw the wisdom, after the big fight took place in Saskatchewan, 
to bring in universal access to good quality health care for 
caring and sharing people in the province of Saskatchewan, and 
it spread across the country. And New Democrats built on that 
program in years after the 25th anniversary. 
 
I think about the dental plan. Dental plan came in, and this 
budget has virtually eliminated the dental plan in the province 
of Saskatchewan. All the therapists that were trained are now 
out of work. It’s going to cost us more, I predict, to go to 
dentists. Rural people won’t go through the great 
inconvenience, in some cases, to bring their children in, if you 
live in a place like Goodsoil, to come into Meadow Lake, and if 
the dentists there are all booked, then the choice is to go to 
North Battleford. 



 
June 22, 1987 

625 
 

And while children’s teeth rot in the province of Saskatchewan, 
the Tories can say that they’re being fiscally responsible. Well 
isn’t that a great state of affairs, Mr. Speaker. You must be very 
proud of the government over there. 
 
Another thing in medicare — chiropractic services, 
physiotherapy services. The Minister of Health in the House 
said today he hasn’t said anything about cutting back on that. 
But why is it that in every physiotherapist’s office, every 
chiropractor’s office in the Saskatchewan, you go in there, 
there’s either a petition or a notice hanging on the wall that 
effective July 1, there won’t be any more than 12 treatments per 
year? And so if you need more than 12 treatments per year, too 
bad — you’ve got to take care of them yourself, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, that’s a sad state of affairs for a party and a government 
that said that medicare was a sacred trust. 
 
And I think that one of the bad things is the cuts in mental 
health. I know in the constituency I represent, we have the 
Saskatchewan Hospital — the only long-term institutional care 
facility in the province of Saskatchewan for mental health 
patients. And I know it’s good. If people can be in society, 
they’d be in society. There are some people — and no one will 
ever convince me differently — there are some people in 
society that require long-term institutional care for mental 
health problems. 
 
What happens at the Saskatchewan Hospital on early 
retirement? Sixty-two positions lost out of the Saskatchewan 
Hospital How many are you going to refill? I hear that they’ve 
given permission to refill about 28 of those positions. The place 
is coming to a standstill. 
 
Now on the thing of turning people out into the community that 
have some degree of mental health problems. That’s fine, but 
there’s only two community mental health nurses left to service 
the North Battleford area and the Lloydminster area, so that’s 
great. 
 
People go out into society, this caring, sharing society, and 
since the Tories won’t provide any support services, these 
people have their backs against the wall, Mr. Speaker, when 
they get out into society. And they don’t have their drug levels 
monitored, which many of them are on out in society. They 
don’t have the care, they don’t have the support services. 
 
The biggest reason actually, though, to have mental health 
budgets increase is for the insanity on that side of the House, 
just a total insanity on that side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Premier Devine said during the election campaign 
that if Tommy Douglas was alive today that he’d vote for him. 
If Tommy Douglas could, Mr. Speaker, and he’s listening to 
what’s going on in the province of Saskatchewan today, I would 
say that there’d be a big hand come out of the sky and smack 
Devine’s government right into the dirt because Tommy 
Douglas wouldn’t stand for it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — And the people in Saskatchewan aren’t  

going to stand for it either, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We were sitting having a meal in the restaurant this evening 
with about four of my colleagues, and an elderly gentleman 
came along and he was wearing his Legion blazer. And he 
obviously knew that we were members of the legislature, and he 
came over and he shook each of our hands, and he said, is the 
legislature sitting this evening? And we said, yes, it is sitting 
this evening. We’re going back there at 7 o’clock to debate the 
budget. And he said, that’s good. He said, you give them all 
you’ve got. He said, I’ve been a Tory all my life, and I’ll never 
vote for them again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — So people in Saskatchewan don’t agree with 
what you’re doing, and that’ll be proven out. And if you want to 
go ahead and call an election, feel quite free to do so, feel quite 
free to do so. 
 
And you members in the back benches hold the key to that. Just 
join the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, have this House 
fall, and see who wins the next election. 
 
But the worst is to come in health care, Mr. Speaker. The worst 
is yet to come in health care, because in the budget the member 
from Qu’Appelle Lumsden says that, and I quote: “we intend to 
redefine the mandate of rural hospitals to accommodate the 
needs of the communities they serve:” What does that mean? 
Well, the Minister of Health is going to set up his little 
commission. They’re going to go around the province, and I 
predict they’re going to be closing hospitals in rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Caring, sharing society of the Tory 
Devines. 
 
I’d like to turn for a few moments, Mr. Speaker, to talk about 
my critic area, which is Highways and Transportation. In the 
budget documents it’s outlined here that there’ll actually be an 
increase of about $7 million in the Highways budget this year. 
That’s on first examination of the estimates that were tabled in 
this House on Wednesday, June 17 — black Wednesday, or 
whatever you want to call it. So initially you look at that $7 
million increase for highways in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But then you look at last year’s supplementary estimates, 
because they didn’t estimate quite correctly in the ‘86-87 fiscal 
year, so they re-estimated. And when they re-estimated, well, 
there’s another $10,450,000 they spent last year. So you’ve got 
to add that on to the ‘86-87 estimates and you find that there’s 
no increase, no increase in the Highways budget. 
 
(2100) 
 
And then you go and you look a little further through here, 
because usually in the past we had a Department of Supply and 
Services, and the Department of Supply and Services always 
provided all the facilities for the government departments. And 
they say, well we’ve made them more efficient and we’ve 
wiped out a department there, but we’ve got a new corporation 
called the property management corporation so we can 
mortgage assets, sell things off, raise money for the 
government, pay  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

626 
 

the Devine deficit. 
 
Well, property management corporation . . . What have we got 
here? Oh, property management corporation. The Department 
of Highways this year has to pay them $8,233,900. And so, 
when you get your pen out and start figuring, Highways and 
Transportation had a budget reduction this year — in this 
coming fiscal year, the one we’re in right now — of 
$11,757,070. Lost $11 million off the budget. The member 
from Melfort is going to have to do something about building 
roads. They’re deteriorating at a very rapid rate. What are we 
going to do about that? 
 
Fiscally responsible? Well fiscally responsible . . . They 
announced the upgrading of the Yellowhead recently, said they 
were going to put it in as part of the Trans-Canada Highway 
system. I found it very interesting. The member from Melfort 
will be prepared, I’m sure, to answer this in estimates, but in 
part of the plan they’re going to reconstruct six new bridges on 
the Yellowhead in Saskatchewan between the Manitoba border 
and the Alberta border. And they’ve budgeted a million dollars 
for that. Fiscally responsible. A million dollars — a million 
dollars for six bridges. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It must be in U.S. funds. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Oh, it would have to be in U.S. funds. 
Fiscally responsible. I can’t believe it. 
 
The thing that really got me a whole lot though, Mr. Speaker, 
was the enthusiasm of everybody on the government side when 
the member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden was giving his budget 
speech. There were members chewing gum and yawning and 
walking out the door, and the whip would go and find them and 
bring them back in. And the most enthusiastic of all, Mr. 
Speaker, had to be the member from Saskatoon Eastview. The 
hand was on the face during the entire presentation — couldn’t 
seem to get the two of them to meet to do any clapping for the 
speech. 
 
And then at the end, Mr. Speaker, it was really good. Were my 
colleagues watching the member from Saskatoon Eastview? He 
was sitting down in his seat and he got up when he saw 
everyone standing, clapped his hands, and back down again. 
Such enthusiasm! We loved it on this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. It was really good. It was really good. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — Maybe he’ll be the first one to join us. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Or resign. He could resign. We could have 
test by-election. I think that would be a very interesting 
experience. You know, don’t hold him. If the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview wants to go, let him go. Don’t let him cross 
the floor. Let’s have a by-election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — One of the other members on the government 
side moved me to deviate from the presentation I wanted to give 
here this evening as well,  

Mr. Speaker, and that was the member from Indian Head-
Wolseley who really inspired me, because so far in the entire 
budget debate, he’s the only one that didn’t stand and read the 
speech that he had to present on the budget debate. Every other 
member has been reading their speech because they’re 
defensive. They don’t know what to say about it, so the caucus 
office writes their notes down. Word for word, what they’re 
supposed to say — even some of the cabinet ministers that have 
spoke. Well I shouldn’t say some because only there’s only 
been two spoke — one read the speech, the other one winged it 
fairly well, member from Indian Head-Wolseley. 
 
But the thing that moved me to say something about the speech 
from the member from Indian Head-Wolseley, the Minister of 
Tourism, Small Business and Co-ops — certainly an expanding 
department — was his comments towards Gainers and 
Vanguard, those two businesses that I welcome very much to 
The Battlefords. They’ve done a great deal for our economy in 
The Battlefords; they sincerely have. And I’ve never been 
critical of the business coming in. What I’ve been critical of is 
the financial package that this government across the way gave 
to attract Peter Pocklington to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — And we want to see the documents. Show us 
the agreement with Peter Pocklington! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Is it true that you’re paying $7 for each pork 
belly that has to be imported into the province? Because they’re 
all coming in from outside the province. You don’t see many of 
the farmers rushing into pork production, Mr. Speaker, not very 
many of them. They require at the Gainers plant in North 
Battleford 50,000 pork bellies a week when they’re running at 
full capacity. How many are there produced in the province? 
Oh, about 14,000, and they’re all currently consumed, so they’ll 
have to be imported. So tell us, is it true that you’re subsidizing 
all the pork bellies that are coming in? Come on, confess! Show 
us the contracts. Show us the contracts you made with people at 
Gainers. 
 
But the interesting thing that I wanted to say to the Minister of 
Tourism, Small Business, and Co-ops is that the government 
seems to put a great deal of emphasis on The Battlefords, and 
the people there truly appreciate that. And the local member, 
from the period of 1982 until 1986 worked very hard for his 
constituents — must have — because the Gainers plant . . . but 
most of this stuff, interestingly enough, happened in the last 
year of the election. 
 
Well the member for The Battlefords at that time got into the 
cabinet and worked very hard. They brought him in as a 
talented individual, and he convinced the cabinet to put into The 
Battlefords, Gainers. Sot here in the year before the election, he 
gets into the cabinet; they’re building the Gainers plant; it’s all 
constructed during the election campaign. The building’s 
standing there ready to go into production. 
  



 
June 22, 1987 

627 
 

Hunter’s manufacturing starts up, bought the Vanguard out in 
Winfield and moved that into The Battlefords. And we 
appreciate all those jobs and all the energy that’s gone into that 
building as well. 
 
Hi R Doors, a firm from Edmonton, is coming in there; they’re 
doing the site excavation now. That was all announced before, 
and we appreciate that business. 
 
There was the John Paul II Collegiate, a new separate high 
school that was built. There was the Battleford Central School 
where my children go to school, and they appreciate the new 
school that they’re going to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they built a young offenders facility out on the 
Saskatchewan hospital grounds. And we appreciate those jobs. 
And there’s a senior citizens high-rise that’s going to open this 
month, the Ruth White Manor — nice senior citizens high-rise 
close to downtown North Battleford. And there’s the enriched 
housing unit for seniors that’s only two blocks from my own 
residence — and the seniors appreciate that as well. 
 
But you see what happened is that even though that member 
was such a good member and worked so hard, and worked in 
consultation with the mayors in that community and the 
community of Battleford and the city of North Battleford, the 
people thought that you were so despicable that they would not 
re-elect him. They were so mad at the Tory government that 
they wouldn’t re-elect a member like that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — That’s a sad testimony, Mr. Speaker, for a 
government that says that they care and are trying to say that 
they’re doing something for the people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Very sad, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, fiscal responsibility seems to be the order of the day. And 
that’s what’s written down in all the papers that are being read 
over there — fiscal responsibility. Well . . . is it okay to say 
false? Propaganda, propaganda is a better word, because I don’t 
know who you have as the propaganda minister, actually, but 
Goebbels would have lost his job back in the 1930’s and the 
1940’s if that person had been in existence today. Because 
what’s actually happening in the province and what’s coming 
out of people ‘s mouths on that side of the House are two totally 
different things. Partly truth, partly fiction — total 
contradiction. You should have a song writer working for you 
as well. 
 
Another note I made came from question period today, Mr. 
Speaker. As far as I know the Premier of this province has no 
speech impediment whatsoever. And today when he was 
answering a question from one of our hon. members, he 
stuttered on the word truth. Yes, fiscally responsible. That’s 
why the demonstration was out on Saturday, a big part of fiscal 
responsibility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Was there a demonstration? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Yes, there was a demonstration. They may 
not acknowledge it, but there was definitely a demonstration 
here. 

 
And some of the members over there said, well it’s the New 
Democrats inciting these people and organizing them to come 
out and demonstrate in front of the legislature. Well I’m very 
happy that all the New Democrats were in Saskatoon planning 
how to defeat those people on the other side of the House. We 
were there, the demonstrators were here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I really want to get on to this fiscal 
responsibility. It happened at the 1982 election, Mr. Speaker — 
came in basically at the end of the fiscal year and this 
government came into place. And they projected a deficit 
budget in their very first year, and they overshot the deficit they 
projected. They spent $7 million more than what they projected 
to spend. And that’s close; it’s not bad. And deficits aren’t 
always bad if you’re investing in something that’ll give you a 
return in the future. Many governments have done that, but 
they’ve always brought their houses back into order, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Then in the ‘83-84 fiscal year they projected a deficit again of 
$317 million. Well this time they overshot it by $14 million . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well still pretty close. And then in 
the 1984-85 fiscal year they projected a deficit of $267 million. 
And then they overshot it. They spent ever more than that; they 
spent $112 million more than that. Yes, it’s getting worse. 
 
And then the fiscal year ‘85-86, they projected another deficit 
of $291 million. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They got a new Finance minister. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Did the Finance minister change at that point? 
That was the difference. The hon. member from Saskatoon 
Westmount tells me that it was a new Finance minister. 
 
Well in that year that they projected a deficit of $291 million, 
they spent $293 million more than what they projected in the 
deficit. So the actual deficit in that single year was $584 
million. Fiscal responsibility, my friends, fiscal responsibility. 
Where is the jeering over there? Come on, it gets me going. 
Silence. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Silence. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Silence. Well and then, Mr. Speaker, we 
come into election year. Election year. I’m excited about this 
one, I’ll tell you. In the fiscal year 1986-87 they projected 
another deficit of $389 million. Mr. Speaker, they spent a 
thousand, two hundred and thirty-five million dollars. They 
overshot their projection by $846 million. Fiscal responsibility. 
Fiscal responsibility? Are you kidding? 
 
And you see, one of the biggest problems, Mr. Speaker, is they 
never stick to any plan. They never stick to any plan, Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s quite obvious because if you stuck to the plan 
you would basically be within what was in the first year, only 
overshooting by 7 million. But when you overshoot by $846 
million, there’s either no plan there or else they never stuck to 
it. And every time the public  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

628 
 

opinion polls flinched a little bit, they’d throw another bucket of 
money here, another bucket of money there, and that is 
absolutely no fiscal responsibility. That’s fiscal irresponsibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — You see, the Tories have . . . I’m sorry, Mr. 
Speaker, the government, I believe, has two agendas. They have 
a political agenda, and that political agenda is to express to 
people how bad things are, but not take any credit for getting us 
in that situation. And this government has to take total credit for 
getting us into the economic mess we’re in today in the 
province of Saskatchewan. No question about that. 
 
And so that in the last year before the next election, whenever 
they’re brave enough o call it, unless some of the back-benchers 
join the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg who, I see, has 
returned, and I’m happy that you’re here this evening. If you 
will walk over there, that’s the only way we’ll get the election 
sooner, so do it now. Don’t wait for, let’s see, ’86 — 1991, it 
could be - 1991 if you go by past precedent, but you never stick 
to any precedents anyway, so we’ll only be guessing. 1991 
comes along for ‘91-92 fiscal year. It looks like we’ll likely be 
projecting — oh, on these projections, be a trillion-dollar 
budget and you’d overshoot it by two. 
 
(2115) 
 
So we’re going to be in a big economic mess unless something 
happens in the province of Saskatchewan, because they will 
push the deficit up there to gain re-election in the province of 
Saskatchewan and hope that people forget what’s happened 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — But they’ve affected too many people, Mr. 
Speaker, because people in Saskatchewan aren’t going to forget 
this. They aren’t going to forget the attack on the medicare 
system. They aren’t going to forge the attacks on themselves as 
individuals in the province of Saskatchewan. They’ll be thrown 
out when they try and buy people’s votes next time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — So to me, that’s the political agenda, Mr. 
Speaker, of the government. The legislative agenda is to 
privatize and destroy whatever has been built up and is viewed 
as public sector in the province of Saskatchewan. They’re going 
to privatize everything they can as a contingency plan so they’ll 
all have jobs when they’re done here. 
 
You go back to the last Conservative government in 
Saskatchewan before the Devine administration came along was 
1929. They went to the maximum on their mandate, went to 
1934, didn’t elect one single member back to the provincial 
legislature. So they’re very wary, Mr. Speaker. They want lots 
privatized so they can have jobs when they’re done their term of 
destroying the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve taken enough time of the House. I’d 
like to close off with a quote, unless the members on the other 
side of the House harass me, and I might be moved to keep 
speaking . . . to keep speaking this evening. But I found this 
quote, and it comes from a Professor Alexander Tyler, and I’m 
sure that the members on the opposite side wouldn’t recognize 
that name at all. And in all fairness, likely the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg wouldn’t recognize it either. And in all 
fairness, possibly some of us wouldn’t recognize the quote 
because it came from Professor Alexander Tyler just before the 
Declaration of Independence was signed in the United States., I 
believe around 1776, or in those years somewhere. And he 
referred, and I quote that: 
 

A democracy cannot exist as a permanent form of 
government. It can only exist until the voters discover that 
they can vote themselves largesse from the public treasury. 

 
And the voters in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
certainly have discovered that with the Conservatives. People 
voted for them in many areas because they promised them rich 
rewards at election time. 
 
But now people realize that you can’t do that because we’re a 
caring, sharing society. Although Professor Tyler may not be 
absolutely correct in what he’s saying, the bottom line is 
certainly true as it applies to Tories in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Professor Tyler goes on to say that: 
 

From that moment on, the majority always votes for the 
candidates promising the most benefits from the public 
treasury, with the result that a democracy always collapses 
over loose fiscal policy, always followed by a dictatorship. 

 
Well let’s examine that a little bit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Certainly they promised lots. As I’ve said before, the people in 
Saskatchewan won’t forget, because there isn’t a single family 
in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that hasn’t been 
touched negatively by this government over the past six months 
— not a single family in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, what about the part he says in the quote about: democracy 
collapses over loose fiscal policy? Today there is no democracy 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The only democracy we had in Saskatchewan was at the last 
election, although by a quirk of constituencies the 
Conservatives formed more seats, but New Democrats got more 
votes in the province of Saskatchewan. So we accept that. 
Democracy’s at work. But here’s no democracy now. You listen 
to no one. 
 
The glow on the face from the member from Cut Knife-
Lloydminster . . . What an asset to that caucus over there, I’ll 
tell you. He’s one of the ones the member from Assiniboia-
Gravelbourg should work on to come on over. It’d be a great 
asset to your caucus as well. You could  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

629 
 

make him deputy leader. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the quote goes on, and I’d like to wrap it up 
because it really speaks of this Conservative government and 
what they’ve done to people in the province of Saskatchewan. I 
quote: 
 

From bondage to spiritual faith; 
from spiritual faith to great courage; 
from courage to liberty; 
from liberty to abundance; 
from abundance to selfishness; 
from selfishness to complacency; 
from complacency to apathy; 
from apathy to dependence; 
(and) from dependency back again (to) bondage. 

 
As I said, I don’t necessarily agree with everything that’s 
explained in there in the way that Professor Tyler would explain 
it, but I certainly know that the Conservatives in government 
have put people in Saskatchewan into bondage. 
 
People in Saskatchewan are having a hard time making ends 
meet, Mr. Speaker. I get phone calls from residents of nursing 
homes from level 2, 3, and 4 care, that in one swoop have had 
their rents increased by $73 a month. I get people phoning me 
in tears — tears out of a serious concern that they wont’ be able 
to afford to get the drugs and the medications they need because 
they have to pay for them up front and don’t have the money. 
 
And is this government listening? No, they don’t seem to be 
listening very well. But we’ll find out what happens, because 
the next demonstration that happens at the legislature won’t be 
5 or 7,000 people. The next demonstration at the legislature will 
be tens of thousands of people unless we can force you to 
change your minds. The only thing that you appreciate on that 
side of the House is raw power. The member from Wilkie runs 
in a safe seat so he can even afford to laugh more than the 
member from Cutknife-Lloyd. And you yuck it up now, buddy, 
because you won’t be here after the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I saw the member from Kelsey-Tisdale 
holding up an article to me, Mr. Speaker, an article from the 
Battleford Telegraph. And it’s got a great headline on there, 
“Anguish Warns Chamber.” Well that’s a very interesting 
article. I wish you’d circulate it to all your members. I was quite 
concerned about it. Chamber of commerce asked me to come to 
a confidential meeting with their board of directors. So I go to 
the confidential meeting with the board of directors, Mr. 
Speaker, and what do you know, a month later the confidential 
meeting appears on the front page of the Battleford Telegraph. 
 
Now you have to appreciate the Battleford Telegraph, Mr. 
Speaker, because the only time, with the possible exception of 
maybe election time, that I’d get front page in the Battleford 
Telegraph is if they could extremely embarrass me. And so they 
thought it was a great embarrassment to have a headline that 
“Anguish Warns (the) Chamber.” But anyway, a month after 
our meeting it  

appears in the paper, this confidential meeting that we had with 
the board of directors of the chamber of commerce. 
 
So I phoned the president of the chamber of commerce and I 
said, Doug, have you seen the Telegraph? Doug’s the president 
of the chamber of commerce, Mr. Speaker; I wasn’t talking to 
myself. So I ask him, I said, have you seen the Telegraph? And 
he said yes. He said, I’m extremely embarrassed about it — 
extremely embarrassed about it. I said, I’m not very happy 
about it either. I said, I see that as a bit of a betrayal of 
confidence in the meeting we had. 
 
I got off to a very bad start with the chamber of commerce, Mr. 
Speaker, because all those people over there were running 
around saying that I was anti-business and I was against all the 
developments coming into the Battlefords. Well I’m not insane. 
I don’t need the mental health budget to protect me. I get along 
quite well with business. I have to rely on business to earn my 
income most of the time, Mr. Speaker. But because the 
Goebbels on that side of the House, whoever that might be, did 
a very effective job with the mayors in North Battleford and the 
former member of the legislature . . . So we had a baring of the 
chest with the chamber of commerce and the whole story got 
out. 
 
But you’ve got to appreciate, Mr. Speaker, that they were 
described in the Telegraph as minutes of a meeting. Well to me, 
minutes of a meeting have always reflected . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. I find the incident the member is 
relating interesting, and other members do, but I wonder how 
that relates to the budget. If you could relate it, well, you can 
carry on. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a well understood rule 
in parliaments all over Canada that the members who speak on 
the two main debates — the throne speech and the budget 
speech — have the widest possible latitude in speaking. And I 
would be very upset, Mr. Speaker, if in fact the latitude was 
narrowed in any way whatsoever, and I know that 
parliamentarians all over would be upset if the latitude on these 
two main debates are narrowed in any way whatsoever. And 
that’s the point of order. But I don’t believe we can narrow the 
latitude. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I accept the point of order as raised by the 
member; however, as I said in my original statement, that you 
could somehow relate it to the budget, it’s acceptable. I think 
there should be some kind of a relationship somewhere. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, it may be your opinion, and 
I respect your opinion. What I am talking about here are the 
rules under which this legislature has functioned for decades. I 
can remember as a small boy sitting in the gallery watching the 
debates on these two debates. The members had the widest 
possible latitude. I can remember sitting on this side and that 
side of the House, having the widest possible latitude. You can 
talk about the price of rice in China if you wish. I don’t advise 
it, but you can. And I say that anything that detracts from the 
practice that we’ve had for generations of wide latitude on 
either of these debates would be a disservice to the  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

630 
 

parliamentary system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — There is absolutely no intention of limiting 
debate, I can assure you of that. That was not the intention at 
all, except I was just wondering, as I sat here, you know, where 
is the relationship going to come? And I am sure that the 
member does have a relationship somewhere. So I just want to 
assure the members that there is absolutely no intention of 
limiting their scope of debate. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll certainly 
carry on. It interrupted my train of thought, but I’m sure that I’ll 
collect myself here in just a moment as to where I’d left off. 
 
The point will be made — and I’ll bring it to a conclusion, my 
little story. But first off . . . I was taunted by a member opposite 
by holding up the article from the Telegraph, and I wasn’t 
going to bring it up at all, but I’m a sensitive kind of guy and I 
feel it necessary to respond. If the Tories are going to be using 
this as a new piece of propaganda against me, I wish to get my 
statement of it on the record in the House. And I‘ll even make a 
further tie in, Mr. Speaker, when I finish telling you my story 
about the “Anguish Warns Chamber” in the Battleford 
Telegraph paper. 
 
And you see, Mr. Speaker, the Telegraph portrayed these as 
minutes of a meeting. Well to me, minutes would signify that 
there were decisions made; there were motions that were moved 
and seconded and debated and passed or defeated, but none of 
that happened. What it was, Mr. Speaker, was that someone at 
the chamber meeting was making notes. So to begin with, it was 
their biased interpretation of the meeting that we had. And then 
those notes were copied out and circulated to some of the 
directors that weren’t there at this confidential airing meeting 
that we had with the chamber of commerce. 
 
And to the credit of the president of the chamber of commerce 
he said to me: I know every one who has a copy of those notes 
from that meeting. And he said: I’m going to find out who it 
was. And I thought, that’s really good, and I have some respect 
for you for doing that. Well, he phones and he confronts every 
director, every director of the chamber of commerce, and he 
finally found out who it was who released these notes to the 
Telegraph. 
 
And the thing about releasing the notes to Cheryl Cook, who is 
a reporter at the Telegraph, is that she has no qualms about 
admitting her strengths in the Tory party. Then again, she 
interprets an already biased set of notes from a meeting, and 
I’m not consulted about it; so then again it’s another 
interpretation that appears in the paper. 
 
And do you know who it was who released the notes to Cheryl 
Cook at the Telegraph? Do you want to know who it was? It 
was Howard Heffernan from Gulf Oil. Yes! Well, it’s still Gulf 
Oil . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Howard Heffernan? Well, 
he’s the former president of the chamber of commerce. He’s a 
very right-wing type of  

individual. He says he has nothing personal against me, but he 
has professional differences with me. 
 
And I said to the president of the chamber of commerce when 
he let me know who it was who released those notes, I said, do 
you think that maybe Howard Heffernan is more interested in 
politics than he is in your chamber of commerce? This 
Conservative that would take those notes over there to try and 
discredit the member of the legislature, instead of trying to 
promote some harmony in which we can work together? 
 
(2130) 
 
So that’s sort of the tie-in. It sort of tells something about what 
strong Tories are really like, those that stick together in the 
most difficult of times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I may close off fairly soon here, but I’d like to say 
that what people in Saskatchewan are learning right now is 
learning from experience. And the problem with learning from 
experience is quite often you learn things you didn’t want to 
know. And I think that speaks for the things that Tories in this 
province have been doing. People are shocked that they finally 
know what’s going on in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And if you could have kept the legislature out, the 
government — I shouldn’t say you, Mr. Speaker — but if the 
government could have kept the legislature out, I don’t think 
they would have ever called it back in because, again, all they 
appreciate is raw power. And they figure if they get elected at 
election time, to heck with everything else, we’ll just ram 
through whatever we want. And if it wasn’t in the Constitution 
of Canada that you have to call the legislature in once per year, 
I’m sure we wouldn’t be sitting here, Mr. Speaker. We’d be out, 
and you’d see even larger demonstrations in front of the 
Legislature building. You’d see people demonstrating all over 
this province, Mr. Speaker, to get out their word in what they 
feel about this government. 
 
So I ask the government: show some compassion; listen to what 
some of the other members have to say, even though it gets 
maybe a bit rhetorical at times and you kibitz back and forth — 
we to you, you to us — but try and take some thing from what 
other people say to you. And if you can’t, well the back-
benchers have the option of joining the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, or you’d have the test case of the 
member from Saskatoon Eastview resigning and call a by-
election — maybe that might make them listen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I think that you should do the people of Saskatchewan a 
favour and lighten up a little bit. Lighten up on the people in the 
province because the people of the province of Saskatchewan 
do not deserve what they’re going through at the present time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I received a note here from the member for 
North Battleford — obviously from someone across the way. 
They say, I guess in conclusion, that I’ve done something that’s 
unforgivable; that’s likely meaning that I’ve spoken out for the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan. I’ll leave it at that for 
tonight, Mr. Speaker,  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

631 
 

but this government is going to hear lots more from this side of 
the House, Mr. Speaker, and you’d better be prepared to stay 
here till the snow flies unless you change some of your policies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased or rise in the 
legislature tonight to respond to the budget address introduced 
by my colleague, the Minister of Finance. And first of all I 
would like to commend the minister highly for having the 
wisdom and the foresight and intestinal fortitude to bring in a 
budget that will help turn the tide in the rising deficit. But being 
that the past member that spoke brought it up, I would deviate 
for a moment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He too, as others over there, have been calling for an election. 
And I would read for a moment the article to which he referred, 
and ask myself why? Perhaps he wants to try the federal forum 
again. I’m really sorry first of all, on behalf of all of my friends 
in the chambers of commerce throughout the province as well 
as, certainly, the North Battleford and Battlefords chamber, that 
he can’t trust his chamber and the business community there. 
It’s quite a headline: “Anguish Warns Chamber.” Quite a 
headline! Who are you to warn anybody? We’re here to discuss, 
and we’re here to debate, and we’re here to serve the people. 
We don’t warn the people. 
 
But in any event, it goes on to say that: 
 

Anguish was welcomed to the luncheon gathering, and a 
suggestion was made politics be kept to a minimum, with 
discussion centring on business and community issues. 

 
Mr. Speaker: — What’s the point of order? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — How does this tie in . . . what latitude does 
this member have to quote from an article in the Telegraph that 
has nothing to do with the budget? How is he going to tie this 
in? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — How is he going to tie this in at the end of his 
comments, Mr. Speaker? He’s got no right to do that in the 
budget debate, and I suggest you call him to order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please, order. The point of order is 
interesting, but not well taken. I listened very carefully, and I 
knew that the member who just raised the point of order was 
going to tie in his remarks somewhere, and I’m confident that 
the member speaking now will do the same thing. 
 
The original ruling was that we give wide latitude to speakers, 
so that’s what we’re doing as long as they can tie it into the 
topic. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, a good ruling. I 
won’t dwell as long as he did on it in any event, but I just think 
that I should read into the record that: 

Anguish promised to be as non-partisan as possible, 
according to the minutes, and then made a speech listing 
all of the philosophical and political views of the New 
Democratic Party. 

 
It states that he attacked the Gainers operation, but yet the 
executive vice-president reminded Anguish, according to the 
minutes that he referred to, that some of the problems he had 
mentioned were instigated by the NDP. He also added that 
provincial grants used by Gainers, Vanguard and Hi R Door 
were available to any new industry in the province, and he was 
pleased to see the Battlefords receive 25 per cent of the total 
amount available across Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Not you, Bergen. 
 
Bergen also told Anguish that: 
 

The approach in the past had not generated any sustained 
business activity in the Battlefords, and that spin-off from 
the recent developments are already apparent and will 
make the financial support for industry a sound investment 
for the community. 

 
It’s unfortunate you disagree with your community . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, I’m getting there. 
 
The minutes from the meeting also show one of the chamber 
directors told Anguish: 
 

It was difficult to deal with an MLA who had publicly 
declared he is anti-business and won an election based on 
the criteria that business owes everyone a living, 
regardless of performance or production. 

 
And the headline, Mr. Speaker, Battlefords MLA, Doug 
Anguish, warned the local Chamber of Commerce Officials . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, Order, please. Order! I think that the 
member for the Battlefords should tone it down a bit. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — If there is any other leader, not only in this 
province, not only in this good country of ours, not only in 
North America, better than Premier Grant Devine, I have yet to 
meet him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — It doesn’t take much to humour you. Listen 
to this: 
 

Battlefords MLA, Doug Anguish, warned local Chamber 
of Commerce officials recently, he might be a cabinet 
minister after the next provincial election, and it would be 
in their best interest to maintain a good working 
relationship with him. 

 
An Hon. Member: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — What is the point of order? 
  



 
June 22, 1987 

632 
 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be very brief. I 
think it was a misquote. I think that I threatened them if I was 
leader of the party and premier of this province, so it might be 
an error in the article. 
 
Mr. Speaker: —. Order, please! It’s a point of order not well 
taken and the member continues. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe I read it 
very clearly. Interestingly enough, and he referred to the 
minutes . . . There are just a couple of paragraphs on another 
article. Not minutes, but rather a reporter’s assessment of the 
situation in Battleford that appeared in an editorial. 
 
And I quote: 
 

It seems clear that the business community of the 
Battlefords is in a difficult position, and so if our local 
member of the Legislative Assembly. MLA Doug Anguish 
doctrines don’t seem to fit the business community’s, and 
the business community knows it. 

 
It goes on further to say that: 
 

(The directors believe it will probably be) difficult to deal 
with an MLA who has publicly declared he is anti-
business, and won an election based on the criteria that 
business owes everyone a living, regardless of 
performance and production. 
 
President Doug Ulmer is recorded in the minutes as having 
stressed that the collective group should be working 
toward common community betterment targets, avoiding 
the political differences as much as possible. Business will 
have its work cut out for it in trying to work alongside 
someone who has taken the stands that he has, but, for the 
benefit of all involved, will have to make the best of it. 
Business feels like the hand that fed and got bitten. 

 
Not very good press. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — It leads me into a little scenario that I’d 
like to talk about diversifications for a few minutes, Mr. 
Speaker, because it was a central theme of our first theme of 
office. It’s an even more important theme in our second term. 
 
It’s absolutely critical that we take advantage of what we have 
in Saskatchewan and build on our strengths. Food processing, 
for instance. It should be no surprise in an agricultural province 
like ours that food processing is our largest manufacturing 
industry. Food processing, in fact, makes up over 40 per cent of 
Saskatchewan’s exports. We must build further on that strength 
and encourage more developments like the Gainers plant in 
North Battleford and the Intercon plant expansion in Saskatoon. 
My home town of Regina has got a co-op upgrader; Prince 
Albert is now getting the Weyerhaeuser paper mill — these 
projects, built on our strengths in oil and forest products. 

We spend a lot of money on health care in Saskatchewan. Why 
not make health products here? Well, the company Canapharm 
is doing just that with its intravenous supply factory in the town 
of Wolseley. 
 
We also use a lot of farm chemicals on our crops. So why 
should these chemicals not be manufactured in our province? 
Premier Devine has indicated the government will do 
everything it can to ensure that a farm chemical industry is 
established in this province. That industry will further reduce 
farmers’ input costs and further diversify our economy. 
 
There’s nothing magical about diversifications. It’s not hard to 
do. I think the reason we’re seeming more of it these days, and 
we’ll see more of it in the future, Mr. Speaker, is because of the 
new attitude which exists towards business in Saskatchewan, 
exclusive of that bench, and towards the role of government in 
the economy. 
 
Our government is solidly behind business people because we 
believe it’s the private sector which creates the wealth in our 
society. More and more people are agreeing with us. We’ve 
seen a dramatic increase in the number of people who want to 
start their own businesses, several times that of only a few years 
ago. 
 
We’ve worked with business, not against it, because it’s only by 
working together that Saskatchewan will grow. And working 
together, of course, applies not just to our business community 
bur right across the board. 
 
Certainly our Minister of Finance had some very tough 
decisions. Decisions to trim expenditures are not easy; they’re 
not pleasant, but without these decisions our deficit could have 
increased much, much more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Finance had not acted now, the 
interest payments on our debt could total nearly $1 billion by 
1991, exceeding our current total expenditures on education and 
highways. And that’s why I congratulate him for having the 
intestinal fortitude, the guts, to make these tough decisions now 
for the future well-being of our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Listening to the members opposite, one 
can’t help but get the impression that they would like to go on 
and did the NDP in Manitoba and add to the horrendous debt 
that they now have. They seem to be living in the past. They 
seem to be preaching the same old rhetoric. And I’m pleased to 
be a part of Premier Grant Devine’s team, led by him, building 
our province with a vision for the future. 
 
The opposition members preach fear, and they still live in the 
past. They have no focus on anything real that’s going on. They 
have a completely irresponsible attitude. They may think, I 
suppose, that it’s politically smart to have that kind of a 
strategy, but it’s the same irresponsible tactics that resulted in 
their defeat by the people of Saskatchewan, not once, but twice 
in the last five years. 
 
You can’t scare people for support. Scare tactics don’t work. 
You must do it the old-fashioned way, the way our  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

633 
 

Premier did. You must earn it. You must earn it by confidence 
and earn it by respect. And if you laugh at that, my friends, you 
are laughing at the voters of this province, and it’s something 
that my colleagues and I do not do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, this is a budget to protect the 
future of our people, something the members opposite don’t 
seem to understand or don’t want to understand. And they’re all 
apparently interested in is some dubious, short-term political 
gain that they seem to believe their tactics will bring them. 
 
There’s no question that this budget will put our province on the 
right path and allow us to continue to protect our people, to 
enhance our quality of life which we are all so proud of, to 
enable us to take full advantage of economic opportunities that 
lie ahead of us. 
 
The members opposite all seem to have their heads in the past. 
They either don’t know or don’t care to know about what is 
going on in the market-place of the world today. They don’t 
understand business; they never did; they never will. Perhaps 
that’s one reason they don’t understand what a staggering effect 
the changes of the world economy is having on our 
Saskatchewan economy today. 
 
(2145) 
 
I note that they never seem too concerned about our agricultural 
sector. But are they not aware that the prices for wheat are the 
lowest in 40 years, that oil prices feel from $42 a barrel in 1985 
to a low of $14 in 1986, that potash prices dropped from $155 a 
tonne in ’82 to under $80 a tonne in 1986, that uranium prices 
fell from $50 a pound in 1978 to $24 a pound in 1986. 
 
This sharp decline in world prices for our resource and 
agriculture products has resulted in heavy shortfalls in 
provincial government revenues and has added tremendous 
pressures to our budget decisions — commodity prices well 
beyond the control of our provincial government. Reaction to 
this world economy must be quick, must be planned, and above 
all, it must be fair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we respond to those problems just in that fashion, 
with good, sound management of our provincial economy. 
That’s why, in this budget, our government has taken steps to 
reduce the deficit and thereby protect our future as a province. 
In taking steps to reduce expenditures, we first conducted a 
review of the costs of government-directed and -operated 
programs and services. These expenditures account for only 
one-third of the provincial budget. The remaining two-thirds of 
the budget provides funding for third party individuals and 
groups. 
 
We did this because, before asking other organizations to 
review their level of expenditures, it was felt that we, as a 
government, should first take a good, hard look at itself. We 
must lead by example. We cannot expect our citizens to do for 
us what we cannot do for ourselves. This we  

have done, by consolidating and streamlining government 
departments and agencies and reducing the size of the civil 
service by 2,000 people — and doing this difficult task 
humanely and yet with compassion. This streamlining is not 
being disruptive, particularly to essential services, but rather it 
will rejuvenate and invigorate public service. I notice the 
member from the North giggling. I guess there’s some humour 
to that — I fail to see the humour. 
 
This is a tremendous undertaking, Mr. Speaker — putting our 
financial house in order. And with the government providing 
the leadership, all residents of the province are being asked to 
do their part in sharing the burden of this deficit reduction 
program. All sectors, all age groups, all geographic regions in 
our province are being asked to contribute. 
 
As Minister of Urban Affairs, I want to report to this House that 
for municipalities, as with all sectors of our society, we made 
our budget decisions with great care. We were guided by the 
principles of fairness and of equity. We tried to be fair and 
sensitive to the needs of all groups and individuals affected, as 
has been our policy in the past. We placed a great deal of 
emphasis on consultation — consultation with the people 
affected by the decisions and policies that we put in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in spite of dramatically decreasing provincial 
revenues, I was pleased that the final result of funding 
reduction, of the revenue-sharing programs of the 
municipalities, was kept at 1 per cent reduction of last year’s 
level to ease the impact of the taxpayers. Further, I see that 
many municipalities have taken up the challenge and have been 
able to absorb this reduction and keep their mill rates the same 
as last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to report that communities like 
Estevan and Prince Albert have kept their mill rates at last 
year’s level, while others were able to hold theirs at modest 
increases of 2 per cent or less. 
 
I quote with interest from the Regina Leader-Post, an article 
from Swift Current, Mr. Speaker, that shows the city with an 
accumulated surplus of $2,6 million in the general revenue 
fund, and a net worth of about $57.9 million. 
 
And finance director Cliff Mathies said: 
 

The city has the lowest municipal property tax in the 
province, but has still been able to generate operating 
surpluses for he last 20 years. 

 
And he said that: 
 

The city is developing its policies to eventually become 
financially independent of funding from senior levels of 
government. 

 
Moose Jaw Times-Herald. “Taxes in Moose Jaw are lower than 
in Regina or Saskatoon,” the article says. 
 

Based on taxes for a standard 1,200 sq. ft. bungalow with 
a single attached garage on a 50 x 110 foot lot, $200 
cheaper than total taxes in  

  



 
June 22, 1987 

634 
 

Regina, and about $36 lower than those in Saskatoon. 
 

Metka, the financial director, says that that makes Moose Jaw 
look pretty good. 
 
Once the revenue sharing level was set, we asked SUMA, how 
do we go about distributing these funds to communities? The 
distribution formula is sensitive to population changes. SUMA 
had asked that the distribution formula and new federal census 
figures be used. The results of 1986 federal census saw about 
half of all communities decline in population since the 1981 
census. 
 
So after consultation with the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association, we decided to modify the 
distribution formula in two ways. First, the basic component 
was increased to provide greater baseline funding that would 
not be affected by population changes. 
 
And secondly, a safety net was put in place to ensure that no 
community would face a reduction in its grant of more than 6 
per cent. And that safety net will protect those 250 communities 
from funding reductions that would otherwise have been too 
sudden and too deep for them to manage. These revenue-
sharing decisions were reached only after intensive 
consultations with SUMA. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel that given the funds available, and 
considering the worst case scenario which could have seen a 
greater decrease in funds, we have made the best allocations 
possible. For this year we were forced to make a decision not to 
proceed with the provincial capital fund. However, I am pleased 
to include $4.7 million in this year’s budget to clean up 
outstanding commitments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out that when the NDP were 
the government, they too had a year when there was no capital 
program in effect. I believe that was in 1979 or ’80. I also point 
out that it was during a time when provincial revenues were 
extremely buoyant. 
 
However, times are tougher now, and being a fiscally 
responsible government we could not continue to totally fund 
this program this year. I realize that the loss of the program will 
force many municipalities to take a hard look at their capital 
spending and financial plans. It will require some hard 
priorization at the municipal level, not unlike what we had to do 
at the provincial level. 
 
But as I travel through the regional meetings now and attend the 
SUMA regional conferences . . . And by the way, SUMA, you 
know, is a totally non-partisan group — they invite all of the 
members of the legislature, whether it be government or 
opposition, to attend. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, only one or 
two of the opposition members have taken it upon themselves 
to attend that convention. 
 
We heard earlier tonight, members opposite talk about political 
cowardice. Yet my critic in the opposition benches, the member 
from Regina Victoria — and unfortunately he has left the 
House — publicly criticizes me for tinkering with the formula. 
And yet, as I explained, this was done through consultations 
with SUMA. Why  

does he not accuse them also? Unfortunately he shows no 
respect for a fine 82-year-old institution who respects all 
political parties. There is no hue; there is no holler or cry from 
the SUMA membership at large as I travel the province. Lots of 
the SUMA membership shares the same vision for our province 
that the Premier does — to build a greater Saskatchewan. And 
they see their responsibility and they go ahead and they do it. 
 
Meanwhile funding levels for northern municipalities will be 
the same for grants under the northern revenue sharing 
program. That means that every community will continue to 
receive the same operating grant as it received in the last year. 
 
In addition, the northern capital grants program will also 
continue this year. As some of you may know, in our northern 
communities revenue-sharing grants account for a substantial 
portion of a community’s total revenues. We realize that a 
reduction such as was announced for the other municipalities 
would have had a more profound effect on the northern 
communities. Even a one per cent reduction would have had a 
significant impact on mill rates, particularly in the smaller 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is also committed to building our 
northern communities and protecting their future as well, to 
ensure that they, too, are kept in a position to take advantage of 
economic opportunities that become available. It is for this 
reason that we decided to continue the funding programs for our 
northern communities. 
 
We do, however, acknowledge that it may be time to update 
their distribution formula, and we will soon be approaching all 
northern communities to seek advice on the development of a 
new funding formula. 
 
In the early part of June I had occasion to travel to some of our 
northern communities, and to consult with the mayors and 
counsellors of these municipalities to seek their advice on these 
and other issues. As I said before, I place a great deal of 
emphasis on the consultative process. It is a process I plan to 
continue tin all my dealings with municipal officials. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government will continue to provide operating 
assistance to the public transit systems located primarily in 
Saskatchewan’s major cities. Funding for transit of the disabled 
services remains a fundamental priority to our government. 
Currently there are more than 60 communities receiving 
operating and capital funding from the provincial government 
for this very important function . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
And it wasn’t cut, if the member would look. 
 
This funding, too, will continue to maintain existing services 
and expand into new ones. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to conclude my remarks with a few 
comments on housing. 
 
Under our administration, the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation has been a leader in Canada for innovative housing 
programs. In fact, we are number one in the nation for the 
delivery of quality housing for our senior  
  



 
June 22, 1987 

635 
 

citizens, low income families, and the disabled. We 
accomplished this through our own provincial initiatives, by 
working together in partnership with the federal government 
and, without question, by working with the private sector. 
 
We are especially proud of our housing programs to meet the 
needs of the continually increasing numbers of senior citizens in 
our province. Through consultation with senior citizens, the 
enriched housing concept was developed. The enriched housing 
concept has been developed to maximize independent living 
through self-contained units. I’ve had the pleasure of 
participating in a number of official openings and sod turnings 
recently for these enriched housing projects, and I can tell you 
that our senior citizens are most happy with them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Success of these programs is due to the 
combined efforts of home care boards, district co-ordinating 
committees, housing authorities and others. And I want to 
commend all of them for their dedication. We are now 
providing excellent accommodation to the people who deserve 
it most — to our senior citizens. 
 
While we as government must target our resources to assist the 
very needy, there is also a need to look at new ways of 
delivering traditional housing programs. The people of 
Saskatchewan have always responded to the need for creativity, 
and we will do so again. 
 
Few programs ever introduced in our province have had the 
appeal of the Saskatchewan home program. Recognizing the 
importance of the family home, this program was developed to 
assist Saskatchewan people in the maintenance and preservation 
of one of their most important assets. At the same time it 
generated millions of dollars in economic activity and created 
thousands of jobs for our citizens. 
 
Nearly 12,000 jobs created since the start of the program to go 
with the individual home improvements which are now 
commonplace in our villages, in our towns and cities. I’m sick 
and tired other rhetoric emitting from the opposition benches 
concerning the cost, the down side, the legality, and I will stand 
up as a PC member proudly and speak out on this highly 
productive and well-received program. 
 
First off, delivery of the home program is well within the 
mandate of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, and we 
have many legal opinions to support that position. Without 
question, the home program is a major job creation program. I 
ask you: are you against jobs? The retail trade sector has been 
significantly strengthened by the home program. More than 
double the normal amount of activity is being enjoyed by the 
home improvement sector. Are you all opposed to small 
business, or just perhaps the one member? It has plunked over a 
half a billion dollars of public and private money into the 
provincial economy. Saskatchewan’s unemployment rate, 
continually one of the lowest in Canada, and I’m proud to say 
that the home program contributes significantly to those figures. 

The Saskatchewan home program was designed to protect and 
improve the most important investment that the people of this 
province will make — their home. You speak of pools and 
Jacuzzis. Swimming pools are labour intensive, it creates jobs 
to put in a pool, and yes, a very small number of people have 
used the grant for that purpose, and the member from Nutana 
speaks out against that. Well let me tell you, will you deny 
those that choose that form of improvement to their home, that 
very basic right to do just that — $1500 grant that sparks a 
$20,000 job? Well I’m proud to tell you that my constituents of 
Regina South are very pleased indeed with that aspect of the 
home program. 
 
The home program has been a tremendous success, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s another program designed by our government to 
improve the quality of life for our people. And I repeat, you 
need only look around your neighbourhood, whether it be a city 
or a town or a village, to see the economic effect of that 
program, one of the most successful job creation programs in 
the history of this province that’s created thousands of jobs and 
millions of dollars of economic activity throughout 
Saskatchewan; another form of diversification to keep our small 
business sector alive and well, and adds another measure of 
protection to the thousands in our small business community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, quality of life is extremely important to me and to 
my constituents of Regina South. So long as my Premier 
continues to build this province to the potential that it can 
achieve, so long as this government continues its plan for 
protecting our people now and in the future, I stand solidly 
behind the sound management that the budget indicates and the 
promise that it holds to protect and to build that future to supply 
all of us with the quality of life that we want and desire. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not support the amendment, but I most 
certainly will support he main motion. And I beg leave, at this 
time, to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:04 p.m. 
 
 


	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS

