













































September 3, 1987 Hansard


 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 3, 1987 

 

2261 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Production Limits on Saskatchewan Potash 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Energy. Madam Minister, 

yesterday in this legislature you defended your government’s 

action to place production limits on Saskatchewan potash 

companies, even though you have no guarantees or agreements 

from our competitors that they will not steal our markets that 

we now have, and even though, Madam Minister, you have 

absolutely no guarantee from the Americans that they will 

withdraw the heavy duty tariffs in exchange for the moves that 

you are making. 

 

Madam Minister, I ask you: why are you asking the 

Saskatchewan workers and our Saskatchewan mining 

companies to sacrifice their incomes and their jobs on the 

strength only of what you hope might happen. Why are you 

doing that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, as I said yesterday, this Bill 

is intended to do several things. Number one, to save our 

markets; and number two, to save our jobs. There are some 

secondary impacts with that, and that is the increase in price for 

our resource. If I were to do what has been suggested opposite, 

and that is sit on our butts and do nothing, 3,600 jobs will be 

lost – guaranteed. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, you and your Premier sat on 

your butts for seven months and didn’t do anything. Now, in a 

crisis, you are reacting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — It’s about time you got off your butt. 

 

Yesterday, Madam Minister, in this legislature you said that 

Saskatchewan would not lose its markets and its market share 

as a result of the production limits. You said that you would not 

allow this to happen yet you have no agreements from your 

competitors that they will not steal your markets. I’m asking 

you, Madam Minister: how are you going to prevent this? How 

are you going to protect our markets with this Bill if you have 

no agreements from our competitors? How are you going to do 

that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan, in the world 

within the potash industry, has approximately 40 per cent of the 

production, 40 per cent, Mr. Speaker – very much a leadership 

role. 

 

If the leader of the potash industry cannot take action and show 

leadership, then they should not be in to begin with. The reality 

is that we are in the potash industry. It’s  

important to Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I’ve stated time and 

time again, while this legislation has the possibility of a volume 

control province wide on it, we are prepared to do what is 

necessary in order to protect our share of the market-place. If 

that means increasing volumes at any particular time, I assure 

the member that we are prepared to do that. 

 

I also want the member . . . to ask him to take a hard look at the 

legislation. Without this legislation and without this action we 

are going to loose a substantial market. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, a question to the same 

minister. Madam Minister, I ask you: are you aware that your 

claim that Bill 36 will not result in market loss has, in fact, been 

disputed by a senior executive officer of one of the producing 

companies here in Saskatchewan, Central Canada Potash? 

 

I read in this morning’s Globe and Mail, Mr. John Gordon of 

Noranda says: 

 

That it will be difficult, difficult to avoid losing a share of 

the market. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

This is a very blunt instrument. It will be extremely 

difficult to control. It’s like trying to turn a battleship. 

 

Those are the words of one of the executive officers in the 

industry, so I ask you again: what steps do you propose to 

protect and make sure that the production cuts in Saskatchewan 

are not, in fact, resulting in a loss of markets. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — What will be difficult for Central Canada 

Potash, or more commonly known as Noranda, is if nothing is 

done and an 85 per cent preliminary duty remains on them. That 

will effectively, Mr. Speaker, shut down Noranda in this 

province. That means the mines, and total job loss – 

permanently – if that 85 per cent remains in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve stated very clearly that we are prepared to do 

with this legislation what is necessary in order to protect the 

industry and the jobs that go with them, and the resource for the 

future for this province, and we will do that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Supplement, Mr. Speaker, to the minister. 

Madam Minister, I think I would rather have some faith in the 

strengths on a chief executive officer in the potash industry 

rather than yourself. But leave that aside, leave that aside. 

 

I want to ask you . . . The essential fear that the Saskatchewan 

potash producers – many, many or most of the workers in the 

potash industry – are concerned about losing jobs and losing 

markets, and day after day  

  



 

September 3, 1987 

2262 

 

we come to this legislature to ask you: what are the facts on 

which you are basing your assumption that you can also 

maintain jobs and also maintain the share of the markets and at 

the same time cut the production? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Quill 

Lakes has made an assumption on its own, and I would caution 

him in making the assumption that he is going to see drastic 

cut-backs in production in the province. I caution him on that 

because he may very well be wrong. I think it’s very . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Tell us the facts then. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — You have been told the facts for several 

days now, and you have chosen not to listen or to totally ignore 

them. Unfortunately, you have also chosen not to support this 

effort to protect the industry and the jobs that come with it. 

That’s unfortunate. This Bill has been presented, what I believe 

in a non-partisan manner, void of politics – void of politics, Mr. 

Speaker – and we will try and maintain it at that level. 

 

The reality is, Mr. Speaker, with the overhang, the surplus that 

the potash industry has been facing in the world has created 

several problems. Number one is the depression of the price 

world around. When that happened, a protectionist attitude was 

put up, particularly with our neighbour south to the border, and 

when that happened, anti-dumping came in to fact. We cannot 

deal in this province and maintain that industry without dealing 

with that issue, and this legislation will accomplish that. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Final supplemental, Mr. Speaker. Madam 

Minister, if production cut-backs are not the essence of this 

legislation and if, in fact, you’re saying that that will not 

necessarily occur, why the Bill? Why the Bill? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The alternative to the Bill, Mr. Speaker, 

is absolutely unthinkable on this side of the House – absolutely 

unthinkable – and that is the total shut-down of the industry, the 

loss of the mines and the jobs that go with it. Why the Bill? Let 

me once again say, Mr. Speaker, this Bill has been put into 

place to address the issue of surplus and bring our price up so 

we can maintain our jobs and our potash industry in this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I have a new question to the minister. Madam 

Minister, you said not proceeding with this Bill, Bill 36, any 

other solution is unthinkable. I ask you what other specific 

solutions are you referring to that are unthinkable? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Exactly what I’ve heard from that side of 

the House, and it was nothing. 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, a new question to the Minister of Energy. The 

Minister of Energy just finished replying to my colleague, the 

member from Quill Lakes, that the alternatives are unthinkable. 

Is it correct to say, that as a result of the minister’s question, 

that the alternative of meeting with the United States’ farm 

groups and farm people, for example, to lobby against the 

United States’ anti-dumping action is an unacceptable 

alternative? Is that the minister’s position? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I don’t know where the member from 

Riversdale has been for the last several months, but he should 

know by now, if he had’ve been listening, that that has taken 

place through the producers, when over the last several months 

since the rumour, the rumour of . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. The minister is 

being interrupted in her attempts to give an answer to the 

question. She’s having difficulty because of interruptions. I ask 

for your co-operation to allow her to make the answer. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite say 

that there has been no consultation, that no one from here, 

Saskatchewan, has been into the United States to talk to the 

people that it’s going to impact on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the vice-president, for example, of the National 

Corn Growers Association . . . 

 

An Hon. Member; — What does he have to say? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — What does he have to say. Here’s what he 

says, Mr. Speaker. The question was put to him of what do you 

think of the Premier of Saskatchewan’s strategy? And he said: 

 

Mr. Premier is a very, very wise man. He’s not unfamiliar 

with agriculture; he is a wheat farmer, as I understand it, 

himself and is familiar with the wheat board of Canada. 

There he understands the American agriculture very well. 

He knows that his best ally is going to be the U.S. 

agriculture in this issue. It is not Canada versus the United 

States in this particular trade dispute, it’s going to be the 

U.S. farmers and some U.S. agriculture interests in Canada 

against the United States in this issue. Therefore this 

strategy is a good one. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Consultations with American Farm Organizations 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, I talked today 

to the offices of several major farm organizations in the United 

States, the American agriculture movement, The National 

Farmers’ Union of America, the North American Farm 

Alliance, and those offices were basically unaware of what I 

was talking about. Now, Madam  

  



 

September 3, 1987 

2263 

 

Minister, can you tell me . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you. They were unaware of . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I think we 

should give the member from Humboldt an opportunity to ask 

the question. 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. They can belittle the 

issue if they like, but the point is, basically they were unaware 

of the potash crisis that we’re feeling up here and the crisis that 

their farmers will feel. 

 

Now can you tell me what organizations you spoke to and who 

you spoke to and who you spoke to in those organizations? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — My only regret in all this is that you took 

till today to talk to anybody in the United States, when this has 

been coming down for several months. Mr. Speaker, I did . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Unfortunately I must 

keep interrupting and thereby detracting from question period. I 

certainly don’t want to do that, but hon. members are not being 

co-operative when questions are being asked and when the 

ministers are answering questions. So I ask you once more to 

please co-operate and allow question period to proceed in a 

reasonable manner. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, over the last several months 

several of our companies, or our producers, that have been 

affected in this province have been in touch with several 

organizations within the United States, from the fertilizer 

industry to some of the farm organizations. We, Mr. Speaker 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

Order, please. Now hon. members perhaps may not like the 

answer received, and that is their prerogative. If they don’t like 

the answer, they can certainly be recognized to ask their 

questions. However, I must once more interrupt and ask hon. 

members to be co-operative and allow question period to 

proceed, because if we have constant interruptions, it simply 

can’t go forward. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, as I stated, the producers 

had been talking to many organizations within the United States 

as it relates to government and government officials over a 

period of several months. I assure the member from Humboldt 

that our Premier has met many times with various governors in 

the United States and has raised the problem many times. 

 

Tied with that, the Department of Energy, through the 

minister’s office, has met with the western states’ governors to 

talk about the trade issues as they relate to two commodities in 

particular: potash and uranium. That took place in early June. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the consultations have been many. But I will quite 

frankly say to the members opposite, and to the Saskatchewan 

public, that early in consultations – back in February and March 

– we met with nothing but apathy  

out of the public in the United States. And that’s unfortunate. 

Perhaps they were saying this is a rumour and this actually isn’t 

going to happen or perhaps they thought: this won’t impact on 

me. Human beings being what they are, sometimes you have to 

be hit between the eyes until you wake up and realize what’s 

going on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. Madam Minister, 

you have been accused of being incompetent because you did 

not ally yourself . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The member 

from Regina Centre is being interrupted. I’m sure other 

members would like to hear the question but it can’t happen if 

he’s being interrupted by members. So please allow him to ask 

the question. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Madam Minister, you have been accused 

of being incompetent by failing to ally yourself with the very 

groups who pack the most punch in Ottawa – the agricultural 

groups in Washington, Madam Minister. I ask you, Madam 

Minister . . . I say to you, Madam Minister, you can allay those 

criticisms by giving us a list of the farm groups in the U.S. 

whom you have met and discussed this matter with. 

 

Will you give us an inventory of those farm groups that you 

discussed this with because most people believe there isn’t any 

list at all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I will provide for the 

opposition the various dates and people contacted by producers, 

what the industry did, and what government has done. That will 

include the Premier and the minister’s office. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to 

the minister. Madam Minister, either the communication that 

you say the Premier has had has been not good enough or there 

in fact has not been any communication and you are here 

misleading the House today. 

 

I ask you to explain to this Assembly, Madam Minister, if 

indeed you have contacted farm organizations in the United 

States, as any responsible government would have done when 

they knew this issue was coming on. 

 

Why would the American Farmers’ Union, the North American 

Farm Alliance, and the American Agricultural Movement – 

major farm organizations in the United States – when contacted 

today by our critic for Agriculture, not be aware of the issue 

that confronts us in Saskatchewan at this time? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I had already stated, Mr. Speaker, that the 

initial consultation with the United States met with a great deal 

of apathy. 

 

I would remind the member that there are many, many  

  



 

September 3, 1987 

2264 

 

groups in the United States and, for example, I do not consider 

the Corn Growers’ Association insignificant in terms of groups, 

plus there are others. I’ve already given you a commitment that 

you will see the outline of the consultation route over the last 

several months as opposed to today – such as your member 

from Humboldt. By myself, personally, you will see much more 

than that, in terms from the Premier on to officials. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have one, for 

me, final question of the minister. The minister said a few 

moments ago in answer to a question by my colleague, the 

member from Quill Lakes, that the opposition would be wrong 

in assuming that there would be cut-backs and therefore 

lay-offs. 

 

I assume I have the minister’s attention. That being the case, 

Madam Minister, my question to you is as follows: will you 

stand up in this House today and guarantee that potash workers 

and families won’t suffer lay-backs or lay-offs as a result of this 

legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, if I could guarantee no job 

lay-offs in any sector, if anyone of us could in this room, we 

would do it. What I can guarantee is if this legislation does not 

go forward, you will see massive job lay-offs, my friend. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Privatization of Personal Property Security Registers 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to move off potash to 

my colleague, the Minister of Justice. I want to ask him a 

question. I want to ask him a . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order, please. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — My question for the Minister of Justice, Mr. 

Speaker, refers to the estimates that we went through in this 

House on August 17, and the minister will recall that we 

covered a great deal of ground and got through them in one day. 

 

One of the issues that I asked you about in three or four 

different contexts was the issue of privatization of some of the 

services being provided by the Department of Justice. And in 

particular, I asked the minister about privatization of the 

personal property security register people and the services they 

provided – and he said they were not a proper candidate; and 

the Land Titles Office – and he said that it would remain about 

what it is. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I have a copy of part of a memo written by 

your assistant deputy minister to the civil law branch, also in 

your department, on August 11, six days before our exchange in 

this House on the matters that I’ve just mentioned. And this 

memo – I’ll quote the part of it that is relevant: 

 

Cabinet has directed our department to return for final 

approval of implementation plans to privatize selected 

services in Land Titles,  

corrections and Personal Property Registry. 

 

Now obviously there’s a discrepancy between the memorandum 

of August 11 and your statements in this House on August 17, 

and I invite you to get up and explain to us who had it right, the 

assistant deputy minister or you, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the question 

as to who had it right, the assistant deputy minister or myself, I 

can assure you I had it right. I don’t know what your memo 

said, and I will read it after. If it does in fact say that, that’s not 

in fact what’s going to happen. 

 

The hon. member asked me, Mr. Speaker: are we, or have we 

investigated the privatization of the personal properties 

securities and the Land Titles Office. I indicated to him that the 

view of cabinet is that we would review a series of things that 

government did to determine whether or not they were proper 

candidates for privatization. We, in fact, did that. As it came to 

the Land Titles Office and the land titles system, we took the 

decision and I took the decision, Mr. Speaker, that that is not an 

appropriate candidate to be privatized. It has to be done in a 

system the way it is now. Now that’s not to say that there’s not 

going to be changes and not going to be mechanization brought 

into the Land Titles Office. Clearly we would hope that there 

would be. And I think the Land Titles Office, the personal 

property securities, is much the same way. 

 

Now the one that we did explore was the trustee, and what we 

did was find that the proposals that come in, both from 

Guaranty Trust and from Co-op Trust, were in fact more 

expensive than could be delivered by government and therefore 

we cast that aside. So the memo that the hon. member refers to, 

while I don’t know exactly what it says in full and in detail, if it 

is as he has said, it is wrong. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. The assistant 

deputy minister was sitting with you in the House when you 

answered my questions. My questions came in three or four 

different ways, Mr. Minister, and the memo says quite clearly 

that the department is to return for final approval of 

implementation plans. 

 

Now without revealing what went on in cabinet, I put it to you 

quite plainly that cabinet had decided that indeed the Personal 

Property Registry and Land Titles system were prime targets for 

privatization, and that your answer to me in the House was just 

simply not accurate. Now will you admit that, Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I will not admit that . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I will not admit that 

because it’s absolutely not true. I indicated to the hon. member 

in estimates, I indicated to the hon. member today, that we 

explored the privatization of various things  

  



 

September 3, 1987 

2265 

 

within government. One was Land Titles Office and one was 

personal property securities legislation. The advice that I 

received from my officials, and my own personal view, having 

explored that, is neither one of them were appropriate 

candidates for privatization. That’s what I told you today, that’s 

what I told you in estimates, and that’s the policy of this 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Time has elapsed. Order, please. Order, 

please. Order, please. Order, please. Order. Question period is 

over. Order, please. Members from both sides of the House are 

once more causing unnecessary noise when the Chair is on his 

feet, and I ask for your co-operation. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to table the document I referred to, which is the first 

page of a memorandum dated August 11, 1987, from the 

assistant deputy minister of corrections and justices services to 

Darryl Bogdasavich of the civil law branch. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mrs. Smith that Bill No. 36 – An Act 

respecting the Potash Resources of Saskatchewan be now read 

a second time. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Well, after that applause, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

going to have to reconsider my decision for the leadership. I 

didn’t know I had that much support. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, in entering this debate again for 

the second time, I left off yesterday making a few remarks on 

Bill 36. And I indicated yesterday, Mr. Speaker, that we have 

the Bill before us, not because the Bill is absolutely necessary, 

because the government had ample opportunity to act under The 

Mineral Resources Act. All the powers pretty well that are in 

this Bill – there are some additional powers, but powers that 

they really wouldn’t need – all the powers that they require to 

deal with the over-supply of potash and the problems that 

existed could have been handled under The Mineral Resources 

Act. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, one must ask the question: why did the 

government present Bill 36? And I think it will become very 

obvious, as we speak on this side of the House, why the 

government had to present this Bill. 

 

We had, Mr. Speaker, in question period, a very, very sad 

display by the Minister of Energy in answering questions posed 

to her by the loyal opposition, Mr. Speaker, and I use the term 

rather loosely when I say answer, because we really didn’t 

receive any answers. I am not certain, Mr.  

Speaker, whether the minister doesn’t know the answers or 

whether she’s embarrassed to give the real answers because it 

shows the lack of action that the government took over the last 

seven months, at least, and prior to that. 

 

I indicated very clearly, Mr. Speaker, yesterday when I 

addressed this Bill, that they had ample time to deal with the 

potash situation, the over-supply, and the alleged dumping that 

took place in the United States. They had ample time to do that, 

but no action was taken. The minister very sort of abruptly said, 

well the opposition doesn’t want us to do anything. That is a 

very unfair statement to make because I indicated to the 

minister yesterday at least three or four alternatives that they 

could have taken to prevent the anti-dumpling tariff 

implementation. And what did they do, Mr. Speaker? The did 

absolutely nothing. They didn’t do anything. They sat on their 

butts, as she clearly indicated, and didn’t do a thing. 

 

What should they have done? Well, Mr. Speaker, they certainly 

could have done many of the things that a provincial 

government naturally would do. I will allude to many of those 

in my address today. And I will also, Mr. Speaker, point out 

some of the weaknesses of the Bill, and our concerns in some of 

these areas. 

 

Now this Bill, Mr. Speaker, claims that it is a response not only 

to the recent U.S. anti-dumping action against the potash 

industry in our province but also the government’s response to 

the larger world-wide problems affecting Saskatchewan potash 

industry and Saskatchewan potash jobs. The government claims 

that it will do both of those things. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is essentially about the management of 

Saskatchewan’s resources, specifically our potash resources, 

and the mismanagement thereof by the government opposite. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is very clear, if you look at what has 

happened over the last three or four years, in the whole resource 

area in this province we have seen nothing but mismanagement 

by the members opposite and the ministers who were in that 

portfolio. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, it seems to be a Bill prepared in 

haste in the government’s confused panic about how to respond 

to a situation that caught the government flat-footed, asleep at 

the switch, and terribly, Mr. Speaker, terribly embarrassed. As 

such, this Bill must be examined in the light of this 

government’s overall management of Saskatchewan’s resources 

or rather, as I indicated before, the government’s incompetent 

mismanagement of our resources. 

 

Let me cite, Mr. Speaker, only three examples before returning 

to the potash industry and the Bill before us. Number one, the 

government’s mismanagement of Saskatchewan’s coal 

resources, which were sold to private mining companies from 

Alberta; number two, Saskatchewan’s forest resources, given 

away to the American multinational company, Weyerhaeuser; 

and number three, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s oil reserves, 

where the government’s mismanagement has cost the people of 

this province more than $1.5 billion over the past five years. 

  



 

September 3, 1987 

2266 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the light on these three examples, why should 

we be surprised that they also would mismanage the Potash 

Corporation and the potash resources? Certainly one shouldn’t 

be surprised at that. If they mismanage in three other areas, why 

wouldn’t we expect them to also mismanage the potash 

resources? 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the PC government’s potash policy 

is all too consistent with their resource policy generally, 

resource policy that is incoherent, resource management that is 

incompetent; and I note, Mr. Speaker, with some interest, the 

little history lesson that we got yesterday from the minister in 

her remarks that she made in this House. And I would suggest 

to the minister, with all due respect, that she was not using 

history; she was really abusing history. 

 

Let me cite just three examples . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Let me cite just three examples, Mr. Speaker. 

First, the minister mentioned the potash pro-rationing scheme 

brought in by the late premier Ross Thatcher in 1969. She 

conveniently neglected to mention, however, that he at least had 

addressed the real problem, the whole North American industry. 

He at least sought a fair deal with the U.S. producers in New 

Mexico, and he at least got a deal with the New Mexico 

industry. 

 

Secondly, the minister talked about the increase in world supply 

over the past five or six years, some of which increase took 

place here in Saskatchewan. Again, however, she failed to tell 

the whole story. She failed to acknowledge that it was her 

government, her cabinet colleagues, that approved and built the 

huge expansion of the PCS (Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan) Lanigan mine. I would therefore remind her of 

the decision taken by her government to expand Lanigan, duly 

reported in March, 1983, on page 3 of the PCS annual report. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I quote: 

 

It is our firm belief that a new and stronger PCS can 

emerge. With this belief in mind, the board of directors 

supported management’s recommendation to continue 

with one of our major projects in Saskatchewan. 

 

I refer to the PCS Lanigan phase II expansion which is now 

under way. That decision, Mr. Speaker, that decision was made 

by the board of directors. The words are those of the board 

chairman, cabinet minister Lorne McLaren, the member for 

Yorkton. Also at the board at that time was cabinet minister, the 

member from Lumsden, the now Finance minister, and who is 

also . . . Pardon me, he’s the member from Qu’Appelle. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It’s too bad he can’t add. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — As my member says, the man who can’t add. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the minister’s very selective history 

lesson had a notable omission. For one reason, she failed to 

mention that just two years ago, just two years ago her 

predecessor, then minister Paul Schoenhals, who is now  

the chairman of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, 

introduced in this House a new mineral resources Act which, he 

boasted: “would provide a corner-stone for resource 

development for many years to come.” Either the government 

failed to develop appropriate legislation at that time or, 

alternatively, the minister is introducing this Bill now as before 

for purely partisan, propaganda reasons. In either case, Mr. 

Speaker, it shows their incompetence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I listened with some care to the minister’s speech 

yesterday afternoon. And while I was somewhat surprised at 

some of the things I heard, I was evermore surprised what she 

did not mention. Did she mention New Mexico or the New 

Mexico potash companies ever once? I don’t think so. Did she 

mention New Brunswick or the New Brunswick potash industry 

ever one? Mr. Minister, I don’t think so. Did she mention the 

political potential of the U.S. farm lobby? Or did she mention 

that Saskatchewan industries off shore market cartel Canpotex, 

or any action by the Government of Canada, Mr. Speaker? No, 

she did not. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, why did she not mention any of those? 

Simply, Mr. Speaker, because they didn’t take any action at all 

with any of those groups. Did they talk to the New Mexico 

industry? I don’t think so. That’s why she couldn’t mention it. 

Did she mention the farm lobby in the United States? No, 

because she hadn’t talked to them. That’s why she couldn’t 

mention it. Did she mention that they had any discussions with 

the federal government and Brian Mulroney? No, she didn’t. 

Why? Because they didn’t talk to them. And the reason, Mr. 

Speaker, I stated earlier: they were caught flat-footed; they are 

now embarrassed; and in order to show that they are doing 

something, they brought forth, in haste, Bill 36. 

 

Mr. Speaker, unfortunately the people of Saskatchewan, the 

potash industry, and the potash workers must judge the 

minister’s policy statement of yesterday not only by what she 

said but also but what she failed to even mention. And by that 

test they see the minister with a resource policy that is 

incoherent and resource management that is simply 

incompetent. 

 

I would like to turn now, Mr. Speaker, to the central thrust of 

the minister’s so-called potash policy and central thrust of the 

Bill before us. Simply put, Mr. Speaker, the PC government 

opposite is planning to impose an arbitrary prorationing scheme 

on the Saskatchewan potash industry by reducing either 

productive capacity, or actual production, or both. That is how 

the government describes their policy. That’s what this Bill is 

all about. 

 

I want to examine that plan in two ways – by examining the 

Minister’s analogy with OPEC (Organization of Petroleum 

Exporting Countries) which she spent some time on yesterday, 

and by examining the supply and demand figures she has 

herself supplied. We all remember how back in 1973 the OPEC 

nations, and I stress nations, flexed their muscle, formed a 

cartel, cut their production, and drove up the price of oil. 

 

I make these few observations. OPEC was a multinational 

producer cartel, a deal struck among several oil producing 

nations, not just one alone. Number two,  

  



 

September 3, 1987 

2267 

 

OPEC’s production cut had the immediate effect of driving up 

the price of oil obtained by their competitors, as those of us in 

Saskatchewan and Alberta well know. The non-OPEC 

producers immediately gained a higher price and access to 

markets. 

 

Is the minister telling us and the people of Saskatchewan that 

her Saskatchewan-only plan will have the effect of raising the 

price paid to other potash producers in the world and giving 

them more market access? I certainly hope not. Number three, 

OPEC’s production cut had a further inevitable long-term 

affect. It very significantly intensified the development of other 

oil resources in the world. OPEC cut production. The rest of the 

world very quickly moved to develop new additional productive 

capacity: North Sea Oil, shale oil in the western U.S., tar sands 

oil and heavy oil in western Canada, and offshore oil in 

Canada’s Atlantic and Arctic waters. 

 

In every single case their accelerated development was a direct 

and immediate result of OPEC’s muscle flexing of late 1973. Is 

that what the government’s policy and this Bill are going to 

produce – development of still more potash productive capacity 

elsewhere in the world? As the minister and the Premier play at 

being the mincing mini-sheiks of Saskatchewan’s potash, is 

their short-sighted policy of bravado in fact going to result in 

the still more potash productive capacity elsewhere in the 

world? 

 

(1445) 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we had no assurances from the minister 

today – absolutely no assurances in question period – that she 

has any plan whatsoever to protect the markets that we 

presently have in the United States, and absolutely no 

assurances that other competitors will not move in. Once they 

have moved in, Mr. Speaker, as everyone knows, it is very 

difficult to get those markets back again. But there is no plan by 

the minister; there is no plan by this government. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the minister in question period also 

gave us no assurances that should there be cut-backs in 

productive capacity in Saskatchewan, that she will protect the 

workers, the workers that will be laid off. We have some very 

grave concerns about how this legislation will be implemented, 

and I will be referring to that a little bit later. 

 

As the minister tries to cloak herself in the robes of OPEC of 

1973, she should note that OPEC of 1987 is divided, ineffective 

and useless, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Impotent. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Impotent is the word I wanted to say. Thank 

you, colleague. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I’m a teacher too. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you. As he indicated, he’s also a teacher 

and obviously a very good one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me turn now for just a few moments to the 

potash statistics provided and quoted by the minister. She  

asserts, Mr. Speaker, she asserts that world-wide total 

productive capacity exceeded total demand by 4.1 million 

tonnes in 1986. She calls it an overhang of 4.1 million tonnes. 

 

How exactly does she propose to address that problem? What 

exactly does she propose to do? Arbitrarily reduce the 

production capacity of one or more Saskatchewan mines? If so, 

which ones, by how much, and at what cost in jobs? Are they 

going to arbitrarily select a mine and say, we’re going to shut 

you down and we’re going to shut you down to get the 

production capacity down? How are they going to do it? Are 

they going to fairly and equally address the problem with mines 

and companies? There’s nothing in the Act, and I hope that the 

minister in her summation will give us some of the answers. 

 

Or does she propose to go further and actually reduce potash 

production at one or more mines? If so, which ones, and by how 

much, and at what cost in jobs? And if she does that, I indicated 

earlier, Mr. Speaker, is she going to compensate the workers? Is 

she going to make sure that those workers who adversely 

affected will receive income maintenance? Nothing in the Act 

that says that workers that have to make this sacrifice because 

of the world-wide problem are going to be compensated. 

 

What protection do our workers have and our mines have on the 

problem that the minister says is an oversupply in the world, not 

just in Saskatchewan. And when, Mr. Speaker, exactly does she 

propose to use these enormous and unprecedented powers: next 

week, next month, next year, or is that yet another one of the 

incoherent parts of a very incoherent policy? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it would be inappropriate to comment in detail on 

specific provisions of the Bill at this stage in the debate, and I 

will not do so. There will be ample opportunity to do that in the 

committee stage. I must, however, make a few general 

comments on the provisions in the Bill. 

 

For a so-called conservative government, Mr. Speaker, which 

pretends to abhor government regulations in the market-place, 

this Bill – almost incredible – is almost incredible, for it is, 

without a doubt, the single most pervasive, heavy-handed and 

insidious regulatory Bill ever introduced in this legislature and I 

think, Mr. Speaker, I can fairly say, in this country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to paraphrase Sir Winston Churchill, he said: 

never has so few sought so desperately to regulate so much and 

done it so badly. The Bill calls for a political board, appointed 

behind closed doors by cabinet, and answerable only to cabinet. 

Mr. Speaker, we have no idea what the composition of that 

board will be. We have no idea how many people from the 

workers, for example, will be on that board. Who are the people 

that are going to be on that board, and who are they answerable 

to? The Bill indicates very clearly, Mr. Speaker, that they’re 

only answerable to the cabinet with absolutely no appeal to the 

courts. 

 

That board, Mr. Speaker, is given the sweeping discretionary 

power to discriminate between companies and even between 

mines, and I trust that all PC members  

  



 

September 3, 1987 

2268 

 

opposite understand this, that it is giving sweeping discretionary 

powers and there is no appeal – that there is no appeal to the 

courts. Their decision is final. They can sound the death of any 

potash company; they can sound the death of any particular 

mines, and you have no appeal. And I will have more to say on 

those and other specific provisions of the Bill when it reaches 

committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill before us and the PC government policy, 

which the minister has failed to make clear, have been sharply 

criticized across Saskatchewan by both the potash workers and 

the potash companies. My colleague, the member from Quill 

Lakes, earlier in question period indicated that a major potash 

executive member asked the government to keep their hands off 

the potash industry . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . A CCP 

(Central Canada Potash) executive. And he clearly indicated 

that they did not agree with the way the government was 

handling this situation. Mr. Speaker, their policy deserves some 

criticism, in part for what it does, and in part for what the 

government has failed to do. 

 

What are some of the alternatives that the government has 

ignored? And we have mentioned these earlier, but I think it’s 

worthwhile, Mr. Speaker, to mention them again. What could 

they have done? 

 

Well, they could have launched a public awareness campaign in 

the U.S. farm states. Did they do that? Our answer is no. The 

minister seemed to indicate a very feeble attempt was made, but 

obviously, we telephoned the major farm organizations this 

morning and they were unaware of the problem that existed and 

the crisis that existed in the potash industry. They were simply 

unaware. So one must assume that if you made an attempt, that 

attempt was a very feeble attempt. But I assume, Mr. Speaker, 

because they have not indicated what they have done, that really 

nothing was done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they could have let the American farmers know 

that their own commerce department was looking at driving up 

the cost of potash fertilizer by 40 to 50 per cent. And surely, 

Mr. Speaker, if the farmers in the United States knew that the 

price of fertilizer would be going up 40 to 50 per cent, do you 

not think that they would be lobbying Washington to stop these 

ludicrous anti-dumping tariffs that have been implemented by 

the Department of Commerce? I think we simply have to 

assume that this government has not done its job in that 

particular area. 

 

What else could the government have done? Well they could 

have pressed that point with the American farm state 

politicians, which again they didn’t do. And they could have 

made common cause with the farm lobby against the commerce 

department and the New Mexico Potash Company. Nothing of 

that happened, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Even today, as I’ve said, farm organizations in the United States 

are simply unaware of the impact of this ruling on their 

pocket-books, and one of our best options to stop this dispute 

was ignored by the members opposite. 

 

Now what else could the government have done in the last 

seven months? Well it could have used its 

much-touted relationship with Prime Minister Mulroney and 

urged him to use his much-touted relationship with Ronald 

Reagan to lobby against this unfair action by the New Mexico 

producers. Did that happen? As far as we know, no it didn’t. 

 

What else could it have done? It could have gotten the 

Mulroney government’s support for Canadian solution to this 

problem, not just a Saskatchewan solution but a Canadian 

solution, which would have guaranteed that New Brunswick 

potash producers would not have taken advantage of this 

production limits in Saskatchewan as a way to gain a larger 

share of the American market. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is interesting to read this morning when a 

spokesman for Dennison Mines of New Brunswick indicated 

that they were working at full capacity now. They were working 

at full capacity but, Mr. Speaker, we are working at about 67 

per cent capacity. And who has been asked to make the 

sacrifice? New Brunswick? No. Who has been asked to make 

the sacrifice? Other world competitors who are working at 87 to 

90 per cent capacity; have they been asked? No. But the 

workers of Saskatchewan. And why, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The reason, of course, is because this government didn’t do its 

homework. It didn’t do its homework over the last seven 

months. It didn’t do the lobbying that it should have done in the 

United States. It didn’t speak to the Canadian government. It 

didn’t ask Mulroney to use his good relationship with Ronald 

Reagan to stop this. None of this apparently was done. So in 

panic they came up with a Bill and asked our workers, our 

producers, to address a world problem and make the sacrifices. 

That, Mr. Speaker, is unfair. It shows the incompetence of this 

government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion I want to say that this Bill and 

the PC policy that it represents is unfortunately typical of the 

performance of the government opposite. Their resource 

policies are very unclear, and they’ve been very incoherent. I’ve 

shown them in the oil industry; I’ve shown it in the forest 

industry, the coal industry; and now we have the potash 

industry. Everything it seems that this government touches turns 

to disaster in the energy field. I say, Mr. Speaker, that their 

resource management is simply incompetent. 

 

The stakes here, Mr. Speaker, today in the potash industry are 

very high. The stakes for the people of Saskatchewan are also 

very high. It will affect 3,800 people in the industry. What 

assurances do those people have that their jobs will be 

protected? This Bill gives them no assurances whatsoever. 

None. Thousands, thousands of people and thousands of jobs 

will be affected once this legislation is implemented. Hundreds 

of millions of dollars are invested in the potash industry. That 

will be affected. Saskatchewan jobs, Saskatchewan families, 

and Saskatchewan communities, Mr. Speaker – the stakes 

indeed are very high. 

 

Potash workers have examined this Bill and are understandably 

worried. I met with a number of them this morning, and they 

are worried because of the generalities of this Bill. Will it be 

implemented fairly? Will it be implemented equally? No 

assurance is given whatsoever – none at all. Will one mine be 

completely wiped out  

  



 

September 3, 1987 

2269 

 

and all those workers wiped out of their jobs? Is the government 

going to compensate those workers that will be laid off? Those 

are questions that the workers want to have answers to. 

 

The companies in the industry, Mr. Speaker, have examined the 

Bill and they, too, are disappointed, for they do not trust the 

heavy-handed, regulatory invasion of this Bill, and they don’t 

trust the government to be either competent or wise or fair, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Similarly, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are 

disappointed, for they simply do not trust this government any 

more. They simply can’t believe it. The paper tiger Premier 

whose government likes to talk tough, but shows its 

incompetence in his actions, or lack of action. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the people of Saskatchewan, they are firmly 

opposed to any policy and any government that sets out to 

sacrifice Saskatchewan jobs and Saskatchewan families on the 

alter of PC incompetence. They don’t trust and they don’t 

believe a government that is caught unprepared, that is caught 

flat-footed, and that has embarrassed not only the government 

but all the people of Saskatchewan, with no sound, 

comprehensive plan for dealing with the U.S. anti-dumping 

action whatsoever. And the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, simply don’t believe this government at all, as long as 

their resource policy, as demonstrated in the Bill before us 

today, produces more and more troubling questions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, until those concerns are allayed, until those 

questions are answered, the people of Saskatchewan will 

continue to mistrust the minister and the PC government 

opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I come to the close of my remarks on this Bill, I 

want to ask the Minister of Energy in her summation, when she 

concludes her remarks on this Bill, to answer and address some 

of the problems and concerns that I have spoken about today. 

There are a lot of people out there that are concerned about this 

Bill; they are concerned about the effect that the Bill will have 

if it’s not fairly and equally administered and implemented. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It will be. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — The member from Rosthern says it will be. 

 

The record that you people have show the people that it 

probably will not be fairly and equally administered. That is the 

problem that we have, and that’s what the problem of the 

people of Saskatchewan have. The generalities in this Bill 

concern them very much. 

 

We need to have some answers, Mr. Speaker, on the following: 

how will the resource board be implemented, and how will it 

receive its approval for the authority and the responsibility that 

it has? Will it be only the cabinet, or will the minister opposite 

allow the legislature to have an input in the establishment of 

this board; and will the minister allow this legislature to help 

select members of this board so that all groups, all groups, will 

be represented on that board and they can speak for their 

individuals and for their groups so that their rights are 

protected? That’s one of the questions. 

 

What will the minister do, what will the minister do to assure 

the people of Saskatchewan, and particularly the workers and 

the industry, that our competitors will not step in and steal the 

markets in the United States that we now have? 

 

In question period yesterday, Mr. Speaker, and in question 

period today we’ve asked the minister to detail for us the steps 

that she would take to protect our markets. We received no 

answers. She has no plan. And again, the workers in the 

industry is concerned, and the people of Saskatchewan are 

concerned. I hope that she will address that problem when she 

concludes her remarks. 

 

Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve addressed this before in my 

speech, and that is if – and the minister seems to say in question 

period today that there may not be any cut-backs in 

Saskatchewan and if there . . . and I find that rather strange – if 

she believes that there won’t be any cut-backs in the industry, 

then why the Bill? Why the Bill? That is the central purpose of 

the Bill, is to cut back production capacity to make sure, to 

show the United States that we’re taking action of the 

over-supply. If that is not going to happen, then why the Bill? 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, if that should happen, if there is going to be 

cut-back in the industry, what assurance will the minister give 

to the workers in the potash industry that they will be 

adequately compensated should they lose their jobs and their 

livelihood if that legislation is implemented? There must be 

some protection in this legislation for those workers who will 

be adversely affected. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the last question, and these . . . and I have 

not addressed all of them, but my other colleagues will as they 

speak to this Bill. The last question that I want to ask the 

minister is this: what assurances will she give to this legislature, 

to the industry, and to the workers, that this Bill will be fairly 

and equally applied to all the companies and all the mines 

producing potash in this province? How will they implement 

this Act? Will it mean that the government will come down 

harsher on a particular mine or a particular company? 

 

I hope the minister, again in Committee of the Whole or in her 

summation, will assure this legislature that we have nothing to 

fear, and the workers in the industry have nothing to fear, and 

she will outline in detail how this Bill will be equally and fairly 

implemented and applied to the potash industry. That is a grave 

concern, Mr. Speaker, that the workers have out there and that 

the industry has and that we have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated in my remarks, we have a 

number of concerns. And I do hope that the minister, when she 

addresses it, will try and attempt to answer some of these 

concerns and alleviate some of the fears that we have on this 

side. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



 

September 3, 1987 

2270 

 

Mr. Saxinger: — I’d like to ask for leave of this House to 

introduce a guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Saxinger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 

to you, and through you to the Assembly, a very special visitor 

from East Germany, Miss Lilly Edens from East Germany. She 

is accompanied by Mrs. John Mueller from Saskatoon, Mrs. 

Blair Kool from Saskatoon, and Mrs. Horst Mueller. They are 

seated in the Speaker’s gallery, and with your permission I 

would like to welcome her in German. 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in German.) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just spoke to her and she tells me it’s just like a 

dream to be able to come in and visit in the legislature like we 

do here. She just can’t believe it. She said she has to go home 

. . . (inaudible) . . . And I would like to ask this Assembly to 

help me welcome our special guest. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce guests 

to the House. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, are four 

representatives of the United Steelworkers of America, who are 

interested in the debate going on this afternoon. 

 

I’d like to introduce to you, and through you to the House, Mr. 

Terry Stevens, who’s the international representative of that 

union; Mr. Ron Fisher, who’s the president of the local at the 

Cory potash mine; Mr. Gary Phillips, who’s the president of the 

local at the Allan potash mine; and Mr. Bernie Welke, who is 

employed at the Cory mine and who works in the office of the 

union in Saskatoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — I appreciate the applause and I take it that 

that’s to welcome the visitors to the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 36 (continued) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — I, too, just before I get into the debate, Mr. 

Speaker, would certainly on behalf of this side of the House 

welcome the representatives from various categories of the 

potash industry in Saskatchewan, as well. And I certainly hope 

that they will find the time to remain with us for the major part 

of this afternoon just to get a feeling of what this potash debate 

is really all about. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, to preface my remarks, I would just like to 

indicate firstly to the member from Saskatoon 

South that I acknowledge that he got a tremendous round of 

applause at the beginning of his remarks, which made him to 

indicate that perhaps he should reconsider his position in 

running for the leadership for the NDP party. But after having 

heard his speech and listening to his remarks, I would suggest 

that he seriously give that another second thought and revert 

back to his original decision. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you that . . . And I 

listened very carefully to his speech and I came to the 

conclusion that I have not really heard such a rambling speech 

in this House prior to his. He was all over the place. He was 

inconsistent in various respects and . . . But that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I would suggest to you, is typical of the position of the 

NDP when it comes to the issue of the potash industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that this Bill is urgent. And right now I 

am somewhat mad; I am somewhat annoyed; I think I am 

somewhat disgusted, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because when I 

entered these hallowed halls I was naïve, and I still am, I 

suppose, because I thought that we would be able to come in 

here and that we would be able to face issues, that we would be 

able to address problems that the people of Saskatchewan were 

facing, and that we would be able to resolve them. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would suggest to you that what has 

happened is that I have become disillusioned. I have become 

disillusioned because we have had opportunities here to discuss 

major, major problems that are having a severe impact upon our 

citizens of this province. We have had the opposition 

adjourning debates time and time again. They do not want to 

discuss the issues of agriculture. They do not want to discuss 

the issue of railroad strikes. They adjourn debates, Mr. Speaker, 

because they do not want to get off the fence. They do not want 

to say: this is where we stand. They want to go ahead and 

remain friends with their union leaders in the eastern part of our 

country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I feel better now. I had not got that as part of my 

opening remarks, but having gotten that off my chest I will just 

initially address some of the issues that the member from 

Saskatoon South did raise. One of them in particular that he 

raised during question period and brought up once again where, 

Mr. Speaker, he is asking the Government of Saskatchewan to 

come up with a series of guarantees. He wants us to have 

guarantees in the market-place that we will keep our market 

share. He wants a guarantee of that. He wants a guarantee that 

the price of potash will go up as a result of this legislation. He 

wants a guarantee that there will be no lay-offs, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Well I say, welcome to the real world; wake up; get out of the 

dream world. But not everything is that bleak, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And in response, at least in part response – and I’m 

not trying to speak for the minister here; she did very well for 

herself, and she will continue to do well for herself – but I have 

an article here by Geoff York, the writer for The Globe and 

Mail, and he writes and I would just like to suggest . . . or he 

quotes I should say a Mr. Ed Wheeler: 

  



 

September 3, 1987 

2271 

 

If Saskatchewan imposes a significant reduction in its potash 

exports to the United States, it appears unlikely that farmers 

in that country could obtain enough from U.S. or overseas 

producers to fill the gap. (And he continues.) Ed Wheeler, a 

former president of the American Fertilizer Institute and 

currently a trade consultant in Washington, said overseas 

producers could supply only 5 or 10 per cent of the U.S. 

demand. Nor could the New Mexico producer supply enough 

potash to meet the need, he said. 

 

I would just like to use that as part response to the member from 

Saskatoon South. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t enter this debate lightly. I support the Bill 

and I will certainly be voting in favour of the Bill as it stands, as 

presented to this legislature. I support this Bill basically because 

I don’t think we have much choice; I don’t think that we have 

any choice other than the direction in which we are going. It is 

time for a firm, decisive choice to be made, and that is exactly, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what this government has done. 

 

(1515) 

 

Now essentially, speaking on a personal note, I am a free 

enterpriser, and I’m proud to be one . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — . . . because to me, free enterprise is the 

vehicle of progress. To me, free enterprise is what makes the 

market respond. Now when you have free enterprise, you have 

the law of supply and demand; it operates at a normal process. 

However, as soon as you get all the extenuating circumstances 

where the market forces can no longer seek an equilibrium, 

where they can cancel each other out, when you get the 

distorting effects and the distorting forces at work because of an 

insanity of subsidies, protectionist legislation, as we have seen, 

then we have to take extenuating circumstances and extenuating 

actions to counteract that. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would suggest to you 

that not only is this Bill dealing with an issue that affects the 

economic well-being of our economy as a whole, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but it impacts directly on the people in my 

constituency. 

 

As you know, my constituency surrounds Saskatoon to the 

north, to the south, and to the east. Saskatoon, as some of the 

members may be aware, had in times past a slogan and that 

slogan of Saskatoon was “POW country” – potash, oil, wheat; 

those are the commodities that are the backbone of our 

economy. We know in this province what has happened to those 

backbones, to those mainstays of our economy. And so it 

impacts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, very, very directly on the people 

in my constituency. And that is why I am on my feet, and that is 

why I want to bring my points across to this legislature, to the 

people of Saskatchewan, and in particular to the people of 

Rosthern constituency that are so adversely affected. 

 

Now as my hon. colleague, the Minister of Energy and 

Mines, has already pointed out, the need to manage the 

production of potash is essential particularly if we are to have a 

viable potash industry in the future. The current situation of too 

much productive capacity and a weak world demand represents 

a major threat to the security of our potash industry in the 

future. The bottom line is: there is a glut; there is a glut of 

potash on the world market. 

 

All the world’s potash producers are caught up in the same 

dilemma: low prices, low demand, and limited markets. It 

doesn’t matter whether you go to the potash industry in 

Saskatchewan, to the one in New Brunswick, to the one in New 

Mexico, East/West Germany, Lebanon, Israel, Russia – you go 

investigate any of these potash producers, and you will find that 

the world economy, in terms of potash, is facing the same kind 

of general dilemma. 

 

And in a response, the American producers lashed out against 

our province’s industry thinking that it was the cause of their 

problems. And my reaction to that, my personal opinion on that, 

is very obvious by some of the remarks that I’d made 

previously. I think the American producers are totally 

misguided; however, I also think that that type of a reaction is 

symptomatic of the American paranoia that is obvious 

throughout their actions. And that is their difficulty with the 

balance of trade issues, the rise of the protectionism that we see. 

We must get them to recognize the facts of life, the reality of 

what life is like out there. But they have not recognized those 

facts, never mind their realities; never mind the efficiencies of 

our production; never mind our regional advantage; never mind 

the superior quality of our product; never mind the dollar 

exchange which is so traumatically in our favour. They have 

struck out; they have struck out blindly in a misguided notion 

that we are responsible for their problems. And that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is not so. 

 

As we all know and members in here, that is not the first time 

that they have done that. I come from the hog industry; I know 

where I speak of. We have dealt with them before, and the 

fishing industry. We could take the lumber, the cedar shingles, 

shakes, the steel industry, blueberries – there’s hardly an 

industry that is left. Why have the Americans done this? They 

have done it for the benefit of two mines. Two mines in New 

Mexico have precipitated this disastrous action. For two mines 

which, as far as I can determine, represents about 600 jobs in 

New Mexico, they have set at risk their relationship with 

Canada. They have set at risk the entire farming industry in the 

United States as well. 

 

And I would suggest to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that is 

not worth their while. But it is obvious at the same time that the 

entire world market for potash is weak, and as I have said, the 

over-supply is the culprit – not Saskatchewan potash producers, 

not Saskatchewan potash miners. Yet, ultimately, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the potash miners and their families are going to pay 

the price. They will suffer. They are the ones that are going to 

pay, and that is what we cannot allow to happen, and that is 

why we have Bill 36 before us today. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this over-supply of potash, if I could 

  



 

September 3, 1987 

2272 

 

just trace a little bit historically, is a direct result of once having 

a prosperous time in the potash industry, that time being, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the late ‘70s and the early ‘80s. Back then the 

forecasters and projections were indicating an ever-higher price 

and an ever-greater demand for potash. It was basically a time 

of unbridled optimism, you might say. 

 

Now naturally many companies began to expand their capacity 

to meet this expected demand. Mines that should have closed, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker – and specifically I can point my finger 

right at the two mines in New Mexico – mines that should have 

closed were kept open in the hope that they once more would be 

in the black, that the profit margin would increase to the point 

where they could make some money. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the price went down as demand for 

potash dropped, and it became obvious, it became obvious that 

the projections of the late 1970s were way out of whack, that 

they were horribly wrong – a world-wide glut of potash was the 

result of too much capacity, too little demand. 

 

What did Saskatchewan do to meet this crisis in the early ‘80s? 

How did they prepare for the future? Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

there was a proposal of how they would meet that crisis, and I 

have here a news release dated Thursday, December 10, 1981. 

And it’s a news release by the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan, and it was a news release that was issued by the 

father of PCS, by the father of the $800 million debt that is now 

hanging like a millstone around the necks of every man, 

woman, and child in our province. And I quote: 

 

The hon. Roy Romanow, chairman of the board of the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, today announced: “It 

is the policy of the Potash Corporation that there will be 

no lay-offs at any of its operations, and that during this 

temporary period of lower than anticipated demand, the 

corporation will build its inventory at its mine site (build 

its inventory). We believe that the market will improve 

significantly in the spring of ’82 and that, in fact, higher 

inventory levels will be a benefit to help us in meeting the 

demand in the long term.” 

 

That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was the member from Riverdale’s 

answer to a potash glut and low demand and low price. We’ll 

just mine and we’ll pile up the stocks. He continues on: 

 

The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is not panicking 

over what we believe to be a temporary softening of 

demand and a normal part of the potash supply-demand 

cycle. Mr. Romanow said, if world economic picture 

continues to deteriorate . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, Order. I would ask members to refer to 

other members by their constituency and not by name, except in 

quotes, I think the last comment was made without a quote. 

Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would be quite willing 

to table this document or have it brought to you to indicate that 

I’m quoting directly from page 3 of the news release that I 

indicated before, where the last paragraph begins and I quote: 

 

Mr. Romanow said, if world economic picture continues 

to deteriorate with its inevitable adverse effects on 

agriculture and the potash industry, the potash corporation 

would be forced to reconsider all options available to it. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not only am I amazed that the 

solution was to just simply stockpile and keep on mining, keep 

on mining, and keep on mining, but what I’m kind of 

wondering here, and I’m very glad that I could speak at the 

beginning of this debate to give the hon. member an opportunity 

to respond because I’m very interested in listening to that type 

of response. What are, first of all, some of these options that are 

being referred to? 

 

I have listened very carefully to the critic of Energy and Mines, 

and I was listening to his criticism. I was listening to his attacks 

on the Minister of Energy and Mines. I was listening to his 

attacks on the Premier of the province. I was listening to his 

attacks on the performance of this government, and that’s fine; 

that’s fair ball; that’s fair game. Sometimes we deserve to be 

criticized; we’re not perfect. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I still 

maintain that when you have that privilege of criticism, 

somewhere along the line you’re going to have to stand up and 

come up with some kind of an alternative. And that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: — That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is what I’m 

looking forward, is to saying exactly what the alternatives are. 

Get off the fence. What would you have done? What are you 

suggesting to us? That is what I am listening forward to, and 

with great anticipation I will be listening to your entering into 

this debate. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if I could, I would like to give some 

examples of what has happened to our province’s potash 

industry as a result of this situation of over-supply. 

Saskatchewan’s sales to the United States, our largest market, 

have declined by almost one-fifth since 1980 – 20 per cent 

reduction in sales to the United States. Now you couple that 

with a drop in price from 1981 – in 1981, $157 per tonne; last 

year, 1986, average price, $86 a tonne – the result is that the 

industry revenues have been cut in half since 1981, and as a 

result, obvious, many, many of the companies have suffered 

substantial losses. And closer to home we have seen production 

cut-backs, as we are painfully aware, frequent shut-downs, 

lay-offs, and Saskatchewan’s capacity utilization has fallen 

from the perfect figure of 100 per cent in 1980 to 67 per cent 

now – capacity utilization down to 67 per cent. The world’s 

capacity utilization right now is standing at 90 per cent, and 

here we are at 67 per cent, operating – as an explanation – 

operating at 67 per cent of capacity, what we could do if we had 

a proper market for our commodity. 

 

(1530) 

  



 

September 3, 1987 

2273 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to continue on in that vein. 

Saskatchewan communities have lost almost 1,000 jobs, or it 

could be 1,000 jobs by now in the potash industry, with many 

of the remaining workers uncertain of their futures, uncertain of 

their futures. We’re talking jobs, jobs and the stress and the 

strain that this puts on workers, their families, family relations. 

The uncertainty of: will we have a job next week, or are we 

going to be laid off – a tremendous amount of stress and strain 

as this uncertainty is increasing. And that is why, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we have to grab hold of this problem, come up with a 

firm solution and solve it. 

 

Now government revenues, at the same time, have dropped 

from $280 million in 1980 to $37 million in 1986. Now just 

work that out; that’s a drop of about 86 per cent in government 

revenue from the potash industry – 86 per cent drop. In other 

words, we’re only left with 14 per cent of our revenue from the 

potash that we were back in 1980. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

would suggest to you that if you combine that with the same 

kind of drop in the oil sector, and an equal kind of drop in the 

wheat sector, the slogan, POW, that I mentioned at the 

beginning loses a lot of its significance and a lot of its impact. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe all members of the Assembly would 

agree that the situation has to be corrected. It’s gone on long 

enough. The American mines anti-dumping action has made 

this already bad situation that much worse. We have a range, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, of dumping duties against us from 9 per 

cent up to 86 per cent, depending on the company. The 

company in my own constituency, the potash mine in my 

constituency, the PCA (Potash Corporation of America) mine, 

was levied a 77.4 per cent duty – 77.4 per cent duty. How can 

they operate under circumstances like that? I suggest that’s not 

possible. Why was that done? Well, dumping, anti-dumping. 

What is dumping? What is dumping? 

 

Sometimes we tend to say anti-dumping and leave it at that, but 

we have to have a little bit of an idea what is going on. When 

the Americans say we’re putting an anti-dumping levy against 

you, that is from their perspective. When you dump, you sell 

something on the market at less than fair value. You’re selling it 

under less than fair value: that is what dumping is. Now, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, who determines what fair value is? Do we? 

We have no say on that. They determine. Who determines? 

Who is they? It is the Department of Commerce in the United 

States that determines what fair value is, and they determine it – 

when in Rome, do like the Romans do – they determine it from 

their perspective. 

 

And what they’re doing now is, they’re taking the COP, which 

is the cost of production from the New Mexico mines – those 

inefficient old mines; poor quality product; high cost of 

production – and then they are adding on top of that 

cost-of-production factor, they are adding on top of that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, a 10 per cent sailing . . . selling, pardon me, 

selling and administration cost. They add that up to fair market 

value as well; 10 per cent for that. Then they add on another 8 

per cent as a profit factor. 

So what do you come up with, Mr. Deputy Speaker? You come 

up with a very, very high price. We, with all our advantages of 

– that I mentioned previously in my speech and I’m not going 

to go through that again – we can undersell that, but that’s not 

the fair market price, and if we sell underneath it, still making a 

fair profit, still making a fair profit, they say, no way, you can’t 

do that. Our mines cannot compete, and so they put on the 

anti-dumping action. Now something has to be done, Mr. 

Speaker, and I believe that this Bill is important in doing so. 

This Bill is important. 

 

Now I have mentioned a couple of times already the Minister of 

Mines and Energy. And I’m just going to take a moment here 

and go to the Leader-Post of September 1, 1987, and an article 

in the Leader-Post, to indicate to you some of the reactions that 

are happening out there in the industry. The opposition had the 

opportunity to do that; they were selective in making some 

presentations in the House here. But I would like to quote to 

you from a heading on this article which says, from the Energy 

and Mines minister – a good minister, I might add, and others 

think so too: “Smith talks with potash producers before 

introduction of potash bill.” 

 

Talk about consultation. The minister has met with the industry 

representatives on more than one occasion, on more than one 

occasion. And I would just like to give you a reaction from Bob 

Connochie from PCA (Potash Company of America Inc.), Billie 

Turner from IMC (International Minerals and Chemical 

Corporation), and John Gordon from Noranda. I must say to 

you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that all of them indicated some 

concern about government involvement in their industry, as I 

suggested to you previously, and I certainly didn’t need to make 

no apology for that. We all have that concern, but this is what 

they said. All three said that: 

 

. . . they were impressed with Smith’s motives for the bill 

and her willingness to let the industry have some say in the 

legislation. 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

Smith is a “very bright and articulate young lady” who 

proved to be “very knowledgeable about the problems we 

wanted to discuss.” 

 

This is done by Billie Turner, as I suggested before, from IMC, 

a company and an industry representative. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I suggest to you that the industry is out 

there. The industry and the Government of Saskatchewan are 

working together to try to come to grips with the problem that 

has been hanging around the necks of Saskatchewan people for 

so long. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that pretty well concludes my 

introductory remarks, and I would like to go now . . . But before 

I get to the specifics of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

point out the situation as it relates to my constituency. 

 

It is one thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to work so hard to save the 

mine, and I’m glad to say that I’m talking about the PCA mine 

now at Patience Lake in my constituency. 

  



 

September 3, 1987 

2274 

 

I’m glad to say that they have saved the main shaft, because as 

you know we had that flooding problem. It is indicated to me 

that they have saved the main shaft. So it’s one thing to work 

hard to save the mine; it’s entirely another thing to do so only to 

find out that after you’ve done that you can’t sell your product. 

So while the engineers try to decide if they should start mining 

a different arm of the potash deposit or go into solution mining, 

as the mine at Kalium, the workers and their families worry 

about whether or not there is enough demand to keep the mine 

open at all. 

 

And that is what this government is worried about. And that’s 

why we’re taking the action – that we’re worried. We’re talking 

about the future. Am I’m concerned about the future of the 

Patience Lake mine. It’s just east of Saskatoon, and the towns 

of Clavet, the town or the village complex of Sunset Estates is 

almost entirely dependent on what happens at that mine. And 

would like to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, some of the 

significance of the potash mine even to my constituency in 

Rosthern where there is the existence only of the one mine. 

 

Now I have some figures here about a tax base that potash 

mines provide for the R.M.s in the province. In 1986 there was 

a total assessment of almost $120.5 millions. Four and one-half 

millions of that went to R.M.s, towns, and villages. That was in 

’86. ’87 is not quite as good, but almost as good, and it’s 

divided up again between 41 R.M.s and 46 towns and villages. 

Now the village of Clavet received in 1986, as a direct result of 

the taxes collected from potash, a sum of over $12,000; town of 

Dalmeny almost $11,000; town of Langham over $10,000; 

Martensville, good town – I had my constituency office there, 

and they appreciated the $15,700 that they received as a result 

of the potash mine in Patience Lake. The town of Warman, over 

$15,500. 

 

Then we come to some of the R.M.s. I have three R.M.s that 

gain to benefit . . . or benefit from this potash tax base. R.M. of 

Blucher, $382,000; R.M. of Corman Park, $491,000, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, almost a half a million dollars added to the tax 

base to the R.M. of Corman Park. Another one is the R.M. of 

Aberdeen, which is also partially in my constituency, of over 

$101,000. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have been an R.M. councillor in the 

R.M. of Rosthern, and all I can say to you is that I envy these 

three R.M.s that I just quoted, because in the R.M. of Rosthern 

we did not have the benefit of this tax base. So I can certainly 

appreciate what those kinds of figures mean in terms of mills 

less tax than the people are having to pay. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, just let me continue on by saying that this Bill 

will help to bring some of that stability, to bring some of that 

certainty to an unstable situation. And this legislation deals with 

all the primary production from all of the potash mines, that we 

will be able to effectively manage the situation. 

 

As the minister has already outlined, there are three major 

thrusts in this legislation: one, it will place the responsibility for 

approving increases in potash production capacity explicitly 

with cabinet in order to minimize future risks of massive 

over-supply; secondly, it 

will authorize cabinet to establish the total volume of potash to 

be produced in Saskatchewan at any given period; and thirdly, it 

will create a potash resources board, charged with allocating the 

total allowable provincial production amongst the mines, to 

achieve a fair and equitable balance between producer and 

Crown interests. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation will help to remove the uncertainty 

that exists today in our province’s potash industry, and I’ve 

tried to address the significance of that. It will protect the 

livelihoods of potash workers and their families. It will help to 

preserve the massive investment that has been made in 

developing the industry – and I suppose we could get into the 

pros and cons of that on a partisanship basis, and I don’t think 

that we would gain anything by doing that. 

 

At the same time, Mr. Speaker, this legislation will ensure a fair 

return to the people of Saskatchewan from their resources. Mr. 

Speaker, this Bill is an important step towards the future 

viability of our province’s potash industry, an industry which is 

the largest and most efficient of its kind in the world, one that 

I’m proud to support, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As a member of this government I can only say, Mr. Speaker, 

that this government is prepared to do what it must do in order 

to protect the industry and the people of this province. I can 

only say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can only say to the people of 

Saskatchewan, I can only say to the companies, the potash 

producers of Saskatchewan, and I can only say to the PCA 

workers in the Sunset Estates in my constituency, that we will 

not let you down; we will not fail you because together we’re 

going to go shoulder to shoulder, and we will fight for you, and 

together we will prevail. 

 

(1545) 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, and in reaction to the member from Regina 

Centre, could I ask you one question. Can I include you in this 

list of people who are working together to solve this problem? 

Can I include you in that? Can I include you with the people? 

Can I include you with this government? Can I include you with 

the producers, the potash companies? Can we all work 

together? Can we all work together to solve this problem? Can 

we have this unanimity – unanimity that would be so desirable? 

 

Because I ask you, Mr. Member, and I ask all members 

opposite: do away with your partisan problems here, face the 

situation as it is, and together we’re going to solve this problem. 

So I would urge all of you members, as I know that all of the 

members on this side are going to support this Bill. Let’s make 

it unanimous. Let’s show that there is unanimity in 

Saskatchewan as we go out an address this problem. I thank you 

all for your co-operation. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — May I have leave of the House to introduce 

guests, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Leave granted. 

  



 

September 3, 1987 

2275 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — I would like to introduce to you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and through you to members of the House, five 

executive members of the Rocanville Potash Employee’s 

Association. They are: Mr. Lyndon Christian, who is the 

president of the association; JoAnn Wilson, the administrator; 

Joe Tourond, who is the secretary; and Colin Blakely and Gene 

Beck, who are members of the Board of Directors. And I’d like 

the Assembly to welcome them to the House. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 36 (continued) 

 

Mr. McLaren: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It is indeed an opportunity for me to speak in support of The 

Potash Resources Act that we are talking and speaking on 

today, and indeed I commend the Minister of Energy and Mines 

for introducing this excellent legislation which will protect jobs 

in our province, which will protect investment and protect the 

future of Saskatchewan’s potash industry. 

 

The intent of the legislation is to protect the potash industry, 

and I have every confidence that it will do just that. This 

legislation will apply to all potash resources in this province, 

including the mines and the potash production. And I am sure 

the families who depend on the potash mines for their living 

will welcome our efforts to defend the potash industry. 

 

We all know the reason for this Bill, and it relates to the 

protectionist mood in the United States. And it was a decision 

by the United States Department of Commerce that led to 

preliminary duties of up to 85.2 per cent on potash exports form 

Saskatchewan. And in order to protect Saskatchewan’s potash 

industry and keep it viable it is necessary for us to pass The 

Potash Resources Act. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have 

throughout the years counted on potash as a source of potential 

revenue, and indeed many Saskatchewan communities are very 

dependent on the industry. 

 

I recall back to 1975 when the then NDP administration decided 

it would be a good idea to nationalize the potash industry in this 

province. They invested millions of tax dollars in the potash 

take-over, an act that was fathered by the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale and our past premier. And I’ve been 

listening to the member from Saskatoon South and many of his 

colleagues about the mismanagement and the incompetence and 

what has been laid on our government since 1982, and I’d like 

to take just a moment to talk about mismanagement and 

incompetence, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I think the whole problem started in 1975 when they took over 

half of the potash industry in our province to begin with – a 

socialist government that started to nationalize  

the businesses that were already in our province, spending 

millions of dollars, hundreds of millions, on dry holes, jobs that 

were already there, already being covered in our province with 

workers, companies doing their jobs to create a profit and make 

a real business thrive in this province. 

 

I’d like to just go back a little bit and let you know how they 

managed the potash corporation. I had the pleasure and the 

opportunity to be minister in charge from 1982 to the end of 

’83, as chairman of the board of the potash corporation. 

 

The member from Saskatoon Centre mentioned in his remarks 

that the PC government started the expansion at the Lanigan 

mine. That expansion was under way before we even took 

office, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A lot of the work had started 

already. There were supplies, there was steel, there was all the 

products necessary to continue the building of that mine already 

in place. So we had a decision to make. We could tell by the 

statistics that the potash industry was starting to slip and slide, 

and we spent a lot of time discussing whether we would 

continue with the expansion at Lanigan. But the materials were 

there – to leave a place half built, it would deteriorate over the 

years – so we decided to carry on with that expansion, even 

though we did slow it down. 

 

The potash sales, Canadian sales of potash, in 1980 was 4.9 

million metric tons. In 1981 it was 4.5; in 1982 it was 3.5. And 

the minister . . . or not the minister but the member from 

Saskatoon South leads the public to believe that it was 1982 that 

the whole problem started to happen. The strange part of it is 

that we are practically selling the same amount of potash now 

as we did in the good old days of 1980. 

 

But we have to look at price. And my colleague from Rosthern 

spelled it out very clearly, where the price of potash has 

dropped form $141 a tonne down to $87 dollars a tonne. 

 

And I was talking about mismanagement, and my colleague 

from Rosthern also mentioned this in his remarks, that the 

inventories of potash in 1982 when I and my colleagues came to 

office, we discovered that there was practically a complete 

inventory to fill all the capacity that we had. And when you take 

in the different grades under consideration, it was full capacity. 

 

But what did the members opposite do? It was spelled out in his 

remarks, from the member from Riversdale, about saying, we 

will not lay off anyone in the potash industry. So they started to 

plan and they drew up a draft to store raw ore on the surface, 

and that was recommended in February 1982. This was at 

Lanigan. They stored on the surface from April 1, until July, 

705,242 metric tons of ore. I can remember in 1983 us trying to 

measure the pile to find out what the inventory was of ore that 

was on the surface. In 1986 that mountain of ore had gone down 

to 350, 858 metric tons due to rain, snow, weather, the material 

dissolving into the air. And that product is still sitting there 

today, Mr. Deputy Speaker – a wasted product. 

 

At Cory what did they do? In 1978 they started to build a  

  



 

September 3, 1987 

2276 

 

pad up on the surface, a pad that cost $195,654. It wasn’t used 

until February 1982, but they sure were getting ready. They 

must have known something was starting to happen. Between 

February 1982 and April 1982, 56,671 metric tons was put on 

the pad. And we started to remove that in February 1983, and 

removed 23,000 metric tons of this ore, and by October 1983 

we removed the balance. 

 

So what does all this mean as far as costs and good 

management and so on, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Transportation, 

hauling the ore from the mill to the pad, cost $132,766. The tarp 

that went over it cost $49,284. And bought used tires and all 

that – I saw that pile, too, when I visited the mine after getting 

the responsibility of the corporation. The tarp had to be 

repaired, the cost of $47,631. The product was wet so it had to 

be put back through the mill again, dried, screened, and 

anti-caked for another $6,406. The roads had to be repaired for 

another $150,000. And it’s estimated that that pile of ore has 

cost the corporation $1,029,837 – $18.17 a tonne, and then you 

add the normal cost of production on top of that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And we call that, or supposed to consider that as good 

management. 

 

As a result, every taxpayer in Saskatchewan has a stake in the 

future of the potash industry. And today there is an over-supply 

of potash in the world. The result has been a steady decline in 

the world price for potash since 1980. In the United States 

potash producers have lashed out by blaming their problems on 

Canadian potash sold in the U.S.A. They are wrong and 

misguided. In the meantime their actions threaten the province 

of Saskatchewan’s economy. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, all of us realize that at the present time the 

world demand for potash is depressed. And what has this meant 

for Saskatchewan? Well it means that we have seen a 20 per 

cent decline in our sales to the United States. It means that since 

1981 potash industry revenues have been cut in half. 

 

Simply stated, the world decline in potash sales has not been 

good news for Saskatchewan, yet we must protect this industry 

because it is vital to our province, Mr. Speaker. That is the 

purpose of this legislation before us today. We cannot allow the 

situation to get worse. If we are to maintain a viable potash 

industry for the future, we must show leadership and 

responsibility. That is the purpose and intent of the Bill before 

this legislature. 

 

And what will The Potash Resources Act accomplish? Allow 

me to deal with that question, Mr. Speaker. The Potash 

Resources Act will place the responsibility for approving 

increases in potash production with the provincial cabinet. This 

will minimize future risks of massive over-supply. The Bill will 

give cabinet the authority to establish the total volume of potash 

to be produced in this province, and it will create a potash 

resources board charged with allocating allowable production 

between mines to achieve a fair balance between producers and 

Crown interests. 

 

Keep in mind the serious consequences of the American actions 

against the potash industry of Saskatchewan, and at the same 

time consider the present world markets for potash. And I am 

sure most members of this legislature  

would agree The Potash Resources Act is a necessary piece of 

legislation. It shows leadership and common sense. 

 

American farmers know full well the consequence of reduced 

Saskatchewan potash exports to the United States, and I say 

reduced, not an embargo. Farmers in the United States are 

alarmed by the prospect of increased fertilizer costs. I note in 

The Globe and Mail of September 1, a report which says, and I 

quote: 

 

(1600) 

 

Farmers in the United States . . . are joining . . . with the 

Saskatchewan potash industry to lobby against . . . U.S. 

protectionist measures. The (United States) National Corn 

Growers Association, representing 1.3 million (American) 

farmers . . . is planning to lobby . . . (President Reagan) to 

try to defuse . . . (the decision on potash by the U.S. 

Commerce department). 

 

The American National Wheat Growers Association is on 

record as saying the U.S. duties on Saskatchewan potash will 

hurt American farmers. They are going to have to pay anywhere 

from nine to 85 per cent more for their potash, and I’m sure that 

the farmers in the United States, Mr. Speaker, are not going to 

sit by and not lobby their Commerce department over that. 

 

The same report in The Globe and Mail took note of the fact 

that potash mines in New Mexico cannot supply the entire U.S. 

market. Foreign producers of potash cannot fill the gap either. 

They cannot . . . They count on Saskatchewan’s potash, Mr. 

Speaker, and that is why U.S. farmers are against the 

anti-Saskatchewan tariffs. 

 

When the American farmers start their lobby to get rid of the 

protectionist measures that so hurt Saskatchewan potash, I 

predict the result will be swift. United States Senator Bob Dole 

of Kansas, who is running for president in 1988, will soon 

speak up for Kansas farmers in trying to get rid of the dumping 

duties on Saskatchewan farmers. He knows that the farmers in 

Iowa, Kansas and the American mid-west, do not want to pay 

more for their fertilizer products. And that is the message we 

want to send to Washington with The Potash Resources Act, 

Mr. Speaker. This legislation will send a clear message to the 

United States, and we will not be threatened by protectionist 

measures. 

 

I note a Canadian Press report that the federal NDP member for 

Humboldt-Lake Centre, Vic Althouse, got up in the House of 

Commons and called for Canada to cut off shipments of potash 

to the United States. And I believe the member from 

Yorkton-Melville has also said, let’s embargo potash to the 

United States. A very clear policy starting to develop from the 

various members of the NDP party, even across Canada. 

 

It is irresponsible to take such a position because thousands of 

Saskatchewan jobs would be at stake. Indeed the member for 

Saskatoon Riversdale was quoted in the Regina Leader-Post as 

saying a total embargo would hurt the potash industry more 

than it would help it. 

  



 

September 3, 1987 

2277 

 

Yet we see this glaring contradiction in NDP policy on the 

potash issue, Mr. Speaker. This is proof that the NDP lacks any 

direction or practical policy in support of the potash industry. I 

really reject as totally out of hand the statements by the NDP 

calling for the complete embargo. Just think of the workers and 

families who would suffer as a result, not to mention 

Saskatchewan’s economy. The legislation before the House is 

the responsible course of action, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At the recent premiers’ conference at St. John’s, New 

Brunswick, our Premier won the support of nine other premiers 

for Saskatchewan’s defence of the potash industry. I commend 

the Premier for that and for his leadership in defending 

Saskatchewan and the potash industry at the premiers’ 

conference. The support of the other nine provinces shows 

Canada is united in wanting to protect our potash industry. 

 

The Potash Resources Act shows that this government has acted 

in a responsible manner to protect our resources. It is a piece of 

legislation that looks to the future with practical and reliable 

policy. The Government of Saskatchewan has once again 

shown leadership in protecting our province. We have 

demonstrated leadership in defending our role as the free 

world’s largest producer and exporter of potash. And this 

legislation will protect the employees, the industry, and indeed 

Saskatchewan’s economy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Bill before us is a timely piece of legislation. It comes at 

the right time in our history, at a time when we must stand up to 

the protectionist mood in the United States. Many people in my 

constituency depend upon the potash mine and the industry, Mr. 

Speaker, and by supporting this legislation I am standing up for 

the interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

These are not ordinary times in the potash industry, and that is 

why we must take ordinary measures to protect that industry. 

To not do so would have been to let the potash mines die, and 

that would have been a dark and sad day for our province. 

 

That is not going to happen, Mr. Speaker. There are those 

misguided souls who have misguided policy when it comes to 

potash. We cannot listen to them. Rather, this government, 

through the Premier and his ministers, have shown real 

leadership. The Minister of Economic Development and the 

Minister of Energy and Mines have worked in close 

consultation with the potash industry and they are on top of the 

situation. I must commend the ministers for their leadership in 

working so hard to protect our potash resources and markets, 

and I am proud with the record of this government in standing 

up for potash and standing up for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was a dark day when the United States 

commerce department announced the unfair and misguided 

duties on Saskatchewan potash. I remind the legislature that this 

government did not back away and admit defeat; this 

government took leadership and began a positive plan of action 

for protecting our potash industry. Over 3,000 Saskatchewan 

jobs in potash mining were at stake, not to mention the millions 

of dollars of investment in the industry. 

That is why the House must pass the Bill before us. The Potash 

Resources Act is about the future of our province, Mr. Speaker, 

the future of our potash industry. And on that note I ask the 

legislature to support this legislation, as I will do. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise in 

this Assembly today to support the legislation put forth by the 

member from Swift Current, the Minister of Energy and Mines. 

The issue we’re dealing with today, Mr. Speaker, of course, is 

potash. It’s an issue that I am sure is on the minds of many 

people across our province today. 

 

At this time I want to express, in several ways, my support for 

this legislation. This legislation calls for quantity control over 

potash production in Saskatchewan – control to protect the 

industry and to protect jobs of individuals. 

 

I would first like to focus on the constituency that I represent, 

the constituency of Moosomin. Mr. Speaker, in our 

constituency we, too, have a mine, a mine located in the town of 

Rocanville. And at this time I, too, would like to welcome the 

members from the union local at Rocanville who have taken the 

time to come to Regina today because of their interest in potash, 

their involvement in potash, and the concern they have for the 

members and the men and women that they represent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the potash mine at Rocanville currently employs 

some 400 people. And as I was looking at one of the news 

releases today, that is two-thirds of the number of people 

employed in the New Mexico mines, the mines that have put up 

. . . lobbied their government to bring forth this legislation. 

 

The mine at Rocanville has a payroll, Mr. Speaker, of over $12 

million, a very significant input into that community and 

surrounding area. Of course, Mr. Speaker, the people in this 

community and surrounding areas depend on that money to 

keep their local economy thriving. You take a minute to drive 

through the community, and you can see what the resources of 

the money flowing into that community from the mine have 

done – from the rink that has been built, the artificial ice 

facilities, the swimming pool, and many other things within the 

community; it’s a very resourceful community. And, as well, 

Mr. Speaker, in our part of the province we are privileged to 

have a very high-grade highway, partly because of money from 

the potash industry. 

 

Families of those individuals employed at the mine depend on 

the mine, depend on the work in the mine for money for their 

survival. And that’s not just people in the local community; it’s 

people in the surrounding area, even small farmers. Small 

family farms survive because of the ability and the availability 

of work within the mine. 

 

In late June, Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of touring the 

mine in Rocanville. Mr. Garth Moore, the general manager, 

took us on the tour where I had the opportunity to see, 

first-hand, the resourcefulness of the employees of  

  



 

September 3, 1987 

2278 

 

that mine. Mr. Speaker, to ignore those families and to ignore 

those communities would be unforgivable. 

 

To the legislation put forth by this government to control the 

quantity of potash produced by this province, those families and 

communities can rest assured that they are not being ignored. 

Through this Progressive Conservative government, they are 

being given a long-term security because the members on this 

side of the House are taking action to protect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a number of years ago the Leader of the 

Opposition was quoted – what would happen if there was a 

downturn in the economy, if there was a downturn in potash 

and in agriculture, if we had faced such a crisis as we are facing 

today? And the quote was, Mr. Speaker, “That would be a 

disaster.” A very significant disaster, and we are facing a 

disaster, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Without any action, without taking . . . If this government stood 

by and didn’t take any action, many people – I believe it’s some 

3,600 families within this province – would be directly affected. 

And that would then reflect right throughout the province, not 

just the individuals directly but families and friends and 

neighbours within communities in this province. 

 

Over the past number of days, Mr. Speaker, the opposition has 

accused this government of not planning for the future. We 

have been asked: where have you been for the last seven 

months as this crisis in potash was unravelling? Well I can 

assure you, Mr. Speaker, that this government has indeed had 

their eye on the situation, that there has been long hours of 

discussion surrounding how to handle the situation, discussion 

which has led to the legislation that is being introduced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we in Saskatchewan, and indeed other potash 

producing regions, are faced with a situation where supply 

substantially exceeds demand. And the reality of the situation is 

that the over-supply problem may even worsen. My colleague 

from Rosthern indicated how back in the late ‘70s and early 

‘80s everyone was led to believe that there was no end in sight 

– just put another shaft down into the ground and produce 

potash; it’s going to sell for ever, and the market is going to 

continue to be there, and the price is going to continue to be 

there. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we realize the balloon has burst. Current 

forecasts suggest a reasonable supply-demand balance will not 

be achieved in the next five years. So, Mr. Speaker, we have 

today’s reality, an over-supply of potash that already exists. The 

depressed agricultural sector cannot provide a strong market. 

 

As I was driving in today, I was aware of the many farmers who 

are out harvesting their crop. And every one of us in this 

Assembly realizes that even as farmers are harvesting their 

crop, the farmers themselves realize that that crop is worth less 

than it was yesterday, which means that they’re going to have 

less to put out for input costs such as fertilizer, which is a 

derivative of potash. And, Mr. Speaker, the unfair tariffs 

imposed by the United States threaten to destroy the entire 

industry. 

In view of all these things, Mr. Speaker, the need to exercise 

measures to stabilize the situation over the years and, equally 

important, to take care of the immediate needs of the people 

involved in Saskatchewan’s potash industry today is evident. 

 

The Progressive Conservative government of Saskatchewan is 

not big on the idea of government intervention. But, Mr. 

Speaker, we are faced with a situation today where only such 

action will allow Saskatchewan to exercise her leadership role 

as the world’s largest exporter and the largest producer of 

potash in the free world. Mr. Speaker, without action 

Saskatchewan could expect to see mine closures, substantial 

additional job losses – many of them permanently lost, and 

further erosion of local economies and the provincial benefits 

which flow from a healthy and successful potash industry. 

 

(1615) 

 

The legislation we are introducing, Mr. Speaker, provides for 

responsible management of the potash resources of 

Saskatchewan. This legislation minimizes future risks of 

massive over-supply. It authorizes cabinet to establish the total 

volume of potash to be produced in Saskatchewan in any given 

period. And it creates a potash board charged with allocating 

the total allowable provincial production between producer and 

Crown interests. Mr. Speaker, this legislation ensures a fair 

return to the people of Saskatchewan from their resources. 

 

So at this time I take great pleasure in supporting the legislation 

brought forward by the member from Swift Current, fully. Mr. 

Speaker, I urge all members of this Assembly to support this 

legislation. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased this afternoon to enter into this debate. I’m not sure, 

right at this point, who’s got the floor though. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh yes, sorry. 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Thank you. 

 

I’m very pleased to enter the debate this afternoon because over 

the past few years I’ve come to know a good many potash 

workers and their families living in the towns of Clavet and 

Colonsay and Allan, and also the fact, Mr. Speaker, that I have 

several potash workers and their families living in my 

constituency of Saskatoon Mayfair. There’s no doubt about it 

that the industry is also of very special significance to the city 

of Saskatoon with the many spin-offs that occur. 

 

Today I’ve listened with interest to the opposition’s energy 

critic, the hon. member from Saskatoon South, and I couldn’t 

help but notice the worried looks on the faces of his colleagues 

– I think, really, looks of concerns about just how much out of 

touch this member is. But I think something more than that: the 

realization of the big mistake that the NDP made back in 1976 

when they took over so many of the potash mines. That was the 

big hand  

  



 

September 3, 1987 

2279 

 

of socialism at work. That big hand of socialism that was 

authored, really, by the member from Riversdale, soon to by 

crowned the new leader of the NDP. And I think in time, Mr. 

Speaker, that the residents of Saskatchewan will well remember 

who authored this legislation to take over the potash mines. 

They’ll remember that, I’m sure, when it comes time for the 

next election. They’ll also ensure that the PC government is 

returned to power. 

 

The energy critic and his colleagues like to try and cover up 

their bungling by talking about a lack of consultation by this 

government. Well let me assure you, Mr. Speaker, that there has 

been a lot of consultation with this, by this government, with 

the industry and with the farm groups in the United States and 

with American politicians. 

 

It’s been made quite clear, I’m sure, by the Minister of Energy 

and Mines in discussions in the last few days that there has been 

much consultation. And I would simply ask the members of the 

opposition: what consultation took place back in 1974 to ’76 or 

’75 and ’76 when they were taking over the farm land of the 

province. So they’re fine ones to talk about consultation. Their 

main idea was just to move in and take over and we’ll go on 

from here and let the big hand of socialism rule. 

 

Another interesting note that the member from Saskatoon South 

was making was talking a lot about guarantees. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I ask you: what guarantees have there ever been in the 

potash industry, what guarantees have there been? We can 

consider, when we go back over the years, that there never 

really have been guarantees in the potash industry as far as jobs 

are concerned. 

 

I can think of many times over the last six or seven years when 

those potash members living in Allan, and in Colonsay, and in 

Clavet, there was a lot of concern about whether or not they 

were going to retain their jobs. And we well know that there 

have been a lot of cut-backs and that there had been lay-offs and 

shut-downs, so the industry has been rather insecure, Mr. 

Speaker, for many, many years. So for the member opposite to 

suggest that this government should be including some type of 

guarantees for jobs in this new legislation is just a little bit out 

of line . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — With leave of the Assembly, I would like 

to introduce some guests that are very important to the province 

of Saskatchewan and indeed to this Assembly. And with leave I 

would like to introduce them to you and through you. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — In the Speaker’s gallery, Mr. Speaker, we 

have a group of individuals who are visiting western Canada 

from Japan. They’re in Saskatchewan and then into Alberta and 

British Columbia, and I would like to take this opportunity to 

introduce them. Mr. Shosuke Idemitsu who is president of the 

Idemitsu CoSan Oil Company; Mr. Shoji, manager and director 

of  

research and development; Mr. Suma, managing director of 

energy development; Mr. Shono, general manager in the 

Calgary office; Mr. Yoshimitsu Mimuroto, who is the coal 

project manager; and Mr. Sata, who is project manager and 

head of marketing. 

 

The Idemitsu company has invested significantly in Cigar Lake. 

They are doing research with the Saskatchewan Research 

Council on Kindersley heavy oil in terms of upgrading. They 

are involved in the four major energies of oil and gas, coal, 

thermo-electric, and obviously uranium. They employ 

approximately 50,000 people. Their annual budget is about 

three times the size of the Saskatchewan budget, Mr. Speaker. 

They are not insignificant when it comes to energy in the world. 

They are big investors, and they are big customers of ours. 

 

So I would like all of the Assembly to please extend a warm 

welcome to a very valuable trading partner for western Canada, 

and certainly for Saskatchewan. Say a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — And, Mr. Speaker, as a result of today, 

we put Mr. Idemitsu in the cab of a combine, and if anybody 

needs a good hired hand when it comes to harvest, he has 

offered to come back if the need arises. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 36 (continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

just review for a few minutes some of the things that have 

happened in the potash industry during the last few years so that 

the people of Saskatchewan will have a little bit better 

understanding as to what our situation really is today. 

 

We consider the fact that since the year 1981 industry revenues 

have been cut in half, and we can consider the impact that that 

has had on the lives of many people in this province, whether 

they’re directly involved or not. I’ve also mentioned the fact 

that there have been several cut-backs; there have been frequent 

shut-downs and lay-offs. Saskatchewan’s capacity utilization 

has fallen from a high of 100 per cent in 1980 to a low of 67 per 

cent today. 

 

Saskatchewan communities, Mr. Speaker, have lost almost 

1,000 jobs in the potash industry in the last number of years. 

I’m sure that if we think back to what some of my colleagues 

have indicated today, that when the hon. member from 

Riversdale announced his legislation some years ago, and made 

the statement that there wouldn’t be any job loss because of the 

government taking over some of the mines, we can see that 

indeed there have been many job losses since that time. 

Government revenues have dropped from $280 million in 1980 

to just $37 million in 1986. And, Mr. Speaker, the opposition 

wonders why certain cut-backs have been  

  



 

September 3, 1987 

2280 

 

necessary in this year’s budget. And I think if we consider in 

just that one industry alone, where we’ve had a tremendous 

shortfall in our revenues, it becomes quite obvious why 

cut-backs have been necessary in this year’s budget. 

 

The Potash Resources Act, as we have had presented in this 

legislature in the last few days, is a piece of legislature that is 

very important to the future of Saskatchewan. All of us in this 

legislature realize how important the potash industry is to the 

province of Saskatchewan. The Bill we are discussing today has 

been introduced to protect jobs, investments, and the very future 

of potash mining in this province. 

 

I remember that in the 1970s the people of Saskatchewan were 

told by the NDP administration that potash was a good 

investment. In 1975 we were told it was good for the future of 

Saskatchewan for the government to own potash mines. And we 

all remember the millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, of public 

money that was invested in public ownership of the potash 

industry. Well be that as it may, Mr. Speaker, we today have an 

obligation to protect the potash industry because the people of 

our province have become dependent on the resource revenues 

from that industry. 

 

This is a very difficult time for our potash industry and that is 

why this legislation is being . . . this legislature is being asked 

to pass the Bill entitled: The Potash Resources Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to take a few moments to review the 

circumstances that have created this crisis for Saskatchewan. At 

the same time, I wish to go on record as showing why The 

Potash Resources Act is a good piece of legislation, designed to 

build a healthy and viable potash industry for the future. 

 

All too often we see accounts of growing protectionism in the 

United States. Not a day goes by that there isn’t a press account 

about trade protectionism. Trade protectionism by politicians 

and vested interests in the U.S.A. is why we are here today 

considering the legislation before us – it was the protectionist 

moves of the New Mexico potash industry. The fact is that in 

February of this year two U.S. potash producers filed a petition 

with the U.S. Department of Commerce, asserting that potash 

was being dumped into the U.S. market by Canadian potash 

companies. Mr. Speaker, that was a protectionist move by the 

American potash industry. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we all know that the protectionist actions by 

the New Mexico potash producers set off a chain of events that 

resulted in the extreme duties on potash announced by the U.S. 

Department of Commerce. That announcement sent shock 

waves throughout Saskatchewan. As a result, we must now take 

decisive and firm action in defending Saskatchewan’s potash 

resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the very purpose of The Potash Resources 

Act introduced by the Minister of Energy and Mines. I should 

like to give special recognition to the Minister of Energy and 

Mines for the leadership that she has demonstrated in working 

so hard to defend our potash industry. The commitment of this 

government in  

standing with Saskatchewan’s potash companies and their 

employees in the battle against protectionism is a commitment 

that I am proud of. The Potash Resources Act will go a long 

way in ensuring a solid and viable future for Saskatchewan 

potash. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that this government is doing 

everything possible to defend our potash industry against the 

unfair American protectionist moves. The decisions by the U.S. 

Department of Commerce are unfair. It is unfair since some 

Canadian companies were judged by standards that the 

American companies themselves could not meet. As a matter of 

fact, a United States trade expert was quoted in The Wall Street 

Journal as saying, “If the same anti-dumping laws applied to 

U.S. companies, every after-Christmas sale in the United States 

would be banned.” 

 

So as you can see, the American federal trade authorities 

applied biased conditions in making their ruling on Canadian 

potash. It should be noted that the U.S. potash industry has seen 

a 20 per cent decline itself since 1980, and during that period of 

time the cost of producing potash in the U.S. has escalated 

tremendously. 

 

The United States Bureau of Mines says that American potash 

mines are running processing plants that are too small to 

achieve economies of scale. And yet, Mr. Speaker, the 

American potash industry blamed its troubles on Canada by 

way of protectionist actions. 

 

Americans are obviously suspicious of Crown corporations. 

They are foreign to the American way of life. A U.S. senator 

from New Mexico in a recent speech attacked the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan when he said, and I quote: 

 

From the beginning, the Saskatchewan government made 

clear that its control of the industry was necessary to ensure 

the implementation of its vision of socialism. 

 

The senator was, of course, referring to the NDP and their state 

control of the industry in the 1970s, yet we can see that such 

rhetoric only fuels the fires of protectionism in the U.S. today. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt the proposed duties on potash 

would cause significant harm to Saskatchewan. Potash 

protection could fall, lay-offs would increase, and mines could 

be shut down, all as a result of the protectionist moves in New 

Mexico and in Washington. We cannot allow that to happen. 

Thousands of jobs and millions of dollars of investment are far 

too important to ignore. 

 

The legislation before this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, is indicative 

of the leadership demonstrated by this government in protecting 

one of our major resource industries, that of potash. The Potash 

Resources Act will give the cabinet a mandate to set the overall 

level of potash produced in this province. It is essential to the 

long-range future of the industry that this regulatory mechanism 

be put into place. 

  



 

September 3, 1987 

2281 

 

As has been previously explained, the legislation will apply to 

all potash resources in Saskatchewan. It is a most responsible 

way to manage this resource. This province is the world’s 

largest exporter and producer of potash, Mr. Speaker, and that 

fact alone is reason enough for the legislation before us today. 

The Potash Resources Act is necessary to protect the future 

livelihood of potash workers, their families, and the industry 

itself. 

 

Economic reality dictates that, at a time like this, leadership is 

required. And, Mr. Speaker, this government has demonstrated 

that that kind of leadership in its actions to protect our 

province’s potash is necessary and is being provided. 

 

In the days ahead it will be crucial for all of us in Saskatchewan 

to put aside partisan considerations and stand together for the 

common good of our province. The future of our potash 

industry is far more important than partisan politics. What is at 

stake here is the very economy of our province. We cannot 

jeopardize the future of the entire industry through political 

moves. Together we must act in a decisive and bipartisan 

manner to pass The Potash Resources Act. 

 

The province of Saskatchewan can only maintain a viable 

potash industry in future years if legislation is in place that will 

provide for the effective management of that resource. 

Circumstances are such that now is the time to put a mechanism 

into place to guarantee a viable future for potash production in 

this province. It is the only way for this industry to survive in 

such a highly competitive world market-place. 

 

The market-place has become so volatile that protectionism in 

the United States has become quite acceptable to many people 

in industries in that nation. Protectionism in the market-place 

simply boils down to hard-boiled trade practices. 

 

The American potash producers are using their government and 

the International Trade Commission to protect the New Mexico 

potash industry and, Mr. Speaker, that is totally unfair. Yet we 

also recognize that fairness has gone out the window with the 

protectionist mood in America today. That is why I believe 

Saskatchewan must show strength and decisiveness in dealing 

with this situation. It would be a sign of weakness, a sign of 

defeat, if Saskatchewan did not present a strong and effective 

policy to protect Saskatchewan’s potash industry. 

 

I challenge anyone coming up with a better way to protect the 

future of Saskatchewan’s potash. And I say with confidence, 

Mr. Speaker, that those who are objective will see that the 

legislation before us is a most effective way to ensure the future 

of potash mining in this province. All too often during a time a 

crisis we hear the naysayers and prophets of doom and gloom 

jump to the centre of attention. These negative souls specialize 

in seeing the worst of a situation. They’re all too quick to 

criticize and to attack. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, a time like this requires vision and 

leadership, the ability to come forward with a plan of action to 

save a valuable resource industry. I cannot  

over-emphasize that the U.S. decision to slap preliminary duties 

on potash from Canada puts our industry at risk. Mine closures 

and job lay-offs are a real possibility. That is why this 

government has put forward The Potash Resources Act. The 

legislation is the first step in strongly protecting a resource that 

is an integral part of our provincial economy. All members of 

this legislature, I’m sure, will concur with me when I say that 

potash is vital to the future of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to be on record as speaking out strongly in 

support of the government in defending the potash industry in 

this province. I’m proud to support the Bill introduced by the 

Minister of Energy and Mines, and at the same time I implore 

on each and every member of this legislature to support this 

legislation. An industry crucial to the very economic livelihood 

of Saskatchewan is counting on this legislation. The future of 

over 3,000 potash workers and their families is at stake, and at a 

time like this we must cast aside the usual partisan political 

differences of this place and pass this Bill. 

 

I know there are many people in the city of Saskatoon, and 

indeed around Saskatchewan, who are watching these 

deliberations with anticipation. They are counting on us, Mr. 

Speaker, to save Saskatchewan’s potash industry. And for all 

those reasons, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the Bill and 

urge other members to do so. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 

it’s certainly my pleasure to enter into this debate this 

afternoon. And I would say at the outset that this is an important 

debate and it is a historic debate. 

 

And I know we, as legislators, stand in the Assembly, and we 

all too often think that all legislation that we pass, and all 

debates that we enter into, are of the utmost importance. And 

certainly I wouldn’t want to say that we take lightly any of the 

items that we debate in the legislature but, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 

think there is any question, I don’t think there is any doubt in 

any person’s mind in this legislature, or throughout the whole 

province of Saskatchewan, that this is indeed a timely and a 

very, very important subject that demands the attention and 

demands the debate by virtually all members of this legislature. 

 

And as such, Mr. Speaker, I have listened here with a great deal 

of interest, a great deal of care, to the arguments presented by 

the opposition – few as they may have been – and to the 

remarks made by members on this side of the House. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I do have to say that I am quite disappointed 

in the members of the opposition. I sat here and I listened while 

the Minister of Energy and Mines invited, in all sincerity, the 

members of the opposition to take a non-partisan approach to 

this issue of major importance to our province. I heard the 

Minister of Energy and Mines sincerely and openly ask them to 

put aside for the moment, to put aside their bickering notions 

and their compulsion to criticize at any costs. I heard the hon. 

minister relate to this House just how critical this situation  

  



 

September 3, 1987 

2282 

 

is, and why we need to present, as a Saskatchewan legislature, a 

unified voice, a unified voice of determination and a unified 

voice of strength, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have to say that I was very proud of our 

minister, and I was very proud of our government, and I was 

proud of Saskatchewan. I felt a great sense of hope, Mr. 

Speaker, that on this one issue – here we had a matter of such 

fundamental importance to our province and to the families of 

our province – that on this one issue, on this one issue, Mr. 

Speaker, we would be able to put aside the hard politics and the 

cynical verbal warfare. 

 

Rarely, Mr. Speaker, rarely does an occasion present itself that 

requires the fullest unity possible, the unity that a government 

sincerely comes forward to its opposition and says, join us for a 

time to protect our people. Rarely, Mr. Speaker, does that 

opportunity present itself, but it happened in this House, Mr. 

Speaker. And I am disheartened a little bit at the result of the 

minister’s decision to be open with the opposition, to invite 

them to put aside their cynicism, and I am even a little bit upset, 

Mr. Speaker, at the result. 

 

And I’ll maybe just relate to you, Mr. Speaker, some of the past 

history. Just no sooner had the minister resumed her seat than 

the NDP were on their feet, sharply partisan, arguing cynical 

distortions, totally rejecting the invitation that we had made to 

work together, and opting instead to play politics, to play petty, 

simple politics with the future and, indeed, the very economic 

survival of many of Saskatchewan families. 

 

The member for Saskatoon South, Mr. Speaker – and I hesitate 

to speak in his absence, but it’s important – the member for 

Saskatoon South began his remarks, his major address as they 

say, not with an effort to build a bridge between us so that this 

crisis could be addressed; not with any suggestions to improve 

the legislation; not a single suggestion, Mr. Speaker, to improve 

the legislation; not with any comment on the matter under 

discussion at all. That member, and I ask you, Mr. Speaker, to 

hear me on this one, that member opened his remarks with a 

gratuitous insult in an offhand personal attack upon our 

minister. 

 

Let me quote, Mr. Speaker, let me quote from Hansard the very 

first sentence that the member of the opposition stated on such 

an important fundamental issue. He said, Mr. Speaker, and I 

quote: 

 

The Minister of Energy attempted to give us a lesson in 

history, but it really had no relevance to the Bill whatsoever, 

and as a history teacher I certainly wouldn’t give her very 

good passing marks. 

 

Now here, Mr. Speaker, is a man who has heard an honest and 

an open appraisal of the situation. He hears a heartfelt invitation 

to him to put away political infighting; he hears the gravity of 

the situation for Saskatchewan families, and he gets up in his 

place, tells us that he finds no relevance in any of that, and calls 

the hon. minister a failure, as a history teacher. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if they want to force this Assembly to be 

partisan on this matter, I can tell you that I can be as partisan as 

the best of them. And when it comes to history lessons, if we 

want to talk about that, I would have to say the Minister of 

Energy and Mines taught an excellent lesson to the members of 

the NDP in the Swift Current constituency. She taught them a 

sound lesson in 1982, and she taught them a sound lesson in 

1986. And Mr. Speaker, every single person on this side of this 

House is extremely, extremely impressed with the Minister of 

Energy and Mines who is carrying a very, very important and 

fundamental Bill through the Saskatchewan legislature at this 

time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — And, Mr. Speaker, I guess we have to 

wonder why do the NDP have to revert to petty politics on 

something like this. I don’t know the answer, Mr. Speaker, but I 

would suspect it is because they are divided on this issue. I 

would suspect, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP on this issue are 

something like the Liberals on the Meech Lake accord. They 

don’t know which way to go; they don’t know which way to go. 

They are leaderless right now, Mr. Speaker, and I think the 

public of Saskatchewan have never seen the NDP in such 

shambles. 

 

I recall, Mr. Speaker, just a few days ago in the news, I believe 

it was Mr. Nystrom, one of the federal NDP members; well, he 

said: I think that Devine’s right; maybe they should put an 

embargo on potash. Then there was Mr. Hovdebo, I think, the 

MP from Prince Albert constituency. He said they should go 

another way. We have Mr. Blakeney who stood in this 

legislature, stood in the courts of the province of Saskatchewan 

and defended with a fervour, defended with a fervour, 

prorationing. And so one day, I think, just late last week, the 

ex-leader of the opposition, the member for Regina 

Elphinstone, says: I think prorationing is a good idea; I think 

that this legislation is a good idea. Then the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale, he came out with a different statement. 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP have never, never in their history, I don’t 

think, been in such a shambles on an issue – never before. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it comes at a time when there’s nothing more 

important in Saskatchewan, nothing more pressing in 

Saskatchewan today, as this particular Bill. And I find it 

extremely interesting, Mr. Speaker – and I know that we’re not 

supposed to comment on the numbers of people in the House at 

any given time, and I certainly won’t at this time – but generally 

speaking, I think the public of Saskatchewan know that there is 

very little interest by the NDP in this particular subject. They’ll 

stand up in question period, as they did here, I think last Friday 

or so, and say: get that Bill into the House; let’s debate it; get 

that Bill into the House; where have you been? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have the legislation forward here today, 

and I find it extremely interesting. And I want the public of 

Saskatchewan to know, I want the mine workers in every single 

mine across this land to know, that here today in the legislature 

not one member of the NDP has had the courage to stand up 

and debate this issue. And I ask you why, Mr. Speaker? I ask 

you why? The answer is,  

  



 

September 3, 1987 

2283 

 

Mr. Speaker, that the NDP do not know where they should go 

on this issue. The NDP know in their heart of hearts that the 

Devine government is right on with this issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — And if they don’t, Mr. Speaker, they 

argue that, well, that’s not correct – I see them shaking their 

heads. Well if they don’t feel that the Devine government is 

right on with this issue, why is it, Mr. Speaker, that they have 

not yet come forward with one concrete solution or one 

concrete suggestion? If you want to change the legislation 

somewhat, fine, stand up and say so. But they have not had the 

courage to do that, Mr. Speaker, because they have to revert on 

an issue of fundamental importance to petty politics. We have 

expressed to them, come forward with us, come forward with 

us. But no, Mr. Speaker, they revert to petty politics and just 

say, no, it’s no good, we don’t like it. But here again on another 

issue they have no solutions whatsoever. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Speaker, they got into a little bit of the history of potash, 

and they made mention that the problems all started in 1982 

with potash. Now, Mr. Speaker, every sound-thinking person in 

Saskatchewan, every reasonable-minded person knows that our 

government, or any government for that matter, has little 

control, little control over the market forces when it comes to 

prices of potash, when it comes to prices of agricultural 

products. So all of a sudden in 1982 the price starts to plummet, 

and the members opposite say, oh, it’s the Conservative 

members who are at fault. I ask, Mr. Speaker, just how foolish 

do you people think the people of Saskatchewan are? Do you 

think that they would possibly believe when you stand up and 

say just because the Conservatives took office that that was the 

problems with potash? Not one iota, Mr. Speaker. The public of 

Saskatchewan will not put up with that kind of petty politics. 

The public of Saskatchewan will not believe what you people 

have to say. 

 

They go on to say that, well, the government got into Canpotex 

and shouldn’t have been into Canpotex. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 

believe that the decision to remain in the marketing arm called 

Canpotex was a good one. And I must believe that if you 

examine the records, if you examine the records, you will find 

that this government, with the aid of the international marketing 

arm of Canpotex, has done a fairly reasonable job of marketing 

our potash overseas into international markets. 

 

You take a look at the country of China. Here again, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve done an excellent job. “Counter-trade for a 

major potash sale to China”; “Firm going all out to get China 

trade”; “Major potash sale to India”; “Potash sales worth 27 

million”; “Potash sale announced again to China.” Mr. Speaker, 

I think we have done a reasonably good job when it comes to 

marketing potash. 

 

And I think it should be known, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP 

voiced their opinion that the government or the potash producer 

should not be in Canpotex. Well, Mr. Speaker, I  

don’t think that is reasonable at all. I think that would be 

somewhat similar to saying that the farmers of the province, the 

farmers of the country, should get out of the Canadian Wheat 

Board. Does that make any sense whatsoever? I don’t believe it 

does, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t believe that the people of 

Saskatchewan believe that one bit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the potash industry, to the people of 

Saskatchewan, is an extremely important subject. I have heard 

talk in the legislature that we have in this province alone some 

3,000 potash workers. And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that it is 

incumbent upon any government to take whatever steps are 

necessary to protect the survival of those families. And, Mr. 

Speaker, if that means taking strong action, if that means taking 

firm action, I believe that those potash workers, to a man and to 

a woman, would say, you bet. We are going to back a 

government who is willing to take strong, firm action. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this legislation that we have before us today 

is not light, is not light legislation whatsoever. Mr. Speaker, it is 

very firm legislation, and I think that you will know that, Mr. 

Speaker, by the rebounding effects and the talk that is now 

coming out of the United States of America. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I say that we are not all that big a province; 

we do not have all that many people here; we are not a major 

threat to anyone when it comes to the great strength and power 

that we have. But when it comes to potash, you bet, Mr. 

Speaker, we are powerful. We command, I understand, 

approximately 40 per cent of the world market. And, Mr. 

Speaker, when you have that type of a market share you have 

some power; you have some clout, even into the big old United 

States. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people in the United States are starting to 

hear more and more about Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, 

you will find in the days to come that the American farm lobby 

groups will be coming onside with our government and going to 

the federal government in the United States and saying, well, 

Mr. Federal Government, I don’t think you should have put big 

dumping duties on the producers in Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I find it very, very strange that the members 

of the New Democratic Party, who traditionally have been 

anti-American, who traditionally have gone as far as actually 

burning flags on the steps of the Manitoba legislature, that those 

people would now side with the federal government of the 

United States and say, well, we don’t think it’s all that bad. (I 

find that very, very strange, Mr. Speaker, very strange that they 

would resort to siding with the American federal government 

because, my friends, that is precisely what you are doing when 

you are denying us the right to pass this legislation, or when 

you vote against it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the farm lobby groups in the United States 

will come and be very, very strong and very vocal in their 

support of what this government has done. They know that it 

takes firm action, firm action by this government to grab a hold 

of the big, old federal government of the United States and get 

their attention. 

  



 

September 3, 1987 

2284 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan, more 

importantly, are going to stand up and say: you bet; we elected 

you as a government, Mr. Speaker, in the fall of 1986 to stand 

up for the people of Saskatchewan, to stand up and be counted, 

Mr. Speaker. And they said to us in October of 1986: you are 

the legislators who will run this province. We have faith and we 

have trust in you that when it comes to important, fundamental 

issues in this province, that you will have the courage and the 

strength to take whatever actions are necessary. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it was clear, it was clear that they did not have that 

some faith and trust in the members of the New Democratic 

Party. 

 

But I don’t believe, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe, Mr. Speaker, 

that although the majority of people did not have that faith in 

the NDP that they ever would have believed that the NDP, on 

such an issue of fundamental importance to the people of 

Saskatchewan, would sit back, would sit back, not particularly 

in a big way, and take part in the debate, but sit back, revert to 

petty politics on such an issue. The people of Saskatchewan, I 

believe, are disappointed in the members opposite. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Not surprised. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Not surprised, no. Mr. Speaker, this 

legislation is firm legislation. This legislation will protect the 

families of Saskatchewan. This legislation, Mr. Speaker, in the 

long run, is in the best interest of the public of Saskatchewan, 

and I believe that we have their support today on this issue. I 

believe that if you take a look at some of the radio phone-in 

programs, I would think that you would find the vast, vast 

majority of people are saying: Mr. Premier, members of the 

Progressive Conservative Party, please stand up for the people 

of Saskatchewan; take that strong stance. That’s what the 

people are saying, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I find it even strange, even strange that the members of the 

opposite, who politically I must say from traditionally, have 

been quite astute. I find it strange that they would not have, for 

simple politics, grasped on to that and felt the mood of the 

people of Saskatchewan. But they are professional career critics 

who are designed to stay in that role for a good long time to 

come, and they cannot get out of that mode of criticizing just 

for the sake of criticizing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — So, Mr. Speaker, in summary . . . In 

summary, Mr. Speaker, this is an extremely important issue to 

the people of Saskatchewan. I do suspect that probably most of 

our members will be voicing their opinions, and they will be 

speaking from the heart, Mr. Speaker, on an issue, on an issue 

that has a great deal of history, a great deal of history about it, 

and I’d like to maybe digress just a little bit, Mr. Speaker, into 

the history of Saskatchewan potash and Saskatchewan politics. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I recall, and I was a very young man at the 

time, the debate that went on in this legislature for a long, long 

time over the subject of potash. And, Mr. Speaker, at the time, 

at the time it has been said by some that that was the right 

decision, and yet there were those  

of us across this province who said, no, that was not the right 

decision, at the time. We did not believe it at that time; we do 

not believe it today, and it was disastrous for this province. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I dare say, I dare say that had that decision 

not been made, two things, two things today would be quite 

different. Number one, Mr. Speaker, the treasury of this 

province would be far wealthier today had that investment not 

been made in potash. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are seeing today, Mr. Speaker, that an 

investment in this type of an industry is a risky business; it is a 

risky business. And, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the people of 

Saskatchewan, I don’t think for the most part they are large risk 

takers. I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, the majority of people in 

Saskatchewan like to jump into high risk ventures in the stock 

market or anything else. They are far more conservative. And I 

don’t believe that the mood of the public of Saskatchewan was 

judged well at all in 1976 when potash mines were nationalized. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I believe there were something like 4 or 

$500 million invested in this industry, and I shouldn’t use the 

word invested, because a good portion of it was already there. It 

was nationalized. It was bought. It was an industry that was 

there; it was developing and growing, but the members of the 

NDP chose to take our hard-earned tax dollars – none of mine, I 

was too young, but the hard-earned tax dollars of my parents, of 

my grandparents, invest them in something that was extremely 

risky, too risky for the taxpayers’ money to be invested in. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they took that money. They put 4, 5, $600 

million in it, and today, and over the last four or five years we 

have seen, we have seen the losses that can be incurred in 

industries like this. The members of the NDP had no business 

nationalizing that resource. Mr. Speaker, we could have taken 

that $500 million, that $500 million, invested it in 

conservative-type investments, and do you know what it would 

have done between 1976 and 1986? Invested in a conservative 

investment, a mutual fund if you like to take an example, of a 

Credit Union if you like, that investment would have tripled in 

the 10 or 11 years. So we would have had . . . A half a billion 

dollars invested would have gone to $1 billion and then 

doubled. There would’ve been $2 billion sitting in the bank here 

today, on a rainy day, Mr. Speaker, when we needed the funds. 

 

And that’s not taking into account, Mr. Speaker, the fact that 

those potash mines were still here. Those potash mines 

would’ve still produced. The government of the day, and today, 

would still have gained royalties, would have had taxation from 

those multinationals. And, Mr. Speaker, we would’ve been far 

better off had the government of the day never gotten into it. 

 

And I put forward to you, Mr. Speaker, that that is one of the 

key reasons that the members of the New Democratic Party 

have very little to say on this issue. Mr. Speaker, they have been 

silent on this issue. They know in their heart of hearts that the 

people of Saskatchewan, and even those that sided with the 

members of the NDP party, they know that even many of those 

people have said: you know, I guess a  

  



 

September 3, 1987 

2285 

 

lot of people were right, back in 1976; the government of the 

day should not have got into that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the majority of people in Saskatchewan today, I 

know, feel that way, and that, Mr. Speaker, is why, that is why, 

you see the members of the New Democratic Party sitting there, 

hanging their heads in shame, with little or no courage to stand 

up and speak on this issue. When they do stand up, Mr. 

Speaker, in the media or in question period, all they can do is 

criticize and complain. They cannot put forward any concrete 

suggestions, and I wonder why. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, once again I say that had decision not been 

made, number one, we would’ve had a lot more money in the 

bank; and number two, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that we 

would not be standing here today debating this particular issue. 

I don’t believe, I don’t believe that this anti-dumping legislation 

would’ve come forward in the United States had the 

government of the day in 1976, the NDP, never got into the 

potash industry. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is not just a politician standing, speaking 

off at the mouth. That, Mr. Speaker, is supported by some facts. 

And I would invite the members opposite to perhaps read a 

news article in the United States, and it was the Senator of New 

Mexico, the Senator from New Mexico – I believe his name is 

Domenici, who openly admitted that a good reason for his 

actions, for his encouragement to the federal government to 

impose these duties, was the fact that he didn’t feel that we 

were playing on a fair playing field, primarily because the 

government of 1976 got into the potash industry. Had that not 

taken place, Mr. Speaker, there would have been no 

anti-dumping duties imposed upon our Saskatchewan 

producers. And, Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s a sad, sad day when 

we have to hear items like that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do have a fair bit more to say on this . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, Mr. Speaker, it is very urgent. 

It is very urgent, Mr. Speaker, and I really wonder why the 

members opposite do not have the courage to stand up and 

debate. Their critic was the only member from the NDP party to 

stand up . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. It being 5 o’clock, this House 

will now stand recessed until 7 o’clock this evening. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


