













































September 18, 1987 Hansard


 

 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 September 18, 1987 

 

 

2663 

 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 

this legislature, Canada’s Ambassador-Designate to the 

People’s Republic of China, seated in the Speaker’s gallery, Mr. 

Earl Drake, and his wife, Monica. 

 

Ambassador Drake is from Saskatchewan, having been born in 

Saskatoon and received his B.A. and M.A. at the University of 

Saskatchewan. He went on to receive his Ph.D. from the 

University of Toronto. Mr. Drake has had a long and 

distinguished career in External Affairs. Has worked in such 

places as Washington, Paris, Jakarta, Karachi, and has had such 

positions as director of planning for CIDA (Canadian 

International Development Agency), executive director of the 

World Bank, Ambassador to Indonesia, and most recently, 

assistant deputy minister of the Asia-Pacific branch of External 

Affairs. 

 

As the assistant deputy minister, Mr. Drake was instrumental in 

developing the new federal-China policy which represents a 

major step forward in our economic relations with the People’s 

Republic of China. Mr. Drake is visiting with us to find out 

what our objectives are for China so that as a new ambassador 

we can work co-operatively in achieving these objectives. 

 

We in Saskatchewan are particularly proud to see that one of 

our native sons take on a important role of ambassador to the 

People’s Republic of China which holds great potential for both 

Saskatchewan and Canada as a whole. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all colleagues to please extend a warm 

welcome to Ambassador-Designate Earl Drake. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official 

opposition I would like to associate myself and my colleagues 

with the remarks of the Premier in welcoming the 

Ambassador-Designate. Certainly the work you undertake, sir, 

is very important work for Canada and for Canadians. I think 

we all agree that the People’s Republic of China, and that 

particular area of Asia, is a developing area and our relations 

with China present to us an opportunity not only for fruitful, 

cultural, and social exchanges but also a fruitful area for 

expanded trade and economic relations. We wish you well, sir. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 

introduce to you, and through you to the Assembly, seated in 

your gallery, some 50 students. They come from Stockholm 

school, the MacDonald School in Stockholm in the Saltcoats 

constituency. And for a little bit of clarification, there are 25 

from Stockholm and 25 visiting  

from Grand Falls, New Brunswick. I understand that they’re 

exchange students. 

 

And of course along with them are their teachers — or some of 

their teachers — Arlene Stensrud and Dale Herperger; 

chaperons Norman Elliott and Edna Langlais; bus drivers Don 

Shivak and Robert Herperger, who are no doubt being 

chaperons even if they are driving the buses down the road. 

 

I would like to meet with them after question period and visit 

with them a bit. I hope the question period will be enjoyable 

and informative. We wish that you have a safe journey back 

home tonight. You must have got up early this morning because 

you’ve come 150 miles, so that would get you up before 6 

o’clock, I’m sure. 

 

And I would like to ask all the members to welcome them to 

this Assembly in the usual manner. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

introduce two special guests to the Assembly. They are Jislaine 

Carey and Miriam Cramer. Miriam is a school exchange student 

from Hamburg, Germany. She has been in Saskatoon for two 

full weeks. She is part of a school exchange program and is a 

grade 11 student at Evan Hardy High School in Saskatoon. Her 

stay will last for three months, and she will be taking part in the 

school semester. 

 

The school student exchange program is arranged through the 

school board, as all hon. members know, and there are four 

schools in Saskatoon participating. In April of next year, her 

host, Jislaine Carey, will become an exchange student and will 

spend time with Miriam at her school in Germany. 

 

I would like to take the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, through you, 

to welcome both guests to the Assembly, and I would ask that 

they stand to be recognized. And I hope Miriam’s stay in 

Saskatchewan and Canada is enjoyable and educational. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Coopers & Lybrand Consulting Study 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, my question is 

to the Deputy Premier, the minister responsible for the Coopers 

& Lybrand government reorganization study. 

 

Two weeks ago, in your absence, the Premier took notice of a 

number of questions respecting this massive and expensive 

consulting study. And since the Premier took notice, I assume 

the Deputy Premier will be able to tell the taxpayers today: how 

many consultants have been involved in this study; when do 

you expect the work to be completed; and what is the budget for 

this massive consulting study? 

  



 

September 18, 1987 

 

2664 

 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, to answer the questions in 

reverse order. The work is essentially completed on the basic or 

prime study done by Coopers & Lybrand. And you’re right, the 

Premier did take notice of the question some days ago, and I’ve 

had the officials pull together everything to present to the 

House. Unfortunately, I forgot to bring it to the House today, so 

I will give you the undertaking to bring it next day, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. I frankly 

find this very hard to believe. You’re the minister that’s 

responsible for this study. Are you trying to tell the House that 

even though you’re responsible you have no idea of the cost of 

this reorganization study. This study is going to go down in the 

hall of fame for consultants, and you don’t know the cost of this 

one? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I didn’t say that at all, but 

I do know how critical the opposition can get when you don’t 

deal with absolute precision in these matters. And out of an 

abundance of caution I intend to have the document before me 

when I answer the question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. One of the 

people that is involved in this study is a former PC cabinet 

minister or — it was indicated that he was going to be involved 

— and I refer to one Tim Embury, Mr. Deputy Premier. Can 

you confirm that Mr. Embury, or one of the companies that he’s 

involved in, was, in fact, a part of this study, and can you tell us 

how much money of this consultant’s study is ending up in his 

pockets? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the prime consultant in 

this study was Coopers & Lybrand. There were several other 

consultants that were brought in for specific purposes during the 

course of the study, several of them from Saskatchewan, some 

of them from outside of Saskatchewan. Tim Embury may have 

been one of them. And I will be more than pleased when I have 

the material before me, to answer that question with more 

precision, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, final supplementary. I 

respect the Deputy Premier’s attention to detail in that he wants 

to make sure that we know exactly the dollars and cents 

involved in this study. But can he confirm, can he confirm that, 

in fact, that this study will cost about $3 million, and that, at a 

time when you’re cutting things like the children’s dental 

program and asking people to put up more for prescription 

drugs, your government is spending $3 million on simply the 

most massive government reorganization study that we’ve seen 

anywhere in this country. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I will not confirm that. 

As I said, I will deal with the matter next day. It’s interesting, 

and it’s shown here again today that we have in opposition a 

group of people who are clinging to the past like they’ve never 

clung to anything, and to move any initiative in change . . . Two 

things, Mr. Speaker — 

and they don’t like to hear this — two things are absolutely 

certain in this world. One is, the world will continue to change, 

and two, the NDP will continue to resist all change. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Privatization of SGI 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. speaker. My question was to be 

to the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance), but in her continuing problematic attendance in this 

legislature, I will address the question to the Premier. 

 

It deals with your government’s plans to sell off Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance. Can the Premier confirm that the 

government’s plans have progressed to the point where SGI 

executives, including the president, have been holding meetings 

in a number of communities around the province discussing the 

details of the sell-off of SGI? And can you now give the public 

the same information which has been shared at these staff 

meetings in locations such as Meadow Lake, North Battleford, 

Swift Current, and Moose Jaw? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, this question, or one 

similar to it, was raised earlier this week, and the answer was 

then as it is now: that in the throne speech of several months 

ago, it was made very clear that there were several candidates 

for public participation and/or privatization. And in the case of 

SGI, I think that it’s quite natural that you should take a look to 

see what the opportunities are as it relates to public 

participation and privatization. 

 

And like Saskoil, Mr. Speaker, I take a great deal of pride in the 

fact that we have in Saskatchewan the headquarters of a very, 

very major national oil company today. Now we have an 

opportunity, we have an opportunity as well, Mr. Speaker, with 

SGI to have headquartered in Saskatchewan a very, very large 

national insurance company. And I think we would not be 

responsible in this endeavour not to explore that possibility, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s exactly what’s happening, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if the president of SGI, and if other people from SGI are 

consulting with agents and policy holders and other people 

related to the insurance company, how can you possibly be 

critical of that? You stand up here and beat on us for not 

consulting; now they’re doing just that and you stand up hear 

and beat on them for consulting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Premier, you talk about the sell-off of SGI as somehow being 

public participation. But the public already owns SGI. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — And your privatization plan means little more 

than selling shares to people from outside of  

  



 

September 18, 1987 

 

2665 

 

 

Saskatchewan — people from Ontario and other places, big 

money people. 

 

More than 75 per cent of Saskoil, which you brought up, more 

than 75 per cent of the Saskoil shares are held by 

non-Saskatchewan residents. Within six months of the Saskoil 

sell-off, there was more than 25 per cent . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. I think 

we’re getting into debate here, and I’d ask the hon. member to 

. . . I think we’re getting into debate, and I’d ask the hon. 

member to direct his supplementary to the topic. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Within six months of 

the sale more than 25 per cent of the Saskoil employees were 

laid off. How do lost jobs and lost control benefit Saskatchewan 

taxpayers, Mr. Deputy Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the member talks about 

the people of Saskatchewan owning SGI. The people of 

Saskatchewan also own the potash corporation, but I don’t think 

you could give a share certificate to them. I don’t think they 

would take it at any price. Members opposite might take one. 

They took the taxpayers’ dollars, Mr. Speaker, back in 1975 and 

did just that, and look at the mess they got us into today. 

 

Now if the people of Saskatchewan really are to own SGI, they 

should have the share certificate in their hand, Mr. Speaker, not 

because some members opposite decided that we should have 

this unto ourself on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 

That’s not ownership, Mr. Speaker. That’s not ownership at all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Premier, we’re talking here about a vital public utility which 

Saskatchewan people have spent more than 40 years building 

up. And now you want to give it away without even consulting 

the public that’s going to be affected with this give-away of 

their company. Will you at least give the employees of SGI and 

the public of Saskatchewan this guarantee: that before you 

make a final decision to proceed with the sell-off of SGI, you 

will submit the full details of this decision to public hearings so 

everyone in Saskatchewan can have their say? You know, it’s 

everyone’s insurance company, Mr. Deputy Premier, and it’s 

just not yours to sell. Will you at the very least give that 

commitment for public hearings so that we can all have a say? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, he talks about this 

organization being built over the last 40 years, and I think to 

some degree that’s true. I can remember not that many years 

ago it was a loser, Mr. Speaker. In the last four years that 

company has been turned around and it is now, I think, a very 

good insurance company. I’m glad to hear the members 

opposite put on the record their position on this. I’m glad to 

hear the members opposite . . . They’re against, they’re against 

any examination of the possibility of public participation or 

privatization with SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), 

with the possible  

exception, Mr. Speaker, of the member from Riversdale who 

was on television the other day saying that, well I don’t object 

to public participation of SGI. What I worry about, he says, is 

control moving out of Saskatchewan. So we may have the 

support of the member from Riversdale, but not the rest of 

them. I’m not entirely sure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that they are very hypocritical — at one 

moment saying, you guys are not consulting, and now that we 

are consulting, they beat on us for consulting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I was 

interested in the observation of the Deputy Premier that the 

public couldn’t own anything unless they had a share 

certificate. 

 

And I’m wondering whether the Deputy Premier will give us 

some information on when he proposes to distribute share 

certificates with respect this legislative building and with 

respect to the University of Saskatchewan. Or does he take the 

position that the public doesn’t own them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — On potash we could just start up the 

press, and it would never end. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the question was offered with some degree 

of jocularity, and that’s how I will receive it. 

 

But I did want to respond to the question just prior to the Leader 

of the Opposition because I didn’t get finished before you sat 

me down. The question was: when will you hold public 

hearings, or will you commit to holding public hearings? Mr. 

Speaker, we will hold public hearings to the same degree — 

and maybe more — but at least to the same degree as members 

opposite held public hearings on the take-over of potash. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have some . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Oh, yes. Okay. The Leader of the Opposition. 

Sorry. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who’s running the House? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I’m running the House, and I’m allowing the 

Leader of the Opposition his supplementary. That’s the bottom 

line. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to confirm the 

last comment of the member for Souris-Cannington — just 

want to confirm it. He says that the procedure will be the same 

as with respect to the acquisition of potash mines. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the Deputy Premier — he will know  

  



 

September 18, 1987 

 

2666 

 

 

that there was a debate on the issue of potash acquisition which 

went 30 or 40 days in this House before anything was done. 

Will you guarantee that there will be similar opportunity for 

debate before you divest this province of SGI? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, hon. members can debate 

it for 40 days if they want, but I don’t want to let the Leader of 

the Opposition get away with putting words in my mouth. He 

said, we will deal with . . . he said, I said that we would deal 

with this in the same way as we dealt with the acquisition of 

potash. I didn’t say that at all. I said we would conduct at least 

as many public hearings relative to this as you did with your 

nationalization of potash. 

 

The second thing that will be significantly different, Mr. 

Speaker, is we will not be forcing the people to buy shares with 

a cannon in their ear, Mr. Speaker, as you did when you took 

over the potash industry in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Federal Process of Tax Reform 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the Premier, or the Minister of Finance, with respect to the 

federal process of tax reform in this country in which the 

provinces will be involved. 

 

That process seems to be moving ahead, although progress is 

hard to determine. And I’m wondering if the Minister of 

Finance can give us his assurance that in preparing the 

Saskatchewan government position in response to the federal 

proposals for tax reform, that there will be in this province the 

publication of a response document that the people of 

Saskatchewan will have an opportunity to receive and review 

and to comment upon before the province of Saskatchewan 

takes a final position in relation to the federal proposals for tax 

reform. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t rule out that 

possibility. There is some difficulty with it, and that is that the 

positions of the federal government are going through 

discussions with a wide-ranging group of interests and people, 

and at some stage we may not get a crystallized federal position 

until near the end of tax reform, and whether we have the ability 

to respond at that time, I don’t know. I don’t rule out the 

suggestion of the hon. member. 

 

I have indicated in the past that we do have a task force within 

the Department of Finance which is prepared to try and respond 

to inquiries from the public, do research on specific issues if 

necessary. I, as well, do not rule out the possibility of public 

hearings on that. To date the issues that have been brought 

forward have been fairly narrow and can be dealt with by those 

involved in the tax advising process. But I don’t rule it out; 

there is some difficulty. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, specifically among the federal 

proposals there was a suggestion for transferring at least some 

farm tax accounting from the cash basis to the  

accrual basis, and there has been at least the suggestion, if not 

the specific proposal, of the imposition of a sales tax with 

respect to food. Could I have the minister’s specific assurance 

that those two ideas will be opposed by the province of 

Saskatchewan — the accrual system of income tax accounting 

for farmers, and the imposition of a sales tax on food? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — With regard to the sales tax on food, I have 

stated unequivocally that I and the government do not support 

the sales tax on food. Secondly, with regard to the change in 

accounting methods with regard to agriculture, the government 

is getting two views on this, quite frankly, from those advising 

farmers. We are asking for more input before we take a 

position, but no position has been formally made at this time. 

 

Inflation Rate in Regina and Saskatoon 

 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Premier. Mr. Speaker, for the second month in a row 

Saskatchewan’s families have suffered the highest inflation rate 

in Canada. Statistics Canada reports this morning that the 

national inflation rate is 4.5 per cent, whereas Saskatoon’s 

inflation rate is 5.7 and Regina’s is 6.2 per cent. 

 

Statistics Canada also says, Mr. Speaker, that these huge 

increases in the inflation rate . . . or that the inflation rate is due 

to huge increases in medical and pharmaceutical products and 

in gasoline prices; in other words, due to this government’s 

policies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we can say every time 

we rise that the Health budget is up, and it’s up over 63 per cent 

from ’82, and it’s the largest in the history of Saskatchewan — 

just to make the record straight — so that in fact it’s larger. 

 

Secondly, as I said before, the reason that you will see on an 

annual average base an increase, is because in the statistical 

analysis they do not count the rebate with respect to the drug 

program, and the hon. member knows that. They don’t count it. 

 

If you look to the month-to-month change, it’s zero for 

Saskatoon and 0.1 for Regina, which is right . . . which is very 

reasonable. But you look over a year’s average, they’re going to 

take into account the new drug program, but they don’t bring 

into effect the fact that there is a rebate. 

 

Now there’s an 80 per cent rebate, Mr. Speaker, which is very 

significant. And the hon. member will mention that, and she can 

for the next three or four or five months as she watches that 

average work us through an annual basis.  

  



 

September 18, 1987 

 

2667 

 

 

Month to month it’s 0.0 rate of an increase in Saskatoon, 0.1 in 

Regina, which is not extremely significant when the average 

overall is 4-something. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I point out again to the hon. member that the 

80 per cent rebate on the drug program is not counted 

statistically, and obviously it will have an impact at the end of 

the year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Simard: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The Premier 

knows that that 80 per cent rebate doesn’t trigger in until the 

deductible has been taken up, and for that reason it’s impossible 

to include that in the statistics. He knows that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The fact of the matter is, he can fool around with the figures in 

whichever way he likes. The fact of the matter is, from on a 

year-to-year basis the inflation rate in Saskatchewan is higher 

than Canada’s national inflation rate. And the facts are that 

Saskatchewan families are suffering from that government’s 

policies. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Are you putting 

your question now? 

 

Ms. Simard: — I’m asking the Premier: when can 

Saskatchewan families expect relief from your government’s 

government-fuelled inflation? When can they respect relief 

from the fact that your government is decreasing their 

purchasing power? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member can stand 

there knowing full well the NDP, the NDP can holler today 

when they’re in opposition. And when they had a chance in 

government and people were facing things like 20 per cent 

interest rates and all the small business and all the home owners 

were crying, where was the NDP — where were they? 

 

When you look, Mr. Speaker, when look at interest rates, when 

you look at today, they can say there now: oh, it’s the past, the 

past. But the past is their record, Mr. Speaker. The past will be 

the record that will haunt farmers and small business and home 

owners for the history of Saskatchewan, because you talked 

cheap; you talked cheap; you could borrow money and buy 

potash mines, but you — you an laugh today — but you 

wouldn’t protect home owners; you wouldn’t build hospitals; 

you wouldn’t build a new agriculture college; you wouldn’t 

build brand-new technical schools; you wouldn’t protect the 

public. 

 

And today when there’s an 80 per cent rebate, and you know 

that it isn’t counted, you’ll even stand up and say: but, Mr. 

Speaker, that isn’t fair. Well, Mr. Speaker, they know that it’s 

actually a fact that the 80 per cent rebate isn’t counted, and they 

know that they didn’t protect people. We do, Mr. Speaker, and 

that’s precisely why they’re sitting over there, to stay there for 

some time, and we’re here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the 

Premier, and I want to ask him about the present. And the 

present, Mr. Speaker, is simply . . . The present simply is this, 

Mr. Speaker, that since this government took office in 1982, the 

new tax load on a family of four has increased by $2,160 a year. 

And on top of that, Mr. Speaker, the property taxes of this 

province have reached unbearable levels because of policies of 

that Premier who talks about the past. 

 

I say to the Premier and I ask him, Mr. Speaker: with tax 

increases of $2,160 a year on a family of four, and with 

property taxes going up, and with health-care costs going up, 

and with students being refused an opportunity to go to 

university and technical institutes, how can he say, how can he 

say that this government is protecting the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 

doesn’t want to talk about the past, and now he doesn’t want to 

talk about the present. At the present, Mr. Speaker, we have the 

second lowest tax rate in Canada — the second lowest tax rate 

any place in the nation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — So if he wants to talk about the present, 

let’s compare our tax rate to anybody else in Canada, including 

the NDP, if he wants to talk about the present. If he wants to 

talk about the past, he didn’t deal with the problems with 

respect to high interest rates that just crippled families across 

the country and across the province. He didn’t do that. And to 

date our administration is better than his because we have the 

second lowest tax rate any place in Canada. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I point out to the hon. member — we built 

new institutions for students; we built a new college of 

agriculture; we build a new technical school; we built new 

rehabilitation centres, Mr. Speaker. And we will expand the 

international offices and international capacity world-wide, 

including China, including Japan, and other places. 

 

So today, Mr. Speaker, the record is better than it was in the 

past: in health it’s better; in education it’s better; and in taxes 

it’s better, Mr. Speaker, and they’re afraid to admit it. They’ll 

just stand there and say, well first it’s the past, and then it’s the 

future. You can get them on either one. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, to the Premier. Mr. 

Premier, you put the taxes up. You closed the doors of our 

university and our technical institutes to the students who want 

to get an education. I ask you: when are you going to come to 

your senses and consider the needs of Saskatchewan people and 

put the priorities on health care so that people can afford to get 

it, and universities and technical schools so our students can go 

there and get their education. 

  



 

September 18, 1987 

 

2668 

 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 

knows that there’s more capacity for education in the province 

of Saskatchewan today than there was in the past, Mr. Speaker, 

and there are more new institutions, and there are more 

technical schools and more spaces in the rural, and he stands up 

and he says we have more kids interested in going to college. 

Well that’s tremendous. That’s exactly what . . . He would 

rather have them on welfare. 

 

The opposition is against welfare reform. He’d rather give them 

$1,000 a month, put them downtown and say, just live 

downtown on welfare — and they ask for that. They’re against 

welfare reform. They’re against new technical institutions, the 

new education. They’re against change unless it’s the 

government. As the Hon. Deputy Premier says: hold a cannon 

to their head. 

 

I will summarize, Mr. Speaker, by saying: you want to look at 

tax load in the province of Saskatchewan, then you want to look 

at educational facilities. Look at Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

the total with respect to total tax income for the province of 

Saskatchewan. We, Mr. Speaker, are better than anybody in 

Canada except for one, the province of Alberta. 

 

With respect to educational facilities, Mr. Speaker, we are 

expanding more than the NDP ever thought of. We’re providing 

new rehabilitation centres, new technical schools, new 

university colleges, Mr. Speaker. The opposition doesn’t want 

us to address welfare reform, or education, or address the fact 

that health care has expanded 63 per cent. They just hide in the 

past and are afraid of the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, 

and with leave of the Assembly, I would like to move, seconded 

by the member from Regina Elphinstone: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution the 

individual has made to his community, his constituency, 

the province, and to the country. 

 

Niles Leonard Buchanan, who died in Regina on 

September 16, 1987, was a member of this Legislative 

Assembly representing the constituency of 

Notukeu-Willowbunch from 1944 to 1956. Mr. Buchanan 

was born on June 12, 1909, at Browns Valley, Minnesota. 

He came to Canada and Saskatchewan in 1913 with his 

parents, who began a homestead near Spring Valley. 

 

Mr. Buchanan received his early education in Spring 

Valley before attending high school and normal college in 

Moose Jaw. Upon graduation  

Mr. Buchanan became a teacher and became involved in a 

teaching career that lasted 14 years. Mr. Buchanan was 

also a farm organizer, active in the co-op association as a 

secretary, president of the Assiniboia teacher 

superintendency, and Saskatchewan Wheat Pool delegate. 

 

Mr. Buchanan served his country during the Second World 

War as a lieutenant of the King’s Own Rifles in Canada. 

He earned his commission in 1943. Mr. Buchanan had a 

keen interest in politics as a result of his belief in his 

family tradition. He was a relative of James Buchanan, 

president of the United States of America. Before his 

election to the Assembly in 1944, Niles Buchanan 

contested the 1940 federal election in the constituency of 

Wood Mountain. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincerest sympathy with 

the members of the bereaved family. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add a few 

words to those of the Premier with respect to Niles Buchanan. 

As the Premier has indicated, Niles was a member of the House 

from 1944 to 1956 — three terms, 12 years — and prior to that 

had been a federal candidate in 1940 for the CCF (Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation). 

 

Niles had a distinguished career in the army during World War 

II and was very active not only in teaching but certainly in the 

political arena. I knew Niles when I was a young public servant 

around the buildings, these buildings, in the early 1950s when 

Niles was a member of the legislature. 

 

As members will have heard before, as a young public servant I 

had a number of duties to perform with respect to the then 

Crown Corporations Committee, and got to know the members 

of that committee because of the nature of the operation of the 

committee at the time. 

 

Niles was certainly very active in our party. Not only did he 

stand at election time but was active in the councils of the party. 

 

I had an opportunity perhaps a year ago to listen to a tape that 

Niles recorded of the early 1940s surrounding the selection of 

Tommy Douglas as leader of our party, which was not without 

controversy. Our party has controversies as well as others . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Not this time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Yes, perhaps not this time, but 

certainly the lively ferment within the party at that time was 

recorded by Niles on this tape, and I am sure will be of interest 

to students of that particular period of Saskatchewan history. 

 

Niles was a diligent member. Because of his lively interest in 

political issues, he kept active not only in his constituency but 

also in the legislature. 

  



 

September 18, 1987 

 

2669 

 

 

Subsequent to his no longer serving in the legislature, he 

continued his interest in politics. And I have, until 

comparatively recent times, within the last couple of years, I 

will have had discussions with Niles on political issues. I think 

it’s to be hoped that those of us who, when we lay down active 

politics, will continue to maintain an interest in public affairs 

and maintain a sufficient interest so that we can have lively and 

controversial opinions on the issues of the day. 

 

Such was Niles, and I’m sure that those who recall his 

contribution would wish to join with the Premier in thanking 

him for his contribution to the public life of this province and to 

extending the condolences of this House to the bereaved family. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I would want to associate 

myself with the remarks just made by the Premier and the 

Leader of the Opposition about the late Mr. Buchanan. 

 

It is my honour to represent in this House today a large portion 

of that constituency that used to be known as 

Notukeu-Willowbunch, and which Mr. Buchanan wished to 

represent. 

 

I had the opportunity to meet Mr. Buchanan only recently, in 

fact when he visited here in this Assembly a few weeks ago and 

was introduced to all hon. members at that time. Therefore, I 

cannot say that I knew him well, but many of my constituents 

fondly and warmly recall Niles Buchanan. Some of the 

highlights of his record and career in public life have been 

recalled in the House today, and I want to join with all members 

in saluting his contribution to his constituency and to 

Saskatchewan. We pay tribute to his memory, and we extend 

our sincere sympathies to his family in their bereavement. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. I wish to make a 

very few comments. I have to confess I did not know Niles 

Buchanan as a member — quite obviously I’m not of that age 

— and I don’t know a whole lot about his work as a member. 

 

I did get to know him well when he lived in Regina. He was one 

of those people who was always interested in the current issues, 

whether it be potash today or Pioneer Trust of another year, he 

was always interested in them. 

 

I think you’ll agree, Mr. Speaker, that anyone who has been in 

elected office for any period of time often receives a good deal 

of advice from a lot of different people. Inevitably, the advice 

of some will be worth more than that of others, and Niles 

Buchanan was one whom I always had time for. I found his 

comments insightful; he followed the events closely; he was 

close to his community; he had the experience of a member, 

and thus, his comments were well worth listening to and I 

always enjoyed it. 

 

And this in a sense reflects what my colleague for Regina 

Elphinstone said; he also lived very much in the future. I 

actually got to know him before I knew he had been a member. 

About the third or fourth time I met him I understood he had 

been a former member. He never talked about that. He lived 

very much in the future, always interested in issues of today, 

and particularly  

tomorrow — what this world was going to look like when his 

grandchildren were his age. He would often ask that as a 

prelude to discussion of any issue. He lived in the future. He 

exhibited the compassion and the idealism that were really 

hallmarks of the early Douglas government. 

 

I very much enjoyed my association with Niles Buchanan. I 

have profited a good deal from him. I think Saskatchewan, as a 

society, profited a good deal from the services of Niles 

Buchanan, and I think we all owe him a debt of gratitude, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In his 

retirement Niles Buchanan and his wife Emmalou moved to 

Regina Victoria constituency. It was my great privilege to have 

been befriended by Mr. Buchanan and Mrs. Buchanan. I had 

many opportunities to sit and visit with him and to benefit from 

his observations and comments on the lie of politics and of our 

society. 

 

(1045) 

 

It was my great pleasure to have been able to read his 

unpublished memoirs which he made available to some people. 

In reading through those memoirs, some things impressed me 

and told me a great deal about Niles Buchanan.  

 

One was the absolute dedication to his cause — the cause of 

democratic socialism. Enough was witnessed and was clear 

from the countless hours and days and weeks and years that he 

spent working to organize people, to help them to improve their 

lives, to improve this province. And all this work, at many 

times at the very edge of poverty, and many instances of where 

the only way that he would be able to attend a meeting, if the 

people at the meeting took up a donation to pay for the gas so 

that he could get back home again, and he always counted on a 

good meeting to be able to get that money to be able to get back 

home. 

 

There was also a great love of country and of our institutions. 

Whatever his feelings might have been, and continued to be, 

about the political direction of this country and the need to 

make changes in the institutions of this country, he believed that 

in the face of an external threat by the Nazis in that instance, 

that we should unite and come together to defend our country, 

as witnessed by his war service. He was very proud of that 

record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you will note that if you look at the pictures of the 1944 

Legislative Assembly members on the ground floor of this 

building, that Niles Buchanan was one of two members at that 

time who was proud enough and wanted to wear his uniform 

when the legislature opened in 1944. 

 

He also had a very strong belief in the Legislative Assembly 

and the workings of the Legislative Assembly. And he evinced 

at times some concerns about the power of executive branch, 

and the need for all members to play a greater role in the 

Legislative Assembly itself. He was very strong in his beliefs 

and his convictions, and thought that there should always be a 

strong role for the individual members, whether it was on the 

government side or on the opposition side, to involve 

themselves in the  

  



 

September 18, 1987 

 

2670 

 

 

governing of this province. 

 

His interest in politics has, as has been indicated, continued. He 

watched this House diligently on the local cable channel. He 

was here, I believe it was on June 26, when he was introduced 

to members of the House. He continued to attend public 

meetings and to offer his insights and his comments and his 

advice on the politics of the day. 

 

Mr. Buchanan had his share of health problems in the last few 

years, but it never seemed to defeat him. No matter what kind 

of condition those health problems might have put him into — 

and they were tough ones for him — there was always the 

spirit, and there was always a spark, and he always fought back. 

He never let the adversity of health defeat him. He always 

managed to fight back and always managed to look forward to 

the future. And I think in that way his latter years were so 

typical of his life — a life of working hard, and a life of 

commitment, and a life of always wanted to look to the next 

day. 

 

Niles Buchanan will be missed by all those who knew him, 

including, I might say, the residents of Embury Heights senior 

citizens’ high-rise on Winnipeg Street in my constituency 

where he lived in the last few years. But he will be especially 

missed by Emmalou and all of the Buchanan family. I join with 

the previous speaker to express my condolences to the family, 

Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I recall the first times that I 

met Mr. Niles Buchanan was when I was a youth about this 

Legislative Chamber. And because of interest in political life of 

the province at that time, I would be here quite often and see 

him in the Chamber. And I got the impression from Mr. Niles 

Buchanan, having met him a number of times over the years, 

that he had an aura of genuine interest in people, and he 

displayed that at any time that I was in association with him. 

 

Mr. Niles Buchanan was a peer of my father, J.H. Brockelbank, 

and I can recall many times my father speaking warmly about 

Mr. Niles Buchanan and the dedication that he had to his work 

as a member of this Assembly. 

 

And it’s with a feeling of honour that I take part in this few 

words of sympathy to the family, and acknowledgement of the 

career, at least the political career, of Mr. Niles Buchanan, as I 

knew it. And I’m pleased to associate myself with the remarks 

of members on both sides of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like 

to join with my colleagues in the House who have expressed 

their condolences at the passing — to the family and friends of 

Mr. Niles Buchanan at his passing. 

 

I just recently got to met Mr. Buchanan, but I felt that I knew 

him through his mother who I had the opportunity to visit and 

have tea with over the years in Prince Albert. A number of Mr. 

Buchanan’s family live in the Prince Albert area, and through 

my contact with them I came to understand why the member 

from Regina Victoria would  

refer to Mr. Buchanan as a fighter. Certainly his mother was 

strong in her convictions as a social democrat, and through 

those convictions passed on, I’m sure, some of the attributes 

that Mr. Buchanan was able to share with members, or people 

of this province, and through his work in the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

So I too would like to join with other members and offer my 

condolences to the friends and the family of Mr. Buchanan. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also want to 

join the members of this House who have spoken about Mr. 

Niles Buchanan on his passing. As has already been said, Mr. 

Buchanan was involved in politics and public life in many other 

ways — as an MLA, as a candidate, and in a number of other 

activities. 

 

I did not know him as long as some of the members who have 

spoken before me. I first met him in 1984, but since that time I 

came to know him very well, because on many occasions he 

and I discussed the interests of the country, as he saw it, and the 

interests of Saskatchewan as he saw it, not only in the present 

but also what it ought to be in the future. 

 

I learned to admire his interest in public affairs very much. I 

also learned to respect his wisdom and the advice that he was 

able to give me on the times that we spoke about the things that 

we had a lot of mutual interest in. He remained interested and 

involved until his passing. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that this is an example of a person who 

lived a full life, but while he lived that life and made a very rich 

contribution, he never lost sight of what the future ought to be. 

This is the kind of an individual who thought about today, but 

also was very concerned about doing the things today so that 

tomorrow people could also have a good life and live with the 

kinds of means available to them that were necessary to live the 

good life. 

 

His son Robert, and his daughter-in-law Gloria, live in my 

constituency in Regina North East. I know them very well. 

They are friends of mine, and I know that they will be missing 

their father very much, as will many others who knew him so 

well. And to them and to the rest of the bereaved family, I want 

to extend, along with everyone else in this House, my 

condolences on the passing of Mr. Niles Buchanan. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — By leave of the Assembly, I move, 

seconded by the member for Regina Elphinstone: 

 

That the resolution just passed, together with a transcript 

of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased member, be 

communicated to the bereaved family on behalf of this 

Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

  



 

September 18, 1987 

 

2671 

 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 36 — An Act respecting the Potash Resources of 

Saskatchewan 

 

Clause 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

we have spent a considerable amount of time last evening going 

over some of the details of the Bill and some of the concerns 

that were raised by the member from Riversdale, and also the 

Energy critic, the member from Saskatoon South. 

 

And so what I want to do is just to crystalize a few of the 

concerns that we have in the general clause in respect to the 

Bill, and we will, as we proceed, be offering, as was indicated, 

some amendments to the Bill, which I think will improve the 

Bill as we perceive it. 

 

I guess our major concern, Madam Minister, is the sweeping 

powers that the Bill provides and gives to the cabinet and to the 

board. And what our concern here is that if in fact you took this 

Bill and if you took the worst case scenario, that is the potential 

for abuse of power, I ask you, Madam Minister: is it not 

possible — I’m not alleging that the government or you would 

do it, but I’m just saying, in respect to the bare bones of the 

Bill, the extent of power here is so extensive that indeed it could 

be used without recourse by any of the participants in the 

industry, no recourse whatsoever — and under the worst case 

scenario is it not possible, in your view, that mines could in fact 

be completely discriminated against, be completely shut down, 

and indeed some mines could be destroyed? 

 

Would that be a fair interpretation of the worst case scenario in 

respect to the extensiveness of the power that is set out, and in 

particularly in section 18, Madam Minister? 

 

(1100) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the question that the hon. 

member from Quill Lake raises is, I think, a fair question as it 

applies to all legislation. I think the potential for abuse exists in 

any piece of legislation brought into any Legislative Assembly, 

or the House of Commons, for that matter, in Ottawa. 

 

If I could refer the member to section 18(3), I think that the 

answer to his question is basically one of “no” in this case. And 

I ask him to look at 18(3) and the criteria that is laid out, and it 

is very specific in showing how the allotment will take place. It 

also, Mr. Chairman, refers to each potash mine. It does not 

allow for discrimination in terms of the criteria, and from that 

aspect of it I believe that it will be done in a fair and equitable 

manner. 

 

As I stated earlier, I suppose if you took any piece of legislation 

to its fullest extent, it would, indeed, allow for the abuse, but I 

believe that this legislation has put in some of the specific 

criteria in order to minimize that potential. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I’ll be coming to the specifics but, Madam 

Minister, since you referred to a specific section, I take it that 

the chairman will allow me the privilege of just raising further 

concerns because that is, indeed, the section, and we’ll come to 

it, that sets out the criteria. And I agree the criteria is set out. 

But will you agree that in setting out a criteria that there still is 

broad interpretation of the application of the criteria. And if I 

could be more specific, it goes on to such generalizations in the 

section: 

 

any additional factors that may be prescribed. 

 

And it doesn’t even say who will prescribe them, may be 

prescribed by the board, and that is a total unfettered discretion 

in the hands of the board. And I’m raising it just from the 

standpoint of a basic concern. 

 

I’m reluctant to agree wit that section without having, as we 

normally do, a . . . if you say it’s going to be fair and there will 

be no abuse, and maybe there won’t be, and hopefully not, but 

you do have a very general provision there — any additional 

factors. And also in an interpretation of criteria under which 

they make the decision as to the amount of production — 

production by each mine — there is an interpretation in respect 

to the criteria, and also the additional factors. 

 

And so I say to you that while you can give me the assurance 

that the board will be fair, I think in looking at it, and I hope 

you will agree, that even if a criteria is set down, there is room 

for interpretation of the application of criteria. Would you agree 

with that? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, as I stated earlier, the 

potential for abuse exists in all legislation. We believe, in laying 

out this legislation and the specific criteria, that we have, in fat, 

alleviated that potential. I want to go on record and make it very 

clear to the hon. members from Quill Lakes, Mr. Chairman, that 

I view this legislation, and particularly section 18(3), as being 

one of being fair and equitable. I would also suggest to the 

member from Quill Lakes that for a board in this particular 

situation to not be fair and equitable, we would in very short 

order hear from the industry and the particular mines. And 

that’s covered in the legislation in terms of the appeal to 

cabinet. 

 

On his concern of the powers to be prescribed, there is an 

accountability factor there. The member knows that the 

definition and prescribing is done by Lieutenant Governor in 

Council which is cabinet order, and that is then made public, so 

that accountability is there. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Well my follow-up question, Madam Minister: 

you say that there’s a potential for abuse in all legislation. I ask 

you” would you agree that if the participants or the parties 

affected by any of the decisions, that if they had the right to 

appeal to a court, say the Court of Queen’s Bench, that that 

would, in fact, give them some guarantee of protection as 

against any potential abuse. And I’m asking you what, if you’re 

going to be fair, what possible excuse have you for not having 

the right to appeal to the court if the party feels aggrieved? 

 

You say it’s all set down; the criteria’s there; you’re going to 

follow it. And what I’m saying is if your board, for the  

  



 

September 18, 1987 

 

2672 

 

 

protection of the individuals affected . . . I mean these are 

sweeping powers. What you’re doing is a complete interference 

n the market-place, and you’ll have to agree to that. And in 

doing that, surely, why would you not consider the right of an 

appeal to the court? 

 

If in fact everything is going to be above-board, it’s going to be 

fair, then you’ve got nothing to fear by having an appeal to the 

court. And so I ask you, if there is going to be no abuse, why 

not put in the right of appeal of any decision by any of the 

companies that will be affected to the courts? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we did consider 

various options in terms of appeal, and we rejected the appeal 

process of the courts for some very good reasons. 

 

First of all, Mr. Chairman, under the constitution changes of 

1982 the provinces were, indeed, given the authority to manage 

and develop their resources. That power included, I will remind 

the House again, a specific clause that allowed a province to set 

the primary rate of production. 

 

If we were to look at an option of appeal through the courts, as 

the member from Quill Lakes has suggested, first of all we have 

the possibility that the appeal could take several years. Perhaps 

the company that is in the appeal would be appealing their 1988 

allocation, for example, and they could very well not receive a 

decision on the 1988 allocation until, perhaps, 1990. 

 

The provision that is in here with the appeal going to the 

cabinet is a common clause, particularly as it pertains to 

resource management. And I would ask the member . . . if he is 

interested in knowing of others, I would refer him to the energy 

conservation resource Act in Alberta which has the same 

provision, and I believe it was probably placed in there after the 

constitutional changes of 1982. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Well I don’t really believe that delay of justice 

is a good excuse for not putting in a right of appeal, because 

throughout our society in attaining justice there’s many delays, 

Madam Minister, and that’s hardly a basis of excluding an 

appeal to the court. But even if you did use the court, and even 

if you justified that the court procedure was cumbersome or 

delaying, or too long a delay for a decision, did you then think 

of an alternative - an alternative being a system of arbitrating a 

dispute by an arbitration board, in order that justice could be 

given in the event that the party was aggrieved. You eject the 

court. Did you think of any method of arbitrating an aggrieved 

party — a concern? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I can only reply in the 

manner that I did in terms of the option of an appeal through the 

court. An arbitration process can be just as lengthy. And when 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, the member says that’s not 

true. That is precisely true, Mr. Chairman. When we looked at 

the situation of the resource management and time delays in 

terms of allocation for production for mines for a year, if even 

one were not to receive their decision — and I urge the member 

to talk to the industry to in fact find out if what  

I’m saying is true. If you were to have, Mr. Chairman, a lengthy 

process on an appeal for an allocation it not only affects the 

mine — and let’s use the Lanigan mine, the member from Quill 

Lakes, as the example — that it affects them all, because there’s 

a total volume to be allocated within the province, and then the 

individual allocation to the nine or the 10 mines. 

 

So if you have one sitting on appeal for two years, everything is 

on hold. And I believe that that is total disruption within the 

industry and its market-place, and would not be agreed to by the 

industry itself. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Madam Minister, you’re giving us a lot of rot 

here because you’re trying to say and put in two years’ delay. 

I’m telling you that you could put in an arbitration board or an 

arbitration provision and you could specify that within such a 

number of days that the board shall adjudicate, and you could 

eliminate the long delay. Why haven’t you considered such an 

arbitration board if you refuse the courts? 

 

(1115) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I suppose we could 

look at a fairly pyramid structure if one wanted to. You could 

have several boards in place. When we took a look at the entire 

picture and we took a look at how resource management boards 

operate, including the energy conservation resource board 

within the province of Alberta, we also looked, Mr. Chairman, 

at the effects of any kind of a overly bureaucratic slow process 

in making decisions and the appeals. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I believe that it is right for a cabinet to accept 

the responsibilities of the appeal. We already have one board in 

place. The members have some concerns about that board. Now 

I hear the member from Quill Lakes asking for another board. 

And that’s rather confusing to this Assembly, as the entire 

position has been from the opposition during the entire debate, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman — a board of arbitration; he’s quite correct; 

you could put a length of time in it when they had to make their 

decision, but we already have one board in place that is to do 

the allocating. The overall volume for the province will rest 

with cabinet, the government. And I believe, on the appeal 

process, if it is to be utilized, that indeed it is right for cabinet to 

undertake that responsibility to ensure that things are done in a 

fair and equitable manner. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Well if one could assume that we had a fair and 

equitable cabinet, then one I guess could make the conclusions 

that you make. But not everybody in this province believe that 

we have a fair and equitable cabinet. And many of the workers 

in Saskatchewan, I’ll tell you, do not believe that we have a fair 

and equitable cabinet. 

 

But more specifically, you deny the right of any aggrieved party 

in this legislation to have access to the courts if they’re 

aggrieved. You also deny them any recourse to a board of 

arbitration. And even worse than that, what you do is to rule out 

the rights of . . . use of any of the  

  



 

September 18, 1987 

 

2673 

 

 

prerogative writs. So I mean what you have done is absolutely 

denied them those special prerogative writs which are designed 

to guarantee that individuals get natural justice, and I talk in 

respect to prohibition; I talk in respect to mandamus and 

certiorari. And you have specifically excluded that. 

 

So you’re . . . Even if natural justice is being denied, the special 

prerogative writs are denied within this Bill. And I say that with 

those sweeping powers and with some suspicions, I say, by 

many people throughout this province in respect to the fairness 

of this cabinet and its competence, I may say, that is the deal. 

The lack of an appreciation — not a lack of an appreciation, but 

the public perception of the total incompetence of this 

government is what frightens them. 

 

And I’ll tell you, if I were in the industry, or if I were a worker 

in the potash mine, I would want some recourse to protect my 

rights, and either it would be a court or a board of arbitration or 

at least the special prerogative writs. Why did you have to 

remove specifically the recourse to the prerogative writs? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, we could debate between 

the member from Quill Lakes and perhaps even the member 

from Regina Centre for a long time on the fair and equitable 

cabinet. I would remind the member from Quill Lakes that 

there’s at least 37 constituencies that thought indeed it was fair 

and equitable. And if there’s a question on that, I would also 

suspect and debate the issue of a fair and equitable opposition, 

or one to be trusted. 

 

However, that is not the issue here, Mr. Chairman, and nor does 

it impact on the legislation and nor does it impact on the mines 

and the workers. The member talks about no access to the 

courts. He’s wrong, Mr. Chairman. As a lawyer, I believe he 

knows he’s wrong. If indeed the board is to act in bad faith, or 

to discriminate in its decisions, the producers under the 

administrative law principles do indeed have that access. That is 

always there, and the member from Quill Lakes knows that. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I asked you: why did you exclude the 

prerogative writs? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve already indicated to 

you and to the member from Quill Lakes on the appeal process 

being directed to cabinet and the reasons for that. Let me restate 

once again the necessity, as we saw it, in looking at the appeal 

process and that it must be done in a quick manner. And that 

was in the best interests of the industry, Mr. Chairman. 

 

I would remind the member once again that to put a hold — 

whether its six months, a year, or two years — on one mine, in 

terms of its allocation, impacts on every other mine in waiting 

for that decision to come down. 

 

Mr. Chairman, once again I state that it will be done in a fair 

and equitable manner. And while I recognize the concern from 

the member from Quill Lakes as being legitimate in ensuring 

that a board does make its decisions in a fair manner, does not 

discriminate against one mine or another, I also think, Mr. 

Chairman, that the  

board, not even being appointed yet, deserves an opportunity 

and a period of time, and then the member from Quill Lakes can 

make his judgement. But I believe that he is not in proper order 

at this point in prejudging a board that has not even been put 

into place to make its first allocation. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Well, Madam Minister, again you’re speaking 

nonsense. What we’re doing here — we aren’t waiting till the 

legislation is passed and waiting for the results — what we’re 

dealing with is approval of legislation and deciding whether the 

legislation is proper. Surely you know that, and I hope that you 

will correct that nonsensical statement that you made, because 

that’s what we’re doing, in dealing with the Bill and deciding 

whether it can be improved. That’s all we’re doing. 

 

And you’re starting to assail that we aren’t giving the board . . . 

I’m not running at the board; I don’t know who the board is, but 

I do know that you have sweeping powers in here. And what 

you have said clearly: trust me. And you know the last person 

that said that was Brian Mulroney. He said: — there’s a sacred 

trust, and you know what the seniors got. 

 

But in any event it’s clear, Madam Minister, that within here 

you’ve got sweeping powers by the cabinet. You have refused 

to put in any appeal to the courts. You have refused to accept 

our suggestion of a board of arbitration. You have refused even 

to put in the prerogative writs or allow the prerogative writs. 

 

So I’m saying to you that it is our concern, and I don’t think we 

should be criticized for indicating to you that there is sweeping, 

massive powers to the cabinet. And virtually what you’re 

saying is, we don’t want any inconvenience; trust me. And I say 

that’s not good legislation. I think people that are affected by 

legislation should have the right of recourse to the court or the 

use of the prerogative writs and/or arbitrations to deal with their 

particular aggrievement. 

 

I want to go on, you having indicated that we can trust you. And 

I have difficulties, and I may say that many people in 

Saskatchewan do. But I want to turn to the workers’ protection 

in respect to this Bill. There’s 3,800 workers, I believe you 

indicated, throughout the potash industry — an important 

employment sector of our economy. 

 

I’m wondering if you could indicate whether, as a result of the 

Bill, whether you have made any assessment in whether or not 

there is likely to be a cut-back in the percentage of production 

capacity of the mines as a result of this legislation. Because you 

indicated last night the purpose of the Bill was twofold. You 

said it was to regulate supply, and as a corollary to that, 

increase price. I believe that’s not misstating you — or not in 

exactly the same words, but those were the . . . 

 

And if you’re going to regulate supply, I ask you, do you 

anticipate that the production level presently that the mines are 

operating at, do you project that that can be maintained, or are 

you anticipating that there will be further cut-back in the 

production of potash in the respective mines, and as a 

consequence of that, lay-offs  

  



 

September 18, 1987 

 

2674 

 

 

of workers in the potash industry? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, before dealing with the 

latter question, I would like to go back to the hon. member’s 

remarks in terms of the sweeping powers and once again restate 

in this House: indeed the powers are sweeping, but in 1982, Mr. 

Chairman, the premier of the day, the hon. member from 

Regina Elphinstone, NDP premier, fought long and hard along 

with Alberta for recognition and ownership and indeed the 

sweeping powers for the provinces to be able to manage and 

develop their resources. 

 

(1130) 

 

The member from Quill Lakes laughs. Why? I think it is fair 

and just that western Canada, which is resource rich, indeed 

have the authority and the powers to be able to manage and 

operate and develop their resources. That’s fair, Mr. Chairman. 

I believe it is also fair that cabinet, in its elected position, takes 

on the responsibility of the appeal process in this instance, 

namely because the province does have the power to manage its 

resources. 

 

I would once again say to the member of Quill Lakes that if we 

were to follow his suggestions, effective planning, particularly 

on the operations side, would be very difficult for any mine if 

they were into an appeal process under the member’s 

suggestions. And it is not, Mr. Member, a matter of 

inconvenience; it is much more serious than that, with a delay 

of six months, one year, or two years. It is not inconvenience; it 

is very serious in terms of the mine itself and its workers. 

 

Mr. Chairman, there is approximately 3,600 direct jobs tied to 

the potash industry today in Saskatchewan. I don’t know what 

the number would be if you were to include the indirect, but 

certainly for today we are talking about the direct jobs, and 

that’s approximately 3,600. 

 

I have stated to this House before, I think any member in this 

House would jump at the chance to say: I can guarantee 

something. We all know that that is unrealistic. So then it 

becomes incumbent upon us to work very hard to ensure that 

you come to the closest thing to that, Mr. Chairman. And we 

believe with this Bill, that’s precisely what we’ve done. 

 

If this Bill was not in, Mr. Chairman, and was not passed, I 

believe at least one or two of Saskatchewan’s nine potash mines 

would close, at least one or two. And with those closures, Mr. 

Chairman, I believe they ran the risk of 400 to 800 jobs being 

closed with the closure of the mines. 

 

Mr. Chairman, this Bill has been brought in to keep the mines 

operating, to give them a fair chance to continue their 

operations. I also believe, and I think it’s fair to say that in fact 

the management board, the potash resource board that will be 

put into place, will limit production only slightly, and then only 

if absolutely necessary, and we are not to that point where we 

know that for sure yet. 

 

I also believe, Mr. Chairman, that it’s likely this Bill will result 

in few, if any, job losses. And again, hundreds of jobs would 

have been lost without the Bill. 

Mr. Koskie: — Madam Minister, you indicated that this Bill is 

important in the regulation of the supply of production of 

potash, that there’s an overhang in supply, an over-supply of 

potash. I wonder if you could indicate: when did you, or when 

did the government, first become aware that there was an 

over-supply of potash in the world? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the date that the 

Department of Energy and Mines works under shows that the 

supply was exceeding the demand in 1981 through ’82 and ’83. 

In 1984 it also shows that there was some market improvement, 

and that carried on through part of 1985. 1986 was not a good 

year; the demand went down again. Our data also shows that 

that excess will be there, without this situation that we are in 

today, well into the 1990s, so from that perspective it is not 

encouraging. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Well I guess what I’m specifically asking you 

is when you became first aware of this problem of oversupply, 

and I think you’ve answered my question in that you said it was 

in 1986 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I’ll go to your 

report then, or the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, and the 

total potash . . . total Canadian producers’ sales was the second 

highest since 1982, exceeded only by 1984. And similarly, total 

PCS sales were the highest in 1986, superseded only by 1984. 

 

So what I’m indicating to you here is that surely in 1986 you 

ran up . . . Obviously the supply must have been too great, and 

you were selling at very reduced prices in competing with an 

over-supply in 1986, otherwise how could you possibly run up 

$106 million, according to your report, in the operation of the 

mines and under the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

during the year 1986? 

 

If it was an over-supply and that you were in fact selling it at 

very low prices, then what I’m asking you: can you give any 

other explanation of what was happening in 1986? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I had stated earlier that the 

imbalance on the supply and demand had begun to show up as 

early as late 1981. The productive capacity in Saskatchewan last 

year was 9 million K2O tonnes; that was our productive 

capacity. Our actual production as 6 million K2O tonnes. 

 

Now you ask, you know, how did this all happen? Yes, prices 

were weak. You can see the difference, the imbalance between 

the 9 and the 6. There were some particularly difficult problems 

with one of our more lucrative markets, and that being the 

United States, in that with their agricultural situation I believe 

the demand was down approximately 20 per cent. 

 

So you take all those situations and tie them together and you 

have some very difficult problems. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Madam Minister, you indicated that the 

problem was detected in ’81, precipitated and continued in ’82, 

’83; ’84 there was a slight improvement, and you made a small 

profit, I recall; 1986 certainly was a lot of problems. 

 

I guess the question I ask you: if this is the saviour of the  

  



 

September 18, 1987 

 

2675 

 

 

industry, this legislation which you purport here, and that it’s 

addressing the question of world over-supply of potash in the 

market, I wonder . . . and you’re not guaranteeing, but you’re 

indicating that there will be minimal effect upon the workers in 

the mines as a result of this Bill. If that’s what you’re saying, 

and if that’s the solution, then I guess my question is to you: 

where were you since 1982? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I believe I responded to 

this same question last night; however, I will attempt to do so 

again. Perhaps the member was not aware of the question from 

last night. 

 

Where were we since 1981? I believe, Mr. Chairman, that 

industry — most industries, all industries, should operate within 

the market-place on the premises without government 

intervention. That’s ideal. And I believe that the member from 

Quill Lakes and others, such as the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview, would probably agree with that also. However, Mr. 

Chairman, there are various factors that have come into play 

over the last several years. Some of them we had no part in; we 

don’t control. 

 

And we had taken the position that while the playing field was 

even, the industry will sort itself out. And while that may be 

difficult, particularly for the workers and the families that rely 

on those industries, that indeed is one of the realities of the 

market-place and, in fact, the work-place. If you have a demand 

for your product, you’re going to have more jobs. In fact, if the 

demand is so great, the price is probably going to go up, and 

that in turn will create more jobs. And, in fact, if the price goes 

so high, there is an incentive for more production of the same 

product to come onstream. And that is probably the story of the 

potash industry in the 1980s. 

 

What we had was a product where those who forecast it forecast 

only an upward trend of potash use. That didn’t happen. And 

while they forecast that, plans were made in various countries 

around the world, and including perhaps Saskatchewan, to bring 

new mines onstream. And if it wasn’t new mines, it as the 

expansion of some of the older mines. So our productive 

capacity increased, but we didn’t sell any more product. And in 

increasing that productive capacity there were more jobs 

brought onstream along with it, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The playing field was relatively even for our producers in 

Saskatchewan in competing with other producers around the 

world up until this year — January, February — whenever the 

anti-dumping charges cam down. 

 

(1145) 

 

That in turn, Mr. Chairman, created a very uneven playing field. 

In fact, it could be said that the duties were to the degree that 

we no longer believed that the industry had within itself the 

capability to deal with this problem on their own, and hence the 

legislation. 

 

So the member says: where were you since 1981? I don’t 

believe, Mr. Chairman, that there was reason for government 

intervention early in the 1980s. Perhaps there could have been 

more discipline — self-discipline — within the industry itself, 

but that didn’t happen. And  

as a consequence the production kept going up, the productive 

capacity, Mr. Chairman, but the demand did not. 

 

And in fact the demand in most cases didn’t even stay level. We 

had a fall on it because of the agricultural situation, and I might 

add the two are tied very closely together. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order. Why is the member 

from Redberry on his feet? 

 

Mr. Gerich: — I beg leave to introduce some guests, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Gerich: — I’d like to ask the members of the Legislative 

Assembly to welcome some visitors — 25 seniors from North 

Carolina, or South Carolina and Georgia. I’d like to welcome 

them to Saskatchewan and hope that they enjoy our scenery and 

hospitality and that they have a pleasant visit. And I’d ask the 

members to please welcome them and make them welcome to 

our legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I too take 

the privilege of joining with the member from the government 

side to welcome our special guests to the legislature. It’s always 

nice to have you come and visit with us. 

 

We’re normally not in session at this late in the year, but as you 

can see, we’re into an important debate this morning, and it is 

really relevant and has a lot to do with our trading with the 

United States, so it may be of some special interest. 

 

So we welcome you here on behalf of the opposition. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 36 - An Act respecting the Potash Resources of 

Saskatchewan 

 

Clause 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Madam Minister, you indicated that it was 

during, up until January, when the Department of Commerce, a 

petition was launched for anti-dumping petition, anti-dumping, 

a petition was launched in the United States, and you indicated 

that that is when the playing field was no longer level. And that 

in fact was the time that you, by the subsequent decision of the 

U.S., decided that an intervention was necessary. Am I reading 

what you have said previously, correctly? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, that’s correct, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — And would you then indicate that part of the 

reason that you have introduced the legislation then is to deal 

with the preliminary findings which have assessed  

  



 

September 18, 1987 

 

2676 

 

 

high tariffs on the potash entering the United States? Is that the 

reason for the legislation, is to address that preliminary finding 

that has come down very heavily by placing heavy tariffs all the 

way from 9 per cent to 85 per cent on various mines here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Would you indicate if that is indeed the purpose primarily, 

because you said the market-place no longer could correct 

itself; so would you agree that this precipitated the need for the 

legislation? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, once again the same 

answer that has been stated many times as it pertains to this 

legislation. This legislation has been put into place, yes, to deal 

with the situation of the over-supply. We have stated straight up 

front that it also will assist the industry and its workers in 

maintaining a viable industry in dealing with the difficulties that 

they are having on the anti-dumping petition. That’s very clear, 

Mr. Chairman, and it’s been said several times over. 

 

The first objective is to remove that over-supply. And I won’t 

go through all that again, but I would urge the member from 

Quill Lake to read Hansard from last night because the answer 

is in there. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Just so the workers who are associated with the 

potash industry are clear, I would like to know some of the . . . 

what percentage of the productive capacity were we operating 

at in Saskatchewan during 1986? We have a total productive 

capacity, and I want to know the average percentage of that 

productive capacity during ’86. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — On average for the province it was 67 per 

cent. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Will you indicate on average what it is up until 

now, during the year of ’87? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the figure that I have for 

1987 is to July, and it’s 69 per cent. And that is mostly 

attributed to the sales to China. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Just in respect to 1987, there are a few 

announcements that have been made, either by the potash 

corporation or Canpotex, and a couple significant things come 

to mind. The first thing is that there was a price increase per 

tonne of potash prior to the last increase announced by potash 

corporation. As I understand it, the price was increased from 

$54 to $58 earlier in the first or second quarter of the potash 

corporation. 

 

And can you verify that there was, in fact, during ’87, a modest 

increase in the price of potash prior to the government’s . . . or 

the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan making this last 

announcement of a 60 per cent increase. Is that accurate? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, in the spring of this year - 

yes, first of all it’s true that there has been some increases; 

however, I would call them slight, and our price lists indicate 

those minor increases beginning this spring. However, I would 

caution the member in the Assembly in that two or three months 

of a price increase  

does not necessarily indicate an upward trend nor some 

stability. I would hope that it continues; however, we do not 

know that yet. 

 

The other factor with the price increases that came this spring 

was that the practice of discounting was still taking place, so 

it’s very difficult to determine that average that one can usually 

depend on. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — And could you confirm that, as Canpotex 

indicated, offshore sales were up some 30 per cent this year in 

the first or second quarter? And I think it was primarily in 

respect to the large sale to the Chinese, but is that a correct 

indication of increased offshore sales in the first half? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, they are up, Mr. Chairman, but I 

cannot confirm. I believe you used the figure of 30 per cent. I 

cannot confirm that right now for you, but they are indeed up, 

and most of it again is attributed to sales to China. And I would 

think that the second quarter for us looks fairly positive in that 

market, and we’re fairly optimistic that the potential for that 

market is basically unlimited, I guess, to a point. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I’m glad you expressed that, because that’s 

what we believe too. When we were in government and when 

we had the potash corporation, we felt that there was a great 

potential of offshore sales. And indeed what we did is to set up 

a branch of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan for 

international sales, and we were going to aggressively. 

 

And what has happened during the past number of years, 

Madam Minister, in respect to the position at least of the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan, that over the average five years 

that you are operating it, the percentage of sales offshore was 

about 44 per cent during your years of operation. When you 

took over the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan we had 59 

per cent of offshore sales, and it dropped to 44 per cent — again 

a clear and unequivocal facts of incompetence in respect to your 

government. 

 

And what I want to ask again, Madam Minister - you’ve 

indicated a couple of facts: that the price had started to rise here 

on the American market, the offshore sales are up, and the 

future looks bright. I ask you one other pertinent fact, and that 

is: can you indicate, in ’87, what is the inventory level 

throughout the potash industry in Saskatchewan? 

 

(1200) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The inventory, Mr. Chairman, is 

approximately 800,000 tonnes. The member makes reference to 

PCS and its offshore market when he was the government of the 

day. And while that’s all fine and dandy, I would bring him 

back to remind him that we are talking about a total industry 

which also includes PCS, but there indeed are other producers 

and people to be concerned about with it. 

 

I agree with the member, Mr. Chairman, that the China market 

is indeed important. And while he thinks there has been a loss 

of market, I refer him to the year ’81-82 —  

  



 

September 18, 1987 

 

2677 

 

 

which I believe is a good reference year; it was the last year he 

was government — and the percentage of the total offshore 

market that PCS had at that time, the Crown corporation, was 

47.3 per cent, the same as it is today, Mr. Chairman. So I don’t 

think he should be worrying and insinuating some of the things 

that he has. 

 

In recognition of the importance of that China market, Mr. 

Chairman, I would also like the member to know that not only 

do we recognize it as being important but we have actually 

invested in trying to get more of that market. And between the 

industry and the potash phosphate institute and the producers, 

along with the government, we have spent in 1986 

approximately $5 million in trying to bring more of the 

market-place — what we consider market-place in China — to 

our Saskatchewan producers. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Well I recognize that we have a whole industry, 

but I guess what I want to ask is specifically whether the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan, relative to its productive 

capacity, is getting a fair shake. And I think the workers want to 

know that. 

 

And you indicate that the industry is operating at about 69 per 

cent capacity, and I guess what I want to ask is: is that evenly 

distributed throughout the industry, or is it, as we are informed - 

some of the mines are operating nearer to 100 per cent capacity, 

and some are reduced very substantially, and the ones that are 

reduced in productive capacity or production are, in fact, a 

number of potash corporation mines. 

 

And so the workers involved are concerned, and all I’m doing 

is, of course, looking at the whole industry. But if you take a 

look — I ask you, too — what is the total percentage of 

Saskatchewan’s productive capacity; what percentage of that is 

held by the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan? What 

percentage of the total production is the capacity of PCS? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I’m glad that the member 

from Quill Lake has stated that in fact his concern is with the 

entire industry. PCS has 49 per cent of the productive capacity 

in the province. In 1987 they will receive 49 per cent of the 

offshore market; however, they have been less successful in the 

U.S. market, and that’s why their operating rates are lower than 

the others. They have been less successful with the U.S.A. 

market. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — But, Madam Minister, you support my 

argument. You say that PCS has a production capacity, relative 

percentage of the productive capacity in the province, of 49 per 

cent. And you say whoopee, we’re going to give them 49 per 

cent of offshore. Do you realize that before recognizing that 

they had some weakness in respect to the North American 

market, to give them an even break, what we were doing is 

pushing the offshore, and while they had less in the American 

market, they had an increased share of the sales offshore. In 

fact, they had 59 per cent of all of the offshore sales, which 

compensated for some of the lesser amount of sales that they 

had to United States. 

 

And so what you have done is intentionally put them on an even 

basis, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan,  

in respect to offshore. You say their productive capacity is 49 

per cent, and you give them 49 per cent of the offshore sales. 

But you say they can’t compete in the American market. And 

you realize that what they get in ’86 with a productive capacity 

of 49 per cent, PCS got allocated about 33 per cent of the total 

production of potash in Canada. That’s where it was at - down 

to 32, in 1985, of the total sales, with a productive capacity of 

49. 

 

Well I’ll tell you, the potash corporation and the workers in the 

potash corporations have to be concerned if indeed you have a 

policy that in fact you will share in an equitable way the 

offshore markets — and that’s what you’ve said. Our share of 

production is 49; we’ll get 49 per cent of the offshore. But 

everybody will fight for the U.S., and the potash corporation, 

you say, can’t compete in the U.S. market to the same extent. 

 

That’s where you have placed this corporation. You have taken 

away offshore sales; you have put it into Canpotex; you have 

allowed other private companies, which were not previously 

members of Canpotex, to come in an to devour up some of the 

offshore sales and to get a representative amount of the 

offshore. But you haven’t reciprocated and asked the industry 

then, therefore, to share with Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan an equitable amount in respect to the U.S. 

market. And as a consequence we’ve seen . . . I think it’s fair to 

say that as you go across Saskatchewan, and certainly I’ve 

talked to the miners at Lanigan, and they indicate that they’ve 

been laid off for five weeks recently, that they have notice again 

that in November there will be further lay-offs. And at Allan 

there has been indication on October 4 there will be a lay-off; 

Cory, that there will be some lay-offs. 

 

And so what I’m really asking you: are the private sector 

corporations, in your view, under the circumstances that you 

provided and the facts that you provided yourself, getting 

preferential treatment in the allocation of markets? And that’s 

precisely what you’ve done. You’ve cut it back from 59 per 

cent to 49, dead on with the production capacity. But they don’t 

have access to the U.S. and you say, well that’s fine, we’ll cut 

back because we just don’t have the market, but we’ll give to 

the privates a share of the off-market even though they have 

better access to the American. And obviously there’s concern 

by the workers. But the question that I ask you, too, is: can you 

indicate — I guess you did — the inventory of 800,000 tonnes 

in ’87. 

 

The point I want to point out here is, on your own indication, 

you indicate these facts: that the price for potash was on the 

upward swing — 54 to 58 is as I understand it. You indicate 

that offshore sales are increasing, and you say there’s no limit. 

You indicate that, in compared to 60 . . . ’86, that the productive 

capacity has increased from 67 to 69, and you indicate . . . I 

don’t think you’re indicating that the inventory is particularly 

high. And so what I am really saying is, that based on your own 

facts here, it doesn’t really justify what you’re saying — is that 

you’re dealing, in fact, with a supply problem. 

 

I think, Madam Minister, what you’re dealing with — and you 

got flat-footed — and what you have to address now is the 

anti-dumping tariffs that have been levied against the potash 

industry here in Saskatchewan. 

  



 

September 18, 1987 

 

2678 

 

 

I want to go on and finish off because I do indeed want to get 

finished with this Bill, Madam Minister. We don’t want to 

delay it. You indicated it’s very important, but you filibustered 

your own Bill, but leave that aside. 

 

I am concerned — and the member from Riversdale addressed 

this in some detail last night — but I am really concerned in 

respect to the Premier’s consistent comments that a major part 

of the problem that we’re having with the tariffs levied against 

the industry is, in fact, the existence of the Potash Corporation 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to lead you through a few facts, and the first fact is that 

in 1967, in 1967, a petition was launched in the United States, 

and as you will recall, the then late Ross Thatcher was the 

premier of the province. In 1969 a decision came down and 

they indicated that there was dumping of potash in the U.S. 

market. Are you aware, Madam Minister, that that decision is 

very similar to what is happening today? Would you agree that 

we had a problem in 1967, which was crystallized in 1969, that 

is very similar to the situation that we have today? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I want to correct one thing 

that the member said at the beginning of his speech, and that 

was that I had stated that they can’t compete. That is not what 

was said for the U.S. market in terms of PCS. I did say that they 

were less successful in their marketing in the U.S.A. than they 

had been on the offshore. In fact, Mr. Chairman, they’ve been 

able to improve their situation in regards to the U.S. market. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the PCS and its share of the offshore market is 

the same today as it was in 1981, and it’s nonsense to suggest 

anything - Mr. Chairman, it is nonsense to suggest anything 

else. I’ve already stated they’ve been improving in the U.S. 

market; in fact, they’ve gone from 28 per cent to 32 per cent, so 

there is an improvement. 

 

(1215) 

 

Yes, it’s true, I’d indicated there is an upward swing on the 

prices. I also told the House and the member why, and I 

cautioned him because of some factors that go with it. 

However, I hope indeed that that stability comes into the picture 

and, in fact, that upward swing remains there. 

 

He says, you know, there really isn’t a supply problem. Well, 

Mr. Chairman, that just is not true. 

 

Mr. Chairman, in the world today — and it affects not only the 

Canadian producers but all the producers around the world — 

and the oversupply is approximately four million tonnes. 

Unfortunately, Mr. Chairman, over half of that four million 

belongs in Saskatchewan. And that ‘s one of the difficult 

situations that we face. 

 

Yes, I agree with the member that the situation is very similar 

today as it was in 196 . . . I believe it was . . . ’69, thank you — 

’67 the member from Regina Centre. Never trust a lawyer, I’m 

told — some lawyers. 

 

I’ve stated from day one, Mr. Chairman, history does in fact 

repeat itself and we were into a situation very similar  

to what in fact had taken place in 1969 in regards to the potash 

situation. However, one of the differences — and it’s major for 

this Assembly, Mr. Chairman — is our ability to deal with the 

situation today versus the government of the day in 1969 and 

their ability to deal with the problem at that time. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — The minister has indicated that in ’67 we faced 

a similar problem, and as a result of the constitutional changes 

brought in, that indeed the government of the day is in a better 

position to address the particular problem of anti-dumping, 

which I take that that is the prime purpose, from her answer, of 

the legislation because that’s what she indicated, and also in 

respect to the supply. 

 

I want also . . . There has been remarks made by the Premier 

that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is a major 

problem. I’ve heard him say that on — as soon as the level of 

tariffs came out. I’ve heard him rant and rave in this legislature. 

 

And the minister has submitted that in 1967 we faced a similar 

problem, but we didn’t have the constitutional amendment to be 

able to address it in the same way. And I want to draw to the 

minister’s attention that in 1967-69 — and ’69 when the final 

decision came down — that none of the potash mines were 

publicly owned. And still we had the high assessment and the 

problem, as the minister said, that was similar to what we have 

today. 

 

Yet the Premier says, the Premier of this province would want 

the people of this province to believe that even though we had 

the same nature of problem in ’67 to ’69 that the potash 

corporation — because it happens today — that it’s the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan that is a major part of the 

problem. 

 

I want to draw also to the attention of the people of this 

province that not only did we have the same problem in ’67 

when we had no public ownership of potash industry, the 

people didn’t own any of the mines, but also that the decision 

that has come down from the U.S., the preliminary decision, 

that not just the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan were 

assessed, but every individual operator in Saskatchewan. And 

the highest level of assessment was against Central Canada 

Potash at 85 per cent. And the potash corporation was 

somewhere in the middle, with IMCC (International Minerals 

and Chemicals Corporation) at the bottom. 

 

So it seems to me that that refutes, those statements refute, the 

very position, the nonsense that the Premier is trying to peddle 

around this province. But I draw also to the attention of the 

minister that in 1984 two U.S. Potash producers, Amax 

Chemical Incorporated and Kerr-McGee Chemical Corporation, 

filed a petition alleging the potash imported to the United States 

from Spain - you know, a socialist country - from Israel, from 

the U.S.S.R., and from East Germany, and they alleged that 

they were selling it below a fair market value. 

 

And in 1985 the Department of Commerce investigators found 

that the potash from these social states, and the state-run potash 

industry from other countries — well they looked at the facts 

and they came down with a  

  



 

September 18, 1987 

 

2679 

 

 

decision. In 1985 the Department of Commerce investigators 

found that potash from Israel, East Germany, was not being 

sold at less than fair value in U.S. And the complaint was 

withdrawn against Spain. The international trade commission 

ultimately concluded that even though the potash from Russia 

was being sold in U.S. at marginally less than its fair value, it 

was not a cause, nor did it threaten to cause injury to the U.S. 

industry, and as a result the petition was withdrawn. Or the 

petition failed, I guess is the correct word. 

 

So really what I’m putting forward here, Mr. Minister, just so 

the record can be clear to the people of this province, to sift out 

the nonsense and the truth, this is a problem that hasn’t been 

created by the presence of the potash corporation. And let us 

assume, Madam Minister . . . Just let us assume that in fact you 

could document that it was a problem, and precipitated the 

tariffs, can you feature a premier which is running that 

corporation, is spouting out against the very corporation that he 

is running? Unbelievable, even if it were true! How can you 

possibly believe that the Premier of the province would join 

with some senator in the United States to criticize a 

publicly-owned corporation in Saskatchewan and help to 

precipitate its destruction. 

 

Those are the facts. Madam Minister, I think you will agree, as 

is set out in the Saskatchewan report by your newly-appointed 

president of the potash corporation, that there is a very specific 

method of determination, and it’s set out by Mr. Charles 

Childers, the president of the potash, and he indicates the basis 

of the determination. And those are the facts, and why run 

around with your political jargon deceiving the people because, 

I’ll tell you, they don’t trust you people any more. So I think 

you better start shooting straight with them. 

 

And all of the evidence here indicates that what the Premier 

said was nonsense. You know it and I know it, and the people 

of Saskatchewan know it. And the sooner . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I want those details to be on the record, and I 

can only say to you that if the potash corporation is a problem, 

it’s a problem of your incompetence and your desire and intent 

because of your ideology to destroy it — your incompetence. If 

the potash corporation is a problem in the anti-dumping, it’s 

your incompetence and your intention to want to destroy it. 

Because for 11 years the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

operated, and I’ll tell you, from ’76 until ’81 . . . $414 million 

of profit to the people of this province during those years. And 

so I say to Madam Minister, get off of that kick; play fair with 

the people of Saskatchewan for a change; deserve the office that 

you hold by coming forward with the truth and not nonsense. 

 

I want to get on with the Bill. I wanted that clarified. But there’s 

one other aspect, and I wonder if the minister is aware . . . and I 

mentioned to her some of the potential lay-offs that have been 

advised in respect to the Lanigan, Allan, and Cory mine. 

 

They indicate that Lanigan, they’ve been out for five weeks, 

because I just talked to a miner — two on holidays and three on 

their own time. And they indicate — and they got an 

announcement that mid-November that they’re getting another 

lay-off; Allan, on October 4, and they don’t know when and for 

how long. Cory is the same thing. 

 

Is the minister aware of this, and is this a planned reaction to 

the intended application of the Bill? Are you aware of any 

intended lay-offs within the industry? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the member has dealt with 

the issue of PCS and the perception of the United States, and 

the impact that that had on the anti-dumping petition. It was 

also an issue that was raised last evening by the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

The ownership of PCS should not, in fact, or is not material to 

the actual Commerce department process of adjudicating the 

anti-dumping which I think the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale and I had agreed on last night. That’s one step in the 

process, Mr. Member, Mr. Chairman. 

 

However, the public record from both the petitioners and the 

congressional record make it very clear, very clear, Mr. 

Chairman, that public ownership of PCS and the circumstances 

of its formation were heavily on the minds of the New Mexico 

congressional representatives and the industry, Mr. Chairman, 

as they initiated the petition that our producers are dealing with 

today. 

 

Clearly from the petition and the supplementary evidence such 

as the petitioners’ submission to ITC (International Trade 

Commission) on the injury question, allow me to quote, Mr. 

Chairman. And I quote: 

 

As described at the conference, the pressure to maintain 

sales in a declining market is the consequence of a decade 

of management of the Canadian industry decided to 

achieving goals of democratic socialism based on demand 

miscalculations. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, last night the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale asked that I table these documents and I will do that 

for him today. He wanted to know . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Do it. Table them, all you want. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, he says, table them all you want. 

You either want them or you don’t. Last night you wanted 

them. Have you changed your mind once again today? I doubt 

it. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I table the decision, the document of the 

decision, and the brief that led up to the decision coming down. 

 

Mr. Chairman, what we have dealt with, it’s clear that if, rightly 

or wrongly, for the member’s benefit, it was part of the debate 

in launching the decision, and the focus clearly came on 

Canada. 

  



 

September 18, 1987 

 

2680 

 

 

Mr. Chairman, in regards to the lay-offs, yes, I am aware that 

there had been some notices sent out. And I believe, Mr. 

Chairman, number one, it is indeed a reflection of the 

market-place that we are in today. It’s one that is not preferred, 

but it’s there. 

 

I also would remind the House, Mr. Chairman, that this Bill 

indeed is designed to minimize those job lay-offs because of the 

market-place. Without the Bill, we would see some possible 

permanent mine closures, or at least near to permanent. And, 

Mr. Chairman, that means massive job lay-offs. 

 

(1230) 

 

Mr. Koskie: — One final indication. I think the situation is 

regrettable, Madam Minister, that the recent report in respect to 

the petitioners is that it’s, as indicated, a broken-down mine, 

almost into receivership, and that one of the reasons for 

launching the petition is of the desperate attempt of this mine to 

force up the prices in order that it might be able to refinance and 

survive in the United States. 

 

And what I’m saying to you is that it’s a kind of a sad day that 

one of our chief trading partners would in fact react right in the 

midst of the free trade negotiations to launch such a vicious 

attack against its trading neighbours. 

 

And I think what it clearly indicates is the folly of the Premier’s 

position, the incompetence of the Mulroney government in 

dealing with it, because ever since they launched their free trade 

objective that United States have in fact been over-reacting. 

 

My colleague, the member from Regina Centre, has a few 

questions. I will also be addressing a few amendments, and I 

think we can fairly rapidly proceed with the conclusion of the 

Bill, Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I would agree with the 

member from Quill Lakes that indeed it is regrettable that the 

action has taken place. And some words perhaps are too strong 

to use in this House. I would use the word that it is a desperate 

act that the petitioners indeed have done. And while I have 

recognized that on the one hand, as I stated last night, human 

beings being what they are, sometimes it’s understandable. 

 

The member says, you know, it’s folly, the Premier’s position. I 

think he is dead wrong, Mr. Chairman, absolutely dead wrong. 

If anything, this action has shown very clearly that the Premier 

of this province has been right in his desire and his thrust on a 

trade agreement for Canada and indeed for this province. And 

not with any backing, might I say, from the members opposite 

who have seen it as something other being a very positive move 

for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Chairman, with the trade agreement, perhaps we would not 

be in the situation that we find ourselves in today. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. Madam Minister, I 

want to suggest to you that this Bill is the latest in a lengthy 

series of incompetent moves, and that this  

problem is largely self-induced. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Madam Minister, a significant contribution 

to this entire problem was the Minister of Finance’s repeated 

statements that they were going to write off the debt of PCS and 

eventually his commitment to do that. I quote, Madam Minister, 

from an article in The Northern Miner in June, which said: 

 

Already the anti-dumping legislation has been complicated 

by the government’s announcement that it would write off 

$400 million in PCS debt. The Americans, naturally 

suspicious of any Crown-owned company, took it as a 

clear sign of a subsidy. The government quickly 

back-tracked, but the damage may already have been 

done. 

 

Well the damage was done, because later he stated he was going 

to write off $800 million. 

 

Madam Minister, after bringing the problem down on your own 

heads, you then had warning in March and April that this was 

coming. In March, the ITA, International Trade Administration 

of the Department of Commerce stated that there was sufficient 

evidence to warrant an investigation. In April they determined 

that they were going ahead with the investigation, on April 4. 

 

You had all those months to take the obvious action, and that is 

to make contact with your best allies, the American farm 

groups. You sat and did nothing — sat and did nothing at all 

until August when the International Trade Administration asked 

you to post bonds. And all of a sudden there was a crisis which 

you’d never heard of before. 

 

Everybody knew what was coming, Madam Minister. You 

should have as well. You and the Premier should have been 

actively engaged in making contacts with those who might have 

been your allies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: — And I suggest to you, Madam Minister, 

that this Bill, far from being a solution, complicates the problem 

which you now have. This Bill, Madam Minister, may well be 

taken as an admission of guilt. 

 

I quote, Madam Minister, from a comment made by the New 

Mexico producers. I quote from a September 3 editorial in the 

Leader-Post. It states: 

 

If the Saskatchewan action causes producers in this 

province unease, it apparently leaves our American 

accusers laughing. Questioned about the legislation, Paul 

Becker of Lundberg Industries . . . (one of the two 

companies which launched the suit, I might add) said: — 

“. . . if you are asking, ‘is this something we wanted to see 

happen’, yes, it is.” 

 

That’s, Madam Minister, what your legislation has done, is to 

make the apparently difficult chore of those two small mines 

with 3 per cent of the U.S. market to succeed  

  



 

September 18, 1987 

 

2681 

 

 

in this suit. 

 

Madam Minister, those comments are echoed by the . . . drawn 

blunt by Noranda and by Cominco, all of whom have been 

critical of this legislation. I won’t take up the time of the 

Legislative Assembly to read those comments, but I have them 

sitting on my desk if you care to deny it. 

 

I remind you, Madam Minister, that the U.S.S.R. faced similar 

anti-dumping legislation at this stage where the ITA makes a 

decision. They were assessed duties of 187 per cent. Later when 

the ITC, the International Trade Commission, made the final 

decision, the actual duties which were levied were 2 per cent. 

And I remind you, Madam Minister, that most Canadian 

producers expected the final levies, if there were any, would be 

considerably smaller. 

 

I quote from the September 7 edition of the Financial Post in 

which it states: 

 

Furthermore, producers and their customers are optimistic 

the hefty preliminary duties imposed by the U.S. 

commerce department on potash imports will be 

substantially cut down when the International Trade 

Commission makes a final ruling. 

 

I say to you, Madam Minister, that this problem has been 

largely self-induced. There’s a trial of incompetency which the 

workers of Saskatchewan and the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

are going to have to pay for. You partially brought the problem 

on your own head by stating you were going to write off the 

debt. You did nothing during the three months when you had a 

golden opportunity to make friends and powerful allies in the 

U.S. Senate — the farm lobbys are. Later when you got a ruling 

that everyone expected at this preliminary stage, you 

over-reacted, brought in this legislation, and have admitted your 

guilt. Madam Minister, to the extent we have a problem at all, 

you brought it on yourself. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I can only assume that the member is 

recommending that we do nothing. On one hand, he degrades 

the Bill. On the other hand, I would remind him that he voted 

for it not too long ago on second reading. So I take with a grain 

of salt anything that he has to say on the Bill. 

 

While the member likes to pull out editorials here and there, I 

would also refer you, with all due respect, to the other 

editorials, perhaps the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix you would like 

to pick up and read; perhaps the editorial that states, “The 

potash move satisfying”; the other article, it says, “Potash 

controls doing the trick,” plus there’s several others; the one 

that “The potash Bill strikes a perfect balance.” Those are other 

media articles. And while I accept that not all people, Mr. 

Chairman, will see the Bill in the same manner that I do, nor 

will they see it in the same manner as the member from Regina 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we stated, and it’s in the record from last night 

and from previous discussions as to the reasons for the Bill, and 

I will not spend time going over those points  

again. It is also in the record last night between the member 

from Saskatoon Riversdale and myself, the contacts that were 

indeed made over the past several months, and I refer the 

member to Hansard. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Madam Minister, that was indeed the 

subject of my next question. What you’re clearly seeking to put 

together is a cartel, Madam Minister. I ask you what evidence 

you have that it’s going to work. If you have some evidence that 

this is going to work and that other producers out of 

Saskatchewan are going to follow suit, you could put a lot of 

mines at ease by sharing that with us. 

 

Madam Minister, you refer to the 1969 legislation. I remind you 

that at that time the then premier of the day had been to New 

Mexico, had worked out an arrangement with them, and had 

that in his pocket when he passed the legislation. It seems to me 

what you’re doing is very dangerous. You’re passing the 

legislation and just hoping that the rest of the world follows 

suit. One would expect the Saskatchewan producers to follow 

suit. Given the nature of the Saskatchewan industry, they don’t 

have a lot of option but to play ball with you, and given this 

Draconian legislation. But producers in the U.S.S.R. and Israel 

and other areas have other options, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister these concerns that this legislation may work 

to the advantage of other producers are shared by persons other 

than myself. John Gordon, vice-president of Noranda mines, 

expressed his concern in The Globe and Mail of September 3. 

In an editorial in The Financial Times of September 7 they said: 

 

But Saskatchewan may find that other producers in the 

world potash market welcome the move for another 

reason. They may move into any part of the market 

vacated by Saskatchewan. Once they’ve moved in, they 

may be difficult to dislodge. 

 

I remind you, Madam Minister, that other nations also have 

excess capacity. If you intend on restricting production in 

Saskatchewan, they may well move into the market which we 

vacate. If you don’t intend on restricting production, then this 

legislation is just purely cosmetic. 

 

So I ask you, Madam Minister: what are you going to be doing? 

Are you going to be . . . is this legislation cosmetic, and you 

don’t intend to restrict production? Is it in fact real, and do you 

have some evidence that other nations are going to follow your 

lead? Are you simply playing very high stakes poker, and 

hoping they do? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, once again the 

objective of this legislation is to clearly seek a mechanism that 

will help us reduce our over-supply or our unused capacity. 

That is the clear objective of this legislation. And for several 

reasons: — number one, Mr. Chairman, to maintain a viable 

industry, to hang on to the jobs that are already there. We don’t 

want to see massive lay-offs . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Are you going to deal with the question 

or are you going to give us this silly . . . 

  



 

September 18, 1987 

 

2682 

 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — . . . Mr. Chairman. Well he doesn’t like 

the answer. That’s too bad; that’s too bd. You ask if the 

legislation is cosmetic. The answer is no. There is a clear 

objective with the legislation, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Madam Minister, I asked you if you have 

any evidence that other nations are going to follow your lead in 

restricting production, or are they going to take advantage of 

your restriction of production and take our markets? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, once again it is our 

intention with this Bill — I’ve stated it several times over — to 

maintain our market-share with this Bill. And recent 

developments around the world would indicate that others are 

following our lead. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — What recent developments? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I think there’s been several reports of 

price increases from Israel and other countries, and if you 

would like I could get you the specifics on that. That’s been 

public knowledge; I’m surprised you haven’t read about that. 

But that would also indicate that they are not about to undercut 

and for some specific reasons — they’ve had as many 

difficulties within their industry as what Canada had. 

 

(1245) 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Madam Minister, I haven’t read about it 

because it hasn’t happened. The Saskatchewan producers have 

raised their price. There’s been no media reports. If you have 

that, I would appreciate it if you’d table it. If you have evidence 

that other nations are going along with this cartel, which is what 

it is, then, Madam Minister, I’d like you to table that 

information. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, this is not a cartel, and I 

will send you the information that I have as it pertains to other 

countries and their production. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Madam Minister, I wonder if you’re 

satisfied with the support which you got from the federal 

government on this. Madam Minister, you got none. I quote, for 

the sake of brevity since time is going, I quote from an article in 

The Financial Post of September 13 with respect to Minister 

Carney: 

 

The fall-out continues. Carney refused to take part in 

Saskatchewan’s efforts to make a deal with Washington 

before the U.S. Trade Commission. The absence of a 

Canadian federal presence made Washington reluctant to 

deal. 

 

Madam Minister, I wonder if you agree with the statement of 

fact in The Financial Post, and if you’re satisfied with the 

none-action and inaction by Minister Carney in Ottawa? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I haven’t read the article 

that the member is referring to, so I will not comment without 

reading the entire article as opposed to the quote that the 

member has given me. I would refer the member to other 

articles: one that includes  

“Saskatchewan potash restrictions backed by Ottawa,” and 

that’s out of a Saskatchewan paper, the Saskatoon 

Star-Phoenix, on September 3. And I’m not sure what it is that 

you expect the federal government, or that you want the federal 

government, to do in terms of this situation, but I would remind 

you that Saskatchewan has authority to manage its own 

resources - not Ottawa, but Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Madam Minister, I’ll tell you what I expect 

the federal government to do. I expect the federal government 

to stand up for Canadians, stand up for Canadian industries, and 

stop acting and looking like a whipped dog when the American 

Congress does what it is elected to do, and that is protect 

American industries. 

 

I remind you, Madam Minister, that the federal government is 

elected to protect Canadians and Canadian industries, and this 

federal government has refused to do that. During the softwood 

lumber dispute, they laid back and played dead. During this 

dispute, they were not to be seen. That’s what I expect the 

federal government to do, Madam Minister. I expect them to 

stand up for us and our industries in what is a very difficult 

international trade market. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 

 

Mr. Koskie: — In clause 2, Madam Minister: 

 

(a) “board” means the Potash Resources Board established 

under section 5; 

 

Have you any idea, and can you indicate to us, since there’s no 

numbers as to what the size of the board might be, do you have 

anything in mind as to the size of the board? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, we are looking at a 

small board of three to five members. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Who are they likely to be? Have you any 

details as to who they might represent, or what segment of . . . 

any representation from industry, any representation from 

workers, in respect to the composition? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No, Mr. Chairman, I am not at the point 

where I have been discussing who they might be. In terms of 

the question, are they industry, the workers, management — I 

would refer you to the conflict of interest clause that prevents 

anyone that benefits directly or indirectly from the potash 

industry is not allowed to sit on the board. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. 

 

Amend section 3 of the printed Bill: 

 

by striking out “conversation” in the second line and 

substituting “conservation.” 

 

  



 

September 18, 1987 

 

2683 

 

 

Is that agreed? Order. I would like a little order in the Assembly 

so people can hear the Chair when he’s reading an amendment. 

I am going to read the amendment again and ask if it is agreed. 

 

Amend section 3 of the printed Bill: 

 

by striking out “conversation” in the second line and 

substituting “conservation.” 

 

Is that agreed? 

 

Clause 3 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 4 and 5 agreed to. 

 

Clause 6 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Yes, in respect to clause 6, indicates the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council shall prescribe the number of 

members of the board. And in respect to that, I’ve asked the 

definition, but I . . . Will there be members from the department 

represented on the board? Have you firmed that up yet? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, they can be. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Well I asked you, are you intending to put 

representatives of your department on the board? I know they 

can be because it’s in the legislation. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Legislation allows for the Department of 

Energy to sit on the board. It has not been decided yet, Mr. 

Chairman, who will be sitting on the board, as I stated earlier. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — In respect to section 6, in the appointment to 

the members of the board, I want to move an amendment in 

respect to that. As the minister . . . and I will move it following 

my remarks, a proposed amendment, Mr. Chairman. 

 

And here we have in the industry, 3,600 workers involved in the 

industry. Many of their lives may be affected or destroyed, and 

what you have purported to do is to set up a board to regulate 

the industry and have absolutely excluded any members or any 

representatives of the labour force. And I think that it’s only 

fitting that those who actually do the work, who sell their 

labour, who have no basic input into the incompetence that led 

us into this problem, I say that the workers of Saskatchewan 

should have an opportunity to be represented on the board. 

 

And accordingly I will be moving, as an amendment to section 

6, that section 6 of the printed Bill be amended by adding the 

following as subsection 4: 

 

At least one-third o the members of the board must be 

miners working in the potash industry in Saskatchewan at 

the time of their appointment. 

 

You can give a copy of this to the minister if you want. 

 

And that’s the essence of the amendment, and I expect  

that the opposition will view this with the same concern that we 

have on behalf of the workers of Saskatchewan and that they 

will indeed — indeed . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . While I’m 

thinking of you in the past, I’m thinking in the future — 

thinking in the future. 

 

But members of the government for the time being - I correct 

myself. 

 

But in any event this is an important, and it’s a vitally 

important, principle that we think that the workers should in 

fact be represented on the board. And accordingly we move that 

and hope that other members on the opposite side will indeed 

support that very important amendment. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I think we all in this 

House agree that workers indeed should have a say and a voice 

in the decision-making process within the working 

environment. However, there is a reason that the conflict of 

interest clause is in here, and it not only applies to workers but 

it applies to management. So if I were to take the hon. member 

from Quill Lakes, his argument as to who should sit on that 

board that knows the daily operations of the mines, we would 

have management and we would have the workers as the board. 

I think it puts a worker, a miner, or a supervisor, a manager of a 

mine, in a very difficult situation. 

 

And let me use the example of, let’s say, Lanigan versus 

Esterhazy — Lanigan versus Esterhazy. We have a miner from 

Lanigan that is sitting on the board and is going to do the 

allocating for all mines around the province. Now first of all 

he’s going to have a fairly difficult time. He works in that mine 

with all his colleagues, and of course they’re concerned about 

their jobs. That’s what this whole issue is about. That’s what 

it’s about, Mr. Chairman. 

 

But how can you possibly place a worker in that kind of conflict 

position in determining not only for that mine but the 

competitor’s mine? I think that is extremely unfair to any miner 

to be put into that position. Now, it would be easy to do if you 

had one company that owned all the mines; then you might 

have an easier time. But even then there would be some 

difficulties. 

 

But for that reason, Mr. Chairman, I have to say no to the 

amendment; that I believe that is unfair to put any worker in 

that position. And that if you start with removing the conflict of 

interest clause in here, you conceivably have management from 

one company versus management from another company versus 

miner from Lanigan and Rocanville, and on down the line. And 

I have to say no to the amendment. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Well, Madam Minister, you have spoken 

against what we have proposed here. In your Bill there’s an 

exclusion of people who can act on the board. It can’t be 

workers; it can’t be representatives of producers. Who is the 

world are you going to get that has any knowledge of the 

industry? Is it going to be a Sid Dutchak or some other . . . 

Embury, or who are you creating a job for? Who is going to be 

the competent person that’s going to sit on this board and do 

this fair job that you are alluding to? You have a total exclusion 

of producers, of workers. Who is the experts that you’re going 

to have that are going to sit on this board? 

 

  



 

September 18, 1987 

 

2684 

 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, that’s a fair question. I 

believe that there indeed are a fair number of people around 

within the mining industry — and when I say the mining 

industry, that could be uranium mining and other mining 

industries. I believe those people that are available, that are not 

directly benefiting in a monetary fashion from the industry — 

and that is the kind of people and the expertise that we would be 

looking for. 

 

(1259) 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas - 14 

 

Blakeney Brockelbank 

Shillington Koskie 

Romanow Tchorzewski 

Mitchell Simard 

Solomon Goulet 

Hagel  Lyons 

Trew Van Mulligen 

 

Nays - 33 

 

Devine Duncan 

McLeod Andrew 

Berntson Lane 

Taylor Smith 

Muirhead Maxwell 

Schmidt Hodgins 

Gerich Hepworth 

Hardy Klein 

Meiklejohn Martin 

Toth Sauder 

Johnson McLaren 

Hopfner Petersen 

Swenson Martens 

Baker Gleim 

Neudorf Gardner 

Kopelchuk Saxinger 

Britton  

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In light of the vote 

that has just been taken, and in view of the minister’s concern 

with respect to conflict of interest, I gather from the minister’s 

remarks that she is not opposing worker input into the decisions 

of the board; she is attempting to avoid the conflict of interest 

problem. 

 

If I have her intention correctly in that regard, could I ask the 

minister: — in the search that she makes for qualified people 

with mining expertise, but without a direct monetary interest or 

involvement, will she give the House the assurance that in her 

search for that expertise she will not simply be looking on the 

management side or the industry side, but will in fact search as 

well on the employee and the worker and the miner side so that 

there can be, on the board, representatives who do reflect the 

point of view of employees but without the direct monetary 

interest that she is concerned with. 

 

And if that is her intention, and if she can give the House  

that assurance, would she entertain some modification in clause 

6 or elsewhere in the Bill that would make that point, so that 

those who are concerned about employee input into the 

decisions of the board can lave legislative assurance that that in 

fact will occur? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, indeed the . . . By not 

having a direct mine person on the board does not exclude the 

need for direct input from all levels within the mines, including 

union representatives on behalf of their members, the workers, 

and so on. 

 

In terms of that board, I can give the House the assurance that 

what we want on the board are some knowledgeable people 

about the mining industry, people with some common sense, 

and that we will be looking for those that have had some, that 

have had some . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well then that 

might exclude the lawyer from Regina Centre, for example, 

who has great difficulty with common sense these days. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I can give the House the assurance that we will 

be looking for board members who have knowledge, common 

sense, and a high degree of integrity to ensure that this is carried 

out in a very fair and equitable manner. 

 

Clause 6 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 7 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 10 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Madam Minister, I am interested in the 

breadth of this section. You have excluded anyone who has any 

interest directly or indirectly, or is an employee of such a 

person. Apart from your officials of your own department, I 

can’t imagine who you’re going to appoint to this board who 

knows anything about it. 

 

My colleague from Regina Victoria keeps wondering: what’s 

Metro Rybchuk going to do? I suppose this might be a position 

for him. But apart from Metro Rybchuk and Gay Caswell and 

Bob Myers, I really have difficulty guessing who you’re going 

to appoint to this board. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Bud Smith, likely. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — And Bud Smith. It is just . . . Your 

exclusion is so broad, I think you’ve excluded anyone who will 

know anything about the industry. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — While the member may have some 

difficulties — and that’s now new in this House — there are, in 

fact, a lot of people with a great deal of knowledge as it pertains 

to the mining industry in general who are not presently 

employed, nor are they benefiting indirectly in a monetary 

fashion from the potash industry. 

 

Clause 10 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 11 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 18 

 

Mr. Chairman: — There is House amendment to clause 18: 

  



 

September 18, 1987 

 

2685 

 

 

Amend subsection 18(2) of the printed Bill by striking out 

“or” in the third line and substituting “of.” 

 

Mr. Koskie: — We have section - not clause but section 18 - is 

the power-rendering section. And in subsection (3) it indicates: 

 

(e) any additional factors that may be prescribed. 

 

And I’m wondering if the minister could indicate “prescribed” 

by whom, in respect to the criteria. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Prescribed as by the Lieutenant Governor 

in Council. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — What I want in respect to this section, Mr. 

Chairman, is also, at the conclusion of my brief remarks, is to 

move an amendment here. Here again it is in respect to the 

potash workers of Saskatchewan - of the industry, of the whole 

entire industry. And because they may in fact be laid off — and 

we got assurances from the minister that that’s not happening 

— but I think our major concern here has to do with the 

workers who produce the product and who, as I said before, had 

no input into the mismanagement by this government. 

 

And therefore what I want is to move an amendment in the 

following words: 

 

Any miner working the potash . . . 

 

This would be that: 

 

Section 18 of the printed Bill, be amended by adding the 

following subsection after subsection (4) (and that would 

be a new subsection, and I will send over to the minister, 

for her convenience, a copy of that): 

 

Any miner working in the potash industry in 

Saskatchewan whose employment is terminated directly or 

indirectly as a result of the decision made by the board, is 

entitled to be fully compensated by the board for that loss. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — As I said, that makes eminent sense to give 

protection to the workers throughout the industry because, after 

all, they are an important part of the development of the 

corporation, of the mining. They had no input into the decision 

making, and accordingly what we’re asking here is, at least if 

you’re going on this course, to give some protection to the 

workers of Saskatchewan. 

 

And certainly if, as the minister indicated, that there would be 

increase in prices and increase in profit, that some of that profit, 

in the event of loss, should give protection to any of the workers 

in the potash corporation that may directly or indirectly lost 

their jobs. 

 

I so move that motion, seconded by my seat-mate, the member 

from Regina Centre. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. The amendment is not in 

order. I’ll read section 7 of paragraph 773, page 233 of 

Beauchesne’s: 

 

An amendment is out of order if it imposes a charge upon 

the Public Treasury, if it extends the objects and purposes, 

or relaxes the conditions and qualifications as expressed in 

the Royal Recommendation. Journals, June 17, 1969, p. 

1172. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I accept your ruling, Mr. Chairman. Therefore I 

extend a challenge to the Government of Saskatchewan who 

can, in fact, and the minister, to take it upon herself to give 

protection to the working people in the potash industry by 

inviting her to put in such amendment to help protect the 

working people by giving them some guarantee of security. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I did not hear the comments at the end of 

the member’s statement, but I’m assuring that he’s asking for an 

amendment. Is that correct? 

 

Mr. Chairman, the purpose of the Bill has been one of 

protection of the industry and its jobs. We have stated that . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Your jobs. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — It has nothing to do with my job, nor does 

it have anything to do with your job. This is industry, the potash 

industry, Mr. Chairman. 

 

In response to the member’s request of an amendment of this 

sort, let me ask the member how on earth he would ever 

determine that a lay-off in a mine is directly or indirectly 

connected to a decision by the board. 

 

(1315) 

 

Listen, Mr. Member from Quill Lake, how do you determine in 

the normal course of maintenance lay-offs, how do you 

determine that it perhaps is directly connect to market 

conditions versus any decision that a board may make? What if 

it’s eight months after a board decision? I believe, Mr. 

Chairman, that that is near to impossible, and I once again 

emphasize this Bill is in here for protection of jobs in the 

industry. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Well that answer strikes me as the most 

incredible statement that I’ve ever heard. Here she is taking 

upon herself with a small board to control a whole industry, and 

she has no determination of whether a person lost his job as a 

result of cut-backs in production. That’s what she’s telling us to 

believe. All I can say, Madam Minister, it’s incredible. 

 

And the incompetence that you’ve demonstrated here today is, I 

think, demonstrated to all the people of Saskatchewan. And all I 

can say, I’m disappointed that you won’t allow worker 

participation in the board, and you won’t in fact allow worker 

protection by guaranteeing in the event of a loss of job as a 

result of your legislation. 

 

  



 

September 18, 1987 

 

2686 

 

 

Those are the basic things that you should be looking at. 

Governments are set up to provide protection for people and 

provide job securities in . . . And I think it’s unfair that this 

government absolutely refuses to give any guarantee or any 

worker participation in this decision that it’s made, brought on 

by its own incompetence. 

 

All I can say is that — to the workers of Saskatchewan — that 

we attempted to give some protection to them, and that the 

members opposite . . . and there’s just about every one of them 

here have refused to join with us to protect the workers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goodale: — On the same point with respect to clause 18, 

the minister is probably aware that the issue of lost jobs in 

relation to trade issues has been very much the subject of 

discussion in the House of Commons, and the Government of 

Canada has indicated, at least in general terms, that job 

adjustment factors are on their minds in relation to trade issues. 

 

And while they have stopped short of announcing any specific 

program in relation to the job implications in Canada of trade 

actions taken against Canada, particularly by the United States, 

while they’ve stopped short of making any specific 

announcements of a program, they have given some general 

indication that that issue is at least under consideration. 

 

And I wonder if the minister could give us her specific 

assurance, in relation to the potash industry in Saskatchewan 

and this Bill and our trade difficulties in relation to potash, that 

she will prevail upon her federal colleagues in the Government 

of Canada to come forward quickly with a specific plan that 

would relate to some form of compensation or adjustment 

mechanism to assist workers in Saskatchewan in the potash 

industry who may suffer as a consequence of U.S. trade action 

or legislative action of the kind that we have before us this 

afternoon. 

 

Will you ask the federal government to bring their resources to 

bear on that problem, because they’ve at least indicated they’re 

thinking about it? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I believe through my 

colleague, the hon. member from Kindersley, the Minister of 

Economic Development of Trade, that indeed those kinds of 

issues have already been raised with the federal government, 

and we will continue to press for what we think is necessary for 

Saskatchewan as it relates to trade. 

 

Clause 18 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 19 to 22 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 23 

 

Mr. Koskie: — I want to make a comment in respect to clause 

23, Mr. Chairman. I have raised these points of concern with 

the minister on clause 1, and what we will be proposing at the 

conclusion of my remarks is an  

amendment: 

 

That a person who is aggrieved by a decision of the board 

may appeal to the judge of Her Majesty, Court of Queen’s 

Bench for Saskatchewan, by filing a notice of appeal with 

the local registrar of the court within 30 days after the day 

in which the decision’s appeal from was made. 

 

I’ll be moving that motion, but I just want the . . . and I’ll pass 

over a copy to the . . . prior to moving it, so the minister has the 

opportunity to see it. You’ll notice the courtesy and the degree 

of preparedness that the opposition demonstrates. 

 

This is a very important principle because, as I indicated, Mr. 

Chairman, there is unfettered power here in this Bill given to 

the cabinet. As I said before, it goes: there is no challenge; there 

is no reprieve; there is no appeal by any aggrieved party. It’s 

solely the discretion and the power of the cabinet in and through 

the board which it appoints. The record of this government in 

its appointment leaves a lot to be desired, because we’ve seen in 

the potash corporation itself, to be a chairman of that 

corporation they appointed a former defeated — badly defeated 

cabinet minister, rejected by the people of Saskatchewan, and 

they put him in charge of the potash corporation — the very 

person that had absolutely, he indicated here, no business 

experience when he took over Small Business. 

 

And that’s the concern that we have here is that they’re setting 

up unfettered power in the hands of the government and a small 

board appointed by the government. And God knows who 

they’ll put in charge of the board. And so what we’re asking 

here is, rather than unfettered control that it in fact be an appeal 

to the Queen’s Bench. 

 

I think that if it’s going to be fair, and operated in a fair manner, 

then government should have nothing to fear to have the 

provision at least for the right to appeal any time that it is 

agreed. 

 

And so accordingly I will move that: 

 

That right of an appeal to the Court of Queen’s Bench be 

permitted. 

 

I move it, seconded by my seat-mate, the member from Regina 

Centre. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, just briefly, while I 

appreciate the courtesy and co-operation from the member 

opposite, I must also state that it’s relatively refreshing coming 

from that quarters, and we can only hope that perhaps it carries 

on. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I have to state once again in opposition to the 

amendment, while I understand the concern of the members 

opposite, I believe that they in turn do not understand the 

impact on the industry, the mines, and its workers, with what 

they are asking. And I’ve stated the reasons why. 

 

And once again, Mr. Chairman, I simply have to state that the 

board and the appeal process, we believe is done in  

  



 

September 18, 1987 

 

2687 

 

 

the best interests of the potash industry in ensuring that those 

mines keep operating and the workers keep working. 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Well again, Madam Minister, I’m disappointed 

that you will not make the amendment as we propose, which I 

think is a good amendment in that it does give a recourse to the 

court. 

 

And as I have indicated to you before, what you have indicated 

to the people of Saskatchewan and all of the producers and all 

the workers, is simply: trust me. And as I indicate, my 

experience with the workers across this province, they don’t 

have much trust left in the fairness of this government. 

 

And I’ll tell you, as we’ve indicated, the tests and the criteria of 

whether this Bill is satisfactory has been laid clearly before this 

legislature. And if jobs are lost and sacrificed and families have 

to make sacrifice, I’ll tell you this Bill will be a disaster and it’ll 

be on your head. 

 

So I again indicate that I’m disappointed that you will deny the 

natural justice even in wiping out the prerogative writs. And 

accordingly, I think it’s a bad precedent for a government to 

take upon itself unfettered powers without some recourse to 

those who may be aggrieved. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Briefly, Mr. Chairman, again I believe I 

stated that this is common as it pertains to resource 

management legislation, and I refer the member to the energy 

conservation and management board in Alberta. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, in terms of the draftsmanship 

of this particular section, there are sections in other laws that 

attempt to prohibit or to restrict judicial review of those laws. I 

wonder if the minister can give us her assurance that the 

language used in this particular section is drawn no more 

broadly than the other precedents in other pieces of legislation, 

and that in this section she is not seeking any restriction upon 

judicial review that is of any greater extreme than that contained 

in other legislation dealing with other matters. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, there are other pieces 

of legislation. And again I believe the member was not here 

when I had stated that there is protection there in terms of the 

board. If a board should act in bad faith or in a discriminatory 

manner, they do, in fact, through the administrative law of 

principles, have access to those courts. 

 

Clause 23 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 24 to 26 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 27 

 

Mr. Shillington: — With respect to section 27, I wonder if 

Madam Minister would undertake to table the regulations under 

this section. I assume since this is a crushing emergency that is 

barrelling at us like a steam-engine  

down a set of tracks, you must have your regulations ready to 

pass. 

 

I therefore assume you’re in a position to table them. So I ask 

you, Madam Minister, if you’ll table the regulations which you 

intend to pass, which I assume are necessary before this 

legislation can have any effect at all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1330) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — His words are “crushing emergency.” My 

words have always been, this is important legislation but it will 

be dealt with in the normal course of events. And he knows that 

regulations, once they are approved, are public. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Madam Minister, I ask you when you think 

the regulations might be ready and when you think this Bill is 

going to pass? 

 

You’ve introduced this with inflamed language. The Premier 

and the Minister of International Trade and Commerce sounded 

like Iranian Ayatollahs when they were talking about the 

Americans and their approach. They were going to stand the 

Americans against the wall. 

 

And, Madam Minister, you as well stated this was an 

emergency; the potash industry was in the danger of imminent 

collapse. I wonder, Madam Minister, when we’re going to have 

the regulations for this Bill. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, he knows that regulations 

are not put into place until the legislative authority is passed, 

and then the regulations are done. 

 

And once again, contrary to the language that is spewing from 

across the floor, it has not been inflamed. If he wants to go back 

and read Hansard in terms of the introduction of the Bill, the 

introduction of the Bill, he will find non-inflammatory 

language. And I urge him to go back and read it. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — When do you expect the regulations to be 

ready? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I would expect once the 

legislation is passed that the regulations will be done very soon. 

 

Clause 27 agreed to. 

 

Clause 28 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Well I just want to ask the minister, you came 

into the House and you said this was going to be an important 

Bill, and I guess the simple question is: when do you intend to 

proclaim the Bill? I mean, why not proclaim it immediately, on 

assent. There’s no indication as to when you’re even going to 

proclaim it. You don’t have the regulations. Obviously, 

obviously it’s a cosmetic Bill that you’ve brought into this 

House, and what I ask you simply is: when do you intend to 

proclaim it? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I believe Monday night it is  

  



 

September 18, 1987 

 

2688 

 

 

scheduled, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. 

 

Clause 28 agreed to. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister move to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Before doing do, Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to take this opportunity to thank the member . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . yes, particularly the member from Quill Lakes, 

and the other members that have had an opportunity to question 

on this Bill. 

 

If I could indulge the House for a moment, Mr. Chairman . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Allow the minister to make 

her comments. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — If I could indulge some patience with the 

House for a moment, I would also like to thank my officials that 

are here today and a particular thank you to Mr. Bob Reid. 

 

When I introduced the officials, I said my former deputy, and 

Mr. Reid is leaving . . . or left the Department of Energy Mines. 

I would also like to state to this House, it isn’t often that we 

have an opportunity in this Legislative Assembly to say 

goodbye to a long-time, excellent civil servant who has served 

under several governments and under several ministers, and we 

have that opportunity today. 

 

Bob is probably the true definition of a true professional, 

competent civil servant. He has worked in several departments 

under the NDP government and under the PC government. He 

is considered an excellent administrator, and I believe the 

member from Weyburn and myself can both attest to that. He is 

one of the best when it comes to negotiating in the best interests 

of Saskatchewan people. And in my one year with him,, I have 

not met a civil servant that can match him when it comes to the 

best interests of the taxpayer in mind. 

 

Mr. Chairman, he’s leaving and he’s going to become the chief 

executive officer of IPAC, which is the Independent Petroleum 

Association and I would hope that both sides would join with 

me in wishing him well in his future and thanking him for his 

time over approximately a decade of working for this . . . for 

government and the people of the province. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I do join with the minister 

to thank her officials for providing information. It was a 

difficult task with this minister, there’s no doubt about that. 

 

But I also want to extend our congratulations to her deputy, Mr. 

Reid, who will be leaving. We have seen during the course of 

this government many good, qualified individuals, competent 

people, leave for other parts of Canada, and that’s why the 

incompetence that  

has been set in, because what they have done is substitute 

competent civil servants with political hacks . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: — . . . like Paul Schoenhals and Sid Dutchak and 

the list goes on. And I say that we are, in fact, sorry to have 

many of our competent people who have served this province 

well leave because of the incompetence of the government and 

inability to continue to work under such mismanagement. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 36 - An Act respecting the Potash Resources of 

Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I move that the amendments be now read 

a first and second time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title, with leave. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1:40 p.m. 

 


