


















































July 9, 1987 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 July 9, 1987 
 
 

1069 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Environment and Public Safety 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 9 

 
Item 1 (continued) 

 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, before we broke for supper at 5 
o’clock we were talking about emergency procedures. And I 
would like you in some detail to explain to the House what sort of 
procedures are in place for PCB (polychlorinated biphenyl) spills? 
What sort of procedures does your Department personnel use? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I gave the hon. member some of the 
information prior to the break at 5 o’clock. I told you that we have 
the spill line. It operates 24 hours a day, and there’s always 
someone responsible to monitor. So as soon as there’s a call on the 
spill line, it would indicate where the spill was, where there’s a 
PCB, or whatever, spill. Someone goes then to the site to see that 
the clean-up is done properly. 
 
One of the first things they do is to isolate the spill. Then the spill 
is cleaned up and, in most cases, put into metal containers. The 
containers, if there are low levels of PCBs . . . and that has too be 
ascertained by the lab test. If there are low levels of PCBs, then 
they go to the firm that we have operating in the province., PPM, 
and they can process to remove the PCBs. 
 
If there are higher levels of PCBs, then they go into storage until 
such times that we can access another disposal. Sometimes 
they’ve had to be transported out of the province to an incinerator 
or whatever the case may be. It depends on what level of PCBs we 
deal with, but the process would be very similar, except in one 
case they’d go to be processed, the other way they’d go into 
storage until a later date. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, you will recall that there were 
two spills in 1985 in Saskatoon. Can you tell me where those 
PCB-contaminated materials ended up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The one spill was cleaned up and the product 
is stored at Inland Steel. The other my staff is not entirely sure of 
the storage site. We’ve had a change of staff personnel, and the 
person that had been looking after that at that time is not here 
tonight. He’s left the employ of the Department of Environment. 
We could look it up for you, but we don’t have that information 
here. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I know where the other 
spill went to. It went to the 600 block of main street which is 
within two blocks of where I live and half a block of where I have 
my constituency office. This storage site is located in a residential 
area. I asked you earlier to give some indication of whether or not 
there are PCB-contaminated materials stored in residential areas 
and you were not able to provide me with that information. 
 
In this situation, PCBs are stored across the street from  

Nutana Towers, which is a high-rise for a number of residents, and 
it’s within a couple doors of where people live, and it’s within a 
couple doors of where people work, and it’s across the street from 
the native survival school. Now this storage site is . . . it’s the 
storage site of Saskatoon; and it’s an electrical substation. 
 
And I think we spoke of earlier how PCBs required very high 
temperatures in order to properly burn. And in this situation, Mr. 
Minister, my concern is that here we have a PCB storage sight 
within a residential neighborhood at an electrical substation, and 
there is potential, and I do say, potential, of fire. 
 
Now you earlier talked about temporary storage sites. And I asked 
you what temporary meant, and you said six months. My question 
to you is this: is that storage site, on the 600 block of main street 
within a residential area, across the street from a school, is that a 
temporary site, or a permanent site? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — My staff advise me that the site can be either 
temporary or permanent, in that case. It’s approved by the city of 
Saskatoon and the Power Corporation. Sometimes you’ll put 
low-level PCBs in for longer periods. If it’s high level usually 
they’re moved sooner than that. So it depends a bit on which 
product you have, how much of it, whether it’s going to stay a 
long time or a short time. So it’s a difficult question to be 
definitive and give you the kind of answer that you’re looking for. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, you just told me a few minutes 
ago that low-level PCB-contaminated material goes to PBM, I 
believe, here in Regina. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — PTM. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — . . . or PTM, and higher-level material is pit in 
storage. Could you tell me whether the PCB-contaminated 
material on Main Street is high-level, or low-level? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — My department doesn’t have the answer here. 
We could find out for you, but I’m not sure which ones are stored 
there. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, one would have to presume that it 
must be a high-level material or it would have been dealt with, 
with regards to your earlier remarks. Is that not correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It’s quite possible it could be a high-level. I 
think that the hon. member must realize that if it’s a very small 
spill and they contain it in one barrel, it would be very difficult to 
have a portable machine move in to process that one small 
amount. They come only when there’s quantities in a given area 
enough that they have significant work to do. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Even in a residential area, Herb? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — If the member for Riversdale has a question, I 
hope he’ll stand and ask it. 
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1070 
 

The product is left, perhaps, in residential areas, I suppose. I’ve 
had a transformer in the yard where I live, right beside my garden. 
It’s been there since 1954; it has caused me no problem. And so 
you may have one in the backyard where you live, and many 
people do have. It’s not a chemical that floats around freely in the 
air and would cause you any problem. The only time it will cause 
problems is if there’s a leakage and it’s a direct skin contact. So 
it’s perhaps not as dangerous as many people think. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, we’re not dealing with one barrel 
of PCB-contaminated soil, we are dealing with between 9 and 13 
huge drums — huge drums. They appear to be the size of Loraas 
disposal bins, and they’re sitting outside of the yard in the 
Saskatoon electrical substation. So it’s a large quantity of material. 
 
My question to you is: is it temporary or is it permanent? Is it high 
level or low level? If it’s low level, why hasn’t it been dealt with; 
and if it’s high level, what’s it doing in a residential 
neighborhood? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We don’t, as a rule, direct the movement of 
that material. I would suggest to the hon. member that the site that 
you speak of is likely owned by the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation, being you say it’s a substation, an electrical 
substation. Perhaps it would be more appropriate if you asked that 
question of the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation and he would have his staff there who could answer 
your question. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, you are the Minister of 
Environment. You’re the Minister of Environment, so in my view 
it’s your responsibility to protect the public safety of 
Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — My question is this: can you tell me what 
happens when PCBs are involved in a natural fire, Mr. Minister? 
What happens to the air and the water and the soil? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That’s a fairly technical question. I don’t 
have a group of scientists around me that can give you an actual 
answer to that. I suppose it depends to some extent on the 
temperature involved at the time of the fire and what kind of 
substances are burning. Every product burns at a different 
temperature. PCBs require a fairly high temperature. We don’t 
even have the exact temperature that it does take. That would be 
something I would have to try and get for the hon. member. 
 
In the brochure that you have, it says 1,100 degrees centigrade is 
the temperature in which PCBs are destroyed. That’s quite warm. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, natural fire would not be 
over 1,000 degrees Celsius. And therefore, if a fire were to occur 
at that substation site, we have the potential of a serious health 
hazard in Saskatoon Nutana on Broadway and Main Street. And 
my real question, Mr. Minister, is: what are PCB-contaminated 
material doing in a residential site? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised by my staff that the products that 
you are concerned about are in an area that’s secured — it’s 
fenced, it’s secured, it’s in a metal drum. So the likelihood of fire 
on that site with metal drums is fairly remote. It’s never 
impossible. I might tell you that when the NDP were in 
government, they weren’t even collected. They were left sitting 
wherever the site happened to be, and they were all over the 
province. At least now they are being collected. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me what is inside the 
building on the site? I’m not talking about the metal drums in the 
inner yard of the site; I’m talking about what’s in the building. 
How many electrical ballasts are there? How many transformers 
are there? Can you give me that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, we don’t monitor the storage of that kind 
of equipment. The power corporation may be able to give it to 
you, but they would likely have to go back to staff members in 
Saskatoon for that kind of detailed information. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, in 1985 when the citizens of 
Saskatoon Nutana were concerned about this material being stored 
in that site, the Department of the Environment did give us the 
information. I’m asking you for an update of that information, and 
I would like it within the next day or two. I’m sure you can get it. 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would doubt if we can get it in the next day. 
We may be able to get it. We would phone the power corporation 
and ask them for the information. I would think the hon. member 
has the same kind of telephone privileges. So do you want me to 
do it for you, or are you going to make your own telephone call? 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I’m not the minister of the 
Environment; you are. And when I’m the minister of the 
Environment, then I’ll make the telephone call for you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I go back to my original point. 
What are PCB-contaminated materials, both in huge Loraas 
disposal bins, both in the electrical ballast and transformers, what 
are they doing in a residential neighborhood? How can you justify 
that? How can you justify PCB-contaminated material being in a 
residential area? I’d like you to justify that to the citizens of this 
province and to the residents of Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would like just to mention to the hon. 
member that in the power substation, you have a number of large 
transformers. You have to have, because otherwise you wouldn’t 
have power for your district. Those containers have the same kind 
of PCB-contaminated oil in them as the barrels. So there’s very 
little difference in storing a barrel of goods or storing  
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1071 
 

a transformer which is just like a barrel with a top on it, that’s all. 
Both of them are fairly secure. So the product is probably no more 
dangerous in its present state stored on that site than it was in the 
power transformer. And with no current going through it, it’s 
likely less dangerous. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I would like to get back to the 
fenced yard that you referred to earlier. I want you to know that 
there have been numerous incidents of children in the yard. It’s 
easy for children to get over the fence and into the yard. So there 
have been instances of children playing amongst 
PCB-contaminated Loraas disposal bins. 
 
Now I’d like to get back to fire. Mr. Minister, that substation does 
have a wood roof. The Department of the Environment made 
some provisions in 1985 to ensure that the plumbing had been 
filled in with cement so that we wouldn’t have leaching into the 
earth and into the sewage system. But there still is the potential 
possibility of an electrical substation starting on fire. That’s not an 
unreasonable possibility. 
 
And my question to you is: why would the Department of the 
Environment want to jeopardize so many residents of Saskatoon 
Nutana and area by having PCB-contaminated ballasts and 
transformers and dirt, etc., etc., in that electrical substation? Why 
would you want to jeopardize the citizens of Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I say again to the hon. member that it is not 
our storage. It’s the Saskatchewan Power Corporation’s storage, 
with the approval of the city of Saskatoon. It’s not our storage. 
 
We have, I think, been fairly effective in cleaning up many, many 
products that have been stored around the Province. We have a 
company now in this province who travel from site to site and 
dispose of many of those hazards. So it’s the first one in the 
country. I think we’ve made a step out ahead of most provinces in 
Canada. We’re doing a good job, in my opinion, of looking after 
the welfare of the environment and of our people. 
 
I might tell the hon. member that it would be far more dangerous 
to the children that are climbing into that substation, the effects 
that could occur, because they’re close to the very high voltages in 
the power transformers than the problem they’re going to face 
from the PCB barrels. So if you’re having that problem, I think 
you should phone the power corporation to put up a fence that is 
capable of holding the child out. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I don’t disagree with you that 
there is a possibility of two potential health hazards in that 
situation. But it is a situation that is occurring and it’s a situation 
that has been brought to the attention of the owners of that 
particular electrical substation. 
 
But I go back to my original point, Mr. Minister, would you take it 
upon yourself to ensure that those PCB-contaminated materials are 
removed from that particular location which is a residential 
neighborhood? Would you please do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that at this time we don’t 

have the authority to demand that Sask Power move the articles 
stored on that site and put them in another site. That isn’t our 
authority. It’s within the authority of the power corporation and 
the city of Saskatoon. They both agree that they have a good site, a 
safe site to store. And I think for that reason I couldn’t agree that 
we will go out and have them moved. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, that’s very disappointing 
because I do think that you have some influence in this province. I 
do think you have some influence with the minister responsible for 
the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. I do think you have some 
influence with municipal government in Saskatoon. And so I 
guess I’d go back to my original premise that I think it’s time that 
you started showing some leadership in this area, and I think 
you’re capable of showing leadership. I do think that you are a 
minister with some integrity, a great deal of integrity. 
 
And I guess my question to you is: why aren’t you prepared to do 
something about a situation where we have PCB-contaminated 
material in a residential area? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would expect that the area that you speak of 
is likely zoned both commercial and residential form what you’re 
telling me is located there. I don’t have a zoning map of the city of 
Saskatoon, but I don’t think you could have the things in the area 
that you speak of without that zoning. 
 
I would ask the hon. member to please refer to her city if she’s 
really concerned. You know many of the city council. If you’re 
concerned about that site being a storage site, it’s been approved 
by that city. You are a resident of that city, an MLA representing 
that city. I have some authorities, but I think you also have some. 
So sometimes the best way to deal with things that are right on 
your doorstep is to deal with it yourself, and you may give that a 
try. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, we have given it a try. and I guess 
I go back to my original argument — I think that you are capable 
of providing some leadership. I think that if you wanted to, you 
could amend the legislation to protect residents in residential 
neighborhoods who have to deal with this sort of thing. We 
shouldn’t have to put up with toxic, chemicals and 
PCB-contaminated material because the legislation allows various 
jurisdictions to do what they will. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, if you were prepared to amend the 
legislation, I know it would certainly be supported on this side of 
the House, and we could protect residents of Saskatoon Nutana 
and other residents in residential neighborhoods across this 
province. So my question is: will you amend the legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m not going to make a commitment right 
now to amend the legislation. That’s a fairly major decision and 
one that I would like to give much more thought to. 
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1072 
 

You know, that site didn’t just occur after 1982. That site has been 
a storage site for some time. It says: 
 

Since 1980 the City of Saskatoon has been using a brick 
building at 619 Main Street to store PCB capacitors and other 
electrical equipment containing PCBs. 

 
So it’s been there a long time, and it says that the city is doing it. 
This was the report that was given to you last year, that I was 
reading from. It’s not new information; it’s last year’s. So it’s not 
updated. So that indicates to me that the city would not be the 
source, and if you’re really concerned, you should go back to that 
source. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, it’s obvious that you’re not going 
to do anything, and we can discuss this for aeons and I suspect 
you’re not going to do anything. I find that very disappointing. I 
thought that you were capable of providing some leadership for 
people who are concerned about the environment in this province, 
but it’s obvious that you’re not. 
 
So then my question is this: what are you prepared to do to ensure 
that that site is properly monitored, and to ensure that a number of 
other sites across this province are properly monitored, so that the 
health and safety of the public is protected? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that the sites are inspected on an 
ongoing basis to be sure that they are secure sites that are suitable 
for the storage of PCBs. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I don’t think that’s what 
you told me last week. I think you told me that they were only 
monitored if there was a public outcry f some kind. So are you 
changing your story? Do we now monitor sites or don’t we? 
What’s the answer here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that they’re monitoring on an 
ongoing basis. That doesn’t mean every day or every six months, 
but on an ongoing basis they re checked and people try to see that 
they are secure sites, sites that are fairly safe. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I’d just like to quote Hansard 
here, and I asked you on July 2 the following question: 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, if you’re not aware of all the 
storage sites around the province, I’m wondering what sort of 
process your department goes through to monitor the storage of 
PCBs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that our department does not 
monitor the storage sites. If there is any complaint raised about 
a storage site that’s not proper, then of course we will have it 
checked out. But Sask Power traditionally is the company that 
we deal with. Sometimes there have been others, but 
traditionally that’s the main company that would be storing the 
product. 

 
Whoops! Have we changed our story? Do you monitor sites or 
don’t you? 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — My staff advised me that in one case you 
talked of storage disposal, of disposables; the other one is storage 
of equipment that would contain. So there are two answers indeed. 
 
We don’t monitor where Sask Power stores its transformers and 
things, but we do monitor the actual disposal sites. So there’s a 
definite difference. 
 
I don’t recall now what your question was. The answer I gave you 
would be the answer from the same people, and that’s what 
they’re indicating to me. On an ongoing basis, they do monitor the 
disposal sites. They don’t monitor the sites where the Sask Power 
Corporation stores their transformers and that sort of equipment. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, can you please tell me what you 
mean by disposal site and storage site? I’m confused. My 
presumption is that they’re the same . Can you tell me that? 
 
And I’m wondering who monitors this. Have you contracted it out, 
or does the Department of Environment monitor the sites or the 
disposal sites, storage sites? Who does the monitoring? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — When we talk of disposal, it’s an area where 
we have had a spill cleaned up and moved to an area, and 
eventually that product then is gathered and moved on for 
disposal. And that’s what I refer to as a disposal. It’s a disposal 
from a clean-up to that site and then another disposal when it’s 
taken away. So that’s what we mean by the difference in disposal 
or just the storage of equipment by Sask Power. The monitoring is 
done by the staff of the Department of the Environment. 
 
(1930) 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I think we were . . . I was talking 
storage site last week. I clarified what I meant. I was talking about 
PCB-contaminated material that was moved to a site. You talked 
earlier in your remarks of how this material is there for awhile, it’s 
temporary. And I’m wondering if you can tell me whether the 
storage site at the 600 block of Main Street is temporary or 
permanent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, as I read to you, the site has been there 
since 1980, and that would be very hard to say that’s temporary 
storage after seven years. The products that are stored there at 
times may be PCBs gathered up from a spill site, but at other times 
those may be gone, taken away to be processed. And the only 
thing that would be left on site then could be transformers and 
equipment. So it varies. At one time it may be a product storage 
space for a spill, other times just strictly used by Sask Power for 
their everyday operations. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Then, Mr. Minister, what you’re basically 
saying is that that particular site in a residential neighborhood has 
become a permanent site. And I go back to my original premise. 
Will you, Mr. Minister, undertake to ensure that that is no longer a 
permanent site, and will you do something to ensure that those 
PCB-contaminated materials are removed? 
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1073 
 

That site is located across the street from a school. It’s located 
across the street from an apartment building that for all purposes is 
a senior citizen complex, and it’s within a couple of doors of 
residences, Mr. Minister, will you either make sure that the site is 
done away with, that we no longer have PCBs stored there, or will 
you change the legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m going to read this section on 619 Main 
Street to the hon. member. You’ve been misleading me on the fact 
that it is a residential district. And I’ll read the paragraph. It’s just 
one fairly long paragraph. It says: 
 

Since 1980 the city of Saskatoon have been using a brick 
building at 619 Main Street to store PCB capacitors and other 
electric equipment containing PCBs. The property also houses 
three large transformers that are currently in use by the city. As 
a result, the property is completely fenced with warning signs 
posted. The area is zoned light industrial; however, it is 
primarily residential. 

 
But the zoning is light industrial, and that is extremely important 
to realize. It says: 
 

Following two capacitor failures in April of 1985, the city 
placed the excavated soil in sealed steel bins and moved them to 
this location. 

 
So I think that’s fairly clear that it is light industrial area. That’s 
what I indicated to you before. From what you were telling me, it 
didn’t sound like a residential district. The people can live in a 
light industrial area, but it’s still zoned that way. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I haven’t misled you a bit. That 
site is located in a residential area. It’s across the street from a high 
rise, for the most part is occupied by senior citizens. It’s within 
two doors of people who live in houses. It’s across the street from 
a school and there are residences all around it. So I haven’t misled 
you one bit. And my question . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — And my question to you, Mr. Minister, is: when 
are you going to start showing some leadership? When are you 
going to change the Act so that people in residential areas can be 
protected from this kind of haphazard storage of toxic and 
dangerous materials? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I can advise the hon. member that we have 
been going through a process of drafting regulations to deal with 
hazardous goods, and the regulations are nearing the final stages. 
They’re in the drafting process. They’ve been reviewed a number 
of times and have had changes, but they are nearing the final 
stages of drafting and will likely be in place in the next short 
while, like within two, three months. 
 
Those regulations could address, I believe, the concern that you 
raise. I can’t give you the detail until they are finalized. It’s a little 
awkward timing, I guess, but it looks like the regulations could 
very easily deal with the storage  

sites such as the one you mention. Whether or not we can actually 
bring that one because it’s under city jurisdiction, it gives us some 
difficulty, but it’s one that we can look at. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, a few minutes ago you said you 
didn’t have any authority, and now you’re saying that you do. So 
I’m wondering under what statute that you’re going to be 
introducing these regulations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It’ll be under the environmental protection 
Act and it will deal with hazardous substances. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, what now prevents you from 
putting in this new policy? What’s preventing you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I indicated to the hon. member that these are 
regulations that will deal with the storage and the handling of 
hazardous products. So once those regulations are through, that 
would give us the authority that we need. 
 
At this point the regulations are not in place, and until that 
happens, they have to go through the whole regulation process. 
I’m sure the member is aware of most of that process. They’re 
drafted by my department. They go through the committees, 
through Executive Council, and then through the legislative 
Regulations Committee before they become final. So there is quite 
a process, and I would expect within two to three months, likely 
they can go through that process if we get our committee 
structured. We’ve had some trouble in this session and the 
committee are not in place. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, the Regulations Committee is in 
place. I’m a member of it, and we have met on two occasions. 
 
And I guess my question to you is this: Are you giving me your 
words that the regulations will deal with the issue that I raised of 
PCB-contaminated material being stored in a residential area? 
Will these regulations ensure that that can no longer be the case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The regulations cannot be as specific as the 
hon. member is mentioning. They’re not going to mention 619 
Main Street, for example. But the regulations will give the kind of 
direction that is required to ensure that the storage of hazardous 
goods is properly carried out. That’s what we don’t have in place 
right at this point. So we’re dealing with it. I think that once the 
regulation comes through, you’ll be quite satisfied with it, and 
we’ll make every effort to see that PCB-contaminated material is 
stored properly. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. Just to clean up on 
the PCB matter, I’m wondering if the minister could tell me how 
the mobile destruction unit works. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that the portable equipment is 
capable of handling PCBs up to 50 parts per million level. It’s a 
chemical process that they use. I’m not scientist enough to give 
you the whole process, but it is a chemical process that it goes 
through, and it brings it back down to a very low level, usable by 
the power corporation 
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1074 
 

Mr. Koenker: — Has that unit been operative here in 
Saskatchewan yet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, the mobile has been operating in the 
province since 1985, I’m advised, so it’s running on two years. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Is there more than one mobile unit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, I’m advised, one unit. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I understood that on February 14, 1986, the 
former minister of Environment entered a joint agreement with 
British Columbia, Alberta, and Manitoba for a mobile disposal or 
destructing unit. How can it be that it was in place already in ‘85? 
Or maybe there was another process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think what the hon. member refers to is 
discussions that were being held between the four western 
provinces. At one point they looked at the complete handling of 
toxic wastes. Then later on Alberta decided to go on its own and 
build its own plant at Swan Hills, Manitoba has now moved to set 
up its own Crown corporation to look after its hazardous 
substances. So we’ve gone on our own and have the first mobile 
unit, anywhere that we’re aware of, that is doing that kind of work. 
And they’ve been most effective in cleaning up much of the 
contaminated oil that is stored within our province. They’re not 
completely finished; it’s an on-going process they’re still working 
at. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Is that unit on the road throughout the year,, 
then, or does it only go out in special circumstances? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — For the most part, the mobile is located in the 
industrial park here in Regina. And when it has sufficient work 
away from Regina, it’s capable of going out and doing that work 
and coming back. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — What is deemed sufficient work to merit the 
unit leaving Regina and going to other parts of the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well this is a business. They’ve set-up; they 
operate on a business economic basis. Unless there is enough 
product to warrant the move, the set-up, and the processing of 
significant volume, they won’t go out. They’ll have the volumes 
of material brought to them, if it’s small quantities. So I can’t give 
you the exact gallonage that would be required. I could probably 
get it if that’s important, but they go out only when there’s enough 
to make it economically viable for them to go out. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — What then, Mr. Minister, is the problem with 
the unit going up to Main Street in Saskatoon and dealing with the 
waste there, or else making the arrangements for Sask Power to 
convey the material, if it is in fact, such a relatively small amount 
that doesn’t merit the unit going to Saskatoon, to make 
arrangements for that material to be transported to the unit in 
Regina and be dealt with. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That kind of arrangement would be  

made between the group that have the product in storage at that 
site and PPM. Like, we don’t get directly involved in that process. 
That’s between the company that has the product that needs the 
treatment, and the people who do the processing. It’s a business 
venture; they deal directly with the power corporation and with 
others. so there may be nothing stopping them. 
 
I don’t know whether the volume is high enough that it would 
require them to move out, and if it’s higher contamination than 50 
parts per million, then their equipment is not suitable for that 
process. so there are many unknowns as far as I’m concerned. I 
couldn’t give you an answer beyond that. 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Koenker: — In other words the department really has 
nothing to do directly with the PTM company and this mobile 
disposal unit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We don’t have any direct ties, no. We do 
have the . . . We’ve had the negotiation with them to get them to 
come, and the permit that’s required for them to operate here is 
issued by the department, but they’re an autonomous private 
company that do the work. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Does the department review their records on an 
annual basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m sorry, I was talking. I missed your 
question. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Does the department review the records of PTM 
on an annual basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No. I’m advised that we don’t monitor the 
actual business operation. What we do is to watch the site where 
they operate to be sure that the operation is not contaminating the 
environment, but we don’t look at their business books. They 
work directly with their client. The client pays them. There’s no 
involvement by Environment to pay them any money or anything 
of that nature. So, no, we don’t monitor their business activities. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Do you monitor their activities with respect to 
the residues that are left over after the destruction process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that after they process the oil, it’s 
clean and ready for reuse. So the little parts that they would take 
out, you know, like they use a chemical treatment which destroys 
the PCBs . . . So there’s no basic problem with the residue. 
 
How much residue there is, I’m not really sure. They tell me that 
they store what little bit there is, but it’s not large quantities. 
 
I might tell you with the major spill at Federal Pioneer, this 
company was able to come in and process the spill and to clean it 
up for the province and for the city. So it’s been a very valuable 
company to the province. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well it sounds to me that we have here an 
example of the privatization, really, of the public  
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1075 
 

welfare again, by virtue of the fact that the department only 
intervenes to get PTM to come into the province, and then really 
once they establish themselves here in Regina, they’re free to do 
pretty well what they want, or not serve the public welfare, 
depending on whether it’s economically viable for them. Could 
the minister comment on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We have many private industries within the 
boundaries of Saskatchewan. This group developed the 
technology to deal with PCB-contaminated products. They came 
and we negotiated with them to get them to establish in our 
province because we had a problem of PCB-contaminated oil and 
no way of processing. I’m indeed happy that they came. 
 
I think far be it from me to criticize anybody because a company 
like that comes. I would say here we have a company who does it 
on a viable basis. The province doesn’t have to pay out a lot of 
dollars. We do monitor to see that they’re not contaminating our 
environment. The product that they turn out has to be checked to 
be sure that it’s free of PCBs before it can be reused. It’s lab 
tested. So I’m amazed at the member criticizing that. To me it 
sounds like a perfect solution for a serious problem. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I agree, Mr. Minister, that it does help to 
provide a solution. And I think the department is to be 
commended for negotiating the company coming into the 
province. 
 
My question is though, with respect to the role of the department 
in facilitating the clean-up of PCBs rather than simply leaving it to 
the economic factors of the market-place, do you not think that 
you have some role to play, as the minister responsible for the 
Environment, in facilitating the clean-up of problem situations 
such as the member from Saskatoon Nutana just pointed out in the 
previous half-hour? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I suppose you can identify that one in 
Saskatoon as a problem area. The city of Saskatoon doesn’t view 
it as a problem area. Saskatchewan Power Corporation hasn’t 
viewed it as a problem area. It’s a storage site. And the products 
go to that site and then they’re moved on and processed and the 
site is clean. And then when there’s a need, there’s other product 
moved there. So I don’t identify it as a problem site. 
 
I just wanted to advise the hon. member that since this company 
has operated here, they have processed something in excess of 
500,000 litres of PCB-contaminated oil. That’s a major 
improvement to our environment, and we’re very pleased with the 
work they’ve done. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I would concur in that opinion too. I think that 
is a good record. It’s just that I would like to see further problem 
areas dealt with. And I think that you as a minister have the ability 
to deal with that. 
 
Let’s talk about 1986 and 1987 now in terms of the estimates. 
What was the funding for the air pollution control program last 
year? 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Last year the budge amount was 386,430. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — What was spent last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The expenditure was 368,479. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And what is the estimate for air pollution 
control this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — 264,510. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — We have a reduction of about a third for the air 
pollution control program here in the province. Would you not 
agree? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The budget figure this year is 264,510. You 
can’t look only at the budget as it relates to this because we have 
changed the internal structures of the department. We now have 
one director that deals with the air and the land both — both areas. 
So much of the saving that you see there will be staff savings. 
 
We had some retirements, some changes, some people that left. 
And sometimes you will end up getting people at a lesser cost 
because they haven’t had 25 years of experience, so that again 
drops it. So I think there has been a significant reduction, and yet I 
think we’ve left enough money to do the job that needs to be done. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — My understanding is that this year you’ll be 
doing or anticipate doing more of a job than you have done in this 
regard with respect to air pollution control than in previous years. 
You’ve mentioned yesterday and in the Speech from the Throne 
that there will be a new air pollution control Act. Do you 
anticipate any added expenditure by virtue of the introduction of 
that Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t expect a lot more work because of it. 
The requirements for industry will be spelled out clearly and the 
industries will be expected to meet the requirements under that 
legislation. But the staff will continue to work hard to see that the 
job is done and the monitoring that’s needed under the Act will be 
carried out. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — You don’t anticipate that the department will be 
providing any assistance, then, to companies in terms of 
facilitating their compliance with the Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Our department doesn’t provide any 
monetary assistance to them to meet the requirements of the 
legislation. What we do is to measure the emissions at plants to be 
sure that they come under the guide-lines of the legislation. Many 
of the industries here have been measured and are monitored on an 
ongoing basis, if need be. So we may have to check different 
industries, but likely not all that many more than what we have 
checked in the past. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well in the past you’ve only really been 
responsible in terms of The Air Pollution Control Act for those 
industries that were covered as of the introduction of the old Act. 
As you said yourself yesterday, you’ll be going back to clean up 
some of those major industrial projects or corporate projects that 
were able to operate  
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1076 
 

without compliance. I would think that now you would need 
additional staff, or have to make some sort of provision in terms of 
dealing with those companies, to facilitate their compliance. Do 
you not admit to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — This new legislation will come into place. 
The compliance by the industries will be phased in over a period 
of time. You can’t do it all in one day or anything of that nature. 
Most of the industries in the province will be operating within the 
guide-lines of the new legislation. What this does is gives the 
department the authority to go back. Now that there’s always a 
problem, but industries established prior to 1976 were not covered 
by the legislation. This will cover them by the legislation, which I 
think is a step forward, in that if there is a problem we can deal 
with. At the present time, we wouldn’t have the authority to. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Koenker: — What will the staffing component for the air 
pollution control program this year be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The only change is that the director that we 
have now will also cover land. So we have five people instead of 
six covering the area. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — This surprises me, quite frankly, that at a time 
when you’re making a major new initiative to enhance air 
pollution control, we see a reduction from six staff people to five. 
We see a reduction in spending by approximately a third. 
 
If we go back to the year ‘84-85, it represents almost half of what 
was spent in that year. I believe the figure of the fiscal year ‘84-85 
was $497,830. I’m wondering what is not being done now by 
virtue of this air pollution control program that would have been 
done, let’s say, three years ago, with double the expenditure and 
probably four people — almost double the staff. What work isn’t 
being done now? How have these cut-backs affected the program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The big change will come in the acid rain 
program because we’ve done the studies. Studies are expensive as 
the member would know. We’ve put the monitoring equipment in 
place. Now it’s a matter of going out and reading the equipment. 
So you don’t need near as many people to do that. That’s the 
biggest change. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And you don’t feel that the introduction of this 
new Act will result in any additional expenditures for the 
department over the previous year, that in fact the introduction of 
this new Act will affect an economy of approximately one-third 
within the department for the air pollution control program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well as the member realizes, when we went 
into the budget process this year, the decision was that every 
program was going to have to be trimmed and that the operating 
costs, the administrative costs, were going to have to be trimmed. 
That didn’t take very many of the people who are actually on site 
doing the work. That means that the office structure will operate 
less expensive than it did before, and because of the acid rain 
program and the studies under the acid rain program  

being complete, there won’t be large expenditures there. 
 
There will be the ongoing monitoring. If there’s something shows 
that we need more activity back in the acid rain area another year, 
then we can do that. But at this time, it doesn’t show that that need 
is there. The monitoring that we’re doing is giving us a very good 
picture, and we will continue to monitor. And I believe that with 
the dollars that we’ve put in place, our department can still do a 
good job of looking after the air and the land within our province. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — What portion of $264,000 allocated for this 
budgetary year will go for personal service? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — 231,260 and $33,250 for other expenses. That 
will be postage and that kind of expenses. So the biggest cost is 
personnel. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — My goodness, Mr. Minister, it seems as if you 
have all the people but you give them nothing to with — $33,000 
for a staff of five people to work with over the course of a year, a 
year in which they’re introducing a new program. Can you 
comment on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That’s basically what it costs. Most of the 
work will be done here. Like, the industries being in their 
emissions and most of the work is done here. There will be some 
traveling out, but it will be limited. 
 
The other expenses for mailing and things are covered under a 
different subvote. Like, if they’re mailing out, then that’s not 
covered directly here — if they’re doing a mailing of any 
significance. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I imagine that amounts to thousands upon 
thousands of dollars. I’m wondering how you can justify what 
would then appear to be gross extravagance for other expenses in 
the previous budgetary year when you allocated $170,000 for 
these other services and a year later you can come back and 
allocate $33,000. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well if the member looks at $170,000, I just 
told you that the main decrease was because of the deletion of the 
acid rain program and the special studies. Special studies on acid 
rain over a province the size of Saskatchewan are very costly. So, 
you know, you delete that, it changes the cost considerable. I 
haven’t got the figure in my mind — maybe the staff do — of 
what those studies actually cost, but they are expensive. 
 
The actual study was $136,920. So if you take that from 170, you 
see that it isn’t that much different in other expenses this year. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And yet you began this portion of the 
questioning by telling me that much of the savings reflecting the 
figure of $264,000 this year, you indicated that much of the 
savings is a result of staff savings, when in fact this year you’ve 
decreased staff positioning, the number of staff positions, from 
five to six, and you’re actually spending more on staff than you 
did last year. How can you explain that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well when you talk of a difference of  
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1077 
 

something like 121,000, the staff member that left — I haven’t got 
the exact figure — but he was an engineer that was paid at a pretty 
substantial salary. I don’t have the exact figure, but he would have 
been in the 50-thousand range which is a good portion of that 121. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Who was that engineer replaced by? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Larry Lechner, that is sitting right behind me, 
is now the director of both the air and land divisions. Before we 
had a director in each division. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — What kind of technical background does he 
have with respect to this role? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Lechner has a master’s degree in civil 
engineering. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well, all I can say is the proof will be in the 
pudding, and we’ll have to wait and see the results of this new air 
pollution control program. It certainly does raise some questions, 
however, when we note the kind of decrease in funding in a year 
in which you introduce a new program. We also note a decrease in 
staff, and at the same time, staff expenditures climbing, and the 
material or the resource provided in terms of other services or 
other expenses for the staff almost negligible. 
 
Would the minister — changing the subject now — would the 
minister please comment on the Ontario environmental legislation 
which proposes fines for polluters, including provision that 
corporate officers and members of the cabinet can be jailed for 
failing to prevent pollution. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I haven’t received the Ontario legislation and 
I don’t think that it’s part of my estimates. I think it would be 
unwise for me to even comment. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Why do you say that it’s not part of your 
estimates? It has to do with protection of the environment; such 
legislation which is within the jurisdiction of the department if it 
chose to enact it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I wouldn’t want to comment on the Ontario 
legislation, but the Clean Air Act and the other Acts in 
environment do have provision for fines as well. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Would you care to comment on the federal Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, I don’t believe that I need to comment 
any further. We’ve had considerable discussion back and forth 
across the floor. The answers that I would give on that legislation 
are in Hansard. The member, I believe, was here at the time of the 
discussion, and I don’t consider that it’s within the parameters of 
the Environment estimates for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well I’ll ask you a question that has very 
directly to do with the parameters of the environment in 
Saskatchewan. I’d ask if you’re considering legislation 
comparable to the Ontario legislation for polluters — industrial 
polluters — or the federal legislation on the same. 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — The answer would be fairly straightforward; 
we’re not considering anything like that at this time. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — None the less, given the fact that you aren’t 
considering it here, I think that you might . . .I’d recommend to 
you, let’s put it that way, that you consider such action. 
 
It’s finally your responsibility and your decision, but I would 
encourage you to do so. No doubt, or notwithstanding that, you’ll 
know that you will be called on to comment on the federal 
legislation. It’s my understanding that that will be developed in 
concert or in consultation with the provinces. Have you given the 
legislation any thought? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I indicated before that staff in my department 
have worked at the Canadian Council of Resource and 
Environment Ministers in conjunction with the staff from 
Environment departments across Canada and have, I think, done a 
lot of work to bring the legislation to the point where it is now. 
 
It’s been introduced into the federal House and it’s there for the 
public review over the summer months. We will, of course, be 
looking at it again during the summer period. But at this time I 
haven’t even read the actual legislation that’s going on into the 
House. There have been many changes from the time that we had 
it last, and probably after our estimates, I may get time, but I 
haven’t had time since the very brief time since they introduced it. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I can certainly appreciate that you wouldn’t 
have time to have dealt with it during the estimate process. I guess 
I would ask, however, would you envision making public 
comment on it during the course of the next couple of months? 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That’s an answer that’s most difficult to give 
until I review it and decide whether there’s any need of public 
comment. I wouldn’t like to give a definite answer one way or the 
other. I will be reviewing it; my staff will be reviewing it; and I’ll 
have to make that decision as time goes along. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I think I can speak for other members on this 
side of the House in terms of encouraging you to comment 
publicly on it after you’ve reviewed it, and to hold up the positive 
aspects of that legislation for the Saskatchewan public, and by the 
same token, maybe point out some of the inadequacies of it and 
how we might regard it here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to turn to yet another matter. Is the sale of carbonated 
beverages in aluminium cans legal in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — They have been allowed in the far North 
where it’s difficult to transport bottled goods, and in some 
institutions, and it’s legal to use on aircraft. But for general sale, 
they are not legally permitted at this time. 
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1078 
 

Mr. Koenker: — Is the minister aware of aluminium cans being 
sold anywhere in the province, outside of aircraft or the North or 
institutions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, I am aware that there have been cans 
coming in from both sides of us, from Alberta and Manitoba, and 
there are cans being sold in some places in the province. I couldn’t 
give you all the places by any means. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I can tell the minister that aluminium cans are in 
fact being sold along the borders of the province, and I know for a 
fact that they’re being sold in the constituencies of 
Souris-Cannington and Estevan. I’m wondering what steps the 
minister has taken to curtail these kinds of sales which have been 
going on at least since early 1986. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I can advise the member that we’re very well 
aware that there are a number of places that cans have been 
brought into the province. I dare say almost every person that goes 
on holidays and ends up coming through either Manitoba or 
Ontario or Alberta or whatever, comes back with a case or two of 
cans in their car. Some stores have considerable volumes. We did 
have a court case in Estevan where we laid a charge, and it was 
thrown out of court because it didn’t meet all the requirements of 
the court. 
 
We’ve had many discussions since I’ve been Minister of 
Environment with the bottlers, with the Retail Merchants’ 
Association, with the Consumers’ Association, with a number of 
individuals. And we’re looking very seriously at what we need to 
do. 
 
I think there are so many places that cans have been brought into 
the province that you couldn’t begin to prosecute all the stores. 
You’d have everybody in court and the courts couldn’t even 
handle it. So we have to do something to correct the problem. 
We’re working with it and may have some recommendations in 
the next couple of months. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — You’ve had one? Am I to believe that you’ve 
had only one, taken one legal action with respect to the aluminium 
cans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — There was only the one dealing with cans that 
was taken to court and I believe it was in Estevan, and it was 
thrown out on the technicality. I might tell the hon. member that as 
I meet with individuals around our province, and I imagine you’re 
hearing the same thing, that the public would like to see cans 
within our province. We’re hearing it everywhere we go. The 
Consumers Association, the retailers, they’re all telling us the 
same thing. It’s only the bottlers who are objecting, and it’s mainly 
because of the benefit that they receive by having a closed border. 
They had a cornered market and it was advantageous to them. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Could the minister tell me when the charges 
were laid in Estevan with respect to the aluminium cans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It would have been during 1986, but I  

couldn’t give the member the exact month. I don’t have the 
information; it was prior to the time that I came as a minister. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Would the minister share that information in the 
next day or two, when the charge was laid and where? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, we could bring that information. I just 
don’t have it here in the House. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — What is the minister’s view of allowing for 
aluminium cans in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I can ensure the hon. member that for those 
who are selling cans at this time, it’s illegal to sell them. The 
decision of my department and my decision is not made at this 
time as to which way we’re going to move to correct the problem. 
 
I can’t give you just a personal view. It has to be a view of the 
government, and I would prefer to wait until that decision is made. 
we are dealing with it. We’re meeting with a number of different 
groups in society. And each one adds a dimension as you meet 
with them. you get new ideas and varying ideas on the best route 
to deal with the issue. I would hope that in the next short while 
we’ll bring it to a conclusion. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And I hear you saying that in the next short 
while we’ll have a solution to this problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We’ll have recommendations on how to 
solve the problem, yes. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And the public will have been fully consulted in 
this process. Will it be characteristic of the process that we’ve seen 
this spring in terms of public consultation, or will you have full 
public hearings, not just private public hearings? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t think we’re talking about the kind of 
thing that would require large-scale public meetings to discuss. 
 
We’re getting quite a quantity of letters, many phone calls. And 
this is not just this year. They’ve been building over the last while. 
The public is demanding a convenience packaging, and I think the 
use of New York Seltzer kind of bottles has indicated some of the 
requests, and that is an approved container, by the way. 
 
So I don’t expect to go out to general public hearings, but what I 
am doing is talking to many groups. Like, when you get the 
Consumers’ Association of Saskatchewan, I would hope that they 
represent the public view. When I talk to the retailers from across 
the province, and we’ve met with many of them, they represent a 
fairly large segment of the public. I’ve met with the bottlers 
association, which again represents the complete bottling industry 
for the province. 
 
So I think we are reaching out and touching many of the interest 
groups, and if anyone is concerned about the  
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1079 
 

process and what they would like to say about it, let them give us a 
letter or a contact any way they wish. We’d be glad to hear from 
others. 
 
But to actually go out around the country and hold public 
hearings, I don’t think it’s the kind of issue that requires that. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, this is the kind of issue that the 
public would like to know that you’re considering. And up until 
this point, I don’t think it’s public knowledge at all that you’re 
reconsidering changing the legislation with respect to aluminium 
cans. 
 
I asked you last week about your advertising budget for the 
Department of the Environment, and you told me that you were 
going to be doing everything that you did last year, only doing it 
better. 
 
I’m wondering, in light of the increases in advertising that you 
have budgeted for advertising in the department this year, whether 
you might not at least advertise the fact that you’re contemplating 
this change and solicit and invite public comment. You don’t have 
to hold hearings, necessarily. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I have been meeting with many groups, as I 
have advised the member, and you don’t meet with groups all over 
the province and keep the meetings secret. 
 
I think that you go to any small town in Saskatchewan and talk to 
the store, and they’ll tell you, yes, the minister’s been meeting 
with different groups, and we’ve been telling him this and this and 
this. 
 
And at the time that our decision is made, that’s the time that you 
would likely make a public release of that kind of information. 
Even after a Bill . . . If we go that route, if we were to introduce a 
Bill in this House . . . Even after the Bill is introduced, the public 
have many opportunities to react. You know, that’s what this 
process is, is to come forward with a solution. 
 
I haven’t indicated to you yet that a Bill is the way that we should 
go. We’re looking at it, we’re assessing it, we’re trying to put 
together the ideas that have been generated from the public. And 
when we get that far that we feel comfortable with the direction 
that the public is looking for us to move, then we’ll be making the 
issue very plain to everyone exactly what we intend to do. And 
people will have the opportunity at that time to state their case. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — You certainly said it, Mr. Minister, that you’ll 
be making clear to everyone at the time that you announce your 
change, you’ll make it clear to everyone what you’re doing. Prior 
to introducing the change, you’ll make it clear to very few people, 
a select group of people that you choose to do consultation with. 
 
You are the minister who’s responsible for enforcing 
environmental legislation. And part of your responsibility as 
Minister of Environment is to regulate The Litter Control Act of 
1973. 
 
And it seems to me that simply because a year ago you  

encountered — you had one case in Estevan, charging an Estevan 
store, and it was dismissed out of court on a technicality — you 
choose, it seems, it sit on your hands and allow the sale of cans to 
continue when you have a responsibility to enforce the legislation 
until the time that it is changed. 
 
Now in my one hand, I have the cans that were purchased in 
Estevan, along with the receipt dated July 4, 1987, in the other 
hand, I have The Litter Control Act that you’re responsible for . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please. I would like to 
remind the member that exhibits of that nature are not permitted. 
You may continue. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — How can you explain your inactivity in this 
matter? Does it have to do with the fact that the beverage in 
question is being sold in the constituency of Estevan? 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’d like to indicate to the member that I’m 
aware that that there are many cans within the province of 
Saskatchewan. We only moved on one case. Then as we started to 
get the information from across the province of the number of 
places where cans indeed have been sold prior to the time that I 
was minister, and they are continuing to be sold . . .There are 
hundreds of stores now selling cans in differing, varying 
quantities. I indicated to you before that I was aware of that, and if 
we were to proceed to lay charges in every location that we’re 
aware of where cans are being sold, the courts could not handle it. 
The public is demanding convenience packaging. I think we have 
to do something different than just lay court charges. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, it seems that you choose to 
selectively enforce environmental regulations. What determines 
whether you choose to enforce or not to enforce any given piece of 
legislation? The fact that the public ignored the legislation, you’ll 
just simply roll over and play dead? What is your responsibility 
for the legislation that has been passed by this House until such 
time that it is changed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would like to ask the hon. member who he 
things was guilty, the storekeeper that had the produce, or you 
when you bought it. That’s the kind problem we face right now. 
Who do I lay the charge against? And the member has the cans 
here. You must have bought them somewhere. So it would 
indicate to me that both would be guilty to some degree, and that’s 
the kind of problem we face. 
 
I’m not taking about a few hundred cans, I’m talking about many 
thousands of cases of canned goods coming into this province — 
canned soft drinks — coming into this province in the last year. 
It’s a major problem; we’re well aware of it and we’re looking at 
solutions. If the member has a solution, I’d be very pleased to hear 
it, but if it’s only to take everybody to court, I don’t think our 
courts have time. 
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1080 
 

Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, I don’t know that my solution is 
to take everyone to court. I’m wondering whether you, though, as 
the Minister of the Environment, gave any consideration to taking 
anyone to court after the first case was thrown out on a 
technicality. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The best answer I can give the member is the 
one that I have given. When I became Minister of Environment, if 
I were going to lay a charge, I can’t selectively pick one person 
and single him out and lay a charge. I don’t think that’s fair 
because there are hundreds of locations where soft drinks are sold 
in cans. So what we have to do is something that will be 
applicable to all across the province. That’s what we’re looking 
for, is that kind of solution, and we’re working very hard on it. 
We’ve spent many, many hours on this problem and I think we are 
reaching close to the time when a decision will be made. 
 
I believe that the hon. member will likely be quite satisfied once 
we announce what we intend to do. But I think the idea of laying 
one court case or 10 would not really be fair with the number of 
problems that we find of people breaking the law in that particular 
area. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Why would it be then, that you would choose to 
lay charges last year in one particular case when you now say that 
you can’t do that? Why did you do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — At the time that the charge was laid, the 
problem was not near what it is today. But it was because that 
charge was laid and thrown out of court that the borders almost 
were thrown open. And it was thrown out of court on a very minor 
technicality. 
 
So we can lay another court case if that would really please the 
hon. member, but I don’t think it’s the fair way to go. I think the 
route that we are following is probably much more sensible at this 
time. And I indicate to the member that he’ll likely be satisfied 
when he does hear the solution that we propose. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well I guess again we’ll just have to wait and 
see. Actions will speak louder than words. 
 
I’d like to talk about another topic now, in terms of government 
actions, and this concerns the initiation of a program last August to 
dispose of hazardous chemicals in hospitals and school storage 
shelves. And I think that’s a commendable initiative for the 
department to have taken, I think it’s an initiative that’s long 
overdue, and it bespeaks a concern for public safety when it comes 
to the environment. This program was called the institutional 
chemical program, as I’m sure you’re aware. 
 
Could the minister tell me if this program is still in effect. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The program is still carrying on and we are 
continuing to collect and dispose of chemicals in the schools. It’s 
the kind of program where you go across the province and do the 
job because it’s in institutions, in schools, in hospitals, and 
universities. And when the job is done then there likely will be no 
need of continuing it on an ongoing basis. 

Mr. Koenker: — How many institutions or provincial sites have 
been visited in this past year under the program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Since October 1 of ‘86, they’ve visited about 
150 sites and have removed approximately 6,500 kilograms of 
chemicals from schools and hospitals. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — That sounds pretty good. I don’t know how 
many are out there, but I do know that that would be, oh, 
approximately a third of the schools and hospitals in the province 
that were said initially to have these sorts of chemicals. 
 
What happens to the chemicals after they are collected under the 
collection program? After they leave the schools? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — They’re categorized according to what 
product is in the container, and then they’re packaged and marked 
as to what is in each container. And some are neutralized, if that’s 
possible to do here; others are shipped out of the province for 
disposal. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Have any chemicals been shipped out of the 
province to date that were collected under this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes. Some have gone to Ontario. I couldn’t 
tell you exactly how many, but some have gone to Ontario. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — What was the budget for this past year under 
which the program commenced, and what would be the budget 
allocation for this budgetary year for the program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The overall cost of the program is expected to 
be about 250,000. We’ve spent approximately 160,000 at this 
time, and the balance will have to be spent over the course of this 
year. It’s not a separately identified item in the budget. It will be 
taken out of the overall budget of the department, that amount of 
money, approximately another 90,000. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Do you believe the other 90,000 will enable you 
to complete the collection of the chemicals outstanding in the 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That was the intention, that that amount 
should do the job. They tell me that we’re past the half-way mark, 
and that we’re doing well as far as the collection is concerned. 
 
I might mention to the member that this was intended to be a 
one-shot operation. You do the job and then you’ve finished the 
program, and you come to an end. 
 
The University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon is setting up a 
similar idea, a collection type of facility that will handle this type 
of chemical. And it is their intent to handle the disposal of 
laboratory chemicals for schools and hospitals and universities at 
that site. So once they’re established, the schools will have access, 
and hospitals will, to a disposal site. So that’s the other side of it. 
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1081 
 

Mr. Koenker: — But you anticipate that you can complete the 
program with the $90,000 and collect those, that aggregate of 
chemical that is still in the Saskatchewan institutions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, that is the intent of the department. I 
think that there will be some ongoing need to educate the public so 
that they are aware of the problem that can exist in laboratories, 
and from there on that they can take their product to the university 
in Saskatoon for disposal. So that’s an educational program that 
will have to be continued and it’ll be part of our advertising 
budget. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Which department of the university will be 
responsible for the continuance of this program once it leaves the 
auspices of the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — It’s the general administration division of the 
university that is building the facility and will, as we understand it, 
be caring for the operation of it. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Does the minister know which department 
though, or which segment of the university community will be 
directly involved in running the program? I would think that the 
general administration obviously would be responsible for it, but 
who are they charging with particular responsibility for the 
program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — They’ll be appointing special staff to do the 
job, but that’s a question that I really wouldn’t have an answer for. 
You’ll have to ask the university. They likely have in mind . . . I 
would think somebody with a pretty good chemical background 
would be required in order to know what to do with the product. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — You seemed to indicate that the university was 
actually building a facility for this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, the indication is that they’re planning on 
building. I don’t know whether it’s actually under construction 
yet. They’ve been working, and they have budgeted for it, and 
have dealt with the city of Saskatoon. I think they’re pretty well 
along in their planning processes at least. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Is there any cost sharing between the 
department and the university with respect to this facility and this 
program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, our department will have no involvement 
in the cost of that. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Can you advise me what the role of the 
provincial government might be then in enabling the university 
fiscally to assume this responsibility? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Our involvement will be the licensing and the 
permit to operate. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — How will the university then pay for the 
operation of this program? Where will they receive funding for it? 
Out of student fees or government grants,  

or how will that work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m not sure how the university’s funding 
will work. They probably have to take it out of their 
administration, or if they’re doing it for other institutions, they 
may levy some  
 
change. I’m not sure of the exact process, but there are a number 
of ways they could do it. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Is there any cost sharing under the present 
program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, we as a department have not been 
charging for the work that we’ve done. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you very much or those comments. 
 
I’d like to turn now to the question of fungicides and to ask 
whether the minister is considering any action with respect to 
fungicides. A recent National Academy of Sciences, United 
States, report states that 90 per cent of the fungicides tested by the 
academy were found to be carcinogenic. And these very 
fungicides that were tested are frequently added to waxes on fruits 
and vegetables. 
 
We’re all, I think, familiar with the waxes that are found on apples 
in the winter months. Vinyl chloride polymers, that are very toxic, 
are used. These have been classified as human carcinogens by the 
International Agency for Research on Cancer. 
 
OPP, orthophenylphenol, is also a carcinogen placed by the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency on its list of most toxic inert 
substances. 
 
Benomyl is a cancer-causing agent known to cause birth defects 
and genetic damage. In addition to its use a s a post-harvest dip on 
fruits to protect and preserve it, it’s used as a seed treatment and 
on field crops. And in fact this chemical, Benomyl, accounts for 
55 per cent of the $320 million world fungicide market. That’s a 
sizable component, more than half of the world fungicide market. 
 
Has the minister given any consideration to banning any of these 
fungicides here in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The fungicides that the member mentions 
would not fall under the control of this department. They may 
come under the health and safety side of the Department of 
Health, or under the federal programs, but they certainly don’t fall 
within the jurisdiction of this department. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Does the minister know for sure under whose 
jurisdiction these fungicides fall? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m sorry, I really don’t know which 
department, but they don’t come under the Department of 
Environment. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — How is it that you can say that they don’t fall 
within the parameters of your department, since they’re used in the 
environment as seed treatments, in addition to preservatives on 
other food substances? How  
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1082 
 

is it you can say they don’t fall within the parameters of your 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised by my staff that they don’t fall 
here. And I think when you talk of agricultural chemicals, they 
would go under the federal jurisdiction of the Department of 
Agriculture. 
 
Others, if you say they’re cancer-causing agents, may fall under 
the Health department, but they certainly don’t fall here within the 
Department of Environment. This is what I’m advised by staff. 
They’ve been in the department since the time of its information; I 
guess I take their word for that. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Would the minister give any consideration to 
reviewing the data on these fungicides with a view toward calling 
it to the attention of the appropriate department whose jurisdiction 
at this point in time apparently remains unknown? Would you 
consider reviewing the data? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We could look at the issue, but since it 
doesn’t really concern our department. I don’t know whether that 
will be that beneficial to you. We don’t mind looking at it. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well if you don’t mind looking at it, would the 
department consider . . . could you give me your assurance that the 
department would in fact look at the issues, particularly with 
respect the three chemicals that I named? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I indicated to you, yes, they would look at it. 
But it really doesn’t fall under this department. So how much 
work they’ll do on it, they’ll read it, and if there’s something they 
could recommend, they’d likely do that. But it wouldn’t be part of 
the department’s normal work. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Who in the government monitors complaints 
about agricultural or farm chemicals and their use? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That would be the Department of 
Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — does the Department of the Environment have 
any role with respect to the use of farm chemicals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, they would be under the Department of 
Agriculture. The only involvement that we have is the chemical 
can collection program. And we’re involved in that respect, but 
that’s a very minor role in that industry. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Although that’s an important role, the chemical 
can collection program, and one that I think it’s fair to say is of 
great benefit to Saskatchewan farmers in terms of preserving and 
protecting their health, I’m wondering though whether the minister 
might consider going one step further than simply monitoring the 
collection of these cans and consider putting notices on product 
labels — requiring that notices be put on some of these 
agricultural chemical labels — that farmers can register 
complaints with the Department of Agriculture  

should they have problems in the use of the chemical that they 
happened to purchase. 
 
In other words, that there would just be a simple labelling system. 
It would be one step before the cans are collected after they’re 
used that there would be some notification on the chemical cans, 
just an adhesive label that might indicate where an individual 
farmer might contact the provincial government should they have 
questions. Would you see that within the parameters of your 
responsibility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Almost every can of agricultural chemical 
that you purchase has a considerable amount of information on its 
label. But most of them also have a booklet that comes with them 
outlining the name of the company that produces it, the address of 
that company, what the responsibilities of the company are that 
produce the chemical if the chemical doesn’t perform. These types 
of things are there now with the purchase of almost every 
agricultural chemical. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Certainly that’s the case, but it’s also certainly 
true that in most instances, these booklets, as you say, would not 
have Saskatchewan points of contact in terms of contacting the 
manufacturer, inasmuch as most of the chemicals aren’t produced 
there. Would you give consideration to providing information, 
perhaps by way of an adhesive label system, where farmers can 
get further information from the Saskatchewan government or one 
of its agencies with respect to the chemicals that are being used? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t think that we really have a problem in 
that area as far as farmers knowing where to contact. It doesn’t 
really matter if you’re contacting a chemical company. You know 
who the supplier was; you can go back through that route to come 
right to the company that produces. So any time a farmer has a 
problem with a chemical that he has used, he can go back to the 
person that he purchased from and right back through to the 
chemical company that’s responsible. I know many farmers that 
have had to do exactly that, and it has been really no problem to 
make the contact. So I think this would just be a make-work 
program that would serve very little purpose. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Is there a registry here in Saskatchewan where 
Saskatchewan farmers can register complaints with respect to 
damage done by virtue of aerial spraying, or other damage done to 
crops by way of chemicals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m not sure whether there is or not. You 
would have to ask that, I think, in Agriculture estimates. They 
could give you an answer. I really don’t have an answer. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Certainly if damage is done to a particular crop 
or to a particular field by an agricultural chemical, it would be of 
concern to you as the Minister of Environment inasmuch as the 
soil might be rendered sterile. We all know about the Tordon case 
and the Eston farmers who were left with this particular 
circumstance. Do you not see yourself as having some role in this 
regard to see that there is some sort of registry where farmers can 
register complaints with respect to agricultural  
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1083 
 

chemicals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — If there is a problem like the member 
mentions, he would have to contact the company that was 
responsible and deal through the legal process. Companies 
producing chemicals have a responsibility that the chemical will 
do what the label says it will do. If tit doesn’t, then they must go 
back through to the company, and if they can’t get satisfaction 
without court, then they have to go the legal route to arrive at a 
solution. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I would agree entirely that the companies have 
a responsibility to ensure that the chemical does what they say it 
will do. I would also suggest that you have a responsibility tot he 
environment if the chemical doesn’t do what it’s intended to do, 
and in fact damages the environment as has been the case with the 
Eston farmers. Do you not see yourself as having some role in this 
regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — If there is a spill that is reported, we would 
deal with that. If a chemical gets into the water through run-off, 
and it’s significant quantities that it would be considered an 
environmental hazard, we would be involved in that respect. But 
just with the application to a crop on agricultural land, no, that 
would not be our responsibility. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Am I to understand the minister to say, then, 
that if it has to do with the ground water, for example, it would be 
a responsibility of the Department of the Environment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — In most cases it’s not the responsibility of the 
Department of Environment. If there are spraying operations close 
to major water bodies, then the person doing the spraying has to be 
licensed by our department to do it, and the types of chemicals that 
can be used are controlled. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Is the minister aware of the legislation 
introduced in Iowa earlier this year, the Ground Water Protection 
Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Would the minister give consideration to having 
his departmental officials review it? I think it would be a good 
follow-up to The Air Pollution Control Act that the minister has 
initiated this year. Would you give consideration to doing some 
investigative work, in terms of ground water protection? 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The department could seek to get a copy of 
that legislation and review it. We haven’t any information on it at 
this time. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I’d simply leave it at that and commend that to 
your consideration and to the consideration of your officials. I 
think it could be of real service to Saskatchewan people, and to 
your credit as Minister of the Environment, to look at that 
legislation and perhaps make applicable applications here in 
Saskatchewan. 

One following concern about water quality: I’d like to ask what 
the process is for individuals who would like to have their water 
tested here in Saskatchewan. Where do such individuals go, let’s 
say if they have concerns with the testing of their water with 
respect to pesticide contaminants? Where would they go? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that if we are contacted and 
there’s a problem identified that a well or something is 
contaminated, we will make an ascertaining look at it and then 
advise them where the best place would be to have that particular 
type of water tested. The Canadian laboratory at the Canada 
Research Station here in Regina does have that capability and 
sometimes we have referred them to that one. 
 
We have testing facilities for some things, but when it comes to 
identifying pesticides and chemicals like that, it takes a very good 
laboratory in order to do that. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Can the Canadian research lab here in Regina 
do pesticide detection work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, I’m advised they can. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — A full range of pesticide or only a very limited 
spectrum of . . . What are the parameters of their ability to detect 
pesticides? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that they can do a reasonable 
range of chemicals — not all chemicals. we do refer some to 
Burlington where there’s a major laboratory that has more 
capability than this one. This one is fairly effective, but not 
capable of doing the whole broad range. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Can the lab here in Regina do nitrates? Can it 
detect total organic carbon? Can it detect total organic halicides? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think for a question that technical, the 
member would be well advised to contact the lab directly because 
it’s not something that I could give you an answer to. 
 
If we were to have an indication of what was in the water, then we 
would contact the lab to see whether or not they have the 
capability. If they don’t, then it would have to go on to Burlington. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — So in other words, if it’s a known commodity 
that a plane has sprayed a field and somehow or another 
contaminated a dug-out or something, you’d probably be able to 
handle it here in Regina. If it were just a general concern of a 
quantity of water with an unknown element in it, it might have to 
go out of province. Is that the gist of it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That’s about the way that it’s explained to 
me, yes. This lab has not the capability of doing a complete 
chemical analysis of the water. It could identify whether or not the 
chemical that they were concerned about had got in the water but 
not the complete analysis. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Are there any municipal water supplies  
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1084 
 

here in Saskatchewan that can extract pesticide residues from the 
water supplies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Most of the treatment processes are not 
designed to remove pesticides. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — So it’s a little bit of an unclear answer. I think 
what you’re saying then is, basically, Saskatchewan municipal 
water supplies are basically unable to remove herbicide or 
pesticide residues from the water supply, on the whole. 
 
I’d like to ask the minister about the impact of the radiation 
emissions from the new uranium mines proposed for Wollaston. 
Have the cumulative effects of these emissions been studied by the 
department to date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The mines at Rabbit Lake that have been 
operating have been monitored by professionals, tested very 
carefully, and they tell us that there will be no major impact on the 
environment from those mines. 
 
The new ones that are proposed, they aren’t far enough along yet 
to have that kind of monitoring. So it will be done as the process 
goes along. I’m not even sure of which ones you’re talking about, 
whether or not they’re even through the environmental impact 
assessment stage or not. You’d have to be more specific of which 
ones you’re referring to. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I guess let’s take the Collins A, the Collins D, 
and the Eagle Point sites which are being proposed, I believe, by 
Eldorado Nuclear. Can you describe what kind of monitoring the 
department proposes or would propose to see take place with 
respect to those three developments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Those are still in the proposal stage. They 
will have to undergo an environmental impact study. So we don’t 
have really, any data that we could give you information on at this 
time. Those mines will, before they can go ahead, have to do an 
environmental impact assessment and go through the process of 
review and all the way down the line. They’re a long ways from 
being at the stage where you could look at their emissions. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — But your own . . . I guess I’m asking about your 
own monitoring procedures or standards. Would they be in place 
relative to the development proposed? Or would you in fact have 
your own standards and procedures already in place now 
regardless of what shape the development takes, so you could say 
already now, thus and so will take place with respect to the 
monitoring? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, those standards are in place and any 
mine coming on stream would have to meet those standards. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — So any mine would then meet existing 
standards? Has the environmental impact statement from Eldorado 
Nuclear been delivered to the department already? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, the Eldorado one is in the  

department now. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Has it been released to the general public yet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, it’s still in the technical review process. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — How long will that technical review process 
take? What’s the time framework for that technical review 
process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that normally it would take about 
a six-week period. We’ve had it about two weeks so it would be a 
minimum of another month. And it’s a very hard thing to put a 
time frame on. If we come into areas that we need more answers 
for . . .And the communication back and forth can be a bit of a 
problem when you’re dealing with a mine that’s quite a ways 
away, so traditionally, approximately six weeks, but it could take 
longer. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — What will determine when the public has access 
to the environmental impact statement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — As soon as the technical review is complete, 
then the environmental impact assessment plus the 
recommendations that my department attach to it are open for the 
public review. And I believe the normal public review is 30 days 
under the Act. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Does the minister consider that 30 days an 
adequate period of time for a public review? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, I believe it has been in most instances. 
We don’t see any problem with it, up to this point, for most 
environmental impact studies. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well the minister certainly must know that it 
presented some difficulties to the general public and proved to be 
insufficient when it came to phase 2 of the Cluff Lake 
development — that the 30-day period was, in fact, rather 
inadequate. 
 
I’m wondering whether the minister would consider giving 
extension to that 30-day public review period for this particular 
environmental impact statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — My staff are not really aware that there was a 
problem on Cluff Lake 2, but the minister has the authority to 
extend the review period if there appears to be a need for that. So I 
suppose each case would have to be played on its own, but most of 
the time it appears that that’s sufficient time for public review. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — If there was reasonable public comment calling 
for more than a 30-day review would the minister consider such a 
review? 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Yes, of course, I would consider it as long as 
there is a reasonable need. You know, it’s very major projects 
when you talk of uranium mines going ahead, and many people 
are concerned about different things. 
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1085 
 

I believe that the government has always taken enough time that 
the public has had a chance to have its input. That’s extremely 
important, and I believe that the mining companies that we have 
here in the province have leaned over backwards, almost, to 
provide the information that people want. 
 
So yes, if there is a major concern raised, or a reasonable concern 
raised, that there needs to be more time, that would certainly be 
looked at. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I guess, Mr. Minister, my concern is that we’re 
dealing with a very technical document, an environmental impact 
statement, one in which your departmental officials have access to 
for at least six months, you’ve indicated — excuse me, that was an 
inaccuracy — six weeks in fact, if not more time, given the 
technical nature of it; time that they as experts need to digest and 
reflect upon the material. 
 
I think the case ought to be made that inasmuch as the document is 
not made available to the public, as you’ve indicated, until after 
the technical review has been done, and so the public doesn’t have 
access to this information, that the case is to be made that it’s 
rather difficult for lay people and the general public to review such 
a document in a four-week period. 
 
I would certainly commend to the minister consideration for 
extending that public review period from beyond 30 days to at 
least an equivalent amount of time that the technical review itself 
is found to take. Would you consider doing that, taking the period 
of time that the technical review takes and allocating that same 
period of time for public comment, particularly in light of the fact 
that the public will not have access to the document until after the 
technical review? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — There’s been no change in that process, you 
know. The technical review period has been similar for a long 
time. I think the hon. member realizes that the department staff are 
the watch-dog of the province. They go through that 
environmental impact study with a fine-toothed comb, and they 
spend many days assuring that the public’s interests are being 
looked after. 
 
When that’s made available for the public review, we have found 
usually that the 30-day period has been more than ample. I 
indicated to you that if it appeared that there was need for more 
time, the minister has the authority to extend the period. 
 
So you would have to deal with each environmental impact study 
on its own merit. Many of them are very simple and they are gone 
with very little public comment. Others are not that simple and 
there may be need. So the opportunity is there, and I have given 
you my word that I will look at it and, if there is need, indeed 
extend it. 
 
So I don’t think you would make an overall extension. That would 
just be a time delay that would have very little purpose in most 
cases. So I think it’s better to deal with it the way I mention, is to 
deal with them individually and if there is a need, then to extend a 
given project. 

Mr. Koenker: — I appreciate your comments on that. I think that 
they’re very appropriate and very reasonable, that if there is public 
concern you will give due attention to that. 
 
I’d like to ask the minister just briefly if you can give this House 
the assurance that a nuclear power station will not be built in 
Saskatchewan within the next five years. Can you give that 
assurance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I haven’t heard anybody even asking about 
one. We are talking about another coal-fired plant which should 
meet the needs of the province for at least five years. It would not 
be my decision to make, whether or not there would be a nuclear 
power station. That would be a very major decision by a 
government, and I can’t give you assurances, but from what I am 
seeing on the horizon you don’t have very many fears. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, back to water for a moment. In 
1986, in September of 1986, there were two fertilizer companies 
in Edmonton that spilled contaminated water into the North 
Saskatchewan River, polluting the water supply down river for 
some 50,000 Saskatchewan residents, the residents of 
Lloydminster, North Battleford, and Prince Albert. 
 
I’m wondering if the minister can comment on the kinds of 
representation your government made to the Alberta government 
at the time of that spill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that there’s an organization 
called the Prairie Provinces Water Board that is in place; it has 
representation from Saskatchewan and Alberta. At the time the 
spills occurred in Edmonton, we were advised immediately by that 
body. That allowed us to set up monitoring stations along the river 
so that we were aware of the contamination and could advise the 
communities and Saskatchewan of the things that they would have 
to do to assure that their water was safe for use within the 
community. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Did your government make representations 
directly to the Alberta government with respect to these spills? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The committee, that I gave the member 
before, met, discussed the problem and the solutions, and 
Environment Canada assigned in providing some of the 
monitoring to enable us to do the job in a fairly short time span. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I take it then that you did not make direct 
representations to the Alberta government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I told you that the committee — that’s the 
Prairie Provinces Water Board — is there for that purpose to deal 
with interprovincial waters, and that board did meet. So the 
Alberta government would be represented on the board, and so 
would Saskatchewan’s government. So it that way there was the 
contact with the government in Alberta, but as far as going beyond 
that to deal with the minister, no, that was not done. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Did your department discuss with the  
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1086 
 

Prairie Provinces Water Board the possibility of charges being laid 
against the two companies involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — That would be a matter for the minister in 
Alberta to decide. It would not be within our jurisdiction to deal 
with that. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well I certainly realize that it wouldn’t be 
within your jurisdiction to charge them, and that it would be a 
decision for the Alberta Department of the Environment, but I’m 
wondering if your department discussed the laying of charges with 
the Alberta representatives of the board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No. As I indicated to you, that responsibility 
would be with the Minister of Environment in Alberta. And the 
board, as a board, would not really enter into that kind of 
discussion. The minister there knew the spill occurred and he has 
the authority to proceed with any charges that he might feel are 
required. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, I realize that the Alberta Minister 
of the Environment has the authority to proceed with charges. He 
obviously chose not to proceed with charges, even though his own 
departmental officials at the time were recommending that he do 
so. 
 
I’m simply wondering why you would not have broached that 
subject with the Alberta representatives, particularly when their 
own departmental officials viewed the matter serious enough to 
feel that the minister was wrong in not laying charges. And I’m 
just wondering why you would not even have broached the 
subject. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I think that the minister — I wasn’t the 
minister at the time it happened — but I think the minister here 
would not be making a good decision for Saskatchewan if he 
interfered in the decisions of the Environment department in 
Alberta and the methods that it would deal with companies within 
the province of Alberta. I know that I would object very 
strenuously if the Minister of Environment in Alberta interfered 
with decisions made within this department, and within my office, 
as it relates to environmental matters within this province. I don’t 
think that’s the proper way to go. Each province has its own laws; 
they have their own department; they have their own minister; and 
they must make those decisions within their own boundaries. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — That’s certainly true, although in this case we 
have an instance where in Alberta a pollution problem affected the 
drinking water of 50,000 Saskatchewan people. And that’s history, 
but I’m wondering what steps you and your department have 
taken now with respect to this water board, the Prairie Provinces 
Water Board, to ensure that similar accidents aren’t repeated, and 
that Saskatchewan residents aren’t subject to further spills from 
Alberta companies. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Alberta has the responsibility, to the best of 
its ability, to protect the water that flows through that province and 
comes into ours. We have the same responsibility for water that 
flows on through Saskatchewan and goes into Manitoba or goes 
into the American states. 

I think that we have to trust the government of Alberta to act in the 
best interests of the protection of the environment and the water 
within their province. And for me to interfere in that process, I 
don’t think would be proper. I’m sure that at times we’ve had less 
than desirable water flowing into Manitoba. We have our hands 
full to see that our industries are not polluting the waters and the 
rivers here in our province. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — In the view of your department, are there 
problems with the quality of the water entering Saskatchewan by 
way of the North Saskatchewan river from Alberta? Does your 
department view there being any problems at the present time, or 
are you satisfied with the state of the water, the condition of the 
water entering the province? 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that there is no significant 
problem with the water quality coming into Saskatchewan at this 
time. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Where would the first point in Saskatchewan be 
where your departmental officials would monitor the water 
coming in from Alberta? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m advised that Environment Canada 
monitors one location very near the border, and then we have 
several that are close to the border, but they’re inside 
Saskatchewan a little ways. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, I’d like to thank you very much 
for the answers that you’ve supplied. I found them very helpful 
and very informative, and I want to tell you that I appreciate them 
very, very much and the consideration you’ve given. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — My first question, Mr. Minister, is in the area of 
acid rain. And before I ask the question in relation to acid rain, I’d 
like to give you some preliminary historical information on acid 
rain. 
 
I come from Cumberland House, and we use to wonder about the 
smoke stack that was from Flin Flon mines which we could see 
when we were out fishing, or when we were out doing guiding 
during tourist season. And we used to wonder what effect, you 
know, that would have on the livelihood of people in our area. 
 
We had watched the changes in the environment. One thing we 
did notice was the different foams that are formed on the lake 
shore, and that there are different types of foams. 
 
And I hadn’t known anything about chemistry at that point in 
time, and as I looked back later in regards to reading reports on 
acid rain, I thought that the acid, you know, the sulphur dioxide 
emissions from the mine were interacting with the limestone base, 
because we had a lot of limestone on Cumberland Lake, and also 
on Sturgeon Lake — the mill lake, it’s called. 
 
And I checked later on in that same basis on Morin Lake and 
Pelican Narrows area. And most of the people had wondered why 
there was a depletion in certain fish. One  
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1087 
 

of the fish that was gone from our area was trout, and of course the 
immediate reaction was to blame the people who did the fishing. 
 
But as I read the reports on acid rain, it says that the first fish that 
it does attack is trout, and that it, in many cases not only the food 
supply is gone, but also it affects, you know, the biological 
reproduction capacity of the trout. 
 
And I asked the people, not only from Cumberland area and 
Sturgeon Landing area, but in the area surrounding Mirond Lake 
and Pelican Narrows, and they reported much the same thing. 
They said they only found trout in the most deepest waters where 
there was possibilities of ledges there, and so on. 
 
So I guess when we come into a newer phase where we are talking 
a lot more about the problems of tar sands development in from 
Alberta, and the requirement for inter-provincial agreements, and 
so on, one has to look at, I suppose, not only the impact on fishing 
— the sulphur dioxide emissions on trout — but the people also 
mentioned the sturgeon. We used to have two different types of 
sturgeon in that area. We had the regular grey type sturgeon and a 
darker sturgeon, and we’re finding out that a lot of them are 
diminishing and not coming back. 
 
When people tend to over-fish and that type of thing, they tend to 
regenerate and come back; but such is not the case. Slowly but 
surely, you know, as in the case of the trout, they’re starting to go. 
The water levels are not protecting them because of the long-term 
accumulation of that acid rain. 
 
The question is: what degree of monitoring is being done in 
northern Saskatchewan in respect to the acid rain question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I’m not going to comment on the fish because 
I really have no knowledge of how fish survive and why they 
don’t. What I will tell the hon. member is that we have monitoring 
in 25 locations in the North, and we check them on an annual 
basis. we check them for rainfall and we check them for the snow 
and then we actually check the water in the lakes. 
 
There has been no indication of any problem with acid rain in your 
area — no problem with it across the North. So if you’re having 
difficulty with the fish, there must be a different problem than 
what you’re thinking of. It isn’t acid rain; the tests will show that, 
and we’ve tested many times and on an ongoing basis every year, 
and there is no acid rain problem in the area that you speak of. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Then I will ask the question: how long, in order to 
make a conclusive statement that you’ve just made, how long has 
your research taken place? What is a longitudinal basis? What is 
your argument? How long has it been taking place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — They’ve been testing since 1982, but the 
levels of contamination that it takes in a lake to indicate that has an 
acid rain problem have been established for many, many years. 
And when they test the water in the lake, and the lake tests within 
the ranges that  

are permissible, then they indicate that there is no major problem 
with acid rain. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — You give me the information that you’ve been 
only testing for the past four years. I am talking about a mine 
that’s been there since 1930. And I think that it’s very important to 
start recognizing that the problem of acid rain, and the recognition 
of the effect of sulphur dioxide, is a recent thing. 
 
But I could see that the research has only taken place in the past 
four years. But I don’t think — I think that the level of research 
and the monitoring may therefore be not that thorough, from the 
evidence that you are giving me of that. And I’m just wondering, 
in regards therefore to the monitoring that you’re doing, what 
research reports and evidence have you got to this date to prove 
the point that you made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The statement that you make that the mine 
has been there for 30 years, and when we have the water tested 
after 30 years it still doesn’t indicate that it has a problem with 
acid rain. I think that speaks reasonably good for the operation of 
that particular mine. 
 
We have done some of the research on our own testing. The 
Saskatchewan Research Council has done about four different 
studies, and each one of the studies come up with the same 
answer: that we at this time do not have a problem with acid rain 
in that area. So I think it’s encouraging to me, at least, that the 
mine has been there 30 years and your water is still in good 
condition. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I would ask a more specific question, then, in 
regards to the research in that area. The places that were reported 
to me were Mirond Lake, Suggi Lake, Beaver Lake, Namew Lake, 
and Cumberland Lake. Has actual research been done on those 
lakes? I will repeat those lakes: Mirond Lake, Suggi Lake, Beaver 
Lake, Cumberland Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We don’t have the list of the lakes here; we 
could give you a list of the lakes that are monitored. I would 
imagine that most of those lakes would have been, but I’d like to 
give you the exact list and the department says they’ll provide that 
list to you. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Okay, I will wait for the research report then. I 
would just like to know when you would be providing those 
research reports to me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I didn’t indicate to you that I was going to 
provide the research reports. I believe that they would be available 
at the library, and if the member would just slip across the hall tot 
he Legislative Library and ask for them, I think you would get 
them. But I did indicate to you is that we would provide the list of 
the names of the lakes that were monitored in that area, and we’ll 
do that. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Could I have your research staff, then, get me . . . 
Most of the research that will have been done in the past four 
years will be on this in that journal. Not all research evidence is 
always in one spot in regards to the reports. Could you give me a 
summary then of all the research evidence, and the titles of where 
I can get them? 
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1088 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — My staff will give you the names of the lakes 
and the names of the reports. You may have to contact the 
Saskatchewan Research Council if the library doesn’t have it, but I 
would expect the library right beside you will have it. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — The next question is in regards to herbicidal 
spraying. There was concern, especially in the past couple of 
years, in regards to the possible utilization of Roundup in regards 
especially to the deciduous forest, you know, in regards to poplar 
and so on. I was wondering, is this going to be a follow-through? 
Are you going to be using Roundup in the future, or anything 
similar to that in the forests of northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The member may not have been in the House 
when we went through the same questions in these estimates 
earlier. I don’t really feel that we should have to go back over all 
of the same ground and answer the same questions. If the member 
refers back to the Hansard, the answers were given in detail and 
for a long period of time on that very topic, and I would ask you to 
review the Hansard. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — There was a question, initially, in regards to the 
more specific information in regards to the actual chemicals used, 
and I was wondering if you do have that information now? 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We have the list here of the information that 
the member was seeking. It was actually Hoechst chemical 
company that made the request to do that testing. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — In regards to the transmission line in the northern 
area, you know, that proposed transmission line, is there any 
proposal there to utilize chemicals also? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — No, the proposal for the clearing of the right 
of way was intended to be done by hand, and I believe many of 
the people in the area have been employed. The project passed 
through all of the environmental impact stages and the public 
review stage, and is under construction. From what I’m hearing 
from people in that area, they’re very happy with the opportunities 
for employment that they’ve had in both the clearing and the 
construction of that particular transmission line. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Minister, that is being done during the 
developmental stage of the transmission line. Is that also going to 
be your policy in the long run, as we go into the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I don’t think the decision is mine to make. 
What we do as a department is, when there’s a proposal to do 
certain things, then they bring that proposal forward. we review 
the proposal, and the decision is made. We’ve had no request for 
anything of that nature at this time. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Some people have also been complaining in 
around Weyakwin about some spraying that was done on the 
roadside. You know, whether it was putting  

something on the road and that type of thing where the vegetation 
surrounding — around the — you know, by the roadside; where a 
lot of the vegetation was dying and so on. And I was wondering 
what type of chemical was being used on that road there; this was 
in around Weyakwin area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I would have to advise the hon. member that I 
have no knowledge of anyone spraying on the road. If it happened, 
it was not reported to me. So I have actually no knowledge at all 
of it. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — The question refers to the area of environmental 
damage which the hydro-electric power developments cause in 
Cumberland House and in Sandy Bay. And what levels of research 
are going on from the government to determine, you know, the 
levels of damage that have been done in regards to Cumberland 
and Sandy Bay area on that hydro-electric power development. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — We have not undertaken any studies with 
regards to damage in that area. If there has been damage, you 
would have to raise that issue with the minister responsible for the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation; or if it’s highways, then with 
the Highways Department. 
 
There’s been no one bringing forth concern that there has been 
damage to our department. If the member is concerned, send us a 
written statement of what the concern is, and we may be able to 
deal with it. But we’ve no indication that there has been damage. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — For the minister’s information, many of the 
trappers have complained to me in regards to the water fluctuation 
levels. One instance is this: when the water levels go right down 
and they go on the shallow area, the fur rubs against the ice, and as 
such, a lot of the fur then becomes damaged. And as a result, the 
water fluctuation levels . . . And I would like to put that on record. 
 
And also the fact that one of the sub-species of sturgeon in the 
Sandy Bay area had been wiped out. There are two types of 
sturgeon in the area, and one of them has been wiped out from that 
area, so I’m providing you with information on that. 
 
In light of information like this, would you be pursuing any type 
of research if those types of information are forthcoming? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The kind of question you raise about water 
levels and things would certainly not be something dealt with by 
the Department of Environment. If there are significant concerns 
in that area, perhaps you should bring them forward to me. If 
you’ve been made aware of them, you didn’t pass them on, at 
least, because I wasn’t hearing it until now. 
 
So if you have concerns like that, those would take very detailed 
study, and perhaps somewhere in government we can do it. But it 
certainly wouldn’t come under Environment. 
  



 
July 9, 1987 

1089 
 

Mr. Goulet: — I’m very glad that the minister is open to 
information that I’ve come across as I travel around, and I’ll make 
sure that the information, as such, will come to you in writing in 
the future. 
 
I would like to relate another one in that regard. Many of the 
communities just don’t have the research space to do water 
studies. And many of the communities do not have proper shore 
and water systems. But a lot of community environment gets 
damaged, and especially a lot of the water that seeps into the river 
systems and the lake systems surrounding, let’s say, the 
communities of Stanley, or the communities of Southend, and that 
type of thing then contaminates their water. Is there any special 
effort being made to look into these water quality levels at the 
communities in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The community water supply is tested by the 
community and the tests sent in. And we do assist the community; 
they take the sample, they send it in. We assist the community to 
have that tested. Some of the tests we pay for completely; others 
we assist to pay for. But the department does do that kind of a 
monitoring service to see that the water is safe for use. 
 
If it goes beyond that kind of a question as regards to water, then 
you would be better to deal with it under the water corporation, 
who is the deliveries of water systems and could do a better job for 
the member in that area. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Before the House adjourns I would like to lay on 
the Table several reports which I have received from the Chief 
Electoral Officer. 
 
The first report is a report of the Chief Electoral Officer on the 
annual fiscal returns of registered political parties in Saskatchewan 
for the period January 1, 1986 to December 31, 1986. 
 
The second report is a report of the Chief Electoral Officer on the 
returns of election expenses filed by registered political parties 
pursuant to section 222(1), The Election Act, in conjunction with 
the 21st Saskatchewan provincial election held on October 20, 
1986. 
 
Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
The third report is the report of the Chief Electoral Officer on the 
returns of contributions and election expenses filed by candidates 
pursuant to section 218 of The Election Act, in conjunction with 
the 21st Saskatchewan provincial election on October 20, 1986. 
 
And the final report is the 21st  general election October 20, 1986, 
the report of the Chief Electoral Officer. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 


