


















































June 17, 1987 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 
June 17, 1987 

 
 

519 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Martens: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with a good deal of pleasure 
that I would like to introduce to you and to the Assembly here 
today a group of 35 students from the school at Waldeck. It’s 
just a little way from where I live, and I’m just glad that they 
could be here today. I know that they have been looking 
forward to it because the staff there told them about some of the 
things that were going to be done here today. And I would like 
to have the Assembly join with me in welcoming them here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you, 
and through you to the Assembly, a group of 33 students plus 
three adults from the Vincent Massey School in my 
constituency in Saskatoon. They’re here to watch the goings-on 
today, and I hope to join them later on for refreshments and a 
short talk. I’d like to ask the Assembly to welcome the students 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Election Promises and Health Care Commitments 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a 
question to the Premier, and it deals with the commitments 
which his party made to the people of Saskatchewan in the last 
provincial election, with respect to health care. 
 
He will recall a PC campaign brochure sent out to every 
household in this province and signed by him, which said 
clearly: a new PC government will place a great emphasis on 
improving the delivery of health service. 
 
Many of the other ads spoke of 500 new nursing positions, 330 
positions in other health professions. 
 
My question to the Premier is this: can you explain to the 
people of Saskatchewan how cutting the prescription drug 
program, privatizing and reducing the coverage under the 
children’s dental program — and incidentally resulting in the 
firing the 300 dental hygienists — and cuts in the coverage 
under chiropractic and physiotherapy care — how is this going 
to improve health services? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I recognize some members of 
the galleries are participating in the debate. I would like to 
remind all guests that they must not participate in the debate in 
anyway and to please refrain from clapping or any other such 
indication of support for either side. 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In response to 
the hon. member’s question, he will soon see in the budget that 
is about to be presented, as I have said on many occasions, that 
the health care funds allocated in this province are not only 
higher than they’ve every been in this history of Saskatchewan, 
but better than any other jurisdiction in Canada. 
 
And he will also be able to see, and my colleague will announce 
in some detail, that we have looked at society today and say 
somebody has to make sure that we are in tune with what’s 
going on with respect to some of the diseases, some of the 
efforts that are being taken. And I point out, Mr. Speaker, that 
we have talked to families in this province about teenagers, for 
examples, teenagers who are in some trouble because of . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The Premier is attempting to answer the 
question. The Premier is attempting to answer the question. You 
will note that the question was of a rather wide range in nature, 
and it may elicit a little longer answer than we like. I would like 
to remind all hon. members at this time to keep your questions 
as short as possible, and all minister to keep their answers as 
short as possible. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will say it in three very 
brief parts. Firstly, that he will see that the health care budget 
this year is larger than it’s ever been, number one. Number two, 
we have new priorities, particularly with respect to drugs, 
alcohol, and social diseases that we should address. And third, 
Mr. Speaker, when we look across the piece with respect to 
health care, we are very proud that it is the best health care 
program, the best dental program, the best drug program you’ll 
find any place in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 
Premier talks about getting us in tune with other provinces. The 
history of Saskatchewan in health care is we have been in front 
of other provinces. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — The Premier speaks of numbers; I want 
to ask about people and their problems. The facts are that there 
are close to 10,000 people waiting for beds in Saskatoon 
hospitals, double the number when you took office. And what 
does your promise of making Saskatchewan number one, or 
keeping up with other provinces, mean to them? And I refer to 
families who have children under medication and some of 
whom now must find hundreds and hundreds of dollars up front 
so that they may have prescription drugs for their children. 
 
My question to you is this: how does that improve health care 
as you promised to do; how does that improve health care for 
those people who, wrongly as it now seems, relied upon your 
word during the election campaign. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
June 17, 1987 

520 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will point out to the hon. 
member that we have increased the health budget and the 
revenue to health every year since we were elected, and it 
provides a great deal of revenue right across the piece and 
particularly to hospitals in Saskatoon. We’ve seen the waiting 
list increase there despite massive increases in health care. The 
hon. member, I’m sure, is aware of some of the problems 
associated with the use of hospitals and the line-ups that don’t 
seem to exist, Mr. Speaker, in other . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, please. I would like hon. 
members not to continue interrupting the individual trying to 
answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I could add, with this 
massive increase in expenditures in health care we’ve still seen 
some increases in the line-ups, and obviously it’s not all related 
to just finding an extra or more billions of dollars just to pour 
into the health care institutions in one particular city. We have 
to look at the entire health care system here in Saskatchewan. 
 
With respect to the drug program, I would point out, when we 
initiated that program, we saw the annual expense something 
like $16 million. Within a few short years it approaches $100 
million, and the population of the province hasn’t changed that 
much. A massive increase — $100 million a year on drug use 
paid for by the people of Saskatchewan. Yet at some point in 
time, Mr. Speaker, I believe the hon. member would appreciate, 
if you’re going to contain expenditures, you should look at 
some of the programs. 
 
And I will finally say, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the Manitoba 
drug program, under the NDP administration, you will find that 
people are very satisfied with that program. They seem to think 
that it works quite well, and whether you talk to young people 
or seniors or others, it’s quite acceptable. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. The 
Premier says that they have to make some cutbacks because of 
the deficit. Notwithstanding the fact, as we know, that there has 
been millions of dollars put out to the purchase of an oil 
company subsidiary in Alberta, and to Weyerhaeuser, and to the 
projected Shand project in Estevan, notwithstanding all of that, 
but the question really is not numbers, but people. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition asked a question specifically 
about hospital waiting lists, and I say to the Premier that I am 
getting tens of letters where people are being denied access to 
hospital on life-threatening matters. I’ll just take the privilege of 
the House for one moment, Mr. Speaker, with your indulgence, 
to cite here a portion of a letter directed to me which is 
indicative . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I will allow the hon. member to quote briefly 
from the letter, but I would remind him that the preamble to the 
questions should be as short as possible, and I hope he keeps 
that in mind in the wording of his question. 
 
Order. Order, please. 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
making the question as brief as I can, and most certainly briefer 
than any of the answers that the Premier has given thus far . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I am citing from the letter which reads, in 
part, as follows. This is not a statistic, Mr. Premier, this is a 
person. 
 

I waited a month for surgery to remove a tumour 
which was suspected of being, and did in fact turn out 
to be, malignant. The cancer had just begun to invade 
the lymphatic system. Had surgery taken place 
immediately, it might not have spread. What good 
does it do to educate the public on early detection of 
cancer if doctors are unable to operate when it has 
been detected? 
 

My question to the Premier is: what answer do you give to this 
woman and hundreds like her in Saskatchewan who want these 
answers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve pointed out, and I 
will repeat to the hon. member, the health care budget, as he 
will soon see, is as large as it has ever been in the history of the 
province. We have new cancer facilities. We have put new 
revenues in place to make sure that we address these kinds of 
problems. And you’ll find out from this budget, Mr. Speaker, 
that it is more money than any jurisdiction in Canada spends for 
health — any jurisdiction spends for health. 
 
So if there’s an emergency, if there is life-threatening situations 
in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, I can only say it must be pretty 
interesting then in Toronto or in Newfoundland or in British 
Columbia or in Alberta or in Manitoba, who spend less than we 
do with respect to health care expenditures. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. 
With the greatest of respect, perhaps the Premier can worry 
about Toronto and Halifax and Winnipeg. I think he should start 
worrying about the people of the province of Saskatchewan, 
first and foremost. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — This person is one of tens — I would say 
without a word of exaggeration, hundreds. And they expected 
differently because in October of 1986 you, sir, and your 
government front benches campaigned that you would expand 
the drug plan, the dental plan, and the health plan, entirely. 
 
I have one . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the Minister of 
Finance says it’s not true. I have in front of me, and I’ll be 
pleased to table this, Mr. Speaker, as a preface to my question, 
the commitment — there it is — of the Hon. Premier in the 
October ’86 election. And what does it say? 
 
  



 
June 17, 1987 

521 
 

A new PC government will place great emphasis, 
among other things, “by expanding the drug plan.” 
 

Exact words. Now you didn’t expand it. You betrayed the 
people of Saskatchewan. How do you defend and answer that 
now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I said that we would have 
the best health care system in Canada and, Mr. Speaker, we 
have the very best health care system in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — And I don’t have to speak about other 
jurisdictions. I don’t have to speak about them at all. We’ll talk 
just about the province of Saskatchewan and the increase in 
revenue, the increase in the beds, the increases in services, the 
increase in specialists, and the money. The members can’t have 
it both ways, Mr. Speaker. They can’t say, well for . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. I’d just 
like to ask the hon. members once more to refrain from 
continually interrupting the individual trying to answer the 
question. I realize that because of the emotions that do take 
place during question period sometimes it is difficult to refrain 
from wanting to enter the debate. However, I do ask you once 
more, and I ask both sides of the House, please refrain from 
interrupting the person who’s on his feet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — If I could just add, the hon. member 
raised the question of investments and diversification in 
Saskatchewan, like in trees or oil or upgraders or 
Weyerhaeuser, Mr. Speaker. He raised that question, so I should 
be able to respond to it. 
 
I would say you will see nothing in this budget with respect to 
buying oil properties in Alberta. That is a private company, it 
was decided to buy other . . . (inaudible) . . . and to raise 
revenue. The upgrader that we’re investing in in Regina will 
return millions and tens of millions of dollars to the people of 
Saskatchewan so we can spend it on health care. 
 
That’s precisely, Mr. Speaker, why we want diversification and 
processing and manufacturing, to increase the revenue so we 
can maintain health and education as number one in the country 
here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I think I might be tempted to 
accept the Premier’s words that I won’t see anything, that we 
won’t see anything, in this budget about oil expenditures in 
Alberta. Because I’ve come to realize, after five budgets, you 
can’t’ expect anything that’s in them because almost everything 
that is done negatively to the province of Saskatchewan isn’t in 
the budget. So I don’t buy at all the notion that we won’t see 
this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Romanow: — But my question is this, Mr. Speaker; my 
question is this: what we’re seeing here for sure is a shift in 
philosophy. When you do away with the drug plan, you don’t 
do away with the costs. Sick people, older people, are still 
going to have to pay for medicine. They’re still going to have to 
pay for the dental technicians’ services. They’re going to have 
to pay for all the other costs that you’re eliminating, over 25 
specialists I’m told, Mr. Speaker, to-day — doctor specialists 
terminated today or the last few days. 
 
My question to the Premier is this: in the light of this obvious 
shift from public service, to your friends in the private sector, I 
want you to tell us how that is consistent with the commitment 
that you made in October of 1986 to support the Saskatchewan 
medicare and hospitalization system. How consistent is that 
kind of privatization of the medicare system, fall into this 
game? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, let me come at it a different 
way for the hon. Member. Under very difficult times, the truth 
is we are short of revenue. The members opposite know that 
there is a decline in revenue in agriculture, decline in oil, 
decline in potash. At the same time they want us to maintain 
first-class health and educational institutions, social services 
institutions, at the same time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just reiterate it again; the budget they are 
about to see will show the largest expenditures in health in the 
history of the province of Saskatchewan, and much higher than 
they ever had themselves. The population hasn’t changed all 
that much. More people are getting health care services in this 
province than they ever got before. We have better institutions 
than we’ve ever received before. And if you want to add it up, 
then we’ll add it up for you and we’ll read it to you, we’ll share 
it with you as we do people across the country. It will be, 
despite difficult times — despite difficult times — the best 
health care, the best drug system, the best dental program any 
place in North America, right here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, another question to the 
Premier. I hear his words, and he expects us to accept those 
words. But I wonder how it is he would explain those words in 
the fact that not only is there a major demonstration today in the 
Legislative Building protesting the fact that there are cut-backs 
in health, and have been in the past and will be, how those 
words jibe with the reality of the situation. I can’t believe that 
this Premier and this government is so absolutely insensitive to 
the needs of the suffering to think that we’ll be satisfied with 
mere words. 
 
My question therefore, Mr. Premier, is simply this: I don’t think 
that you’re going to change. I don’t think your front-benchers, 
or the Minister of Finance, or the Minister of Health is going to 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Please put the question. 
 
  



 
June 17, 1987 

522 
 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Will you permit your whip to allow your 
government back-benchers to have a free vote on these 
programs to get a true expression of what this House really 
believes about what you’re doing about this budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the result of our caucus and 
our work and the result of the major whip, the last two 
elections, ’82 and ’86, I think we’ve got the result right here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker — mind you, hearing what one 
hears in Saskatchewan about the PC back-benchers — I don’t 
blame the Premier for not allowing a free vote on these issues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — So I understand the answer. Obviously 
we’re not going to make any headway with the Premier and the 
government, so my next question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier 
is this. I think, as these answers painfully and clearly 
demonstrate, this PC government has compounded and devised 
a complicated, tangled web of deceit and deception perpetrated 
upon the Saskatchewan public in October of 1986. And they did 
it without electoral approval. They told us things were good, 
and six . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order! Would you please put the 
question. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — My question, Mr. Speaker, is this. Mr. 
Premier, you did not get the mandate of the Saskatchewan 
people to dismantle medicare, and my question is to you as 
follows: will you do the right thing, therefore, and now dissolve 
the legislature and call an election so the people can decide 
what you did? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order! Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition in 1986 
asked for an election all year. They finally got one, and they 
lost, and now they’re asking for it again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — In four or five years, when you finally 
pick a leader, we’ll call another one and we’ll be the first to let 
you know. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to just address one point that the hon. 
member had in his question with respect to we didn’t tell it as it 
was in October when we had the election. Let me point out, Mr. 
Speaker, the last . . . at least the last two weeks of the campaign 
in October I spent all my time on how difficult economic 
conditions there were in agriculture. I had the opposition 
members walking all over this province talking about a billion 
dollars because 

the farmers were in trouble. We talked about the difficulties in 
the potash, difficulties in agriculture, difficulties in oil . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — And the opposition didn’t have any 
answers. They didn’t have an answer; in fact, nobody would 
listen to them. 
 

Impact of Cut-backs to Health Care 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. 
Mr. Premier, I want to know whether you really understand the 
impact of your government’s cuts with respect to health care. 
And more importantly, I want to know if you really care what 
these decisions are doing to Saskatchewan people. 
 
And I’ll give you an example, Mr. Speaker: a senior citizen 
couple in Saskatoon, living on the old age pension and the 
supplement. They have just been affected in the last several 
weeks by two major cuts. Their son has been told — he’s a 
resident of the North Park Centre in Prince Albert — that he’s 
going to have to move. They have also been told, Mr. Speaker, 
that the prescription drug plan, for the most part, has been done 
away, and they will have to pay for drugs up-front — drugs 
up-front, Mr. Premier — of $322.16. My question to you, Mr. 
Speaker: do you really care about the people in Saskatchewan 
when they have to pay for these kind of drugs and they have to 
pay for it up-front? Do you really care? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Make the poor pay? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say at the outset 
that, when you look at any particular program, there are 
adjustment periods that will have to take place. And we’ve 
consulted with the Government of Manitoba and looked at their 
drug program. I can say to senior citizens in this province, the 
deductible is $25 this year — $25 for single individuals. Now 
beyond that, if you have specific information where you have a 
unique problem and it’s something that you would like to table 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please! Would you let the 
Premier answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — . . . please provide the information about 
the pharmacist and the company that’s providing their 
prescription service, about the individual, to the Minister of 
Health. He will be glad to examine a specific situation if it is 
unique. As you know, senior citizens in nursing homes don’t 
have to pay anything. As you know, it’s only $25 deductible 
this year for seniors, which is not prohibitive. And if you have 
specific situations that you’d like looked at in detail, the 
minister will be glad to look at them. 
 

Credibility Regarding Budgetary Matters 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. 
In any budgetary process, one critical but intangible ingredient 
is basic credibility. Can the 
  



 
June 17, 1987 

523 
 

government be believed? 
 
Miscalculations of last year’s deficit turned out to be a full 200 
per cent mistake. Many financial analysts have concluded that 
this government has a very large credibility gap, that it’s 
diddled the arithmetic too often. 
 
Can the Premier tell us how, precisely, he intends to restore 
some faith and some confidence in this government’s 
believability; what his game plan may be for rebuilding some 
credibility to Saskatchewan people and the financial 
community? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I can say to the hon. 
member a couple of observations. One is, as he knows, every 
provincial government in Canada, and indeed the federal 
government, has a deficit. Because of the economic times, you 
can have a Tory government in Alberta or an NDP government 
in Manitoba or a Liberal government in Ontario — they all have 
deficits, and we all face that because of international economic 
conditions. 
 
Secondly, we have not seen any significant change in our cost 
of borrowing money because of our reputation. If you go into 
the international markets you will see provinces have had their 
credit rating modified somewhat. But you can go and look 
through the documents that we’ll provide today. No significant 
or even modest increase in the cost of borrowing because the 
financial institutions are saying, we believe that you have got a 
reasonable hand on managing the province, and that’s why 
we’re prepared to back you up under these difficult times. 
 
Now you can look at the cost for other jurisdictions. And I 
would just point out, Mr. Speaker, if you go to the province to 
the east of us under an NDP administration, you’ll find close to 
a $10 billion deficit. And a 10 per cent interest rate on that is $1 
billion a year — in some difficulty. And I think that your 
observations level there would be quite appropriate. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, that still doesn’t explain last 
year’s 200 per cent mistake. There’s an obvious gap, Mr. 
Speaker, between what this government said last fall at election 
time and what it has done since. There’s a blatant contradiction. 
Last fall everything was rosy; now everything is a disaster. 
When pressed by the news media to explain that contradiction, 
ministers in the government say, well, we’re just politicians; we 
just tell our side of the story, and the public doesn’t expect us to 
tell the whole truth. That’s their explanation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question to the Premier is this: does the Premier stand by 
that explanation as the official policy of his government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member raises the 
last campaign and what I talked about. And that’s precisely 
what he wants to get. He says, what you said then is not the 
same as what you’re saying now. Let me reiterate — and he 
nods that’s what he wants addressed — let me reiterate. 
 
All through the campaign we talked about the difficult 

times in Saskatchewan agriculture, which is our largest industry 
— all through the campaign — how difficult it would be. There 
isn’t a person in this country that didn’t know that I was trying 
to get a billion dollars for Saskatchewan farmers because of 
difficult economic conditions. All through the campaign I said, 
somebody’s got to stand there and fight provincially and 
nationally and internationally for Saskatchewan agriculture and 
for Saskatchewan resources, because they’re in a lot of trouble. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Now you or nobody else can deny that. 
That’s what I did all through the campaign, as did this front 
bench. And you provided your solutions, and they provided 
their solutions, and you were rejected again. You were rejected 
because we said we would go to defend farmers when interest 
rates were 20 per cent, and we did. We said we’d help farmers 
when wheat prices were 2 or $3, and we did. We defend the 
energy patch; we defend potash; we’ll defend trees. We talked 
about the problems, and we got elected talking about the 
problems because we had solutions for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Before orders of the day I would like to lay on 
the Table the report of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Order, please. I think hon. members realize that when the 
Speaker is on his feet there are to be no interruptions. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY 
ESTIMATES 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — On orders of the day, I have a message 
from His Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The message from His Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor: 
 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits estimates of 
certain sums required for the service of the province 
for the 12 months ending March 31, 1988, and 
supplementary estimates of certain sums required for 
the service of the province for the 12 months ending 
March 31, 1987 and March 31, 1988, and recommends 
the same to the Legislative Assembly. (Signed) F.W. 
Johnson, Lieutenant Governor of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Souris-Cannington: 
 

That His Honour’s message, the estimates and 
supplementary estimates, be referred to the Committee 
of Finance. 
 

  



 
June 17, 1987 

524 
 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I rise this afternoon to present 
the first budget of this Progressive Conservative administration, 
an administration with a renewed mandate from the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
On October 20, 1986, the people of Saskatchewan voted for a 
Premier and a party whose first priority is to provide the people 
of this province with the means to build a more prosperous 
future for themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan wanted a government 
that was willing to look realistically at the challenges which 
face us. They wanted a government committed to protecting the 
Saskatchewan families and the social institutions that enhance 
our quality of life. They wanted a government determined to 
create a climate in which they can get on with the job of 
building and diversifying the economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are optimistic about 
the future, and that’s why they re-elected a Progressive 
Conservative government that will continue to build, to protect, 
and to diversify. Our need to build, to protect and diversify is 
underscored by the events in the world economy. Recent sharp 
declines in world prices for our resources and agricultural 
commodities reminds us of our vulnerable fiscal and economic 
base. Diversification of the provincial economy will help us in 
the long term to protect ourselves from these global 
circumstances. But the dramatic shortfall in government 
revenues over the past year has added to the deficit and put 
additional strain on our expenditure base. Faced with this 
situation, we responded as any Saskatchewan family would 
respond, by undertaking a fundamental review of all our 
expenditures and revenues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are acting to protect our future. We had to be 
realistic, and we had to be fair. Before we asked others to make 
sacrifices, we had to improve further the financial management 
of our affairs to protect our social institutions, enhance our 
quality of life, and encourage the new activity that 
diversification will bring. Accordingly, this budget presents the 
results of our initiatives to significantly reduce the deficit, 
thereby protecting Saskatchewan’s future. 
 
It also outlines the other major actions that this government will 
take — actions to address the two central issues facing our 
farming community — low commodity prices and high farm 
debt; actions to protect and further develop our essential 
commitments to health, education, and employment, and 
actions to build and diversify our economy to provide new 
opportunities and jobs for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the world economy is undergoing fundamental 
change. The huge American trade deficit and the large trade 
surpluses of Japan and Germany are weakening traditional 
trading patterns, as predatory subsidies multiply and 
protectionism is enshrined in law. American and European and 
Japanese governments now 

provide over $80 billion in subsidies to their farmers. 
Protectionist trade measures by the United States have already 
attacked Saskatchewan’s lumber, steel, beef, and pork 
industries. Our potash and uranium industries are now being 
threatened by anti-dumping actions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the changes occurring in the international 
market-place are having a dramatic effect on the Saskatchewan 
economy. Wheat prices are at their lowest levels in 40 years, 
and mineral and oil prices have also dropped dramatically. Oil 
prices fell from a high of $42 a barrel in 1985 to a low of $14 in 
1986. Potash prices fell from $155 per tonne in 1981 to under 
$80 in 1986, and uranium prices fell from $50 per pound in 
1978 to $24 in 1986. The sharp decline in prices for our 
commodities stands in stark contrast to the 1970s when 
increases in prices outpaced inflation and led to expenditure 
decisions based on the assumption of even higher prices. 
 
In 1981, for example, the then minister of Finance told the 
international investment community and rating agencies that by 
1986 oil revenues would increase by 180 per cent, from $530 
million to $1.5 billion. In actual fact, Mr. Speaker, they 
declined by 60 per cent, to $213 million. 
 
In 1981, the then minister of Finance promised the people of 
Saskatchewan that potash revenues would increase by almost 
220 per cent, from $185 million to $600 million. In actual fact, 
Mr. Speaker, they declined by 80 per cent, to $37 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — In 1981 again, the then minister of Finance 
said uranium revenues would increase by over 350 per cent, 
from $30 million to $136 million. The truth is, Mr. Speaker, 
they declined by 40 per cent, to $18 million. 
 
Saskatchewan government resource revenues have fallen by 50 
per cent since 1985, declining from roughly one-third of 
government revenues in 1981, to only 13 per cent today. 
 
Today the economic outlook for Saskatchewan is difficult. 
Record world stocks and low prices for most Saskatchewan 
resource exports are depressing the economic outlook for 
agriculture, oil, potash, and uranium, and significantly lowering 
expectations for related provincial investment spin-off activity 
and government revenues. This uncertain world situation 
requires strong action to protect Saskatchewan’s future. 
 
Global events beyond the control of Saskatchewan people have 
led to a sharp decline in government revenues, making it 
apparent that we have to streamline the operation of 
government to fit the new economic and fiscal realities. We 
have to protect our future flexibility to deal with changing 
social and economic development priorities. Significant 
government economies were needed to reduce the deficit of 
$1.5 billion projected in March. If we had not acted, Mr. 
Speaker, the interest payments on our debt would have totalled 
nearly $1 billion by 1991, exceeding our current total 
expenditures on highways and education. 
 
  



 
June 17, 1987 

525 
 

Over the past five years we have provided the people of 
Saskatchewan with a more efficient and productive 
government. In 1982 the people of Saskatchewan made it clear 
that they wanted a government which placed its priority on the 
delivery of services and programs to those who need them 
without waste or duplication. 
 
We listened and we acted. During our first term we reduced the 
civil service by more than 1,000 positions through the prudent 
management of retirements and attrition — a reduction of 7 per 
cent. We introduced new management information technology 
systems. We established the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation to centralize the functions of 
acquiring, financing, and managing government land and 
buildings. 
 
In 1983 we reorganized several government departments and 
agencies which resulted in administrative savings and a much 
clearer definition of responsibilities. 
 
We created the Saskatchewan Water Corporation, consolidating 
all water-related activities from four government departments. 
In 1985 the corporation was moved to Moose Jaw, and in 1986 
we announced the decentralization of other government 
operations, the agricultural credit corporation to Swift Current; 
the crop insurance corporation to Melville; and the Department 
of Science and Technology to Saskatoon. 
 
These initiatives have brought programs closer to the people 
they serve. Here are a few examples of the priority this 
government places on delivering services to the people of 
Saskatchewan in an efficient and effective manner. It is through 
such government cost-saving measures we were able to save the 
taxpayers of this province nearly $300 million in our first term 
in office. 
 
In March I indicated in my Economic and Financial Report that 
we had to be realistic, but fair, in our efforts to control 
government expenditures. I indicated that we would take 
significant measures to reduce our own expenditures before we 
asked others to make sacrifices, and only then would we 
consider raising general tax revenues. 
 
I specifically announced that we had set as our target the 
reduction of the civil service by 2,000 positions; that 
government employees would receive no wage increases for at 
least two years; and as other public sector and Crown 
corporation labour contracts expired, this same wage policy 
would apply; that the province’s funding to third parties such as 
schools, universities, municipalities, and hospitals would not 
recognize salary increases for the next two years; and that 
funding increases for 1989 and the following years would 
depend on the strength of the economy, particularly the 
agricultural economy. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I indicated that the process would not be 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I believe there 
are too many interruptions. All members will get an opportunity 
later on in the debate on the budget to voice their views and 
opinions, and I would like to ask you that for the next little 
while, while the minister is presenting the budget and while 
later on the opposition member is 

responding to it, we try to allow them to get through their 
presentations as efficiently as possible. 
 
I think we should note that the galleries are full. It might be 
some time this afternoon before we adjourn, so the fewer 
interruptions, the quicker everybody could get out. 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I indicated that 
this process would not be an easy one and that many difficult 
decisions would have to be made requiring both trade-offs and a 
spirit of good will and co-operation. 
 
We began a review of expenditures by focusing our energies on 
government-directed programs and services which account for 
one third of the provincial budget. There are two reasons for 
making this approach. First, we believed that it was important 
to be fair by reducing our own expenditures before we ask 
others to make sacrifices. And secondly, we believe that as a 
result of these reductions we could significantly improve 
government efficiency and productivity. The decisions we have 
taken have produced both significant savings and improved 
government accountability. 
 
Since March we have reduced the size of the civil service by 
over 2,000 positions. Through an early retirement package, 
1,200 positions have been vacated, and 800 of these have been 
permanently deleted. An additional 550 vacant positions were 
eliminated, and over 700 positions were deleted as a result of 
lay-offs. These reductions will result in a saving of over $200 
million over the next five years. 
 
We have eliminated nine government departments and agencies. 
This will enhance the co-ordination of government 
decision-making while reducing administrative costs. Mr. 
Speaker, we will continue to pursue decentralization initiatives 
to operate government more efficiently and to make it more 
responsive to the people of this province. 
 
We are currently examining administrative structures in 
regional offices with a view to implementing further 
decentralization initiatives. We have amalgamated three 
regulatory functions into the Local Government Board to 
reduce costs and provide “one-stop shopping.” We are moving 
our various mediation functions, the Provincial mediation 
Board, the Rent Appeal Commission, and others, into the 
Department of Justice. The Minister of Justice will be making 
further announcements respecting alternative dispute resolution 
mechanisms. Our objective is to relieve individuals as much as 
possible from the emotional and financial burden associated 
with the court system, reduce court case loads, and create 
administrative savings. 
 
We are streamlining the administration of health care, including 
the amalgamation of the Medical Care Insurance Commission 
within the Department of Health. We have reorganized our 
technical institutes by placing them under one management 
structure. This measure will not only improve the quality of 
education in our technical institutes, but it will reduce 
administrative costs. 
 
  



 
June 17, 1987 

526 
 
 

Opportunities to improve service and achieve savings through 
private sector delivery will be pursued in areas such as tree 
nurseries and park facilities. There are many non-essential 
services which can be operated more efficiently by the private 
sector, with substantial savings to the taxpayers, and we intend 
to pursue those opportunities. 
 
The measures that I have just outlined to improve the financial 
management of these programs and services which we directly 
control were not always easy or pleasant, but they were 
necessary, they were realistic, and they were fair. If we had 
taken no action, government program services and 
administrative expenditures would have increased substantially 
this year. But because of our actions, expenditures in this area 
will be reduced by 2 per cent below last year’s budget estimate. 
 
It was also clear that as part of our overall review of 
government expenditures, we had to examine the two-thirds of 
our provincial budget which provides funding for third parties 
and individuals. We reviewed all grants on a realistic and fair 
basis. University operating grants were maintained at least 
year’s level, and the Minister of Education asked the University 
of Regina to eliminate its deficit over the next four years. 
School operating grants and rural and urban revenue-sharing 
grants were reduced by 1 per cent. Spending under the 
provincial capital fund was deferred except for prior 
commitments, and payments to doctors are being held at actual 
1986-87 funding levels, and hospital grants have increased by 2 
per cent. 
 
They also under took an extensive review of the hundreds of 
smaller third-party grants. In most cases we were able to 
continue with the previous level of funding support. However 
we found that the utilization rate for some organizations had 
dropped over time, but that their funding level had been 
maintained. In some cases we found that different agencies 
were in direct competition with each other by offering the same 
public service. In other situations we found that some agencies 
were duplicating government programs and services. We also 
found major inconsistencies between salaries paid by similar 
organizations to people doing similar jobs. In all these cases we 
reduced or eliminated funding to these third parties. 
 
We believe we have been fair in our approach, and in most 
cases have maintained or increased funding to third parties. Our 
expenditures this year on grants and payments to individuals 
will be 1.4 per cent below last year’s budget estimate. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, through a 2 per cent reduction in our 
own expenditure base and a 1.4 per cent decrease in grants to 
third parties and individuals, we have been able to reduce 
overall government expenditures in these areas by $51 million 
relative to last year’s budget estimate, and that will be $680 
million less than that estimated in March. 
 
In developing this budget, it would have been easy for us to 
follow Manitoba’s recent example by simply raising taxes to 
meet our expenditure requirements. We have not chosen that 
course. We have taken a more thoughtful, 

more time-consuming, but ultimately a more responsible 
approach. We have reviewed closely all government 
expenditures, and the measures we have taken as a result will 
substantially reduce our requirements for revenue-generating 
initiatives. But this did not entirely eliminate the need for tax 
increases. 
 
In considering the taxation alternatives available to the 
government, three basic principles guided our deliberation: 
fairness, economic self-development, and revenue sufficiency. 
We considered the alternatives with a view to ensuring that 
incentives to work, to save and to invest would continue, and 
that our competitive position relative to other provinces would 
not be eroded. We rejected taxation measures such as 
succession duties and payroll taxes, as they were both unfair 
and detrimental to economic development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the principle of fairness was foremost when I 
announced the flat tax would increase to 1.5 per cent for 1987, 
and this tax ensures that people pay their fair share of tax. 
Tomorrow the federal Finance Minister, the Hon. Michael 
Wilson, will present a major tax reform initiative. I expect that 
his reform proposals for the personal income tax system will 
focus on the issues that this government has long advocated: a 
reduction in the number and size of tax preferences; a simplified 
tax structure; and a significant reduction in marginal tax rates. 
These are the very concerns the Saskatchewan flat tax 
addresses. 
 
Members opposite and others have called upon the government 
to reinstate the gas tax to ensure non-residents and 
interprovincial truckers pay their fair share of highway 
construction and maintenance costs. We considered their advice 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please, order. 
Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I could quote for the hon. members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, many speeches in which they called for 
reinstitution of the gas tax, but that debate will come later. 
 
I am announcing today that the gas tax will be introduced 
effective June 22. A 7 cents per litre fuel tax will apply to 
gasoline, diesel, and aviation fuels and propane. However, Mr. 
Speaker, this government does not believe that Saskatchewan 
individuals, including farmers, should have to pay this tax. 
Accordingly, I am announcing today that the gasoline tax will 
be rebated to Saskatchewan individuals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Saskatchewan farmers and individual 
primary producers will be exempt from the tax on their 
commercial purchases from their bulk fuel dealers, and all 
heating fuels will be tax exempt. Mr. Speaker, the residents of 
this province will continue to have the lowest gasoline prices in 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The Premier and Minister of Agriculture 
will be announcing incentives to encourage 
  



 
June 17, 1987 

527 
 

the consumption and production of ethanol and motor fuels. 
 
Today I am announcing revenue measures to provide adequate 
funding for the services that people of Saskatchewan desire. 
Effective midnight tonight, the education and health tax will be 
increased to 7 per cent. Effective January 1, 1987, the tax rate 
levied on the taxable paid-up capital of trust and loan 
companies has increased to 3 per cent. Effective midnight 
tonight the tobacco tax will be increased by 15 cents per 
package of 25 cigarettes, with similar increases for other 
tobacco products. Liquor prices will be increased to generate an 
additional $10 million . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please; order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — During the past few years the government 
has significantly reduced the impact of the education and health 
tax on Saskatchewan families by exempting such basic 
necessities as clothing, footwear, heating, and electricity. In 
additions, farmers are exempt from the tax on input costs such 
as machinery, fertilizer, and pesticides. Mr. Speaker, in 
Saskatchewan these essential goods will remain sales tax free. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — In order to build on these previous 
initiatives I have one final revenue announcement to make that 
is of significant benefit to lower income families, especially 
single parents and senior citizens. To improve the fairness of 
our tax system and to provide further protection to lower 
income families, I am pleased to announce an enhancement to 
and restructuring of the Saskatchewan tax reduction. 
 
There are five components to this new program. First, a $200 
sales tax reduction will be introduced to offset the impact of the 
education and health tax increase. Secondly, a $300 tax 
reduction for home-makers will be introduced. Third, to protect 
families with children, a $200 per child tax reduction will also 
be added. Fourthly, a special provision for single parents will be 
introduced in recognition of the difficulties they face. This will 
provide a $500 tax reduction for the first child. And finally, a 
new supplementary $200 tax reduction for senior citizens will 
be introduced. These benefits will be reduced as income rises in 
order to target these substantial savings to those most needed. In 
total over 330,000 people will benefit from this $51 million 
program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — These enhancements to the Saskatchewan 
tax reduction complement the Saskatchewan Pension Plan and 
provide further support to home-makers in recognition of the 
valuable contribution they made to society. For example, a 
senior couple with net income of $17,000 will receive $350 in 
tax relief; a single mother, with two children, with a net income 
of $15,000 will receive $650 in tax relief; and a family of four 
with a net income of $20,000 will receive $400 in tax relief. 
 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this is welcome tax relief for 
Saskatchewan families, single parents, and senior citizens. I 
invite members opposite and the public to read the two budget 
papers which describe the effects of the tax changes I have 
announced. And this government will continue to ensure that 
provincial taxes paid by Saskatchewan residents compare 
favourably to the provincial taxes paid by other Canadians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for example, if we were to impose Ontario’s tax 
rates on Saskatchewan residents, taxes would rise by over an 
additional $150 million today. And if we, Mr. Speaker, were to 
impose Manitoba’s tax rates on Saskatchewan residents, taxes 
would increase by a further $500 million. And if we were to 
apply Quebec’s provincial tax rates on Saskatchewan residents, 
taxes would increase by a further $830 million. Saskatchewan 
continues to have the second lowest provincial taxes in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — By reducing government expenditures, and 
by introducing the revenue-generating initiatives that I have 
announced, the deficit for 1987 will be reduced to $577 million, 
a decrease of 60 per cent over $900 million from the projected 
deficit of 1.5 billion. The substantially revised deficit target has 
been achieved primarily through expenditure control and keeps 
us on the track to balance the budget. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Speaker, agricultural development. The people of this 
province know and understand that our farmers are in serious 
difficulty. Today the international grains market is characterized 
by predatory pricing and subsidized over-production which has 
resulted in seriously depressed prices. This problem has been 
compounded in Saskatchewan by high interest rates and the 
inflated land prices of the late 1970’s and early 1980’s. Many 
farmers are in serious financial difficulty, confronted as they are 
with high debt costs and reduced prices for their grains. The 
drop in world grain prices has been sudden, but the causes have 
been with us for some time. The belated effects of the “Green 
Revolution” reduced Third World demand, turned some major 
importers such as China, India, and Saudi Arabia into exporters. 
European and American agricultural subsidies grew 
significantly over the past decade and have now escalated into a 
full-scale grain war over market shares . . . I know the hon. 
member may not want to hear about the difficulties of 
Saskatchewan farmers, but this Government and, I believe, the 
people do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And our Saskatchewan farmers are caught 
in the middle. Current world wheat stocks are estimated at 150 
million tonnes, the equivalent of two years of the world wheat 
trade. Coarse grain stocks are estimated at approximately 186 
million tonnes, double the level of world trade. The price of 
wheat has been cut in half from $222 per tonne in 1981 to $110 
today. Net farm incomes would be substantially below zero 
without the assistance of government programs such as the 
  



 
June 17, 1987 

528 
 
 

production loan program, the federal deficiency payment, and 
the western grain stabilization program. 
 
And now is not the time for governments to turn away from this 
important industry. This government will continue to defend 
and develop our agricultural interests and address the two 
central issues facing our farming communities — low 
commodity prices and high farm debt. 
 
This government believes that trade-distorting subsidies in the 
international arena must be eliminated. Premier Grant Devine 
has shown foresight and leadership in raising this issue at 
national and international meetings. Premier raised this issue for 
the first time in a national forum. And recently he’s urged 
Japanese leaders, American farm leaders, and the President of 
France to eliminate agricultural subsidies. 
 
The federal government must continue to support our Premier’s 
efforts to reduce farm subsidies to allow Saskatchewan farmers 
to compete fairly. An international process that will lead to the 
elimination of agricultural protectionism must be introduced 
quickly, and our federal government must sustain our Premier’s 
initiatives for such a process. 
 
We have already seen some concrete results from our Premier’s 
success in bringing agriculture to the forefront of the national 
agenda — I’m speaking, of course, of the $1 billion injected 
into Canada’s farm economy by the federal deficiency payment. 
 
This government will continue to push for the elimination of 
rain subsidies in the international arena. However, in the 
meantime, we are committed to securing essential protection for 
our farmers. A second substantial federal deficiency payment of 
between $1.6 billion and $3 billion is required this year. And 
that position of our Premier was unanimously supported at the 
western premier’s conference recently held in Humboldt. 
 
The other key issue facing Saskatchewan farmers is the burden 
of farm debt accumulated through recent droughts, low grain 
prices, and high financing charges. Mr. Speaker, farm debt in 
Saskatchewan is now estimated to be over $5 billion, and it is a 
serious problem that requires a response. 
 
This government will be proposing new initiatives regarding 
alternative forms of farm equity financing for public discussion 
later this summer. These initiatives will require the co-operation 
and participation of the farming and financial communities, as 
well as the federal government, fi we are to resolve this 
pressing problem. 
 
In our first term in office we provided substantial relief to 
Saskatchewan farmer sin the face of back to back droughts and 
high interest rates. We provided short-term solutions to 
immediate and pressing needs. However, problems confronting 
our farming community have now changed. They are 
international in scope and more difficult to resolve. Solutions to 
low grain prices and large farm debt cannot be provided by this 
government alone. 
 

But there is much we can do to improve the competitive 
position of Saskatchewan farmers. We are taking steps to 
refocus the agriculture budget by moving away from some 
interest rate protection programs and moving towards increased 
development initiatives, irrigation enhancement, and a more 
effective gathering and distribution of market information. 
 
While the budget for agriculture is reduced, we believe that now 
is the time to reallocate the funds in this important area to 
address the central issues facing our farm community. 
Accordingly, I am announcing today that the farm purchase 
program is suspended. The program will continue, however, to 
meet its commitments to farmers already participating in the 
program. When we established the farm purchase program in 
1983, interest rates were 13,25 per cent, while farm land prices 
were $400 an acre. Since that time both interest rates and land 
prices have fallen substantially. 
 
The livestock cash advance program will also be modified to 
provide cash advances to livestock producers similar to cash 
advances provided to grain producers. And this modification is 
made possible by increases in market prices for livestock. 
 
Our approach to agricultural research, trade, development and 
diversification will be comprehensive. We will bring agriculture 
extension services into the new technological era. We will 
maintain our commitment to the $92 million College of 
Agriculture building at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We will follow the advice of our farming 
community and pursue expanded local supplies of farm 
chemicals, fertilizers and fuels with cost savings to farmers. We 
will continue to support the production of generic agricultural 
chemicals in Saskatchewan. We will be examining initiatives in 
the area of inland grain cleaning, feedlot and livestock 
development, special crop trading, and meat packing and 
processing. 
 
We will provide almost $30 million to the agricultural 
development fund, an increase of 28 per cent. And we will 
provide an increase of $7 million for irrigation development, for 
a total of $16 million to permit further agricultural 
diversification. And we will establish an agricultural 
development secretariat to monitor and promote the interests of 
the agricultural community in trade discussions, and to provide 
a focus for the diversification of Saskatchewan’s agricultural 
economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in our first term in office we faced a difficult 
environment with excessive interest rates, a world recession, 
back to back droughts, and the commencement of the 
agriculture and resource downturn. This government acted with 
common sense and care. Mr. Speaker, we introduced, over the 
objection of the opposition, the mortgage interest reduction 
plan. We introduced, over the objection of the opposition, the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan, the farm production loan program. 
We introduced, over the objection of the opposition, the 
Saskatchewan heritage program, the 
  



 
June 17, 1987 

529 
 

Saskatchewan student loan program, an enriched day care 
program, and emergency drought assistance. These actions 
protected Saskatchewan people in difficult times. They 
addressed immediate and pressing needs. And this government 
remains committed to the protection and the advancement of the 
people of Saskatchewan, and we will act when and where 
necessary to offset economic hardship. 
 
This government introduced the mortgage interest protection 
plan to protect Saskatchewan families against high interest 
rates, and we also introduced measures that lower-income 
Saskatchewan residents pay less tax than elsewhere in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We have already exempted virtually all 
essential goods from the sales tax. And this budget, Mr. 
Speaker, provides further relief by enhancing the Saskatchewan 
tax reduction, which will result in an actual decrease in taxes for 
many lower-income families. 
 
And I am pleased to announce today, Mr. Speaker, that the 
application forms for the senior citizens’ heritage program will 
be distributed over the course of the next week, and this 
program will put approximately $40 million into the hands of 
107,000 Saskatchewan senior citizens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — In recognition of the growing number of 
working families, I’m pleased to announce a $500,000 increase 
in day care funding for 225 new spaces. Since 1982, the number 
of spaces has been increased by 53 per cent, and expenditures 
have increased by $4.7 million or 52 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We have consistently acted to protect the 
people of this province, and I invite the members of this 
Assembly to review the interprovincial comparison of taxes and 
charges contained in this document. 
 
A Saskatchewan family of four with an annual income of 
$20,000 will pay almost $600 less in taxes and charges than the 
average Canadian family with similar income. At $35,000 per 
year, a Saskatchewan family will now pay $300 less in taxes 
than the average Canadian family. Saskatchewan families 
continue to pay the lowest overall charges in Canada for such 
essential living expenses as automobile insurance, electricity, 
home heating, and telephone services. And when these charges 
are combined with taxes, a Saskatchewan family of four with an 
annual income of $20,000 will now pay $1,400 less than the 
average Canadian family at that income. A Saskatchewan 
family with an annual income of $35,000 will pay $1,100 less 
than the Canadian family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 1987 is the 25th anniversary of medicare in 
Saskatchewan, and we have seen many changes over the years. 
In 1962 the budget for health care was $47 million. This year 
the budget exceeds $1.2 billion — a 25-fold increase. In 25 
years, medicare has become a national 

program with slightly different characteristics in each province. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, please. I would once again 
respectfully ask hon. members to please refrain from constant 
interruptions, to allow the minister to deliver his budget speech. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today every 
province faces the challenge of protecting medicare in the face 
of spiraling costs. For example, Ontario is cutting the number of 
medical residents in teaching hospitals by 15 per cent. Manitoba 
is reviewing the process for setting the physician fee schedule, 
has cancelled ophthalmology training and has increased its drug 
plan fees and has closed some hospital beds. Alberta has 
delayed the opening of the Peter Lougheed Hospital in Calgary; 
has deinsured certain benefits; has begun means testing of the 
Alberta aids to independent living, and has increase health 
premiums by nearly 29 per cent. 
 
I bring these examples to the Assembly’s attention because 
protecting medicare, Mr. Speaker, is a priority of this 
government. Medicare must be safeguarded, Mr. Speaker, so it 
can provide basic, high quality health care for today and 
tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And to protect medicare, Mr. Speaker, 
changes will have to be made. We are making the difficult but 
necessary decisions to ensure that Saskatchewan has the finest 
health care system into the next century, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — This government has been proud of its 
support to medicare through the expansion of programs and the 
construction and rejuvenation of hospitals and nursing homes. 
Our health . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order! I regret to have to rise 
once again to interrupt the Minister of Finance. I would like to 
once more ask hon. members to please refrain from constant 
interruptions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I know the hon. members 
opposite don’t want to hear this information. Our health care 
expenditures have increased over 63 per cent over the last five 
years, Mr. Speaker, and the people of Saskatchewan will 
continue to receive the highest quality of care available. And 
achieving this objective requires the combined efforts of the 
entire health care profession and all of Saskatchewan people. 
 
In spite of substantial expenditure increases in the health care 
field, particularly over the last five years, it is becoming 
increasingly clear that the continued application of large 
amounts of moneys is simply not enough. The health care sector 
is beset by structural and systemic problems which prevent us 
from delivering the best health care system available. Structural 
problems include a disjointed, layered system built up over the 
years through a simplistic, add-on mentality. We have a system 
that lacks adequate accountability and 
  



 
June 17, 1987 

530 
 
 

performance standards, a system that encourages excessive 
utilization and high administrative costs at the expense of the 
patient. 
 
(1515) 
 
Many health care professionals believe that the system does not 
fully utilize the skills they have to offer. And left unattended, 
these problems would weaken the health care system and 
diminish the quality and accessibility of the care we have all 
come to expect. Notwithstanding what the opposition says, Mr. 
Speaker, we cannot and we will not allow that to happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We must act now, Mr. Speaker, to protect 
and improve our health care system for the benefit of future 
generations, health administrative costs are escalating 
dramatically. Today there are about 500 separate boards, 
agencies and commissions managing the various components of 
the health care system in Saskatchewan. Obviously, this 
administrative structure directs funds away from patient care, 
and at the same time we have in place open-ended funding 
mechanisms. 
 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — and I ask the hon. members to 
listen carefully — has 6.7 acute care hospital beds for every 
thousands residents. That’s 31 per cent above the national 
average, and is certainly the highest in Canada. Yet waiting lists 
for elective surgery in Saskatoon have doubled over the past 
five years, while beds in our smaller hospitals remain 
under-utilized. It’s clear that Saskatchewan does not have a 
hospital bed shortage, but rather a serious utilization and 
distribution problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The uneven distribution of physicians between rural and urban 
areas further compounds this problem. The present system can 
cause extensive utilization of physician services and medical 
procedures. And in recognition of these difficulties, the 
government has agreed to undertake a joint study with the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association to examine the utilization of 
physician services. 
 
And a final concern is the limited accountability of the health 
care system which focuses pressure for funding almost 
exclusively on the provincial government. If we are to protect 
the people of Saskatchewan and guarantee quality accessible 
care, this system must become more responsible for the dollars 
it spends. 
 
And we intend to improve the health-care system by addressing 
these problems, Mr. Speaker. We intend to move towards a 
regionalized, integrated health care system which is more 
efficient and streamlined, more responsive and accountable. 
 
We intend to redefine the mandate of our rural hospitals to 
accommodate the needs of the communities that they serve so 
well. We intend to revitalize regional facilities and, where 
appropriate, reduce duplication of services in cities. 
 
We will assess the ratio of spending on health care and 
administration to make sure it is spent primarily on 

front-line patient care, and we will decentralize the 
decision-making process to ensure that all participants in 
medicare have a stake in the performance of its system, making 
it more responsive to the needs of the people of Saskatchewan. 
And the Minister of Health will soon begin an extensive 
consultation process to discuss how we should structure a new 
regionalized health care system. 
 
In addition to establishing a long-term strategy to improve 
essential health services, this government has examined the 
performance of our supplementary health care programs. These 
programs must be restructured in the face of sharply rising costs 
and competition for funds for emerging new social problems 
such as drug and alcohol abuse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the cost of the Saskatchewan drug plan increased 
from $16 million in 1975 to $83 million last year, and would be 
$95 million at the end of this year if no changes were made. In 
order to curb this trend, a deductible system, similar to that in 
place in the province of Manitoba, will be introduced by the 
Saskatchewan prescription drug plan effective July 1. As 
announced by the Minister of Health, families and individuals 
will be reimbursed for 80 per cent of their prescription drug 
costs after paying the first $125, and that is $67.50 for the 
balance of this year, Mr. Speaker. The deductible will be $50 
for seniors, $25 for 1987, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I’d like to please 
ask the member from Quill Lake to please refrain from making 
his comments in kind of a constant fashion all the way along. I 
would respectfully ask the hon. member from Quill Lake to do 
his utmost to try. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the deductible will be $75 for 
senior families, $37.50 for 1987. People who require long-term 
prescription drug treatment to control or combat disease such as 
cystic fibrosis, diabetes, and tuberculosis will experience no 
increase. Nursing home residents will continue to pay only the 
prescription dispensing fee. And welfare recipients will 
continue to pay a minimal dispensing fee as they have in the 
past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the Saskatchewan dental plan was 
established in 1974, the number of dentists in the province has 
increased 46 per cent, and employer-sponsored dental plans 
have become very common. These changes have prompted us 
to modify the Saskatchewan dental plan. Effective September 1 
the dental plan will be delivered through dental offices, Mr. 
Speaker. The adolescent component of the program is 
eliminated; however, full coverage will be maintained for all 
children aged 5 to 13, and this provides for the most effective 
targeting of funds by insuring that correct dental hygiene 
practices are established at any early age. 
 
In addition to improving the quality of dental care, one of the 
objectives of these changes is to encourage more dentists to 
establish in rural areas. Mr. Speaker, we cannot expect the 
current structure to survive without changes. Some would argue 
that medicare should never change, that no changes should be 
made to the present system, and I suggest that they are not 
realistic. The medicare system must become more flexible; it 
must be prepared to 
  



 
June 17, 1987 

531 
 

deal with new issues, new illnesses, and new problems. It must 
be prepared to adapt to changing priorities and to reallocate its 
financial and personnel resources accordingly. The problem of 
substance abuse is a growing concern among our young people, 
and their parents and I am pleased to announce that we will be 
providing $13.2 million this year to the Saskatchewan Alcohol 
and Drug Abuse Commission, an increase, Mr. Speaker, of 69 
per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — An enhancement of $3.2 million to 
programs that deal with the problem of substance abuse among 
adults and youth — and funding of $1.5 million for the 
Whitespruce Drug and Alcohol Treatment Centre near Yorkton, 
Canada’s first specialized youth treatment centre for substance 
abuse, are included in these funds. This government will 
respond to the growing problem of AIDS (Acquired Immune 
Deficiency Syndrome). Particular emphasis will be put on 
educational programs, and as a first step we have sponsored the 
symposium on AIDS education and prevention in Saskatoon. 
 
And a further example of the need for medicare to adapt to 
changing circumstances is demonstrated, Mr. Speaker, by the 
reappearance of health problems we all once had thought been 
solved. For example, new cases of tuberculosis have been 
reported in northern Saskatchewan, and the government will be 
assuming responsibility for the treatment and prevention of 
tuberculosis in northern Saskatchewan this year. 
 
The hon. member from Wilkie or Quill Lakes may laugh at this, 
Mr. Speaker, but it is a serious problem, and the government 
intends to respond. 
 
This government recognizes the need to provide specialized 
support and the latest technological equipment to the disabled 
so that they can enjoy more accessible telephone services. In 
recent years SaskTel has provided telewriter services and 
in-province long distance phone lines for the hearing impaired 
at a 50 per cent discount in conjunction with the Saskatchewan 
hearing impaired person. 
 
At the request of the hearing impaired for more and better 
services, effective August 1 SaskTel will introduce a 
dramatically upgraded operating service providing: a new 
message relay service costing some $600,000 annually, and 
long-distance calls discounted by 50 per cent; volume control 
handsets at a 50 per cent discount, at an annual program cost of 
some $250,000; a new communications aid for the vision 
impaired and physically impaired telephone users at an annual 
program cost of some $150,000. Saskatchewan also provides a 
50 per cent discount to Saskatchewan Aids to Independent 
Living for the rental of special equipment such as artificial 
larynxes, telewriters, hands-free phones, light-weight head-sets, 
and automatic diallers. SaskTel will now absorb the full cost of 
this equipment and its operation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a surcharge of 15 cents per month on all phone 
bills in the province will fund these improved services. And I 
am sure that the people of Saskatchewan 

will not object to the disability surcharge which will ensure that 
our disabled people are given a further opportunity to 
participate in the activities of our society. 
 
The Saskatchewan Abilities Council, Mr. Speaker, is 
recognized both nationally and internationally for their 
outstanding achievements. This government and the Abilities 
council believe that the council is fully capable of operating 
many services currently provided by the Saskatchewan Aids to 
Independent Living plan. The government has therefore agreed 
to transfer certain Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living 
services to the Abilities Council. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the 25th anniversary of medicare this 
government is determined to protect our health care system, and 
we must adapt our health care system now if we are to maintain 
high quality health services for the next 25 years. And this 
government will take the necessary actions to protect medicare 
for our future and our children’s future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes 
that excellence in education is crucial to the future prosperity of 
the people of Saskatchewan. A well-educated population is 
more adaptable and better equipped to deal with the rapid 
technological changes that shape our social and economic 
environment, and for that reason education is a priority with this 
government. 
 
In the economy of the future, we will be less dependent on our 
natural resources and more dependent on our intellectual 
resources. If Saskatchewan is to compete in the world 
market-place of new ideas, new skills, and new technologies, 
our educational systems must become more flexible. We must 
build upon our strengths and pursue excellence in key areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we cannot get too comfortable with old structures 
and the old way of doing things. To succeed, we have to 
recognize that the education system is more than a collection of 
distinct parts. This government recognizes that our educational 
system must continue to evolve to meet the changing needs of 
our students. It must be relevant today and tomorrow. And we 
must continue to develop an educational system that stresses 
lifelong learning, quality, accountability, financial accessibility, 
and increased access for rural students. These are important 
objectives and ones that must be achieved. 
 
Over the past few months, we have taken a number of important 
initiatives to ensure that the people of this province will have an 
educational system that is capable of delivering excellence. To 
improve policy and program development and management 
through the education system, we have amalgamated the 
Departments of Education, Advanced Education and Manpower 
and the Saskatchewan Library into a new Department of 
Education. To reduce administrative duplication, develop areas 
of excellence, and focus on skills that are in demand by 
employers, we have amalgamated the four technical institutes 
and four urban community colleges into the new Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology. We have 
reorganized the fifteen 
  



 
June 17, 1987 

532 
 
 

community colleges into nine regional colleges which will 
concentrate on skills training and, now, university extension 
programs. We have asked our two universities to commit 
themselves to the development of excellence and to establish 
standards by which their performance can be measured. 
 
We have also asked our educational institutions to recognize 
they can no longer be all things to all people. Our institutions 
must develop their particular strengths. They must make the 
critical and important choice between putting their resources 
into programs that have the potential to be first-rate or those 
that will remain mediocre. 
 
This government has established basic objectives for the 
elementary and secondary school system from the 
recommendations of the Directions study of curriculum and 
instruction. And these objectives, include an emphasis on 
quality instruction, basic life skills, lifelong learning, and 
respect for the individual student. We established the $275 
million educational development fund to help carry out the 
recommendations of Directions, to direct additional funds to 
elementary and high schools for enhanced learning resources, to 
apply computer technology to education and to implement other 
new programs. 
 
Since 1985, this government has made available $45 million to 
the elementary and secondary school system through the 
education development fund. And I am pleased to announce 
that this government is continuing its commitment to high 
quality elementary and secondary school system by allocating 
$14.5 million to the education development fund this year. 
 
(1530) 
 
This funding is over and above the $330 million in operating 
grants provided to the school divisions in this province, and the 
$31 million in capital assistance for the construction and 
renovation of new schools. 
 
This government has also launched major initiatives in support 
of the universities and adult education. Funding to the 
province’s university sector has increased by almost 50 per 
cent. Part of this increase is due to the university renewal and 
development fund which has already committed $83 million for 
a variety of projects, including renovation of the historic Darke 
Hall at the University of Regina; construction of a new 
administration building at the University of Saskatchewan; 
purchase and installation of a new administration building at the 
University of Saskatchewan; purchase and installation of a new 
computer system at the University of Regina; construction of an 
agricultural and an animal resource centre at the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I am pleased to announce that this government is 
continuing to enhance the capital structures of the universities 
by committing $13 million from the university renewal and 
development fund this year. And this is on top of our 
commitment to maintain operating grants totalling $144 million 
to the universities at the 1986-87 level. 
 
Since taking office in 1982, this government has 

expanded the number of training spaces in the technical schools 
at a cost of $52 million. This initiatives has been highlighted by 
the opening last fall of the $35 million Prince Albert campus of 
the new Institute of applied Science and technology, and a new 
campus in Regina. 
 
This government is also sensitive to the need to improve 
student’s financial accessibility to post-secondary and adult 
education. Our students can receive up to $3,000 per year from 
the Saskatchewan student loan program, in addition to 
assistance available through the federal program. Interest rates 
on student loans have been written down to 6 per cent for three 
years. Enriched assistance is now available for single parents, 
and loan criteria have been relaxed for students whose parents 
are farmers or owners of small businesses. This year we will 
convert bursary assistance to loans which are forgivable upon 
the student achieving successful academic performance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is proud of its record of success 
in providing financial support to students. Since 1982, the 
number of students in Saskatchewan receiving assistance for 
post-secondary education and the amount of that assistance 
provided have almost tripled. This year the government will 
provide nearly $14 million of direct assistance, and $32 million 
of loans to students. And these loans were not available prior to 
1982. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Over the past four years, the Opportunities 
program has created jobs for university, technical institute, and 
high school students. The government, in partnership with 
employers, has provided students with valuable work 
experience and assistance in financing their education. 
Opportunities ’87 will provide over 4,300 jobs for students with 
a priority given to work-related experience related to a student’s 
course of study. 
 
In addition, our $4.3 million summer student employment 
program will provide 2,500 seasonal student workers with the 
opportunity to earn money for the coming school year while 
gaining valuable work experience in government. 
 
In addition to enhancing financial accessibility, we will be 
undertaking new initiatives to increase educational accessibility 
to our rural students. This year, Mr. Speaker, planning will 
begin for the inauguration in 1988 of an educational television 
network designed to deliver adult education programming. The 
government will establish a new $3.2 million education 
outreach fund for the teaching of university and institute 
courses in smaller Saskatchewan centres. Regional community 
colleges will become the vehicle for adult education and skills 
training in rural Saskatchewan and the Prince Albert campus of 
the Institute of Applied Science and Technology will deliver 
post-secondary courses at satellite centres throughout northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This Government is proud of its record in education over the 
past five years. Since 1982, funding to our . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order! I would 
like to remind the individual in the galleries to my 
  



 
June 17, 1987 

533 
 

right, who I have noted several times now making comments, to 
please refrain from that. Guests of the Legislative Assembly, as 
I mentioned earlier, are not to engage in the debate itself, but to 
sit and listen. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m sure that the guest has learned a great 
deal today, Mr. Speaker. It’s probably good for him. 
 
Since 1982, funding to our K to 12 and post-secondary system 
has increased by almost $260 million, or some 48 per cent. Mr. 
Speaker, the hon. members opposite didn’t hear that. This 
government, since 1982, funding to our K to 12 and 
post-secondary system has increased by almost $260 million, or 
48 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The new initiatives and funding support 
that I have announced today reaffirm this government’s 
commitment to excellence in education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have always been 
willing to tackle difficult challenges with the understanding that 
they could not stand still for the future. Saskatchewan people 
know that, for the province to prosper, we must diversify our 
economy. Diversification not only affords the best protection 
against global economic uncertainties and the instability of 
resource markets, but also provides new economic 
opportunities, jobs, and an improved quality of life. 
 
In our first term, a start was made on building a new economic 
future for Saskatchewan. Through our activities to build on our 
natural strengths, economic diversification initiatives are now 
under way throughout the province, including the construction 
of Canada’s first heavy oil upgrader in Regina; the construction 
of a new paper-mill in Prince Albert; the construction of a new 
facility to manufacture recreational vehicles in North 
Battleford; the expansion of meat processing facilities at 
Intercontinental Packers in Saskatoon; the construction of a new 
hotel and convention centre in Regina; the construction of a 
new meat processing plant in North Battleford; the construction 
of the Rafferty and Alameda dams and the Shand power 
project; and expanded irrigation development around Lake 
Diefenbaker. 
 
These projects and many others throughout the province have 
all created new economic opportunities, jobs and related 
economic spin-off activities for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The government has acted to increase public participation in our 
economy through such measures as the venture capital 
corporation . . . the venture capital program, the stock savings, 
plan, and the sale of Sask Power and Saskoil securities. In 
response to this economic development program, 
unemployment has remained well below the Canadian average, 
while incomes, jobs and output have continued to grow. 
 
Diversification of the provincial economy continues to be a 
central theme of this government, and we remain committed to 
developing new investment, new trade ties, and new 
diversification initiatives. Mr. Speaker, economic 
diversification does not mean the buying up of 

Assets already at work in the province. Rather, to us, 
diversification means the building of new assets. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And that is why we developed the 
Saskatchewan Builds program. 
 
Saskatchewan needs to focus our resources towards areas such 
as food processing, tourism, fertilizer and agricultural chemical 
manufacturing, special crop production, ethanol production, and 
health services, biotechnology, communications, electronics, 
information management and trade. 
 
During the past eight months, we have undertaken a 
comprehensive review of all of our economic programs, and 
have come to appreciate the need to simplify and streamline our 
operations. As a result of this review, various programs 
designed to assist economic diversification will be consolidated 
into a new economic diversification and investment fund. This 
fund will enable us to improve the co-ordination and strategic 
application of current economic development funds. It will 
enable us to enhance our ability to rationalize, alter priorities, 
and when necessary, develop new program initiatives; and to 
allocate effectively government resources around current 
priority areas such as technological research and development, 
trade and tourism promotion, entrepreneurial growth, and other 
specific industrial sector priorities. 
 
And I am pleased, Mr. Speaker, to announce that $22 million 
will be placed in the fund for 1987-88. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the rich legacy of natural 
resources which Saskatchewan enjoys provides the people of 
this province with a wide range of development opportunities. 
We have made considerable progress in building on our natural 
resource strengths. The Regina heavy oil upgrader will change 
the way Saskatchewan markets our heavy oil resources, and 
upon completion it will produce upgraded petroleum products 
from a resource that used to depend solely on the road building 
market. Mr. Speaker, we will work with the oil industry and the 
Government of Canada in heavy oil research and upgrading 
projects to ensure the continued development of this resource. 
 
In January of this year, we responded to the changing world oil 
markets by restructuring Saskatchewan’s oil royalties. These 
changes will enable the province to compete effectively for oil 
industry investment and jobs. The industry has responded 
positively to these changes as demonstrated by the June 9 land 
sale which earned some $23.4 million for the province — 
almost twice as much in one sale as was generated in all of 
1986-87. We anticipate that a $30 million enhanced oil 
recovery project in the Swift Current area will soon proceed. In 
addition, new deep-well oil discoveries have been made 
recently in south-east Saskatchewan. And these are proof 
positive, Mr. Speaker, of our success in the development of the 
energy sector in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
  



 
June 17, 1987 

534 
 
 

Earlier this year we announced a deregulation policy for natural 
gas to promote economic diversification and self-sufficiency. 
We introduced a new price and royalty structure, and the 
government is considering further options for further market 
deregulation of natural gas. 
 
This year, Mr. Speaker, marks an important milestone for 
Saskatchewan’s gold industry. In January the Star Lake gold 
mine pour its first gold bar. It has been almost 50 years since 
Saskatchewan has seen a primary gold producer operating in 
this province. 
 
The hon. member from the Quill Lakes says it’s nothing, Mr. 
Speaker. We think it’s an important project for northern 
Saskatchewan and for the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The relocation of Canpotex and the Potash 
and Phosphate Institute to Saskatoon from Toronto has made 
the city of Saskatoon the world’s leading potash centre. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I might add it was persuasion, not nationalization, 
that brought them to Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Since that time, both agencies have taken 
significant steps to improve our customers’ awareness of the 
advantages of using Saskatchewan potash in agriculture. 
Canpotex is now well established as a leading potash supplier to 
the largest markets in Asia, and is a major supplier to Brazil, the 
largest market in South America. 
 
This government intends to continue working with the potash 
industry to pursue new opportunities for Saskatchewan in 
mining research, processing, transportation, and market 
development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan was 
created from revenues generated by our non-renewable 
resources during the 1970’s. The government of that day, 
instead of using these moneys to invest in new industry and new 
economic development, took $500 million of those revenues to 
forcefully acquire ownership interest in assets that were already 
at work in the province. 
 
The investment made in the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan has not only failed to produce a decent rate of 
return, but it has become a financial drain on the government 
and the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, by 1986 total 
losses had exceeded total profits, and we had to take action. As 
a first step, we implemented a major corporate restructuring in 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. We reduced staff and 
we brought in a new management team to turn the potash 
corporation around. The government is now considering a 
number of options. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hon. members opposite don’t like to hear 
about potash, and the dismal failure it has become as the prime 
place of their economic development 

initiatives. And I can assure the hon. members, Mr. Speaker, 
that we will have ample opportunity during this session to 
debate the potash industry, and I know that the deputy leader of 
the members opposite will be most interested to recall some of 
the speeches he made as the fathered potash nationalization 
through this very Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The government is considering a number of 
further options, including writing off the corporation’s 
liabilities of some $500 million. This would provide the 
corporation with the flexibility necessary to restore its financial 
affairs to a healthy balance. Mr. Speaker, the government must 
review all of the alternatives available to us to revitalize the 
potash industry in Saskatchewan, and we expect to have more 
to say on that later this session. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has taken steps to assist smaller 
communities in rural Saskatchewan to identify and pursue local 
economic development opportunities. For example, in last 
year’s budget I announced that financial assistance would be 
made available to municipalities interested in establishing 
community development corporations. And recently the 
Minister of Rural Development announced the establishment of 
our first rural development corporation. Mr. Speaker, the Poplar 
Hills rural development co-op will encourage job creation in six 
rural and urban municipalities in the south-west corner of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’m pleased to announce that we will be taking another 
important step to build on our business initiatives. We will 
establish an entrepreneur institute as a means to diversify the 
economy, establish new enterprises, develop business 
opportunities, and create more jobs. We will be consulting with 
the business community, organizations, and educational 
institutions to develop a consensus on the form the entrepreneur 
institute should take. 
 
The government is committed to continuing the development of 
Saskatchewan’s tourist industry. The tourist industry brings 
almost $1 billion annually into our province. But there is much 
more we can do to develop Saskatchewan’s potential as a 
tourist destination. Through TISASK (Tourism Industry 
Association of Saskatchewan), the tourist industry and the 
provincial government have co-ordinated their efforts to attract 
new visitors to our province, with impressive results. However, 
we must continue to develop the skills . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I’m sorry, but 
the interruptions are starting once again. I can see hon. 
members want to get into the debate and the time is fast 
approaching when they will have their turn. So I just please ask 
you to refrain from once again entering the debate from the 
seats. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will repeat for 
the hon. members’ benefit that the tourist industry brings almost 
$1 billion annually into our province, but there is much more 
that we can do to develop our potential as a tourist destination. 
Through TISASK, the 
  



 
June 17, 1987 

535 
 

tourist industry and the provincial government have 
co-ordinated their efforts to attract new visitors to our province, 
with impressive results. But we must continue to develop the 
skills of employees in the tourism and hospitality industry. 
Accordingly, the government, in partnership with the hospitality 
industry of Saskatchewan, will establish a tourism and 
hospitality institute to bring a new level of professionalism to 
the industry to enhance our competitive position in the tourism 
market-place. 
 
Since 1982, Mr. Speaker, we have achieved some significant 
progress in agricultural manufacturing and processing. For 
example, Intercontinental Packers in Saskatchewan is in the 
midst of a $24 million expansion of its plant, and is 
aggressively marketing gourmet meats in the United States. The 
Gainers plant in the Battlefords will create up to 185 new jobs 
and provide an annual payroll of $3.5 million to that 
community; and Thomson Meats in Melfort has completed a 
major expansion. 
 
New manufacturing and trade opportunities have been created 
in other industrial sectors. For instance, Canapharm in Wolseley 
now manufactures intravenous solutions for the health care 
industry. Marubeni-Hitachi will build an electrical turbine 
generator plant in Saskatoon to supply the Shand power project 
and other customers. It will be the first Marubeni-Hitachi 
manufacturing plant outside of the country of Japan. Vanguard 
Industries is producing recreational vehicles in the Battlefords. 
Hi R Door will soon be manufacturing insulated doors in the 
same industrial park. Phillips Cable is producing electrical cable 
at a new plant in Moose Jaw to serve the prairie and the United 
States markets. Weyerhaeuser Canada is building a $250 
million paper-mill in the city of Prince Albert. And Northern 
Telecom has recently consolidated its fibre optics 
manufacturing and research in Saskatoon. 
 
Saskatoon has become a high-tech centre within the province 
attracting new high-tech research and business projects. Total 
sales of Saskatchewan high-tech goods and services have grown 
to over $500 million from just $81 million in 1982. 
 
Three years ago this government announced, Mr. Speaker, the 
establishment of a venture capital tax credit program to 
encourage investment in new manufacturing and processing 
activities. And last year the program was expanded to 
encourage economic development in the smaller centres of this 
province. I am pleased to report to this Assembly that the 
venture capital program has encouraged the investment of more 
than $50 million in over 100 new businesses in our province. 
And these are new businesses, Mr. Speaker, creating new jobs 
in communities all over Saskatchewan. And the government 
will continue to encourage Saskatchewan people to invest in 
their own province and we will continue to use the tax system 
to encourage them to invest. 
 
As part of last year’s budget, I announced the introduction of 
two new tax initiatives to encourage investment in 
Saskatchewan. Through the stock savings plan, more than $17 
million has been invested in Saskatchewan-based public 
companies, operating in a 

variety of industries including oil and gas, precious metals, and 
the financial sector. The people of Saskatchewan will soon have 
an opportunity to invest in a new share offering of Saskoil 
under the stock savings plan, and other initiatives are being 
considered. 
 
We will also extend an invitation to employees to invest in 
Saskatchewan through the labour-sponsored venture capital tax 
credit program. This program provides the opportunity for 
employees to invest in small and medium-size Saskatchewan 
businesses. 
 
Over the past five years, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has 
maintained one of the lowest unemployment rates in Canada 
despite the difficulties faced by our agricultural and resource 
industries. In 1986, our average annual unemployment rate was 
7.7 per cent, almost 2 percentage points below the national 
average, and this is in large part attributable to the success of 
our economic development initiatives and other employment 
generating activities such as the home program. The home 
program has succeeded in generating employment for many 
Saskatchewan workers. By April of 1988, the program is 
expected to stimulate almost $850 million of new investment in 
the province while creating 19,000 jobs. 
 
We will continue with our policy of encouraging economic 
diversification, Mr. Speaker, to create new jobs. We will also 
continue to provide opportunities for people with special needs. 
 
When we came to office we inherited an outdated welfare 
system that offered no hope. It encouraged dependency and 
abuse, resulting in escalating costs. In 1984, Mr. Speaker, this 
government began the process of welfare reform by reducing 
dependency through the development of training programs and 
employment alternatives that encouraged people to work. 
Saskatchewan skills development program has provided 
educational upgrading and training for 8,700 people. More than 
half of the program trainees have been single parents, and they 
have received special allowances to cover child care costs and 
incidental expenses relating to their participation in the 
program. Mr. Speaker, we will continue to invest in their future, 
and this year we have committed some $6 million towards 
educational upgrading for social assistance recipients. 
 
In 1986 Saskatchewan signed a federal-provincial agreement to 
provide welfare recipients with valuable on-the-job training and 
work experience. The Saskatchewan employment development 
program has provided jobs for 7,000 welfare recipients, 
approximately one-third of whom were single parents. Based on 
our success to date, I am pleased to announce that $13.8 million 
will be provided in the coming year to continue these efforts, 
and this is another example of this government’s commitment 
to help individuals who want to become self-sufficient members 
of their communities. Saskatchewan support programs for 
single parents are nationally recognized, and other jurisdictions 
have shown great interest in our initiatives. 
 
  



 
June 17, 1987 

536 
 
 

Earlier this year the government continued its reform of the 
welfare system by initiating new work training projects in 
Saskatoon and Prince Albert. The project in Prince Albert is 
managed by Par Industries, a non-profit corporation with an 
impressive record of employing disadvantaged people. This 
new initiative is already paying dividends by reintegrating 
welfare recipients into the work-force. 
 
The welfare reform initiatives undertaken by this government 
have now reduced social assistance costs by $50 million from 
what they would have been under the previous government’s 
system, and these savings have been reinvested to provide 
meaningful training, skills upgrading, and employment 
opportunities. Mr. Speaker, through our welfare reform 
initiatives we have taken steps to reduce fraud, to reduce 
dependency, and to hold out hope for a better life ahead. And 
we have invested in the future of these people who need a 
second chance, Mr. Speaker, by encouraging them to work. And 
this government, Mr. Speaker, as we have said before, will stay 
the course of welfare reform in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to announce the 
final reconciliation of the 1986-87 fiscal year. Actual revenues 
for ‘86-87 totalled $2.8 million, a drop of 448 million from the 
estimate of last spring. Expenditures totalled $4.35 billion, an 
increase of 287 million. As a result the deficit for the fiscal year 
will be $1.235 billion. As I noted in the March “white paper”, 
the deficit increase was primarily attributable to sharply 
declining resource revenues and the concurrent demand for 
increased expenditures. In the March “white paper”, I also 
noted that if no changes were made the projected deficit for 
1987-88 would reach $1.5 billion, and I announced at that time 
the government’s intention to trim that deficit to $700 million. 
 
A rigorous review of government spending activities and 
increases . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I regret to once 
more have to rise this afternoon to ask hon. members to please 
refrain from entering the debate from their seats. Now I have 
done this several times this afternoon and, as you are well 
aware, I have been very patient before I have risen. So I ask you 
once more to allow the Minister of Justice to finish his speech 
without constant interruption . . . Order. Order. Order, order! 
 
I’m sorry, the Minister of Finance. That’s fine. We know who 
we’re talking about. But let me once more ask hon. member to 
my left — as they are well aware, I have been very patient this 
afternoon — and I would ask them once more to allow the 
Minister of Finance to finish his speech. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, a rigorous 
review of government spending activities and increases in 
certain charges and taxes have reduced that figure to $577 
million. 
 
Total government expenditures for 1987-88 are forecast at 
$3.78 billion, an increase of .9 per cent over 1986-87 

estimated expenditures of 3.748 billion. The revenue forecast 
for 1987-88 is 3.203 billion, a decrease of 156 million from the 
last year’s estimate. Compared to actual 1986-87 experience, 
expenditures next year will decrease by $255 million, or 6.3 per 
cent, while revenue will increase by 403 million or 14.4 per 
cent from all sources including equalization. 
 
1987-88 capital financing requirements are estimated to total 
$1.535 billion, of which 958 million will be for the purposes of 
Crown corporations, and 577 million will be for government 
purposes. Debt retirement is expected to amount to $670 
million, resulting in an increase in public borrowing of $865 
million in 1987-88. 
 
Borrowing by the province from the Canada Pension Plan 
Investment Fund is estimated at $120 million, leaving $1.415 
billion to be raised in various capital markets during 1987-88. 
 
Mr. Speaker, improving the financial management of 
government and diversifying the economy to protect our future 
will be a challenge. But the people of Saskatchewan have faced 
many challenges before. The people of this province came from 
all parts of the globe, but they shared a common purpose to link 
their isolated communities together. And they shared a vision 
that together they could overcome the challenges of geography 
and climate to create a unique way of life. 
 
The early pioneers settled a vast fertile area, and in doing so 
they built our first schools, hospitals and roads. Later 
generations built telephone, power and natural gas networks 
which now extend throughout Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 
many of these activities were undertaken in difficult financial 
and economic times, but they were achieved through prudent 
financial management. There was much to be done and they did 
it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the course of building up this province previous 
generations have passed on to us many material benefits, but 
they have also left us with a more important tradition — an 
innovative approach to getting things done and a common sense 
set of values and encouraged us to look forward, to look 
outward towards the world with a sense of optimism and 
confidence. And this government is building on that tradition. 
 
Since 1982, this government has expanded the natural gas 
network in rural Saskatchewan. We have extended television 
services to our smaller communities, and we have initiated a 
five-year program to provide individual line service to 
subscribers in rural areas. We have constructed new hospitals, 
new nursing homes and new schools throughout the province. 
And this government is determined to continue to build on its 
past accomplishments and, like earlier generations, we will 
continue to manage the public purse in a prudent manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in protecting our social institutions and offering 
economic opportunity to build for the future we will continue to 
make a conscious effort to utilize the vision and the vitality of 
the people of this province. We will continue to draw upon their 
desire to encourage initiative, innovation and productive effort. 
The people of 
  



 
June 17, 1987 

537 
 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are builders, they’re not buyers, 
and the government they elected in 1982, and re-elected in 
1986, shares their vision of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are now anxious to 
get on with the job of building for the future. In the election 
campaign last fall, in the Speech from the Throne and in the 
March “white paper”, this government reaffirmed its 
commitment to work with them to achieve that goal. This 
budget is in keeping with that commitment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from 
Souris-Cannington: 
 

That this Assembly do now resolve itself into the 
Committee of Finance. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, this is a budget of betrayal. 
It is a budget that has been written by a dishonest cabinet 
directed by a Premier who has betrayed the trust of the people 
of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And once again this budget has been 
presented by a Minister of Finance, today, in the same dishonest 
way that all previous budgets of this government have been 
presented since 1982. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And I submit to you, sir, that for years to 
come June 17, 1987 will be remembered by the people of 
Saskatchewan as a very black Wednesday, the day that our 
great province was thrown into a tail-spin by one of the most 
senseless and destructive budgets in our history. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Why do I say that about betrayal, Mr. 
Speaker? I say it because the facts are undeniable. Last fall, 
those Conservative candidates campaigned across this province, 
and they were telling voters the following: they said the deficit 
is not a problem. They said, it’s manageable. They said, we 
have it under control. Every single one of those members on the 
government benches made those comments to their 
constituents. The Premier said it, the member from Wascana 
said it, the member from Kinistino said it wherever they went. 
In fact those members, Mr. Speaker, told voters that the 
economy was so strong that the government could afford a 
series of new spending programs. And their campaign slogan, 
which I think will be remembered for a long time, went on to 
say, keep on building Saskatchewan. 
 
I say to the Premier and to the Minister of Finance that the 
people of Saskatchewan will remember this for a long time to 
come. What a transformation. Just 10 months later the 
government tells us all that the provincial economy is in dire 
straits, that the budget deficit is out of control, and that 
everything must be sacrificed in order to reduce this 

deficit. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the members of 
this House, and to the people of Saskatchewan, what a betrayal! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Rather than building this province, rather 
than building Saskatchewan, the government has set about 
dismantling it. Vital public services like medicare and our 
education system have been undermined. Students are being 
turned away from our universities and our technical institutes. 
They used to have no jobs; after the Minister of Finance’s 
address they no longer have any hope. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Our health care programs with this 
budget are being ravaged, so that the people will once again, in 
this province, live in fear. They will live in fear of catastrophic 
health care costs if they happen to get sick. This budget begins 
to turn the clock back over 25 or 30 years to a period of time 
before medicare. 
 
And I say to the members opposite and to you, Mr. Speaker, 
that rather than building for the future, this government has 
been turning the clock back. They live in the past. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And I know that the people 
of -Saskatchewan who watched the presentation of the Minister 
of Finance are asking, and others will be asking: what has 
changed? What happened between October and today? The 
answer is one thing and one thing only. In the opinion of this 
cynical government, an election has passed. 
 
Last fall, Mr. Speaker, when this Conservative government said 
that the deficit was well under control, and that it was managing 
the finances of this province efficiently, it lied. It lied. Plain and 
simple. And I challenge the Premier to have the courage to 
stand up and deny it, if and when he is prepared to take part in 
this debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And I say to him that while he is 
contemplating what he is going to say, he should be reminded 
about some of the things he said in his first speech on this 
government’s first budget when he said, on June 23, 1982, 
when he stood in his place, he said: 
 

The working men and women of the province of 
Saskatchewan on April 26 voted for the government 
that: (1) they could trust . . . 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if those people of Saskatchewan indeed did 
that, that trust has been betrayed today. On that same day, I 
remind the Premier — and he should contemplate on that as 
well — in that same speech he said when he talked about why 
the people voted the way they did, he said because they wanted 
a government that they could control. 
 
  



 
June 17, 1987 

538 
 
 

(1615) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, today we saw evidence of a government 
that’s out of control. Without consultation, without any 
consideration for human or social costs, program after program 
important to Saskatchewan people has been destroyed. Day 
after day, cabinet ministers have sat around in the secrecy of the 
cabinet chamber, and from time to time one of them would 
venture out and attack another vital public service or public 
servants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only way that the people of Saskatchewan 
controlled this government was through the threat of legal 
action to get them back into this Chamber where they can be 
held accountable for their actions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And finally, I remind the Premier that in 
that 1982 debate he said one other thing. He said, the people, 
and I quote: 
 

. . . want to see a government which is sensitive to the 
needs of working men and women in this province. 
 

Now I ask: where is this sensitivity when faced with an 
unemployment of almost 40,000 people in this province, this 
Premier and this government and this Minister of Finance add 
hundreds more with this budget, to the unemployment lists. 
 
Where is the sensitivity, when many families and our elderly 
will see their prescription drug costs increase by as much as 
$500 a year or, in some cases, even more? Where is the 
sensitivity, Mr. Premier, in those kinds of circumstances? 
 
I have here a letter which was sent to the Premier on June 11, 
and I want to raise it here because I think it’s significant. In that 
letter, which is written by someone whose father is on some 
substantial amount of prescription drugs, it is said that under 
this prescription drug change that the government is announcing 
here today, the cost of this individual for the drugs for 
prescription purposes will be $500 a month. And even after the 
rebate, and even after the deductible, this person who is on 
disability pension is going to pay over $1,000 a year more for 
his prescription drugs. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Premier, is that sensitive? I hope you’re proud 
today of what has been accomplished with this budget to those 
kinds of people, because we’re not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today this government is claiming that 
Saskatchewan’s budget deficit is the only problem, and that it 
has no option but to cut public services and raise the taxes of 
ordinary people to get the deficit under control. I submit to you, 
Mr. Speaker, that that too is dishonest. This government has 
options. It has options to the cruel and the hurtful and the 
destructive and the senseless steps that it has taken today and 
over the past number of months. And I will be discussing those 
options when I speak again in this debate. 
 

But right now I want to say to the people of Saskatchewan this 
government deceived you last October. It deceived you when it 
said that the deficit was no problem. But equally it is deceiving 
you today when it says that the deficit is the only problem, and 
that it has no option but to cut vital public services. You are 
told, people of Saskatchewan, that you have to pay more, but 
you’re going to get less. 
 
This government has options. It has made a choice to make 
families, the sick and our elderly and our children, pay for its 
mismanagement. New Democrats say that that’s the wrong 
choice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — It seems, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government and this Minister of Finance are simply incapable 
of being truthful with the people of Saskatchewan. They have 
been dishonest with the public for more than five years on issue 
after issue, and this budget speech simply continues their record 
of deceit and betrayal. 
 
Now the minister claims that he has reduced the budget deficit. 
First, in March he issued a paper in which he provided an 
inflated figure, or fabricated figure of what the deficit might be. 
Now he talks of a deficit that might have been, and claims that 
he has reduced the deficit from that phantom figure. Now the 
minister complains about the past. But surely he’s got to 
understand that he must have known about the past since 1982, 
and yet the government proceeded on the course which 
provided an accumulated deficit which is now going to be well 
over $3 billion. 
 
And I say to him, Mr. Speaker, no matter how he tries to 
disguise it, the deficit for this budget year will be $557 million 
— more than one-half of a billion dollars of red ink. And that’s 
a jump of 48 per cent from the deficit the government 
announced in its pre-election budget in March of last year. 
 
And what does this all mean? What does this all mean, Mr. 
Speaker? It means that the government has come to power . . . 
when it came to power in 1982, now has accumulated a budget 
deficit of $3.4 billion. That’s $3,400 in new debt for every man, 
woman, and child in Saskatchewan since this government took 
office. That’s $13,200 in new debt for every family of four 
living in Saskatchewan. Another promise, Mr. Speaker, that has 
been broken — another betrayal. 
 
In 1982, this government took office on the promise that it 
would eliminate the gas tax. Remember that? No one can argue, 
and I would not argue that that campaign promise was one of 
the main reasons why this government was elected in 1982. In 
fact they said, and I quote, never again would Saskatchewan 
suffer a gas tax. The Premier said it; the members opposite said 
it. In fact they even said, not as long as there was a PC 
government in office in Saskatchewan. 
 
Today, Mr. Premier, and Mr. Minister of Finance, you 
  



 
June 17, 1987 

539 
 

have broken that commitment; you have betrayed that trust. 
And Saskatchewan people will be paying a gas tax of 7 cents a 
litre or 32 cents a gallon extra. For an average car that means $6 
every time they fill their tank. Oh, and I know the minister, he 
says, oh but we’ll give individual drivers a rebate. All people 
have to do is save their gas receipts. This from a government 
who promised to cut government red tape. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Another betrayal and another broken 
promise. And I point out, because it’s important, that the gas tax 
rebate applies to individual drivers only. It does not apply to 
vehicles owned by local governments who have been 
devastated by the cut-backs that have been announced by this 
government in past months. Municipalities and school boards 
will all get stuck with the full cost of the 7 cent per litre or 32 
cents a gallon. And the Minister of Finance says on the one 
hand, that individuals will get a rebate; and then on the other 
hand, he makes sure that it is taxed away through higher 
property taxes. 
 
And I think one other example to show the unfairness of the 
judgements and the choices that these people have made and the 
Minister of Finance announced today is the example of the 
special buses that are owned by the Saskatchewan Abilities 
council, which transport people with disabilities. They will have 
to pay the full tax, Mr. Speaker. That’s the Conservative view 
of fairness. That’s the Conservative view of fairness. 
 
Now the Minister of Finance announces also a 2 per cent jump 
in Saskatchewan provincial sales tax — another betrayal. In 
1982, the Conservative Party campaigned on the promise that it 
would eliminate the provincial sales tax, and I’m sure that they 
all remember. They even said that they would do it in the first 
term of office. But in this budget, Mr. Speaker, it has increased 
the sales tax from 5 percentage points to 7 percentage points — 
a 40 per cent increase. 
 
In 1982, Mr. Speaker, I remind those members opposite again 
that they had another major campaign promise, and that was to 
cut personal income tax by 10 per cent. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
what do we have instead? This government hikes the unfair flat 
tax from 1 per cent to 1.5 per cent — a 50 per cent increase. 
Another betrayal, Mr. Speaker, and another solemn promise 
broken by this government and by this Premier and by this 
Minister of Finance today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now in agriculture, Mr. Speaker, even 
the farm purchase program is gone in this budget. Another 
major campaign commitment gone, another betrayal. Now in 
1982 and 1986 this same political party that now sits as 
government promised to make health care in 
Saskatchewan - and I quote so I will not be wrong — “number 
one in Canada.” That budget we heard today betrays that 
promise too. 
 
The prescription drug plan has been decimated and the sick of 
this province will be hit with the economic hardship of huge 
prescription drug bills. What we will have is a two-tiered health 
system, one for the rich and one for everyone else. We see the 
children’s dental plan cut. The minister announces that rural 
hospitals — he doesn’t announce it, but it’s certainly there — 
are threatened with closure. And this is making Saskatchewan 

number one in health care. I ask? Is this looking after rural 
Saskatchewan, I ask? 
 
I heard the Minister of Finance when he spoke. I heard the 
Minister of Finance say that protecting the medicare is a 
priority of this government. It even shows up in the budget 
speech. And the fascinating thing is that he even said it with a 
straight face. And then he claims that he has to cut medicare in 
order to save medicare. What kind of double talk is that? 
 
The minister’s comments remind me of a United States marine 
in the middle of the Vietnam war who tried to explain to 
reporters that the American army had just destroyed and 
devastated and obliterated a village in order to save it from 
communism. Clearly, Mr. Speaker, this government has 
betrayed its promise to maintain and to support our health care 
system. Nothing they say can be believed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Members opposite will debate and they will say, well, we’re 
doing everything that we said to the people we would do. Well 
let me just bring to the attention of this House and to the 
attention of the Saskatchewan public what these people have 
said. Here is another one of those famous guarantees of the 
Conservative Party. It’s an ad that was run in one of their 
elections. I will read it for the record. It states: 
 

A Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan is 
committed to continue the medicare system in our 
province. The Progressive Conservative Party of 
Saskatchewan rejects any form of deterrent fees or 
health insurance premiums. 
 

And hear this: 
 

The Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan 
will abolish the unfair deterrent fees on prescription 
drugs. 
 

Who is it signed . . . well it’s interesting. Another lie. Who is it 
signed by? It’s signed by, lo and behold, Gary Lane, MLA, 
Qu’Appelle. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — This chameleon, once Liberal, now 
Conservative, bringing in a Liberal budget. He learned from 
Davey Steuart in 1968, but he didn’t learn the right things. And 
he’s modelled everything he’s done on that budget of 1968. 
And I ask and I remind him, where is Davey Steuart today? 
 
Now maybe the Senate isn’t all bad, but the government of that 
day did not last very long, and it prompted that member who is 
now the Minister of Finance to switch parties from the Liberal 
to the Conservative Party because that was the most opportune 
thing to do at that time. His options have become very narrow. 
  



 
June 17, 1987 

540 
 
 

Now there was another comment, there was another comment 
that the minister made with respect to health care which I just 
cannot let pass. In Saskatoon today, Mr. Speaker, it was 
mentioned in question period, we have nearly 10,000 on the 
waiting list for a hospital bed — people in pain, people living in 
fear of their condition deteriorating and getting worse. In 
Regina there are thousands more. But the Minister of Finance, 
his only solution is, he says, and I believe — I think I wrote this 
down correctly — he says Saskatchewan doesn’t have a 
hospital bed shortage; we have a distribution problem. 
 
And while we have long waiting lists in the cities, beds in rural 
hospitals are under-utilized. What does he propose? That the 
people who need surgery should move? Some solution, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Minister of Health. I cannot leave him alone. The Minister 
of Health announced that the best children’s dental care 
program in the western hemisphere would be destroyed by this 
government, last week. And the Minister of Finance, in his 
speech today, tried to justify it. Now the Health minister said — 
and it’s important to note because it reinforces the betrayal and 
the deceit that has taken place here — he said that the 
government expected to save $5.5 million from the changes that 
he announced. He said that the cost of the plan was out of 
control, and that it could be provided at less cost through 
private dentists. And now we have a government document . . . 
now there is a government document, his own document, 
showing that essentially no money will be saved. 
 
The minister went on further to say in his announcement that 
these things, even though . . . his own annual report said 
something else. He had it on his desk. That annual report 
showed that the cost of service to adolescents by private 
dentists average $103.52 a child, but by dental therapists under 
the dental plan, it was $91.98 a child. And he tried to mislead 
the public by saying that it was more costly under the 
arrangement of a very good plan. He deliberately deceived 
Saskatchewan people. He ignored the fact that the cost of the 
dental program had actually dropped from $92.56 per child to 
$91.98 a child over the period of one year, and that the cost 
provided by private practitioners had increased. 
 
The government, Mr. Speaker, had a choice. And they chose the 
most expensive alternative, and they call it fighting the deficit. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I find it very regrettable that with all of the 
talk of the need for reform to our tax system, the Minister of 
Finance once again passed by the opportunity to make our tax 
system in this province fair to everyone. 
 
Instead, this budget continues this Conservative government’s 
record of huge tax increases for ordinary people and tax breaks 
for big business and the wealthy. Since taking office this 
government has hit the average Saskatchewan taxpayer with the 
biggest tax hikes in the history of this province while letting the 
oil companies and the banks and the wealthy investors off 
scot-free. 
 
(1630) 
 
And I just want to examine for a moment, Mr. Speaker,  

what these latest tax increases mean to ordinary people. Let’s 
take a look at the family of four. If they drive a car they will pay 
a 7 cent a litre or 32 cent a gallon gas tax each time they fill up. 
If they drive 12,000 miles a year, which is an average distance 
people drive, they will pay an extra $128 a year for gas. And to 
put it another way, they’ll pay an extra $6 a tank every time 
they fill up. If that same family has an income of $25,000 
they’ll pay an extra $125 in flat tax as a result of this budget. 
And if that family of four purchased $5,000 worth of goods 
over the year — that’s not unusual — with the new 7 per cent 
provincial sales tax, they’re going to pay another $100 in taxes. 
And so that this family of four with a net income of $25,0000 
— not a princely sum of money — is going to pay a minimum 
of $353 in additional taxes this year because of this budget we 
heard today. 
 
What will they get in return? Well, they’re going to get higher 
property taxes; they’re going to get higher prices that they’ll 
have to pay for prescription drugs; they’re going to see a 
crumbling dental care plan for children; they’re going to have 
less coverage under the chiropractic program; and, if they’re 
farmers, they don’t have the farm purchase program any more. 
And they’re going to lose educational opportunities. And only 
those at the patronage trough of this government are going to 
benefit from that increase in taxation. 
 
All this, Mr. Speaker, all this from a party which came to power 
promising to cut everybody’s taxes, the tax increases which hit 
every family and every individual in Saskatchewan. 
 
The flat tax, the new gas tax, the sales tax increases will take 
more than $400 million out of the pockets of Saskatchewan 
people. More than $400 million which will not be spent in the 
small business places in Saskatchewan, in the stores, and in the 
shops — is it fair? It’s only fair if it compares with everybody 
else equitably. 
 
Well what about the oil companies? In this budget no mention 
was made of any change from the tax holiday announced last 
December What about the banks — no tax increase. The only 
tax change for corporations, according to the budget speech, is 
an increase in the corporate capital tax for trust and loan 
companies. And according to the Minister of Finance, in his 
budget speech, that will bring something like an income 
increase of $2 million a year. A revenue increase of $2 million a 
year. He is going to take $400 million in tax hikes from the 
large corporations — is that fair? And to put it another way, Mr. 
Speaker, in simple terms, the tax increase which the trust and 
loan companies will pay is equal to about five days of the gas 
tax. That does not sound to me like sharing the load or making 
equal sacrifices which the government pretends it is doing with 
this budget. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the government will no doubt, dismiss our 
concerns about his budget and its impact as just gloom and 
doom from the opposition. That’s what they will say. But I want 
to say to this government that we are not alone in expressing 
concern about his government’s direction. Many, many 
Saskatchewan people are angry, 
  



 
June 17, 1987 

541 
 

frustrated, and worried about the decisions that this government 
is making, and among them are our church leaders who last 
month met with the Premier and his cabinet to express concern 
about the number of the government’s policies. And they had 
some good advice for the Premier and the government. But that 
advice was ignored. And I find that a troubling commentary on 
the government’s priorities. 
 
The words of Saskatchewan’s church leaders are well worth 
noting. In their brief, they said — and I want to quote a couple 
of sections — they said: 
 

Saskatchewan has a history of concern for its citizens, 
and its government has often eloquently demonstrated 
its commitment for the common good. 
 

And the church leaders went on to urge the Premier and the 
Minister of Finance, and they said this: 
 

Ponder seriously the effects many of the actions you 
have taken will have on the people of Saskatchewan 
and, more particularly, on those who have very little 
voice and almost now power. 
 

And their brief went on further to say: 
 

The cut-backs being announced are creating an 
atmosphere of uncertainty, mistrust, even fear, at 
many levels of our society. 
 

Well the Premier and his cabinet have obviously ignored the 
concerns of these church leaders because since the meeting 
which took place in May, the government has announced a 
steady stream of cuts in important social programs like health 
care and education. The attacks on the poor, the disadvantaged, 
and the defenseless have, if anything, been escalated. 
Saskatchewan tradition of caring and sharing, of neighbour 
helping neighbour, has been abandoned by this government, 
and with it any commitment to the common good or sense of 
moral purpose. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude, before I adjourn, with this. An 
important characteristic of good government is that it be and be 
seen to be in charge, and having a clear sense of direction. But 
equally important, good government must be and be seen to be 
treating all citizens fairly, with sensitivity, honestly, and 
sensitivity to their needs and aspirations. Unfortunately, it 
seems that this Saskatchewan government today is too busy 
worshipping at the altar of the Fraser Institute to hear or to 
understand the concerns expressed by our church leaders and by 
the ordinary people of our province, and that’s why we have 
had the kind of budget we heard here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is a betrayal. I have a great deal more 
that I want to say on behalf of my colleagues, and they do as 
well, but at this time I wish to ask leave, Mr. Speaker, to 
adjourn this debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 

Resumption of Budget Debate 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 
I move, seconded by the Minister of Justice: 
 

That debate on the motion that this Assembly do now 
resolve itself into Committee of Finance be resumed 
on Friday, June 19, 1987. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Before adjournment of the House, I 
have been asked to announce on behalf, and invite all members 
and all guests, on behalf of the government, to a tea in room 
218 which is just down that corridor, and all members and 
guests are very welcome. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:36 p.m. 


