













































July 17, 1987 Hansard


  

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 July 17, 1987 

 

1245 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, and 

through you to the other members of the Assembly, a large group 

of students involved in the Wicca bridging program, which is 

jointly funded, I believe, by the federal job strategy, and involves 

putting women who have not been accustomed to working in the 

work place, putting them into the work place or into educational 

institutions. 

 

And I’ve noticed that today they are here with Arlene Franko, 

who is one of the leaders of the Wicca program in the province. 

I’d like all members of the Assembly to give them a warm 

welcome here today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Call for Investigation into Collapse of Investment 

Companies 

 

Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

Minister for Consumer and Commercial Affairs, and it has to do, 

of course, with the collapse of First Investors Corporation and 

Associated Investors of Canada, and your government and your 

department’s negligence in regulating these companies. It’s 

obvious that your government’s “open for business” philosophy 

has downgraded the Department of Consumer Affairs and your 

ability to regulate corporations for the protection of consumers. 

 

We’ve had the collapse of Pioneer Trust, we’ve had the collapse 

of Supercart International, and now we have the collapse of First 

Investors Corporation and Associated Investors. The collapse of 

these two companies, First Investors and Associated Investors, is 

your responsibility under The Investment Contracts Act, an Act 

which does not distinguish between provincial and 

extra-provincial companies. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan have a right to a full, independent 

inquiry into all the circumstances, including the actions of you 

and your department. You are responsible, and my . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, order, please. 

Order, order, please. Order on both sides of the House. I think 

you’ve had quite an adequate preamble. Please get to your 

question. 

 

Order, please. Order, please. I would like to ask members not to 

question the Speaker’s rulings. I have listened to the preamble 

carefully. I have determined that the preamble has had sufficient 

length. I now ask the member to put her question. 

Ms. Smart: — My question is: will you now call that full public 

inquiry which would get to the responsibility of you and your 

department? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, as I have stated before, the 

supervision of financial institutions across Canada is the 

responsibility of the incorporating jurisdiction and, as such, my 

department relied on Alberta’s responsibility to enforce 

regulations of the two firms in question. And my department 

received no notice of pending problems and therefore continued 

to license the two firms to do business in the province. 

 

This spring, Mr. Speaker, Alberta’s . . . the Alberta firms’ 

external auditors notified the Alberta provincial regulators that 

the firms’ reserve requirements were substantially less than 

needed, and at that time the regulators checked, agreed, and 

suspended both of the firms’ licences after giving these firms an 

opportunity to rectify the problem. At that time the firms applied 

to the courts for . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At that time the 

firms applied to the courts for a manager, and Coopers & 

Lybrand was appointed as manager and was asked to report on 

the condition of the companies by August of this year. Since then, 

Mr. Speaker, two of the investors sought and got approval from 

the court to have the management committee extend its scope of 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order. I 

would like the minister to try to shorten her answer. It looks like 

she has several pages more, so if she could shorten her answer. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The member from Regina Centre has been 

carrying on a running commentary since question period started. 

And I would just ask him now to be quiet. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to comment 

specifically on the inquiry. The process includes a review of the 

practices in all provinces and with all investors. In other words, it 

includes the Saskatchewan investors whose moneys seem to be at 

risk at this point. Any criminal investigations being done is being 

done by our Department of Justice, and . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. I don’t think 

there’s any doubt that the answer’s getting quite long. Could you 

wrap up your answer in a few seconds? Could you just wrap it up 

in a few seconds. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you. The member asked a very, 

very important question as to why we would not, in this province, 

hold our own inquiry. I would say to the member that the 

allegations of impropriety and misleading of investors seems to 

encompass the whole Principal Group. The Principal Group is not 

licensed to 

  



 

July 17, 1987 

 

1246 

 

do business in this province. The Alberta court has expanded the 

inquiry to delve into the practices and the inner workings of all 

the Principal Group’s companies. And as that, we will be 

providing Alberta with information from here. Investors from 

Saskatchewan can report to the . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please, order. Next question. 

 

Ms. Smart: — My question is a supplementary. I did not ask for 

a public inquiry into the companies. I’m asking for that as well, 

but I’m asking for a full public inquiry into the workings of your 

department. It is your responsibility, in terms of licensing these 

companies in Saskatchewan. 

 

We want to know what’s happening in Saskatchewan, and I 

would like you to give me the opportunity to give you one 

example of why we question your government’s competence and 

responsibility when it comes to the regulation of companies like 

these. 

 

Alberta’s former Superintendent of Insurance has told reporters 

that he knew in early 1986 that First Investors Corporation and 

Associated Investors of Canada were not keeping enough cash on 

hand to cover investments. In fact, in early 1986, the Alberta 

Superintendent of Insurance instruct . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Now we’re starting off this 

question period with a . . . certainly going in the wrong trend. 

We’re getting too long preambles to question. We have a very 

long answer by the minister. So let’s get back on track. Let’s put 

the question, put your supplementary question, and I would ask 

the minister to keep her answer brief. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, I would love to get on track with the 

Department of Consumer . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Smart: — I would love to get the Department of Consumer 

and Commercial Affairs on track. And obviously, because I’m 

not getting my questions answered, I have to put this information 

forward. The Alberta Superintendent of Insurance . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order, please. 

Order, please. Now I will ask the member to put her question 

directly without any further preamble. 

 

Ms. Smart: — Was that fact not reported to the Saskatchewan 

Superintendent of Insurance? and if so, why didn’t he act on that 

information before renewing the licence of these two companies 

in January of 1987 under The Investment Contracts Act of 

Saskatchewan, which is your department’s responsibility? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, we had no information 

prior to the end of June to indicate that these two firms were in 

financial difficulty. We were given two days’ notification by the 

Alberta government that the licence were being cancelled. 

 

Licensing of Investment Dealers 

Ms. Smart: — I’ve a new question to the Minister for Consumer 

and Commercial Affairs. The minister has continued to try to get 

herself and the government of the hook for this sorry mess by 

claiming that First Investors Corporation and Associated 

Investors of Canada were registered to do business in Alberta, 

and therefore Saskatchewan didn’t need to investigate them 

before renewing their licence in January. 

 

You are referring to the Business Corporations Act, and this law 

has nothing to do with the Investment Contracts Act, Section 7 of 

the Investment Contracts Act requires Saskatchewan’s 

Superintendent of Insurance to see to it that any application meets 

a number of conditions before getting a licence to sell investment 

contracts in Saskatchewan. Can you tell us what information 

Saskatchewan’s Superintendent of Insurance had when he 

recommended the renewal of these companies’ licences under the 

Investment Contracts Act just seven months ago? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Certainly I can. As an extra-provincial 

institution working in Saskatchewan they are required to submit 

an annual audited report to the Superintendent of Insurance for 

review prior to a licence being issued. The Superintendent of 

Insurance received an audited, signed annual report, I believe in 

December, and issued the licence. 

 

The member does not understand how financial institutions are 

regulated across the country. I will state again, as an 

extra-provincial institution operating in Saskatchewan it is the 

primary responsibility of the incorporating jurisdiction to see that 

all regulations are abided to and are enforced. This practice has 

gone on in Canada for years and years and years. It was done 

under your administration, it has been done under our 

administration, and to suggest that the people in the department 

are not living up to their responsibility is just not true. The 

people, senior people in the department are the same people that 

worked under your administration and, surely to goodness, if they 

were competent enough to work for you, they are competent 

enough to work for us. 

 

Protection of Investors 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister 

of Consumer and Corporate Affairs. Madam Minister, you have 

suggested that the primary responsibility for regulating these 

companies rests with the government of Alberta. No one quarrels 

with that. I ask you, Mr. Minister, can you show, Madam 

Minister, can you show one shred — one shred of legislative 

jurisdiction for your proposition that let’s you off the hook? 

 

Do you not agree that regardless of the obligations of the 

Government of Alberta, your obligation under The Investment 

contracts Act is to see that Saskatchewan Investors are protected 

and there’s noting in this Act which permits you to rely upon the 

Alberta assessment? 

  



 

July 17, 1987 

 

1247 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member, the 

former premier of this province, knew exactly how financial 

institutions are regulated across the country. And what we are 

doing today is no different than what is accepted as normal 

practice and will be accepted as normal practice in years to come. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, Madam 

Minister, you know that the implications of your answer is 

wrong. You know that the Government of Saskatchewan has 

rejected, under The Securities Act, dozens of financial companies 

which were incorporated in other provinces, because the Act 

requires that. You know that the Government of Ontario rejected 

these companies. 

 

Why can you say that it is not your personal and your 

departmental responsibility to see that these companies are safe 

for Saskatchewan investors? Do you not agree that that’s what the 

legislature said, and you have no legislative authority to rely upon 

the Alberta assessment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I will repeat one more time. 

The Principal Group incorporated which, at this point in time, 

seems to be at the centre of this controversy, is not licensed to do 

business in the province. Two of their subsidiaries were. 

 

However, the member full well knows that the practice, the 

accepted practice across the country, is that the primary 

responsibility for regulatory enforcement lies with the 

incorporating jurisdictions. We do not go out and audit banks. 

They are federally incorporated, therefore it is the responsibility 

of the Government of Canada to see that regulations are enforced 

and are in place. He knows full well. 

 

Now you want us to have a hearing in this province, a hearing 

that will not get down to the questions that the investors are 

asking because we have no jurisdiction to go and see what 

Principal trust did at Alberta if there was finagling between the 

subsidiaries, etc. You know full well. 

 

The management committee that is being appointed by the courts 

in Alberta will be looking into all improprieties, all transactions 

on behalf of all investors, including Saskatchewan investors. And 

I want . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. I think the minister has adequately 

answered the question. 

 

Meeting of Saskatchewan Investors 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 

Minister of Consumer and Corporate Affairs. Mr. Speaker, the 

member for Souris-Cannington has undertaken your obligation. 

But I’ll readdress you and say, Mr. Speaker, new question. 

 

I direct this question to you, Madam Minister. Earlier this week 

you decided not to attend — you declined to attend 

a meeting of Saskatchewan investors, some hundreds of 

Saskatchewan investors to discuss the collapse of these 

companies. And you sent an official who, I may say, sat in the 

crowd when the official of the federal Department of Consumer 

Affairs was up at the table. 

 

Now there’s a second meeting of investors next Monday evening 

in Saskatoon. My question to you, Madam Minister, is this: will 

you agree to attend; will you take your senior officials with you 

so that you can answer the questions of Saskatchewan investors 

about your obligation to protect them under Saskatchewan 

legislation, The Investment Contracts Act? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 

Opposition alleges that I declined to attend a meeting of investors 

in Regina on Tuesday night. For your information, I was not 

invited to . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, Order, please. I would ask members not 

to constantly interrupt the minister. Will you allow her to answer 

the question, please. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — What my department was requested was 

to send a representative from the department. A representative 

was there, and a representative will be in Saskatoon on Monday 

night. 

 

But I might say, Mr. Speaker, I find it rather funny. I mean, they 

profess to be concerned about the investors. They are not 

concerned about the investors, Mr. Speaker. And that was evident 

by the member from Saskatoon. They love to see businesses fail 

in this province. They are against business. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the member for Maple Creek, the minister, may feel that 

it’s humorous to talk about business failures, but what I want to 

ask her is this: why should individual investors have to pursue 

legal action to get recovery when it is becoming increasingly 

obvious that their loss stems from the negligence of your 

department in failing to discharge its statutory responsibilities, 

you have some obligation to assist these people to get their 

money back and do something more than tell them to go see a 

lawyer? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I will once again tell the 

Leader of the Opposition, my department fulfilled their 

responsibilities. We are concerned, Mr. Speaker, about the 

allegations of improprieties, but those allegations will clearly be 

dealt with by the management committee which, I might add, has 

been expanded to include two of the investors on that panel. 

Those allegations and those improprieties and redress will be 

ordered and upheld by the court, once the hearings are completed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Madam Minister, you have referred to 

other companies in the Principal Group, three 

  



 

July 17, 1987 

 

1248 

 

of which are operating in Saskatchewan — at least Principal 

Trust and Associated and First. Will you use your authority under 

legislation to see that none of those subsidiaries operate, none of 

the Principal Group operate in Saskatchewan until all of them 

take responsibility for the losses sustained by Saskatchewan 

people in dealing with First and Associated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, upon notification from the 

Government of Alberta that there were problems and the licences 

were being suspended in Alberta, the two firm’s licences here 

were suspended, as were the licences of some 70-odd salesmen 

throughout the province. At this time my department is also 

reviewing the status of Principal Trust. 

 

Saskatchewan Input into Inquiry 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the same matter to 

the same minister: is the minister telling us in her answers, that if 

events as they have unfolded in this case had, in fact, unfolded in 

a slightly different manner so that there had not been difficulty in 

Alberta but difficulty only in Saskatchewan, that this matter 

would not be investigated in Saskatchewan because the 

incorporating jurisdiction was in the province of Alberta? 

 

Are you telling us, Madam Minister, that if Alberta had not had 

grounds to investigate this matter, but those grounds existed only 

in the province of Saskatchewan, that Saskatchewan could not 

have investigated because the incorporating jurisdiction was the 

province of Alberta? Is that the proposition you’re advancing to 

us? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — That’s a hypothetical question, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Goodale:; — Madam Minister, it is not a hypothetical . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Please indicate if it’s a . . . Order, please. Order, 

please. Order, please. Would the member please indicate if he’s 

asking a new question or a supplementary. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — This will be a new question,, Mr. Speaker, to 

the same minister, Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, if you’re going 

to rely upon an inquiry procedure in Alberta, if that is going to be 

good enough for you and good enough for the Government of 

Saskatchewan, could I ask you specifically what input you have 

had into that inquiry procedure? What input did you have into the 

definition of the mandate of that inquiry, and into the personnel 

doing that inquiry? And what will be the specific jurisdiction of 

any court-appointed procedure of the Court of Queen’s Bench in 

the province of Alberta? What will be the jurisdiction of that 

court-appointed procedure in the province of Saskatchewan? I 

presume you would know the answers to those questions. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, the process of structuring 

the management group, as ordered by the court to look into a 

broad area, they indicate that the review of practices in all 

provinces off Principal Group 

incorporated, including their subsidiaries, will unfold and will 

include all investors — including the investors here in the 

province. I believe that the court has also ordered, upon 

completion of their review of the practices, that the management 

committee may recommend redress to the investors who are at 

risk. 

 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I take it the minister is saying that 

she had no input into the establishment of the procedure. My final 

supplementary would be this: will the minister and her 

appropriate officials volunteer, Mr. Speaker, to appear before that 

Alberta inquiry and to give testimony under oath before that 

Alberta inquiry about their conduct — that is, the conduct of the 

minister and her officials in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, part of the mandate of the 

management committee includes a review of the regulatory 

process, and they have also been charged that, if necessary, 

changes or recommendations for improvements in the regulatory 

process be recommended. And we would definitely have a look at 

those. 

 

Royalty Tax Rebates to Farmers 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I took notice, Mr. Speaker, of a question on 

July 6, Hansard, from the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 

. . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I have recognized 

the Minister of finance. He is going to give the reply to a question 

he took notice of. He has the floor. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — As I indicated, Mr. Speaker, I took notice of 

a question on July 6, Hansard, page 950, from the member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. The question was with regard to the 

deadline for receipts for . . . or applications for the farmers’ oil 

royalty rebate program. As I indicated . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. If we’re going to 

have constant interruptions, we can’t hear the minister’s reply. I’d 

ask your co-operation in allowing the minister to reply. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I know the members opposite 

don’t care about farmers, but I would like to answer the question, 

notwithstanding the interruptions from the members opposite. 

 

The April 30, 1988 deadline for 1987 fuel purchases was 

established, as I indicated, because most of the refund 

applications for 1986 fuel purchases were submitted during the 

first four months of 1987. I am prepared, however, to extend the 

annual deadline to May 31 to accommodate those farmers who 

may require additional time to apply for the refund, in response to 

the hon. member’s question and suggestion. 

 

Pharmacy Closure at Ile-a-la-Crosse 

 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I direct my 

question to the Minister of Health. On July 2 in this Assembly the 

acting minister of Health took notice of a question concerning the 

closure of the only pharmacy in 

  



 

July 17, 1987 

 

1249 

 

the northern community of Ile-a-la-Crosse. The closure of this 

pharmacy makes Buffalo Narrows, a return trip of approximately 

100 miles, the nearest location where the people of 

Ile-a-la-Crosse can get medication, and it leaves the regional 

hospital in Ile-a-la-Crosse without night stocks for emergency 

medication. 

 

Have you looked into the planned closure, and what 

arrangements have you made to guarantee that the residents of 

Ile-a-la-Crosse and the surrounding area will continue to have 

access to needed medication? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, yes, we’re aware of the 

circumstance that the member raises. We are working to be sure 

that there is a pharmacist service in Ile-a-la-Crosse. As the 

member has stated, Ile-a-la-Crosse has the hospital, and the only 

one in for quite a wide region around there. The pharmacist who 

is in operation there is in Buffalo Narrows and had a branch 

office in Ile-a-la-Crosse, and has stated that he has no longer an 

intention to remain in the Ile-a-la-Crosse area. 

 

It is of some significant concern to us, as it relates to having a 

pharmacy service in proximity to the hospital. We’re working on 

it through our northern health branch, and as the member has also 

indicated, it has not . . . this service has not closed as yet, and 

we’re trying to get a contingency plan in place so that there will 

be pharmacy service in that area. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 21 — An Act to amend The Mineral Taxation Act, 

1983 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill, 

An Act to amend The Mineral Taxation Act, 1983, be now 

introduced and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 

the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 22 — An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to 

amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 

the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Energy and Mines 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 23 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, last 

night we covered a number of topics, and a number of questions 

were asked and requests were made. I must admit, Madam 

Minister, I was somewhat disappointed in not getting the answers 

that we, as an opposition, not only required, but have an 

obligation to ask and should receive. 

 

Madam Minister, it may not be impressed upon you, or you may 

not be aware that 45 per cent of the people in the last election 

voted for the members on this side of the House, and only 

44-point-some per cent voted on your side. So I think we’re about 

equal in representation on both sides of the House and we have an 

obligation, I think, to perform our duty. And it can’t be done, 

Madam Minister, unless you are willing to carry out your 

responsibility in answering some questions. 

 

This morning, Madam Minister, I want to pursue a line of 

questioning on the NewGrade upgrader in Regina. Last night the 

Leader of the Opposition asked you a number of questions on the 

NewGrade, and you conveniently, Madam Minister, opted out by 

saying, confidentiality. 

 

I want to say to you, Madam Minister, that that cop-out is simply 

not acceptable. And it can’t be acceptable, Madam Minister, for 

the simple reason that, as I indicated, 45 per cent of the people 

supported people on this side of the House. And the people out 

there are asking questions. They asked questions, as you well 

remember, on the Weyerhaeuser deal when your colleague also 

refused to answer any questions or table any documents. 

 

But finally when the heat got to him because of the insistent 

pursuant of the members on this side of the House, and because 

pressure got to you from people on the outside, your government 

finally caved in and made documents available. 

 

Madam Minister, we’re still waiting for documents on the 

Pocklington deal. We’re still awaiting documents on many other 

deals that you people have made. 

 

But, Madam Minister, this particular agreement that you have 

with the federal government and Federated Co-operatives is the 

biggest agreement, guaranteed agreement, that has been made in 

the history of this province. It cannot be done in secret. It must be 

done in the open. That agreement must be scrutinized by the 

opposition and by the people of this province. And if you have 

nothing to hide, then you should be willing to table those 

documents, let us have a look at them in the estimates, so that we 

then can question you on the legitimacy of that agreement, on the 

viability of that agreement. 

 

I think, Madam Minister, the reason that you don’t want to table 

this document is the following. 

 

Let me start back a little bit. There is no one in this province that 

doesn’t welcome the agreement and the project if it is viable. But 

I think you’re a little bit afraid about the agreement and the facts 

that are contained in that agreement because you may be afraid 

that the project may not be viable. And since you have taken 99 

and nine-tenths responsibility — you and the federal government 

— on the financial aspects of that agreement, you may be afraid 

to let us have a look at it, and let the 

  



 

July 17, 1987 

 

1250 

 

people have a look at that agreement. 

 

I say to you, Madam Minister, that that is not acceptable here. 

And I think we have a right to those answers. We have a right to 

see those agreements. And I want to ask you again, now, will you 

make those agreements available? Not only those agreements you 

have signed between the Saskatchewan government and the 

federal government, but also those agreements that have been 

signed between CCRL, the Consumer Co-operative Refinery 

Ltd., and the provincial government. 

 

Have you changed your mind overnight, and are you now willing 

to be open with the people of this province, and make those 

agreements available to us today so that we can scrutinize them 

over the weekend and discuss them in estimates next week? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I would certainly agree with 

the member’s first statement that we have an obligation to 

perform as designated in this House. And that includes more than 

simply myself and the department, but it also includes some 

responsibilities that rest with the critic. 

 

We will do our best to answer questions as quickly and as 

correctly as we are able to. On the other hand, I believe that he 

has an obligation to act responsible with the information and, in 

fact, with the question that he’s seeking. 

 

I think that, for example, it was responsible on our part to send 

him information with some figures because of the technicalities 

of the areas that we are dealing with before we even get into 

estimates. So from that point, Mr. Chairman, we’re going to start 

the morning off fairly well in agreeing that we both have some 

obligations to this House. 

 

As it relates to NewGrade, Mr. Chairman, I think back to the 

member from Saskatoon South’s opening statements last night. 

And I believe it went something like the private sector cannot do 

it all by itself; that, in fact, there should be joint ventures or a 

mixed economy. I recall you using those words. You may correct 

me if I’m wrong. 

 

An Hon. Member: — We’re off to a good start. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Okay, we’re off to a good start. 

 

If I think back to some of the joint ventures that have taken place 

between government and the private sector in this province of 

Saskatchewan, I would remind the member that it has cut across 

all political lines in governments; that, in fact, governments of 

any particular day, regardless of the political stripe, did, in fact, 

take part in joint ventures, joint commercial ventures. It is not 

unusual, Mr. Chairman, that in such joint ventures where there is 

a commercial entity form the private sector that, in fact, the 

agreements are not disclosed. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Nonsense. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, the member from Regina Centre 

says, nonsense. I’m going to remind him, PAPCO (Prince Albert 

Pulp Company) in the NDP . . . 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order. Would you let the 

member answer, or the minister please answer the question. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — There’s another example, Mr. Chairman, 

Prairie Malt — Prairie Malt was another one where, because of 

commercial reasons, the competitors, the information was not laid 

out to the public. I didn’t have any difficulty with it back when 

these people were in government and I was a taxpayer, because I 

understood some of the reasons that you would not, in fact, 

disclose for the protection of the commercial entry. 

 

I believe the potash corporation is perhaps another good one, but 

somewhat different. But somewhat different, Mr. Chairman. But, 

Mr. Chairman, there is a definite precedents laid out by the NDP 

in their day, and there’s a reason for some of the ventures not, in 

fact, being disclosed. It has nothing to do with secrecy or with 

what somebody may be afraid of, as it relates to the project. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, NewGrade is one of those joint ventures 

that entails three organizations — the federal government, the 

provincial government, and the Consumers’ Co-operative 

Refinery. We signed an agreement that parts would not be 

disclosed to the public, and it was basically for commercial 

reasons. I would remind these members that there is probably 

information in there that would put the Co-op — and I’m not sure 

that you would do that to the Co-op. I don’t believe you would, 

but that’s what you’re asking for. You are asking for pertinent 

information, as it relates to the Co-op’s competitive position, to 

be laid out to the public where they, in fact, would lose. 

 

Now I also want to remind you that is the only, Mr. Chairman, 

the only refinery that is left in Saskatchewan, is the Co-op 

Refinery. Why would we put them in a position where that may 

be lost, in order to be competitive with the Esso refineries in 

Edmonton and other factors. I don’t believe that the members 

want that done. I also don’t think they understand that is, in fact, 

they are asking that to be done. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we signed a confidentiality clause within the 

agreement, the three. I cannot lay out this agreement because of 

that being signed, but I would say to the member from Saskatoon 

South, if he has some specific questions, we will do our best to 

respond to the questions that he may have as it relates to the 

investment in NewGrade. But, Mr. Chairman, at this time that 

will not be disclosed. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, I cannot accept what you have 

just related to us. First of all, Madam Minister, just to deviate a 

little bit from the NewGrade, you indicated to me that you would 

give me the answers, you know, that you have to research. Let me 

remind the minister, it was not us that delayed the calling of the 

legislature for four or five months. It was you people that delayed 

it. 

 

And the answer that was constantly given by the members of the 

Executive Council was that they had to get things in order; we 

have to get ready for it; we are reorganizing and we need to get 

all our information ready so that we can 



 

July 17, 1987 

 

1251 

 

give the answers to the opposition. I’ll tell you, Madam Minister, 

that those four months, obviously you didn’t make good use of 

them because I still have not got the answers that we need. 

 

Madam Minister, you say that there were joint ventures. I agree 

with you that there were joint ventures, and that’s the history of 

this province are joint ventures. But I can’t recall, Madam 

Minister, a joint venture where you have three partners, and two 

partners are 100 per cent responsible for the financial risk of that, 

and then the minister coming before the House and saying that I 

can’t make this public because it may do damage to the third 

party that has no financial risk involved. 

 

Madam Minister, you told us last night that the total risk, 

financial risk, of the NewGrade was between the federal 

government and the provincial government, either in equity 

capital or in loans guaranteed. And therefore I’m asking you, 

since the federal government and the provincial government 

represent the people of this province, you have an obligation to 

tell us what those agreements were so that they can come under 

public scrutiny, and then the public can judge whether or not this 

is a good deal or a viable deal for the people of the province. 

 

No one is saying that we want to do damage to the co-ops. And 

I’m not prepared to take the minister’s word for it, particularly 

based on some of the answers that I received last night. I’m not 

going to take your word for it that there is a competitive position 

for the co-ops that they will lose out on. I don’t buy that. 

 

(1045) 

 

And, Madam Minister, to tell us, to come before this House and 

say, well, I decided that we will write a confidentiality clause in 

here and then I don’t have to disclose the deal to the public — 

now that is nonsense. If that were the case, the public would 

never ever find out a single thing about agreements that are made. 

All governments have to do is simply write in a confidentiality 

clause, come before the legislature and say, well, we can’t 

disclose that because we have agreed to a confidentiality clause. 

Now that’s a cop-out. And what I’m saying to you is that you 

have an obligation to make those agreements available to us. 

 

Madam Minister, in order that I can more clearly and fully 

understand this NewGrade company, would you tell me, first of 

all, when was NewGrade registered as a company in this 

province? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I want to respond briefly to 

what the member from Saskatoon south has said in terms of not 

providing information and not being ready. I want to remind him 

that it is near to impossible to second-guess every question that 

the opposition may very well ask. 

 

In fact, Mr. Chairman, it’s one of the reasons that information 

was sent to him beforehand, to enable and to speed up the process 

somewhat. So I find it interesting that he feels a department or a 

minister should be able to second-guess everything that the 

opposition may be 

interested in knowing. I would also suggest that it would be an 

extremely inefficient use of time. 

 

The NewGrade upgrader . . . The member asks if there’s risks. I 

want to remind him that the Co-op is a full partner and active in 

this project. To suggest that they would seriously jeopardize their 

refinery, I believe, is very unfair and in fact plans a seed of fear, 

and maybe that’s what the motive is, I don’t know. But I find it 

unfair; I find it unfair to the Co-op refinery. 

 

The other aspect, Mr. Chairman, those agreements contain 

commercial information about costs of producing their product 

and other factors that are very sensitive, once again, to the 

Co-op’s competitive position in competing with others out of this 

province. And, Mr. Chairman, it is for that reason, and a very 

good reason, that there is a degree of protection for the Co-op 

within the agreements itself. 

 

I can only state once again, Mr. Chairman, that if he has some 

specific questions we will do our best to answer, as opposed to 

layout out the agreement. To the best of recollection, it was 

registered in 1984. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, would you tell me very 

succinctly, why was the company formed? Just give me your 

reasons as to why the company was formed. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, in answer to the member’s 

question, it was simply put into place to build and operate an 

upgrader. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, would you mind telling me who 

are the partners in NewGrade? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The Government of Saskatchewan and the 

Consumers’ Co-operative Refinery. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — The Government of Canada and Saskatchewan, 

did you say? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No, I didn’t. I said the Government of 

Saskatchewan and the Consumers’ Co-operative. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — All right. Who are the Consumers’ Co-operative 

that you’re referring to? Who are they? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, it is a wholly-owned 

subsidiary owned by the Federated Co-operatives. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, in other words what you’re 

saying to me is that the company is owned by the Government of 

Saskatchewan and Federated Co-ops. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — In practical terms, that’s correct. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, would you mind explaining to 

me where NewGrade receives its funding for the upgrader? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Basically through equity, but . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . let me finish, please. $120 million. Now the rest 

is in debt, so they will be borrowing. It is the Government of 

Canada and Saskatchewan that 

  



 

July 17, 1987 

 

1252 

 

guarantee it. But they will be borrowing. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — You didn’t answer my question. From whom has 

NewGrade received its funding up to date? They obviously, you 

told me last night, were paying some bills. From whom has 

NewGrade received its funding? And will you please break it 

down for me; from whom has NewGrade received its funding up 

to date, and how much? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, up until the last statement 

we’ve received, the money is as follows, if the member would 

like to note of it; CCRL (Canadian Co-operative Refineries 

Limited); $2 million, the Toronto Dominion Bank, 25 million; the 

Credit Union central, 51.6 million . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — 51.6? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — That’s correct. The Government of 

Saskatchewan, 60; the Government of Canada, 15. And that’s 

funds expended to date from the last statement we’ve had. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, am I correct in assuming that all 

these funds, even the $2 million by CCRL, and except for the 

Government of Canada, are they guaranteed by the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No, Mr. Chairman, this is interim. The 

final financial arrangements will have $120 million of equity, and 

the remainder will be debt, and that will be borrowed by 

NewGrade itself. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Chairperson, that was not my question. 

My question to you is — I know this interim — would you tell 

me: is this money part of the 120 million? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I did answer that, with all due respect. I 

said no, this is interim, and there will be a final one of the 120. It 

was outside. I said no. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — All right. Madam Minister, lease make certain 

that you are sure of this. What you’re telling me, that the 51 

million and the 25 million and the 60 million from the 

government of Saskatchewan and the 15 million from the 

Government of Canada, is above the $120 million. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, in answer to the member’s 

question, let me say, first of all, not technically, to your question. 

When the final finances are put into place, the interim payments 

will be done on the equity. 

 

I also want to remind the member that this project is being 

managed through the Crown Management Board, which he . . . if 

he takes the opportunity to, or chooses to, can question crown 

Management Board in that respect. However, as I said before, we 

will do our best to respond to his questions. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, we’re going to be on this a 

long, long time. Either you don’t . . . Either you’ve got to get 

yourself knowledgeable about this $600 million project or get 

someone else in your place who has the answers. we are simply 

not going to take this as a sleight 

of hand. If the critic wants to go somewhere else and ask the 

question, fine, but I’m not going to take the responsibility for it. 

 

(1100) 

 

As I said to you earlier, you had four months to get yourself 

knowledgeable. Surely, Madam Minister, you didn’t expect that 

we were not going to ask any questions about the NewGrade 

upgrader. And surely you should have been briefed by your 

officials on the details of this agreement. 

 

Madam Minister, I want to know whether or not this interim 

financing . . . And you’re saying to me, and I wrote down, the 

interim payments will be done in equity. Now the equity, you told 

me, you told me the equity was $120 million. 

 

Now first of all, I don’t really understand what it means — 

interim payments will be done in equity. Do you mean it will be 

part of the equity — of the 120 million? What are you asking? Or 

what are you saying? Is it part of the $120 million equity, or is it 

not? And don’t say: technically, yes it is, or technically, no it 

isn’t. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I can only repeat what I 

said to him. And perhaps he did not understand it the first time. 

My answer to you in light of your question was, when the final 

financing is in place — and I believe I earlier said, when the final 

finances are done, the interim financing will be paid out. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Please, very simply answer yes or no. Is this 

interim financing part of, or included in, the 120 million equity? 

Yes or no? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, Saskatchewan will most 

likely choose to leave our 60 million in the equity. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, please, very simply, yes or no. 

You have 2 million from CCRL. You have 25 million from 

Toronto Dominion. You have 51.6 million from Credit Union 

Central. You have 60 million from the Government of 

Saskatchewan. And you have 15 million from the Government of 

Canada. Please answer yes or no. Are these part of the $120 

million equity? Yes or no? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, with all due respect, I had 

answered that about two questions ago. And I told you no. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — But, Madam Minister, all right; you told me that 

it wasn‘t part of the equity about two minutes ago. Yet just 60 

seconds ago you said that the Government of Saskatchewan 

would leave its 60 million in as equity. That’s exactly what you 

said, and we can go back to Hansard next week and check. You 

told me that would be part of the equity. Now is this part of the 

$120 million equity or isn’t it? 

 

Let me be more specific now. See if you’ll reverse your position. 

Is the 60 million that you have made available from the 

Government of Saskatchewan, is that part of the equity? 

  



 

July 17, 1987 

 

1253 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, again, technically speaking, 

the answer is no. You know, I don’t pretend to be a banker, and I 

don’t believe you are either . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, 

you’re right, that’s what we have officials for. But you are not 

going to address your question or get the simplistic answer that 

you want if you don’t consider some of the technicalities of the 

financial information. Now I will do my best to give you simple 

answers, but you must admit that some of this makes it very 

difficult to address it in the simplicity that you’re demanding. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — There is nothing difficult; there is nothing 

complex. You have told me there was 120 million in equity. You 

have told me that the rest of it was borrowed and guaranteed by 

the Government of Canada and the Government of 

Saskatchewan. I understand all of that. 

 

All I am now doing is returning to the 120 million equity. I want 

to know what is included in that 120 million equity. You have 

told me that the interim financing up to date has been the 

following: CCRL, 2 million; Toronto Dominion, 25 million; 

CUC, 51.6 million; Government of Saskatchewan, 60 million; 

Government of Canada, 15 million. That is simple mathematics, 

nothing complicated about it. Would you please now tell the 

people of Saskatchewan is the 60 million that you have forwarded 

from the province of Saskatchewan, is that part of the 120 million 

equity, or is it not? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I believe I’ve answered the 

question. I’ve said, no. It will be paid out. I don’t know what 

more there is to gain by this. N-o, no. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Now you’re telling me that it’s not part of the 

equity. If it’s not part of the equity, what is it then? Where does it 

come in? If it’s not part of the equity, where is it included? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — It’s interim financing, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — But interim financing in what? When you 

described the financing to me, Madam Chairman — let me go 

through, and you check Hansard — when I asked you about the 

financing you told me the following, and you told the Leader of 

the Opposition last night the following: that there was 120 million 

in equity; the rest would be in loans guaranteed by the 

Government of Saskatchewan and the Government of Canada. 

That is all that you included in your answer to the Leader of the 

Opposition, and that is all that you told me this morning when I 

asked you about the financial structure. 

 

Now, you are telling me that there is another section which is 

called interim financing. Would you please tell me, in the final 

analysis, where does it fall under — under 120 million equity, 

under the loan guarantees? Or is this a separate section that you 

have now created that you didn’t tell us about before, or forgot to 

tell us about before? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, if the member from 

Saskatoon South will just think back to what was asked last night. 

The information asked for had to do with the debt equity 

arrangements. The interim financing., once again, will be paid 

out. I’m not sure what we are 

misunderstanding here. If there is any further information, 

perhaps another question to try and clarify it. I’m not sure what 

the member’s having difficulty with, but I believe that it’s been 

rather straightforward, as straightforward as some very complex 

financial arrangements can be said. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, I am simply trying to find out 

what the total financing for the NewGrade upgrader is going to 

be. I simply want to know: is this in addition to what you told us 

last night and told me this morning? 

 

You told us, and I want to make it very clear again, you told us 

there’s a 120 . . . Madam Minister, would you answer this for me: 

did you not tell us last night, and this morning, that there would 

be a $120 million equity? Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The total that we gave you last night — 

$680 million — that was the total for the project. This is interim 

financing. It is not in addition to. There are some arrangements 

made in order to get the project up and running until the final 

details of the financial arrangements are put into place, and I 

don’t find that difficult to understand at all. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, I simply asked you a very 

simple question. Did you not say this morning that the equity 

would be $120 million? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well if he wants to be precise, it was the 

Leader of the Opposition, last night, that raised, yes, with all due 

respect, the $120 on equity. 

 

It is within that range, the equity. I would suggest it’s probably a 

little higher than 120, perhaps 130, but yes that’s what we’ve 

been talking about since last night. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, you could have answered that 

before. Madam Minister, by the way, you said that this morning. I 

wrote it down here — equity, source of funding. In order to keep 

track I wrote it down this morning; when you were answering, 

you said equity is $120 million. From that I simply ask you: 

where does the interim financing fall in? But I will come back to 

that a little later. 

 

So we have approximately now 120 to 130 million equity 

financing. Would you now answer the following question: in loan 

guarantees, what do you estimate that will be, both under 

provincial government and the federal government? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, this information has already 

been given also. The total debt is $544 million. That breaks down 

as such: Canada, $234 million; and Saskatchewan’s loan 

guarantee will be $310 million. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — All right, Madam Minister. It doesn’t add quite up 

to 680 million, but . . . now, so we’re out $20 or $30 million. The 

Tory Minister of Finance was out about a billion dollars, so I’ll 

have to forgive you about the 20 or 30 million. Now Madam 

Minister, that is the total financing for the project. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Total financing, or the total cost of the 

project, is $680 million. The debt is 544. 

  



 

July 17, 1987 

 

1254 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, why be so vague about things? 

I’m asking you some very simple questions. The financing, as 

you see it right now, is 120 to 130 million in equity, plus loan 

guarantees by the federal and provincial government of $540 

million, making a total of $560 to $570 million. That’s what 

you’re saying to me now. Is that the total financing? Is that it? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Now we got that straight. We got two sources. 

We’ve got equity of 120 million to 130 million; we’ve got loans. 

Now you’ve done some interim financing. All right. Now we’ve 

got those two categories. You told me that’s all the financing 

there is. Under what category does the finding fall that we have 

discussing this morning — the CCRL, 2 million; TD, 25; and the 

rest? That’s interim financing. Does some of it fall under loan? If 

so, which ones and how much? Does the rest fall under equity? 

Which ones and how much? 

 

(1115) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, it’s interim financing, and it 

will be fully paid out by the long-term debt financial arrangement 

that have been made. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Okay, so you’re telling me now that it doesn’t fall 

under equity, it falls under loans. Because you told me the debt 

was 540 million. You told me this morning that the long-term 

debt, guaranteed debt was 230 million by the federal government, 

310 million by the provincial government, and therefore, now 

you’re telling me that this comes under long-term debt and will 

be paid out over a number of years. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, again, this is 

interim financing . . . I’m asking you. I’m asking you to think 

about this. And if you don’t believe what we are saying, then I 

encourage you to go and talk to a financial expert on the matter. 

It’s interim financing. It’s going to be paid out — fully paid out 

— once the financial arrangements are completed. Okay. It is 

neither your equity, nor is it your long-term debt. It is interim. 

Interim means for the time being . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — For the time being. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Exactly, Mr. Member, for the time being. 

That’s precisely it. You know, what more can one say to it, 

because you are not understanding it. 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — Madam Minister, just one further question. I can’t 

let this go by. Madam Minister, don’t lecture this side on 

arithmetic because last night we had so many mistakes coming 

from that side, and I certainly don’t blame that onto your 

officials. I’ve known some of those people for a long time, and I 

know what they’re capable of. 

 

Madam Minister, you told me, and I asked you, very specifically 

— two categories. You told me there was a long-term debt, 

guaranteed long-term debt of $540 million. Then you told me that 

there is a guarantee equity of 120 to $130 million. And I asked 

you, is that the total financing: you said yes. 

Now if that is the total financing, I’m simply asking you: when 

you make your final decision on the finances, out of which pot 

are you going to take it? Out of loans that are guaranteed, out of 

equity that you have invested? And you have to take it out of one 

of those if you have no other pot to take it out of. It’s got to come 

out of one of those, and if you don’t, then you’re telling me that 

there’s another pot that you have put extra money in. 

 

So I can’t see why you can’t simply tell me: no, Mr. Critic, we’re 

going to take so much out of loans; we’re going to take so much 

out of equity, or it all comes out of equity, or all comes out of 

loans. Surely that’s not too difficult a question to answer. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, he’s right. It’s not 

difficult. Let’s hope it’s not as difficult to understand also. 

 

It isn’t like there’s several pots, to use your words, sitting around. 

Okay? When all is said and done, there is going to be the interim 

payment paid out on the total, not out of this little bunch over 

here or this little bunch over there. And I think that’s what you’re 

trying to see, and that in fact isn’t how it works, for all practical 

purposes. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Madam Minister, I hope I can put this in a 

form which even you can understand. Your inability to grasp 

detail is legendary — absolutely legendary. But let me try and put 

this issue in a fashion which I would hope even you could 

understand. 

 

Madam Minister, whose dollar is in first. Is the equity capital of 

120 million, or the debt capital or the capital supplied by debt of 

540? Incidentally, it doesn’t add up to 680. But 16 million bucks 

here or there, oh, what the heck, with an outfit like this. Whose 

capital’s in first? Is it the equity capital that goes in first, or the 

debt capital that goes in first? It makes an awful difference in the 

funding of a project of this sort. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, in answer to the member’s 

question — I believe it was the member from Regina Centre — 

the first block of funding will be $28 million in debt . . . in equity, 

I’m sorry, in equity; and 310 in the debt. Now once that is spent 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well that’s not unusual in the 

beginning, that your debt is higher. Once that’s spent, it reverts 

back to the 20 per cent equity and the 80 per cent debt ratio. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — All right. This trifling sum of 28 million, 

which about equals the difference between the figures you gave 

us and 680, I might add — this trifling figure of 28 million, these 

figures that are so slight as to be almost irrelevant in the scheme 

of things — the $28 million which goes in in equity first, is that 

the portion being purchased by the . . . I understand, of the $120 

million equity — I want to get back to that figure because I don’t 

believe it. It’s more than that. That’s another movie for next week 

I suppose. 

 

With respect to the $120 million, I understand a portion is equity 

provided by the Government of Saskatchewan purchasing shares, 

and a portion — the fractions I don’t have and I’m going to ask 

for that in due course — a 

  



 

July 17, 1987 

 

1255 

 

portion is provided by a guarantee to CCRL to purchase shares. 

The government’s guaranteeing a purchase of shares by CCRL, 

so that, as I understand it, is the equity. Who’s equity is the $28 

million? Is this the shares that the government is purchasing or 

the shares that CCRL is purchasing with a government 

guarantee? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the first equity, the 

$28 million, will, like all equity, be put in by Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I want to get back to the primary question of 

the complete disclosure of the details of this and the financing 

documents. Madam Minister, do I understand that all the equity is 

being provided by the Government of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — In answer to your question, yes. But once 

we are repaid by the project, then CCRL will be entitled to its 

shares. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, this is 

just nonsense. We’ve spent an hour of the time of this Assembly 

trying to pull out of the minister a few meagre details about this 

project. Madam Minister, I want to get back to the main issue of 

you providing a complete disclosure by laying on the table the 

entire details of this financing. 

 

Madam Minister, I want to remind you of the history of some of 

these projects. I go back to the financing of PAPCO (Prince 

Albert Pulp Company) back in the ‘60s, when it was originally 

. . . when the mill was originally financed by the Thatcher 

government. That was . . . The Thatcher government did it by 

bring a Bill into the legislature — moved by Ross Thatcher, and 

he laid all of the financing documents on the table. 

 

Whether or not, Madam Minister, we agreed with it, at least he 

had the courage to defend what he was doing. He didn’t hide 

behind a nonsensical excuse that PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp 

Company) needed the details of the financing of its construction 

kept confidential. 

 

Madam Minister, when the potash . . . during the takeover of the 

potash mines in the ‘70s, the now leader, the now House Leader, 

the member from Saskatoon Riversdale, moved the Bill, and in 

his second reading speech he laid on this table all of the papers, 

all of the documents dealing with the financing of it. 

 

Madam Minister, there’s a great deal more involved in this than 

there was in either of those two. This is $650 million. That’s an 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, that’s an open question. Up 

until today. It was 650 million. Now, last night, it’s become 680 

million. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Just 30 million. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — There seems to be a $30 million cost overrun 

somewhere. 

 

Madam Minister, the public are entitled to a complete disclosure 

of the details in this financing. This business of badgering you, 

and begging you, alternatively for details is nonsense. Madam 

Minister, the public are entitled to an 

accounting of a sum this large. If it were only $650, the public 

would be entitled to an accounting of it. But this is $680 million. 

Even to a bunch of spendthrifts such as this government, one 

would think such a sum would be treated with some respect. 

 

(1130) 

 

Madam Minister, you raised in your comments the . . . a couple 

of projects financed by Sedco (Saskatchewan Economic 

Development Corporation). Those are loans to ongoing 

businesses, and different considerations apply. But, Madam 

Minister, until this government took office, I don’t thing there 

was a single case of a new development . . . of the financing of a 

new development, a megaproject, as they were once called, 

without (a) a Bill being introduced in the legislature, and (b) 

complete disclosure. Complete disclosure. 

 

Madam Minister, with one exception, which I’ll get to, you’ve 

never done that. You gave a most unsavoury character, Peter 

Pocklington, some 20 to 30 million without ever disclosing the 

terms upon which you gave it. During the period of time that loan 

was being granted, Maclean’s magazine carried a story about the 

Royal Bank foreclosing on his house in Edmonton. And you gave 

him 20, $30 million, and you didn’t feel any obligation to tell the 

public of Saskatchewan the basis upon which you were giving 

him that sum of money. 

 

You financed a perfectly respectable company, Manalta Coal — 

the takeover of their . . . of the coal mines in Coronach. You 

didn’t give us any detail. You gave away an asset worth a quarter 

of a billion dollars in Prince Albert, and you wouldn’t give us the 

details. We got some of them by mistake. We finally got the 

balance, but after the election, Madam Minister, I say to you that 

you are under an obligation to disclose, in complete detail, the 

financing of this project. 

 

Madam Minister, you refer to the competitive position of the 

Co-op. I say that’s absolute nonsense. Either through ignorance 

or through a lack of integrity, you fabricated that excuse, because 

I don’t believe for one moment that the directors of Federated 

Co-operatives, most of whom I know, would ever allege that they 

should get $650 million of public money without any accounting 

for it. I don’t think that Federated Co-operatives would put that 

forward. I think you concocted that, Madam Minister, and I don’t 

think it came from them. 

 

There is nothing about the financing of this project which would 

in any way impair the competitive position of the Co-op. It is 

public knowledge — you gave it last night — it’s public 

knowledge what the cost of the product from the refinery is. It’s 

public knowledge what the differential must be. Everybody, both 

in and out of the oil industry, knows that. 

 

Madam Minister, I say there that is something about this project 

that you don’t . . . that you, the government, doesn’t want 

disclosed, and that’s why you won’t give it to us. It has nothing to 

do with the competitive position of Co-operative Refineries. 

Madam Minister, I say to you that you’re under an obligation to 

do it. You may think that $650 million is a paltry sum. The public 

of 

  



 

July 17, 1987 

 

1256 

 

Saskatchewan don’t. Until this government took office, full and 

complete disclosure was always made in these megaprojects 

which the government, through one means or another, back — as 

was done in potash by the NDP, as was done with PAPCO in the 

‘60s by the Liberals. 

 

So I ask you, Madam Minister, to give us the details and stop 

relying on this complete fabrication of an excuse that it would 

impair the position of Federated Co-operatives. That’s patently 

not so. And I don’t believe for a moment that Federated 

Co-operatives will ever put that forward. They have some 

integrity. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I take very serious the 

charges and the allegations by the member from Regina Centre. I 

also think . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Rolfes: — I would like to ask the minister to speak up a little 

bit. I have a little tough time hearing her. I didn’t bring my 

hearing-aid today. I’m serious; I can’t really hear you. Okay? 

 

Mr. Chairman: — At the same time, I would ask for the 

co-operation of all members of the House to please be a little bit 

quieter. And I’m sure that we will then be able to hear the 

minister. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, I will Mr. Chairman, as I was saying, 

I find it serious — the charges and the allegations coming from 

the member from Regina Centre. He talks about accountability, 

as do many of his other members. I want to say that 

accountability is a two-way street in this House, and that includes 

both government members and opposition. The unfortunate part 

is that many times opposition gets a free ride when it comes to 

accountability; accountability for the figures they use; 

accountability for the charges they make, and accountability for, 

in fact, backing up what they say is actually happening. And I 

suppose in one respect that’s unfortunate; however, they have a 

good opportunity to change it, and perhaps we’ll get into that 

later on. 

 

As I stated before, there are three signatories to this agreement, 

one being a commercial entity. There is a confidentiality clause 

within the agreement and, if the member does not believe me, 

then I would ask him perhaps to contact the senior management 

or perhaps the chairman of the board of Federated Co-op and the 

Co-op Refinery and in fact ask if there is a confidentiality clause. 

I think that would be one big step forward in terms of 

accountability for your charges and for the information that I 

have given you. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I have stated, and I will say it again, while we are 

not able to lay out the agreement, the full agreement, we will 

provide whatever information we can. For example, if you would 

like a full, complete description of the financial arrangements, we 

will provide that to you. But we will not provide the agreement 

that has cost information in it as it relates, in this case, to the 

Co-op Refinery. I will not jeopardize their competitive position 

with other refineries outside of this province. And I don’t think 

you’re asking us to do that; at least I hope you’re not. 

Mr. Shillington: — Indeed I am, Madam Minister, asking you to 

disclose that agreement. The last thing on earth I want to have to 

do is to rely upon your interpretation of what that agreement says. 

Madam Minister, who cannot appear to add simple sums and 

have them come out, I do not want you interpreting that 

agreement for me. 

 

I want to see that agreement for myself so that we may judge 

whether or not the public of Saskatchewan are getting good value 

for what is an enormous sum of money. 

 

Madam Minister, I believe there is a confidentiality clause in the 

agreement, but I believe it was inserted at your request. I don’t 

believe for a moment Federated Co-operative give a hang 

whether or not this information is disclosed. 

 

I believe, Madam Minister, the clause was inserted at your behest 

and not at the request of Federated Co-operatives. I believe, 

Madam Minister, that you did it because you know that this 

agreement cannot stand the light of day. You can’t defend it. You 

cannot defend it. 

 

No one, Madam Minister, is suggesting that the Federated 

Co-operatives or the CCRL is anything but a worthwhile partner. 

But Madam Minister, your behaviour since this project has begun 

suggests that you people have not, have not been careful stewards 

of the public purse in this project. And, Madam Minister, you 

confound those suspicions and pour fuel on the fire when you 

stand here and give us this nonsense about CCRL being impaired 

in their competitive position because of the costs of a new 

project. That’s just nonsense, Madam Minister. 

 

There’s nothing about the disclosure of that agreement which 

would in any way impair their competitive position. And if there 

is, I wish you’d describe it for me. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Take that portion of the agreement out. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, someone behind me says take that 

portion of the agreement out. If I were in any way convinced that 

the agreement did in any way impair CCRL, I’d agree to that 

suggestion. But I don’t agree to the suggestion because I don’t 

believe that. I don’t think there’s anything about that agreement 

which impairs CCRL’s position. 

 

I think you put it in, Madam Minister, because you can’t defend 

it. And I’ll tell you, as the summer wears on, you’re going to get 

lots of opportunity to give us these excuses, because for $650 

million we have a responsibility to put these questions to you 

over and over and over again until we get some answers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the member from Regina 

Centre is wrong — dead wrong. 

 

The Co-op Refinery, as a commercial entity, the only one as a 

refinery in this province, competing with 

  



 

July 17, 1987 

 

1257 

 

multinationals outside of this province. He is wrong if he thinks 

that they don’t care about the confidentiality of pertinent cost 

information items as it relates to them doing business. He is 

wrong again. And I can only say that is unfortunate, not only for 

this Assembly but for the Co-op Refinery. 

 

If that’s the kind of position that he wants to put them in — and 

let me rewind him that if he does put them into that position, 

there will be no Co-op Refinery in this province. They will be in 

Edmonton and elsewhere, and we’re back to the same old story 

— Saskatchewan not being able to compete with others and not 

being able to attract that kind of economic activity and 

investment and jobs that are there for people in this province. 

 

You talked and talked about an upgrader for how many years — 

how many years? And that’s all you did, my friend, you talked. 

You didn’t accomplish anything with it. Now that the 

accomplishment is there, because you didn’t do it you want to 

tear it down. And we, quite frankly, get a little fed up with your 

attitude when it comes to ripping apart Saskatchewan 

opportunity. And why do you do it? It’s a simple answer. 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please. At the rate it’s 

going, I’m going to have to ask for a headset myself, and I don’t 

think that would be appropriate, so could we calm it down a little 

bit so I can hear too. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It’s a 

difference, I suppose, in how these political parties, when they are 

in government, approach the role of government. Better it be that 

people be dependent on government, or have a little bit of dignity 

and happening, what’s happening on their own. Think about it. 

Think about it, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I can only repeat again, there are three signatories 

to the agreement, the Co-op Refinery being one of them. And we 

will provide all the information that we can in terms of the 

complete and full description of the financial arrangement. But 

we will not disclose the components of the arrangements that 

affect cost information items as it relates to the Co-op Refinery 

position. We will not do that. 

 

We signed a confidentiality clause, so did the Co-op, so did the 

other party to the agreement, and I believe that there is not only a 

legal obligation but a moral obligation to uphold that. And I think 

that the member from Regina Centre, being a lawyer, would 

probably agree. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, being a member of the Legislative 

Assembly for the last five years, and listening to this government 

fabricate excuses for its own incompetency. I’ll tell you that I 

don’t . . . I just simply do not believe what you just said. Madam 

Minister, if the CCRL and the Federated Co-operatives would 

agree to the disclosure of that agreement, would the Government 

of Saskatchewan do so? 

 

(1145) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, let’s not forget 

Canada is in on the agreement. There’s three. However . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Once again you jump in before giving 

somebody else a chance. Okay, I’m reminding you that there is a 

third one — Canada. Canada, Saskatchewan, and the Co-op. We 

would be glad to review the issue with the other signatories and 

along with yourself, but I remind you it is not just a matter of 

Saskatchewan and Co-op. There is a third component there which 

is Canada. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — Madam Minister, I’ll take my chances with 

someone with the integrity of Michael Wilson. I’ll worry about 

the Government of Canada later on. You didn’t answer my 

question. If Federated Co-operatives and CCRL will agree to this, 

will you? I want a yes or no. I don’t want a comment which is, 

we’ll go and review it with them. 

 

What you’ll do is go and try to intimidate them into not agreeing. 

That’s what you’ll do. I don’t believe for a moment. I don’t trust 

you for a moment to go and talk to them, as I think you will go to 

them and try to encourage them to say no. 

 

Madam Minister, if you were sincere in what you just said about 

keeping it confidential because of the competitive position of 

CCRL, you’d have given us a simple, yes; if Federated 

Co-operative and CCRL will agree to it, we’ll agree to it. The fact 

that you’ve obfuscated and hedged on you answer confirms what 

I just said, and that is that the clause, that the confidentiality 

clause, was inserted at your behest because you don’t want to 

have to defend this agreement. you made some comments about 

us wanting all . . . everything to depend upon the government. 

What in heaven’s name is this, if this isn’t a project which 

depends entirely to the last nickel on government support? 

There’s no risk capital in this thing at all except to the public 

purse. 

 

Madam Minister, you said that we tried to get the project of the 

ground and didn’t succeed. One of the reasons, Madam Minister, 

we didn’t was because we were never satisfied that we had all of 

the details in place, and that’s important when you’re spending 

650, 680 . . . these figures float around. By the tens of millions 

they grow. That’s important when you’re spending hundreds of 

millions of dollars of public funds. 

 

Madam Minister, you say you’ve got it off the ground. To borrow 

the language from the member from Morse, prove it! Give us the 

agreement. Let us see that agreement so we will know whether or 

not you’ve struck a sound deal. Because, Madam Minister, 

Madam Minister, your; behaviour suggests that you haven’t 

struck a sound deal. If you did, you’d defend it as has always 

been done with these new developments which the government 

funds. Madam Minister, I say that your answer which you just 

gave us confirms our worst suspicions, and that is that you put the 

clause in because you wanted it. 

 

I’ll take my chances with Michael Wilson. Whatever the sins of 

the federal government, a lack of integrity and competence by the 

current Minister of Finance in the Government of Canada isn’t 

one of them. I’ll take my chances with him. I certainly will not 

take my chances with the member from Regina-Qu’Appelle, or 

with the 

  



 

July 17, 1987 

 

1258 

 

member from Swift Current. 

 

I say, Madam Minister, the answer you just gave us, that we’ll 

negotiate it, instead of a simple yes, confirms what I’ve said. You 

put the clause in because you wanted it, because you didn’t want 

to have to answer hard questions in this Legislative Assembly 

about that agreement. I ask you again, Madam Minister, for $650 

million, cut the crap, give us the agreement. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, to the hon. member . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . No, I’m not shaking. It would take 

more than you to make me shake. 

 

Let me suggest why you didn’t make a deal when you were 

government on an upgrader . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m 

going to talk about that. But you, you talked about it. I believe 

that that’s fair and that’s within the rules and the procedures of 

this debate, and I’m sure as a lawyer you’ll correct me if I’m 

wrong. 

 

The reason, the reason there was no deal made was that you 

zeroed in on the multinationals, and that’s all you were trying to 

make a deal with were the bigger oil companies, the 

multinationals. You never even thought about the local Co-op 

Refinery as being a possibility for the upgrader. It had nothing to 

do with the amount of time in order to put some figures together. 

As I recall, at that point in time you were in office from 1971 to 

1982. Now that’s 11 years. How much time do you need? Eleven 

years. That’s a long time, my friend. 

 

Let me simply state again, and I can assure you we would be 

willing to sit down and review parts of the agreement as it 

pertains to the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — It’s not what I want. That’s not 

satisfactory. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well I know it’s not what you want. But I 

believe that it does, in fact, go for a long way to aiding what you 

have been requesting for. And for me to simply stand in here 

today and say, yes, we’ll agree to this, if Co-op agrees to this. I 

mean, I believe that’s simply playing one off against the other. 

And I don’t believe that that is fair. Not at all. Not at all. 

 

Let me finish, please. I sat and listened to you. Now please return 

it. We will sit down and we will review it with the signatories to 

the agreement. It was your request, and we would be glad to do 

that. I’ve stated that. 

 

Now I don’t know how much further, Mr. Chairman, we can go 

on this point. The member knows there’s a contract signed with a 

confidentiality agreement to it, and I believe what we have 

offered to do o n this matter is more than fair and reasonable. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — It is neither fair nor reasonable. I say, 

Madam Minister, again, it is not satisfactory for you to decide 

what parts of that agreement I see and what I don’t. I say, Madam 

Minister, unless we’ve got the complete agreement, we’ve got 

nothing at all. The last thing on earth I would do is trust this 

government to candidly and completely make a disclosure of a 

project in which they have entered into. 

You say, Madam Minister, how long can we go on this? Just wait 

and see how long we can go on a $650 million project which you 

don’t want to tell us about. 

 

Madam Minister, I am not at all encouraged by your comment 

that you’ll sit down and review it. I’ll tell you what will happen; 

after you sit down and review it, and after the Government of 

Canada says, disclose it, we don’t care, and after Federated 

Co-operatives says, disclose it, we don’t care, you’re going to 

come back and say, we were unable to reach an agreement to 

disclose it, because you don’t want it disclosed. 

 

I say, Madam Minister, give us the agreement. I’ll rephrase the 

question. If the Government of Canada agree to it, and the 

co-operatives in the form of the Federated Co-operatives Ltd. and 

the CCRL agree to it, if the other two partners agree to it, will you 

agree to it? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I have given the member a 

possible resolution to the question, and I can only restate it again, 

that I am not at liberty to disclose the details to the agreement in 

this House. I’ve also stated why. I believe it’s very serious what 

he is asking us to do. He is either not understanding the 

seriousness of that particular situation for the commercial 

enterprise of the Co-op Refinery, or he doesn’t care. I’m not sure. 

But it is serious. 

 

It is for that reason that we have said tot he member, there’s 

nothing to hide on this, but the clause is in there for a good reason 

when you’re dealing with a commercial enterprise. We are not 

going to allow the Co-op to be second-rate in terms of its 

competitive position with outside factors of this province. We 

simply are not. We have a legal obligation and, I believe, a moral 

obligation to uphold that contract which included the 

confidentiality clause. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, along with that we have given a 

commitment to the members opposite that we will give whatever 

information they want on the financial costs of the project, and 

details. If they want full disclosure of that particular agreement, 

then we will have to sit down with the other signatories to the 

agreement. We have given a commitment that we would in fact 

undertake that. 

 

Mr. Shillington: — I asked a simple question and, Madam 

Minister, I ask you not to avoid the question by saying you’ll 

consider it. The simple question is, Madam Minister, that’s what 

you’re saying, Madam Minister, what you’re saying is that you’ll 

consider it. I’m afraid you will consider it, and you’ll always say 

no. 

 

A simple question, Madam Minister: if the other two signatories 

to the agreement agree to disclose it, will you? If the other two 

signatories agree to disclose it, you can hardly claim you’ve a 

legal and moral obligation to keep it quiet. A simple question, 

Madam Minister: if they agree, will you? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I have given a commitment 

to undertake the possibility of that happening. But I can’t give the 

commitment that that in fact will happen. I just can’t. I will 

undertake to address 

  



 

July 17, 1987 

 

1259 

 

the question and review it with the signatories to the agreement. I 

believe that’s fair and reasonable under the circumstances. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Madam 

Minister, I feel compelled to join in this questioning and debate. 

But I want to preface my remarks simply by stating that I will 

happily match my support for the co-operative movement with 

that of anybody on either this side or that side of the government. 

I have a long history of co-operative support, and it’s a personal 

one as one as a family one that goes back a great many years in 

this province. 

 

I’m glad, Madam Minister, that the NewGrade refinery, that one 

of the major partners is a co-operative and not a multinational oil 

company. Indeed if it were anything other than the co-operatives 

that were involved in this, you would be facing such a barrage of 

questions, and we would not be accepting anything nearly the 

non-answers that you are giving us right now. 

 

Madam Minister, yesterday did you say that the necessary 

differential between heavy oil and medium oil crude that was 

required to make the upgrader pay, did you not say that 

differential was $7 per barrel? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, yes, the differential figures 

. . . There were two that were used last night. One was $7. We 

based, in laying out the project, that we would require a 

differential of $7, in fact, to make the project a good one. Last 

night the figure of $5 was also used. And that is the figure at the 

current time on the differential. But even at $5, the project will 

pay for itself. 

 

I think, if you’re having a look at the differentials and the 

viability of the project and what’s going to make it tick, you 

should perhaps also know that there are some views within the 

energy field that, in fact, the differentials will have a good 

possibility of widening. 

 

(1200) 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Madam Minister, for a rather 

expansive answer to a rather straightforward, I thought, and 

simple question. The answer is that, yes, last night you said the 

upgrader requires a $7 per barrel differential between medium 

and heavy crude oil to make the upgrader pay. Did you not? 

You’re shaking your head. Now I thought I just heard you say, 

yes. I’ll repeat the question, and please elaborate. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: —There was no discussion at any time about 

the differential, Mr. Chairman, on the difference between 

medium and heavy oil. That was not in the discussion when it 

raised last night and the figure of $7 was given. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Madam Minister, it’s amazing to hear the 

double-speak, the double talk, and so on. What did $7 differential 

between the price of a barrel of crude . . . what was that figure 

purported to represent? Because I was sitting in here last night, 

listening, and what I distinctly heard, my recollection of what I 

heard, is that for NewGrade upgrader — that project to pay, to 

make its own way — you required a $7 per barrel difference 

between medium crude oil, that it is now using, and heavy crude 

oil which, when the upgrader is completed, NewGrade will be 

processing. Please straighten the difference out. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I think perhaps, Mr. Chairman, we simply 

had a misunderstanding on how it was phrased. I believe you had 

said the differential between heavy and medium. And I wasn’t 

talking about the differential between medium and heavy oil. I 

was talking about the differential that is required at the project. 

And the differences between the feedstock — and it is heavy and 

medium oil that goes in for feedstock — and then what come out, 

the product, that’s the differential I was talking about. I had 

misread perhaps the member’s question in that he wanted to 

know the differential between heavy and medium oil. If I was 

wrong, my apologies. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Of course I was 

talking about feedstock, and obviously we had a little difference 

in understanding of what it was I was talking about. 

 

Did I — to further this question a bit — did I hear you about five 

minutes ago saying that at $5 per barrel differential between the 

feedstock price of medium and heavy crude, that at $5 per barrel 

the NewGrade project would pay for itself? Did you say that 

about five minutes ago? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, at $5, Mr. Chairman, it will pay its 

debts. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Now I’m really confused. Madam Minister, what 

has happened to change the situation between — some time 

between 7 and 10 o’clock last night and it’s now 12 o’clock noon 

today — what has happened to change the figure from $7 per 

barrel to $5 per barrel in that short period of time? I don/’t think 

there has been any major event in the world that could possibly 

make that kind of a difference. Please tell me, why the difference 

between 7 and $5. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I don’t know why it’s confusing, Mr. 

Chairman. I think, when statements are put together as it relates 

to a business or a project, that most people look at a reasonable 

return on their equity. That’s what . . . the $7 factor includes that. 

And what I said was the $7 figure was used for the differential, 

and that will give a reasonable return on equity. That’s fair to all 

involved. That’s fair to the Co-op, and that’s fair to the people of 

the province and to the federal government, in terms of their risks 

also. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Madam Minister, I just simply say that is not so. 

The difference between $5 per barrel and $7 per barrel is some 40 

per cent. I have been around the co-operative movement long 

enough to know that nowhere in their wildest fantasies do they 

ever get a mark-up of 40 per cent on materials that they are 

handling. I shouldn’t say nowhere; certainly not in the oil area. 

There may be such a mark-up in drugs and some special items 

like that at pharmacies, but 40 per cent is clearly not just a 

marginal sort of a rate of return; 40 pre cent is pretty substantive. 

Please justify the difference between the 7 and $5 per barrel. 

  



 

July 17, 1987 

 

1260 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, at $7, there is going 

to be a reasonable return on equity. At $5, it is simply going to be 

able to pay its debt. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Madam Minister, the next project that your 

government undertakes, would you please put me at the front of 

the list. These are such lucrative programs. I’d like to buy a 

coal-mine such as the deal you gave Manalta Coal in Coronach. I 

wouldn’t mind getting Weyerhaeuser, one-quarter of a billion 

dollar gift. And I certainly wouldn’t mind the terms that you’ve 

given to NewGrade Energy on this upgrader. Please put me at the 

head of the list for the next project. Whenever you want to give 

something away, I’d like to be at front and centre of it, and I think 

it would be pretty decent. 

 

Madam Minister, it’s with more than just a little bit of concern I 

note your projections on this project. And I really wonder, when 

last night you’re telling us you need $7 per barrel difference, 

today you need $5 per barrel difference. Admittedly, that is much 

closer to being the same position than what the Minister of 

Finance came up with in his budget, where he was some 200 per 

cent out. You’re vastly improved. You’re only 40 per cent out. 

 

But it’s no wonder, Madam Minister, that the people of 

Saskatchewan have totally lost confidence in your administration. 

And what you’re telling us last night and today,. just adds to that 

lack of confidence that the people of Saskatchewan have in your 

government. So I ask you, Madam Minister without energy,. I ask 

again for you to give us the terms of the agreement with 

NewGrade. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, when the question was 

addressed to us last night on the differential, it was: what is the 

differential that you were estimating to make this project 

successful? 

 

I think most people understand that if you put money out at risk, 

you in fact expect a return. If you put money into something, you 

expect a return. The member probably is well aware of that in 

terms of putting his money into the credit union or into a bank. 

His interest is his reasonable return on loaning that money for 

investment to the credit union. So that’s why the $7 figure was 

used. Because I believe that’s a responsible way to do it. 

 

I believe the Co-op has been extremely responsible in how it’s 

budgeting, its evaluations, and its projections on what is required 

for now and in the future. And I don’t think the member would 

disagree with that. 

 

I guess what I hear him subtly saying is that we have been far too 

generous to the Co-op Refinery, and that’s what we’re dealing 

with in this instance. I guess time will tell whether that in fact is 

so. I think he should also be aware that a reasonable return on that 

equity is going to give the Co-op and the people of Saskatchewan 

an opportunity for reinvestment into the province, and out of that 

reinvestment we have the potential or the possibility for job 

opportunities for young and old alike. 

 

And when I think of the Co-op and its situation around that 

province, it essentially touches on every community. As he well 

knows, given what he has just stated, in this province — and it 

doesn’t matter if it’s Regina or if it’s 

Waldeck, Saskatchewan, or Richmond or Kamsack — the Co-op 

touches on every community in this province. 

 

So from that aspect, I say all the more power to the Co-op if they 

can get a reasonable return on their equity in this project because 

it will in fact benefit the province well, and benefit from two 

aspects. If the member has done any reading in terms of energy, 

oil within this province, he will know that heavy oil — if there’s 

going to be a future in oil for Saskatchewan, it’s going to be on 

heavy oil. 

 

And the upgrader is certainly going to facilitate the development 

and the markets for heavy oil. And given that factor when I look 

at the total project including the $7 differential, I believe it’s 

going to stand in good stead. And I challenge him to come up 

with anything different than that. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Madam Minister, of course the Co-op is 

responsible in its assessments. Definitely. It’s not the Co-op that 

is being questioned here, it is you and your department. It is not 

your generosity or lack of generosity to the co-operative 

movement. That’s not the issue here today, although I can assure 

you it will be when Co-operatives comes up for estimates. 

 

The issue here is simply one of your, and your only, 

incompetence in not being able to give me an answer within 40 

per cent. And what typifies that is the difference between this $7 

differential on the feedstock of last night and the $5 differential 

today. So I’m going to ask one more time: will you divulge to us 

and to the people of the province the details of the financial 

agreements that NewGrade Energy has entered into with you? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I want the member to 

clearly understand that he’s dealing with two different questions 

on the differential. The question last night, the first question last 

night was: what is the differential to make this project successful? 

We gave them that — $7. 

 

The second question was: what is the differential today? And we 

said, that is $5. We have also said to him at $5, that pays the debt. 

There’s no return for further investment on the equity, but the $5 

does in fact pay the debt. So I just ask the member from Regina 

to understand that very clearly. 

 

Once again, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I will state what I have said to 

the member from Regina North — or Regina Centre, my 

apologies — and the member from Saskatoon South. We will be 

happy to answer questions on specific financial matters within the 

agreements but we are not at this point in time permitted to 

disclose. And I have laid out all the reasons, and I believe that the 

reasons are reasonable and I also believe our approach to it is one 

of acting in good faith in terms of those contracts. And I’m not 

about to move off of that. 

 

If the member, and I will tell him again, wants to sit down and 

further discuss it, I’ve also told him that if they want, we will 

review the question, discuss the matter of full disclosure with the 

signatories to the agreement. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Madam Minister, you keep talking about the 

competitive position of NewGrade. And yet you have 

  



 

July 17, 1987 

 

1261 

 

given for the whole world what is required for NewGrade to 

make money. Simply put, they need $5 per barrel differential on 

the feedstock between medium and heavy crude to pay the debts. 

Anything after $5 per barrel is gravy or is earnings, however you 

call it. I call it gravy because in this instance NewGrade has such 

a marginally small amount of money at risk, I would think it’s 

gravy. 

 

(1215) 

 

But, Madam Minister, you have given all of the competitive 

details necessary to the whole world when you announced the 

differential required. So your argument just rings totally hollow 

that you refuse to give us the details of the financial arrangements 

because of a competitive position for NewGrade oil. It just 

simply cannot be, because you’ve already given the pertinent 

information. 

 

So again, please give us the details of what is a massive amount 

of money that you are refusing to tell us where that money is. 

Give us that information. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I have not given the 

member nor any of his other colleagues any information about the 

cost structures of the Co-op Refinery, and nor do I intend to. And 

that’s what they’re asking for. And I maintain it would put them 

in jeopardy, and I believe that the member from Regina North 

East probably knows that. If he doesn’t, he should have, after 

being minister of Finance for a period of time. 

 

The Co-op Refinery will be integrated with the upgrader, as the 

member well knows. And we are just not going to put them in a 

position where they will possibly lose an edge with their 

competition. So, Mr. Member from Regina, you have not 

received any information on the cost structures within the Co-op 

Refinery itself, nor will you from within the House. I would 

suggest if you want to talk about cost structures, you are by 

means at liberty to discuss it with the management at the Co-op 

Refinery but I will not release the details as it pertains to the cost 

structures for the Co-op. 

 

Ms. Simard: — Madam Minister, is it true that the federal 

government has signed the confidentiality clause? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — All parties to the agreement have, Mr. 

Chairman, yes. 

 

Ms. Simard: — I wonder if you could tell me then, Madam 

Minister, how this co-ordinates with the disclosure of federal 

disclosure of information Act and how the federal government 

purports to circumvent that piece of legislation? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I would suggest that as it 

relates to the federal legislation, that perhaps the member take it 

up with the . . . with perhaps her federal MP. I can say that our 

understanding is that the legislation allows for commercial 

energies and recognizes the need for confidentiality in respect to 

that. But I would encourage her to in fact, perhaps clarify it with 

the federal government. 

 

Ms. Simard: — I would also like the minister to tell the 

people of Saskatchewan what she thinks of the morality of an 

agreement that has clauses in it that do not allow her to disclose 

to the public all the facts and circumstances surrounding this 

agreement. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the member from Regina 

Lakeview, being a lawyer, recognizes the need for many 

contracts dealing with government and private sector, that in fact 

there is going to be a point if you are dealing with pertinent 

information, particularly on the commercial side of it, that is not 

going to be disclosed. 

 

We have said that we will give the financial information as much 

as we can to the members, as long as they are not requesting 

financial information that will put in jeopardy the competitive 

position of the Co-op Refinery. 

 

To date, they have asked us to disclose the agreement that 

includes the cost structures of the Co-op Refinery. We will not do 

that. And I stand by that legally; we signed the confidentiality 

clause. But I would also say to the member I believe we have a 

moral obligation also. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 

Minister, I just have one question. At whose insistence was a 

confidentiality clause included in the agreement? Was this at the 

insistence of the federal government, your government, or the 

Consumers’ Co-operative Refinery Ltd? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, we did not insist on this. I 

am informed that this is a very normal commercial and legal 

practice as it pertains to that section of the agreements. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Hon. Minister, given the fact that there 

are two governments involved in this agreement, namely the 

federal government and the provincial government, it would seem 

normal that governments would seek to avoid confidentiality 

clauses insofar as they’re dealing with the taxpayers’ dollars. Can 

you clarify now, at whose insistence was this clause inserted into 

the agreement? 

 

You’re saying that it’s a normal type of a clause, yet you did not 

say that it was at the insistence of one of the partners to this 

agreement. Can you tell this House, at whose insistence was this 

clause inserted? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I can only say . . . and I 

believe it’s the same answer; perhaps the member didn’t quite 

understand it. We have been informed that this is a very normal 

clause when you are dealing with a commercial enterprise. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, I have also started and the member knows 

that there in fact is a part of the agreement that will be made 

available. But it will not impact on the competitive position of the 

Co-op. You are asking for disclosure on areas that deal with the 

cost structures of the Co-op Refinery and as to how it deals with 

its competitors. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Minister, I’m not asking for any 

disclosure. I just simply asked you at whose insistence was this 

confidentiality clause included in the agreement. 

  



 

July 17, 1987 

 

1262 

 

Your response is to say that this is a normal type of a clause. And 

it may well be a normal type of a clause. But I wonder, Madam 

Minister, did you at any time during the discussions with the 

Consumers’ Co-operative Refineries Ltd. and with the federal 

government point out that there are significant taxpayers’ dollars 

involved in this agreement and that for those reasons, that we 

might seek to exclude the confidentiality clause? Did you make 

any comments or your officials any comments, to that effect to 

try and ensure that there would be full disclosure of the 

agreement? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, no one insisted that this be 

put in. It was a recommendation from the legal people from all 

sides. And we were informed that this is a very normal and 

reasonable clause to be put in dealing with the types of 

information that was in there as it reflected upon the cost 

structures for the Co-op Refinery. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Can you tell us, Madam Minister, that if 

this is one of those normal things that just sort of came before 

you, whose lawyers drafted the agreement? Was it your 

government’s lawyers or was it Consumers’ Co-operative 

Refineries Ltd. lawyers? Whose lawyers drafted this? Who 

included this in the agreement? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as joint projects go, 

this was jointly done. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Madam Minister, might . . . you’re being 

extremely evasive, Madam Minister. But might I ask you, might I 

ask you: did you or your officials, or any of the other members of 

the Executive Council that might have been involved in the 

discussions leading up to the signing of the agreement, did 

anyone from the Government of Saskatchewan, or acting on 

behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, raise any questions 

about the advisability of including this confidentiality clause? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, once again I can only say 

that the clause was there as a draft or a recommendation and it 

was considered to be reasonable. And when we looked at it, that 

is the view that we took with it. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Madam Minister, surely some of t he 

officials that are with you today participated in the discussions 

leading up to the signing of that agreement. Can you ascertain, 

Madam Minister, did any of those officials, or again, anyone else 

acting on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan, raise any 

questions whatsoever about the advisability of including the 

confidentiality clause? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, again, the clause was 

reasonable and we did not try and remove it. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Madam Minister, I’m coming to the 

conclusion that we’re not going to get anywhere with you, given 

your evasiveness on this whole matter. But there’s a couple of 

things that are coming out. One is that you and your officials 

would be so blasé, so blasé about signing agreements and not 

asking questions about some of the clauses in that agreement; not 

pointing out, for example, that the Government of Saskatchewan, 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, are investing millions upon 

millions of dollars in a venture, yet you would not ask one 

question about whether it’s advisable to disclose as much 

information as possible so that the taxpayers might know what’s 

going on in this particular development. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, we have never said we will 

not disclose information. And let me refresh the member’s 

memory. Last night, when the question first arose, we gave a 

commitment to talk . . . to give information. We also said that the 

agreement on the guaranteed loans would be disclosed when the 

arrangements are finalized. And I believe I told your leader that 

that would be at the end of August, and the member from 

Saskatoon South can correct that if it’s incorrect. 

 

What we are talking about today is another matter also. I will 

disclose as much financial information as we can. We believe we 

have an obligation to do that. But it will not be the information 

that impacts on the competitive position of the Co-op Refinery. 

And that, my friend, is a very normal, reasonable clause to have 

in a contract when you have a joint venture with a commercial 

enterprise. I will not put them into that position, and I ask you to 

think seriously about what you are asking us to disclose as it 

pertains to the Co-op Refinery. 

 

(1230) 

 

You are talking about cost structures that impact on that Co-op 

Refinery because it is integrated with the upgrader. And it’s a 

very normal and needed clause for a commercial entity and a 

joint project. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — I wasn’t going to ask any more questions. 

I might say that my memory is excellent, Madam Minister. What 

you’ve been saying is that you’ll release certain bits of 

information as it suits your purposes, but that you’re more than 

reluctant to release all of the information and allow the taxpayers 

to judge for themselves whether this is a good deal for the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan or not. 

 

Might I ask one further question, Madam Minister. Did any of the 

representatives from the federal government who were involved 

in discussions leading up to this agreement raise any concerns 

whatsoever, ask any questions whatsoever, about the advisability 

of including or retaining a confidentiality clause? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, it is extremely interesting to 

listen to the member talking about what is a good deal, what 

should be disclosed, and what isn’t. I don’t believe he really 

believes what he’s saying, simply because of the track record of 

the NDP when they were in power. You know, one of the 

questions I would ask for him to think about is this one: was it a 

good deal for Saskatchewan on buying potash mines? Nothing 

was disclosed. Was that a good deal? 

 

An Hon. Member: — I think you hit a nerve, Patty. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I think so. That information wasn’t 

disclosed. But it got worse. Those agreements weren’t 

  



 

July 17, 1987 

 

1263 

 

even around in 1982 when this government came in. So what is a 

good deal? What’s a good deal? I think the member talks out of 

both sides of his mouth. Hopefully it’ll change. 

 

Mr. Chairman, once again I’m not about to jeopardize the Co-op 

Refinery on that portion of the contracts. And the Co-op, in 

discussion, raised the importance of confidentiality as it pertains 

to the cost structures of the refinery. And, Mr. Chairman, we are 

going to stand by that agreement. 

 

I will once again tell the members, if they want some specific 

financial figures, and if we can do that without breaking our 

obligation on the contract, we will do so. I have also given a 

commitment that we would undertake a discussion with the 

signatories to review the confidentiality clause. I can do no more 

than that. And I believe, Mr. Chairman, that is very fair and very 

reasonable. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Madam Minister, we’ll let the 

people of Saskatchewan decide whether I’m speaking out of both 

sides of my mouth, or whether I’m putting to you straightforward 

questions about a deal that involves their money, that involves 

millions upon millions of taxpayers’ dollars. And they will also 

judge whether or not you are providing the kinds of answers that 

should be forthcoming from a minister of the Crown. 

 

Madam Minister, I’m not particularly concerned at this point 

about the financial arrangements of the potash corporations of the 

previous government. I am not concerned about the arrangements 

that led to the financing of the pulp mill under the Thatcher 

government. I am not concerned about the activities of the 

Patterson government of the 1930s. I was asking you some 

questions about events that are taking place now. 

 

Madam Minister, we seem to be going up a blind alley. We’re not 

getting anywhere with you. You’re being evasive; you’re 

avoiding the questions; you will not answer. The questions, I 

would suggest, are not offensive. They’re straightforward 

questions about confidentiality clauses. 

 

Might I ask you, Madam Minister, would it be your intention, in 

case of future contracts and agreements of this sort, would it be 

your intention to ask questions about the advisability of the 

confidentiality clauses? And would you commend a similar 

attitude to your colleagues in the Executive Council as they 

undertake to sign agreements with private interests which involve 

the taxpayers’ dollars? Will you give us that undertaking? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I understand fully why the 

member doesn’t want to talk about the past. I think most of us on 

this side do. And, Mr. Chairman, quite frankly, I don’t raise the 

issue to dwell on the past. But I raise it to keep it in perspective in 

terms of what the NDP are asking. And what I’ve said is: it has 

been reasonable, and it has been normal with joint ventures and 

commercial entities through various governments, they disclose 

as much as they can. But portions as it pertains to the commercial 

aspect of the signatory, it is not unusual that that has not been 

disclosed. 

That’s why I raise the past, Mr. Chairman. I am not prepared to 

suggest that in the future all joint ventures be disclosed in total. 

That’s not reasonable to ask. And I don’t think it’s feasible. 

Unless of course you don’t want any joint ventures but the 

government is going to do it all — how, I don’t know. But 

perhaps that’s one of the motives behind it. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I can only state that on future joint ventures — 

and I mean it’s a very hypothetical question, so perhaps the 

answer’s going to be hypothetical also — that where it is 

necessary to protect commercial information, confidentiality 

clauses will be a normal, reasonable aspect of contracts. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Madam Minister, who signed 

this agreement on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I did. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, wouldn’t it be a normal 

course of events to take such an agreement before cabinet? And 

I’m not asking you to divulge any discussion that may have taken 

place in cabinet. But wouldn’t you agree that it’s a normal course 

to take such an agreement to cabinet for approval before you’ve 

signed it? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, that’s a very normal process, as the 

member from Regina North East well knows. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And indeed I 

do well know. And that is the crux of the issue here. And we’ve 

spent a lot of time talking about what is normal. 

 

Well I say to you, Madam Minister, that there is noting more 

normal than for a government to assure, when it puts at risk some 

$680 million of taxpayers’ money, that it make assurance that it 

can be and will be responsible and accountable for the 

expenditure of that money. 

 

Madam Minister, you’ve made no such effort. you talk of the 

confidentiality clause in the agreement. And that is going beyond 

what should be required and expected of any government from 

what is normally expected. Why, Madam Minister, did you not 

request that this confidentiality portion be removed from the 

agreement because you were committing that kind of money 

which the people of Saskatchewan are going to put up? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, with all due respect, that 

question has been answered, I believe, about four times this 

morning. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well I’m sorry, Madam Minister, but 

you’re going to have to answer it again, because my question is 

based on what is required of you and required of the Executive 

Council on behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

Why would you not have, Madam Minister, requested, or at least 

made a suggestion, when you took this to your cabinet, that the 

confidentiality portion of this agreement 

  



 

July 17, 1987 

 

1264 

 

which you now are using as your excuse not to make this 

information public and available, why would you not have made 

some effort to have it removed? Because it is not your personal 

money that’s being committed,, it’s the personal money through 

the taxes of every Saskatchewan citizen. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, like I said, I’ve already 

answered the question. It was a reasonable clause to have in there 

in terms of it being a joint project with the Co-op Refinery. 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Is it not, Madam Minister, reasonable for 

the people of Saskatchewan to know what they are laying out 

their money for? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I have offered several 

times. I haven’t heard one member say yes, we will arrange a 

time and a meeting with you to talk about this. I will make the 

offer again. We will gladly sit down at their request, if they 

should choose, to review and discuss this matter with the 

signatories to the agreement. I have given a commitment to 

undertake that. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I have also stated if they have some specific 

financial questions of various areas of the project, please come 

forth with them. We will disclose to them as much as we can and 

stay within the legal limits of that contract. But Mr. Chairman, I 

will not disclose the cost structure component as it reflects upon 

the Co-op Refinery and put them in jeopardy in terms of their 

competitive edge in doing business. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Madam Minister, I have been listening 

patiently as the members on this side have been fishing for the 

information that the people of this province deserve to have. I’ve 

been hearing consistently the members on that side chirping 

about business ethics and what’s good for business and how you 

run a government. And I want to tell you, Madam Minister, that 

it’s not acceptable, the kind of statements that you’re making to 

this House. 

 

You’re trying to run this government as if it was a proprietorship 

and not as if it’s a government. You, Madam Minister, are the 

chairman of the board of directors in this particular deal, and you 

are responsible to one million shareholders in this province. 

You’re dealing with 650 million or 680 million; we’re not sure, 

because you’re not sure. 

 

Madam Minister, do you not feel some responsibility? I ask you: 

do you not feel some responsibility to the million shareholders, 

the people of this province, to let them know what’s going on to 

the 650 or the 680 or whatever how many millions you’ve got 

tied up in this deal? Do you not feel some responsibility to let 

those people know? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I believe from every 

member in this House, it doesn’t matter which side it comes 

from, each one of them would feel a high degree of responsibility 

when it comes to the expenditure of $680 million. So yes, Mr. 

Member, we feel a heavy degree of responsibility, not only in 

terms of t he $680 million, but 

what happens in the future, and that the project in fact be viable to 

give this province an opportunity to create more opportunities for 

the work-force and for other factors. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the upgrader is a good deal, and we have said that 

to the opposition and to the taxpayers. In fact, Mr. Chairman, it is 

a much better deal than what the take-over of the potash mines 

ever were. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: — Madam Minister, you talk about the 

viability of the upgrader deal. And I want to say to you that there 

isn’t member on this side of the House that doesn’t hope, you’re 

right. And the reason that we hope that you’re right is because 

you’ve tied up 650 or $680 million of the taxpayers’ money. 

 

(1245) 

 

And what we’re asking, Madam Minister, is that you table the 

agreement. I frankly don’t believe, when you signed that 

agreement, that it was anybody but you who asked to have that 

confidentiality clause put in there, because you’ve got a track 

record, your side of the House, of not being accountable to this 

legislature. And this is just another example of the kind of 

incompetence that you guys have been demonstrating. 

 

I ask you again, Madam Minister: why did you not, when you 

signed that agreement that was putting some $680 million of 

taxpayers’ money on the line, did you not insist on behalf of the 

people of this province that there be no confidentiality clause? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order. We’re having difficulty 

hearing the minister’s answer. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I want the member to understand what a 

loan guarantee is. He says we’ve tied up $680 million. My guess 

would be he’s trying to leave the insinuation that actual cash is 

tied up. That hasn’t happened, Mr. Chairman, under this project. 

In fact the last time I remember a large amount of cash being tied 

up was 400 . . . I think it was, the Leader of the Opposition would 

know, about $400-plus million cash, hard cash, for the take-over 

of potash mines. He may find that interesting. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I believe that to his latter statement I have 

answered that question, and there is nothing more to add to it. 

The clause is reasonable and quite a normal clause as your past 

government would have known in doing joint ventures outside of 

government. Very reasonable. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, I’d 

like to in essence pursue the same discussion but try to pursue it 

in as orderly a way as I can. 

 

Madam Minister, would you please give to me the titles — the 

names and titles of the agreements which you have singed or are 

negotiating with respect tot his project so that I will know just 

what we’re talking about. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I thought we had touched 

on them last night; perhaps we didn’t. The 

  



 

July 17, 1987 

 

1265 

 

project agreement and the operating agreement — those two are 

signed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Sorry. I’m not hearing. Did you say the 

project agreement and the operating agreement? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — And the operating agreement are signed. 

We have the loan agreements between NewGrade and its lenders 

to be estimated to be completed before the end of August, plus 

we have the guarantee agreement between Canada and 

Saskatchewan, and that too is scheduled for the end of August. 

Now there’s about 20 other minor agreements, and if you would 

like a list of those, we will require a little bit of time to get them. 

But we can make those available to you if you so wish. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, I 

wonder if I am now understanding you that there is a project 

agreement, an operating agreement, loan agreements between 

NewGrade and the lenders, and a guarantee agreement between 

Canada and Saskatchewan. If I have that right, could you tell me 

how many loan agreements are there? One between NewGrade 

and Canada, and one between NewGrade and Saskatchewan, or 

any others? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. The list, as the leader 

has laid out, is correct. There are two agreements to the loan 

agreement with NewGrade and its lenders. One agreement is 

dealing with the Canadian lenders, and one agreement is dealing 

with its American lenders. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, and Madam 

Minister, which of those agreements contain the confidentiality 

clauses to which you were earlier referring? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The operating agreement and the project 

agreement contain the vital information as it pertains to the Co-op 

cost structures. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Madam Minister, you will have to speak 

up because your colleagues are making too much noise. Would 

you mind repeating. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — With all due respect, Mr. Chairman, if the 

leader’s colleagues would be quiet, the leader would be able to 

hear, both on the left and the right to him. 

 

What I said was, the operating agreement and the project 

agreements are the agreements that contain the cost structure 

elements as it pertains to the Co-op Refineries that we will not 

release because of the confidentiality clause. 

 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, 

I’m sorry that I didn’t make my question clear, or, in the 

alternative, the answer was not clear. I’m not asking whether the 

agreements contain a cost breakdown. I’m asking whether each 

of the project and operating agreements contain confidentiality 

clauses. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, they do. 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, I 

want to be clear on what I am asking here. Many, many 

agreements contain a confidentiality clause which prohibits the 

disclosure of the contents of the agreement. Thus it is not 

uncommon to have a confidentiality clause which will say: 

technical information which we have disclosed to you to during 

the course of these negotiations shall be kept confidential; 

however, the terms of this agreement are of course perfectly 

public. 

 

And that is the norm. After all, you couldn’t list these shares on a 

stock exchange unless you would declare the underlying basic 

agreements. You wouldn’t be able to get bank financing without 

disclosing them. You wouldn’t indeed be able, generally 

speaking, get bond money without disclosing them. Now this 

doesn’t mean that all the technical information is available. I’m 

talking about the terms, the copy of the project agreement and the 

operating agreement. 

 

Now what I am asking you, Madam Minister, and I will talk 

about one for the moment, the project agreement: are you 

advising me that there is a provision in the project agreement 

which prohibits the disclosure of the terms of the project 

agreement by any one of the parties? 

 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the leader would have us 

believe that this is very abnormal; this has never happened in the 

past. And that’s just utterly nonsense. I can’t think of a clearer 

way of saying it. It is nonsense. 

 

We have given a commitment to give you as much of the 

financial information as we can in terms of the total dollars 

amount, the breakdowns. You know that you will have access to 

the guarantee loan agreement when it is finished. You know that. 

But we have also been very up front in saying why we can’t 

disclose the project and the operating agreements. You know that. 

And there’s nothing to hide. It’s a joint venture. And I’m not 

about to put the Co-op refinery in jeopardy. And I don’t think you 

would ask that. 

 

Those agreements contain some very pertinent information as it 

applies to cost structures with the refinery. Obviously, it would 

either put them in a competitive position or not. And I’m not 

about to disclose that. That’s why the confidentiality clause is 

within the agreements, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Before I officially adjourn the House, fellow 

colleagues, I’d like to bring one or two items to your attention. 

Starting next week, as you no doubt are all aware, we’ll be having 

here in Saskatchewan the 27th Canadian Regional Conference of 

the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. 

 

We will have delegates from Malaysia, the United Kingdom, 

some Caribbean islands, and from all provinces and territories in 

Canada — somewhere over 200 delegates and observers. 

  



 

July 17, 1987 

 

1266 

 

Just for your information we will be discussing in our business 

sessions, topics such as native self-government, free trade, 

parliament and the press, and immigration. There are six 

delegates from among you who will be official delegates of the 

convention. I would just like to point out that these business 

sessions are open to the public and if any of you can find time to 

attend, you’re certainly welcome. We would look forward to that. 

 

However, if you’re looking for something to do this weekend, as 

you all know, there’s a Big valley Jamboree going out there in 

Craven, Saskatchewan. There’s going to be something like about 

70,000 people, I understand. There’s going to be some great 

talent there, like George Jones and the Saskatchewan Express and 

Glory-Anne, native Saskatchewan talent. I’m sure you’d enjoy it. 

And I mention this only because Craven, of course, is in Last 

Mountain-Touchwood constituency. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 


