




















































October 31, 1987 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

October 31, 1987 
 

 
3769 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Non-Controversial Bills 

 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the Standing 
Committee on Non-Controversial Bills, I present the first report of 
the said committee which is as follows: 
 

Bill No. 29 — An Act to amend The Legal Profession Act 
 
Ms. Simard: — I wish to report Bill No. 29, An Act to amend 
The Legal Profession Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in Committee of the Whole of the said Bill be 
waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 38 — An Act to amend The Prairie and Forest 
Fires Act, 1982 

 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you. As chairman of the 
Non-controversial Bills Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 38, 
An Act to amend The Prairie and Forest Fires Act, 1982, as being 
non-controversial, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in Committee of the Whole of the said Bill be 
waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 39 — An Act to amend The Law Reform 
Commission Act 

 
Ms. Simard: — As chairman of the Non-controversial Bills 
Committee, Mr. Speaker, I wish to report Bill No. 39, An Act to 
amend The Law Reform Commission Act, as being 
non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in the Committee of the Whole of the said Bill 
be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I move the said Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 40 — An Act to facilitate Economic and Social 
Development in Rural Areas 

 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the 
Non-Controversial Bills Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 40, 
An Act to facilitate Economic and Social Development in Rural 
Areas, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in Committee of the Whole of the said Bill be 
waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move the said Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 54 — An Act to amend The Vital Statistics Act 
 
Ms. Simard: — As chairman of the Non-Controversial Bills 
Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 54, An Act to amend The 
Vital Statistics Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in Committee of the Whole of the said Bill be 
waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 59 — An Act to amend The Animal Protection Act 
 
Ms. Simard: — As chairman of the Non-Controversial Bills 
Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 59, An Act to amend The 
Animal Protection Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in the Committee of the Whole of the said Bill 
be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
  



 
October 31, 1987 

 

3770 
 

Bill No. 61 — An Act to amend The Department of Parks and 
Renewable Resources Act 

 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the 
Non-Controversial Bills Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 61, 
An Act to amend The Department of Parks and Renewable 
Resources Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in the Committee of the Whole of the said Bill 
be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that said Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 53 — An Act to amend The Uniform Building and 
Accessibility Standards Act 

 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the 
Non-Controversial Bills Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 53, 
An Act to amend The Uniform building and Accessibility 
Standards Act, as being controversial. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Controversial. Second reading next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 58 — an Act respecting the repeal of The Agricultural 

Research Funding Act 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the 
Non-Controversial Bills Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 58, 
An Act respecting the repeal of The Agricultural Research 
Funding Act, as being controversial. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Second reading next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 72 — An Act to amend The Land Titles Act (No. 2) 
 
Ms. Simard: — I wish to report Bill No. 72, An Act to amend 
The Land Titles Act, as being controversial. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Second reading next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 73 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of 

The Land Titles 
Amendment Act, 1987 (No. 2) 

 
Ms. Simard: — And I wish to report Bill No. 73, An Act 
respecting the Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts 
resulting from the enactment of The Land Titles Amendment Act, 
1987 (No. 2) as being controversial. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Second reading next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 60 — An Act to amend The Forest Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I understood that the committee also dealt 
with Bill No. 60, An Act respecting The Forest  

Act. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, there is a member who wishes to 
make a comment on that on third reading, who is not prepared to 
do that at this time, so I thought I would report that Bill next week. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, by agreement of the House 
leaders, both sides have agreed to waive question period for this 
day. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Question period is waived. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 87 — An Act to amend The Planning and 
Development Act, 1983 

 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first reading 
of a Bill to amend The Planning and Development Act, 1983. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 88 — An Act to amend The Local Government 
Elections Act (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to 
amend The Local Government Elections Act (No. 2). 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 89 — An Act to amend The Controverted Municipal 

Elections Act (No. 2) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to 
amend The Controverted Municipal Elections Act (No. 2). 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 90 — An Act to promote Regulatory Reform in 
Saskatchewan by repealing Certain Obsolete Statutes 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to promote Regulatory Reform in Saskatchewan by repealing 
Certain Obsolete Statutes. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 91 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the Passing of 

Certain Acts resulting from the Passing of Certain Orders and 
Regulations pursuant to The Government Organization Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
respecting the Consequential Amendments of Certain Acts 
resulting from the Passing of Certain Orders and Regulations 
pursuant to The Government  
  



 
October 31, 1987 

 

3771 
 

Organization Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 92 — An Act to amend The Matrimonial 
Property Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Matrimonial Property Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 93 — An Act to amend The Reciprocal Enforcement 

of Judgments Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Reciprocal Enforcement of Judgments Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 
(1015) 
 

Bill No. 94 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical 
Care Insurance Act (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act (No. 2) 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 95 — An Act to provide for the Registration and 
Regulation of Persons Engaged in the Real Estate Trade 

 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to provide for the Registration and Regulation of Persons Engaged 
in the Real Estate Trade. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill ordered 
to be referred to the Standing Committee on Non-Controversial 
Bills. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 1 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, when 
we last were considering agricultural estimates I asked for 
information regarding your staff salaries, the polling, aircraft 
charters, and advertising. You’ve seen fit to say that they are in 
orders for return, and I don’t find that acceptable, Mr. Minister, 
because I think it’s important that I have that information now so 
that I can 

ask you the questions in these estimates. 
 
So I would ask you again if you would table these documents this 
day or at least before . . . this day. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I don’t think that that’s possible, because 
you may get them within days, but they’re in orders of return and 
that’s normally where they’re provided. So the process is pretty 
clear and has been followed. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, I definitely do not agree with that. 
I’d asked you over a week ago for this information. You have 
taken it upon yourself to conceal this information so that the 
people of Saskatchewan, who should know and who should be 
able to receive answers, through me to you, on the costs of 
running your department, specifically with regards to, let’s say, 
polling, how much money you’ve spent on polling; or advertising, 
how much money that you’ve spent on advertising in agriculture; 
or aircraft flights . . . So I think that this is basically a cover-up of 
information. And I don’t think this government and this legislature 
should run this way. 
 
So I would ask you again, considering the fact that you have had 
ample, ample time — and I’m sure if it takes that long to get this 
information out of your department, then I question the runnings 
of the department — so I would ask you again: would it be 
possible to have this information later this day? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in a spirit of 
co-operation, I don’t think that this information has ever been 
asked in this basis. But I will, in the next few minutes, try to get 
you the information on staff salaries so that the hon. member can 
have them. I will say that to the best of my knowledge there was 
only one aircraft charter and that was to Swan River, Manitoba — 
chartered from the department is the information that I have, for 
about 200 or $300. 
 
Polling — I don’t have the specific numbers. And advertising — 
all the advertising is going to have to wait for orders of return, and 
that is in returns no. 525, 351, 216 and 204, respectively, for staff 
salaries, polling, aircraft charters, and advertising. 
 
The total cost of AgNews, which I believe that you wanted 
specifically, was $91,295 for 10 releases with a per copy cost of 
approximately 12.5 cents. And I’ll get you that information with 
respect to staff salaries right away. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Premier, that’s just not good enough. 
You are standing here and you are deliberately withholding 
information as you have done on previous occasions. I want to 
remind you and the committee that prior to the spring session of 
1986 you withheld, for two years, information ordered by this 
Assembly on your travel by orders for return. 
 
That’s clearly what kind of game you’re up to here. You’re trying 
to use the order for return process in order that you will not 
provide timely information to the House so that the committee 
members can question you on it. It is not 
  



 
October 31, 1987 

 

3772 
 

unusual to provide this information. Other ministers have been 
able to come to this committee and provide that information on 
request because they got ready for it. As late as last night, your 
Minister of Finance, who has been known to be fairly lax on some 
of his other activities, was able to hand across the floor, when 
asked, some of this information. 
 
I fail to see why you can’t do likewise, Mr. Minister, if you are 
doing your job. You’ve had a week. You’ve had a week to 
prepare. I submit to you, if you spend more time doing some of the 
work of your department and less time visiting Reno and other 
holiday spots out of the country, we might be able to get the job of 
your estimates done in this House expeditiously. 
 
Mr. Minister, you are deliberately withholding information. It’s 
got nothing to do with what the procedures are because we know 
what the procedures are and they are to provide this information. 
Now you can go ahead and do your traipsing around the continent 
but surely your departmental officials don’t go with you, and they 
should have had that information because they knew it had been 
asked. And if they don’t have it they haven’t done their job, but I 
don’t believe that to be the case. I think that they have done the job 
and you’re not doing your job because you’re refusing to provide 
that information in the House. 
 
Now will you explain, Mr. Minister. If you say that your officials 
don’t have it, will you explain to this House why they don’t have 
it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I just said to the hon. 
member that . . . And then he just used the term, he received some 
of the information he asked for immediately from the Minister of 
Finance, and some of it he didn’t. And I will say, as he knows, 
with request for my information on travel. I mean, you looked at 
all the information on my travel and it’s certainly public, and you 
didn’t do anything with it because it was all just fine. Right? So, I 
mean, there’s no indication at all that information . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. order. I’d ask members to allow 
the Premier to answer the question. Everybody has a chance to get 
into this debate so allow the Premier to answer the question that he 
was asked by one of your members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, let me just say to the hon. 
member that we can provide some of that information today, and 
some of it you will get later. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why later? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Because that’s the way it is. Some of it 
we’ll get later because it’s orders for return and that’s the way that 
we have provided that kind of information. And you know it’s 
1986 information — ’85-86 information. 
 
So, I mean, it’s in the process, and I said I will get the salaries to 
you as quickly as possible. I gave you the charter airline. So, Mr. 
Chairman, I’m giving him most of the information right now. 

(1030) 
 
The ’85-86 information with respect to advertising is going right 
through the process. He’ll have access to it as he has had every 
year. And he’s had access to my travel information every year and 
he can do whatever he likes with it. They’ve had it before, and 
they’ve made no issue of it because it’s been above reproach. So I 
just say that we’ll provide that information and you’re getting 
most of it today. And the rest of it you’ll get through orders of 
return. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, you display once again your 
total disrespect for this legislature with that kind of a comment — 
total disrespect for the process of being accountable for your 
actions and your government’s actions. The issue isn’t whether the 
information is so bad that the opposition might want to do 
something with it; the issue is, providing information that the 
public has a right to know. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We’re getting it. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well you’re getting it, Mr. Minister, but 
you were in estimates a week ago. These questions were asked a 
week ago. Why haven’t you got it today? 
 
An Hon. Member: — I gave you some of it today. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — We want all of it, Mr. Minister, because 
you’ve had time. And it’s not as if it’s a surprise. It’s not as if it’s a 
surprise question because this kind of question has been asked of 
every minister in his estimates or her estimates during this session 
and in previous sessions, and even those of your ministers who 
may be not quite as competent as we would like have been able to 
provide it, Mr. Premier. That doesn’t speak very well for you. That 
does not speak very well for you. 
 
Can you ask this question . . . since these questions were asked a 
week ago, can you explain why your officials have not been able 
to prepare it, having been given a week’s length of time, so that 
we could get it today? Would you explain that please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m giving them most 
of the information today. and for the hon. member I will give him 
today the salaries that they asked for. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Pass it over. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — All right. I’ll pass it over, Mr. Chairman. I’ll 
send a copy over so that the hon. member can have the salaries. 
With respect to airplanes, I’ve advised him there’s been one 
charter. And with respect to advertising, I said that it would be in 
orders for return, and they can receive it like they normally receive 
it. 
 
So he’s getting three-quarters of the information today, so he’s not 
giving me a fair side, Mr. Chairman. So I will pass the information 
over with respect to salaries so the hon. member can review it and 
examine it. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, it’s not for you to decide how 
much information you provide on a selective 
  



 
October 31, 1987 

 

3773 
 

basis. I mean, your answer is like the Minister of Economic 
Development and Trade saying to the committee in answer to the 
travel questions: I’ll give you all the travel that I did except my 
trip to Calgary to go a relative’s wedding. That’s what kind of an 
answer you’re giving this committee today, and that’s quite 
inappropriate. 
 
Mr. Premier, we appreciate you’re going to give us two items of 
information, but I want to ask you again, because you still haven’t 
answered my question, is why have your officials not been able to 
prepare the information on the advertising question having been 
given a week to prepare it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the information is coming 
and it’s in the process and it’s in orders for return, and the 
opposition will have it for the next four years to use, or the next 
eight years. So it’s not being confined; it’s just not ready Saturday 
morning. So it’s in orders of return. You’ll have it; you’ll be able 
to . . . if there’s anything in there, you’ll have the full information, 
and you can look at it, and you can examine it. You can take it to 
every town in the province, if you want to. It’s in the process. It 
isn’t here this morning, but you will get it through orders of return, 
and you’ll have it in detail. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Premier, let’s talk about the orders for 
return. The orders for return were ordered on September 15. 
That’s a month and a half ago. The question was asked here last 
week in the committee a week ago. You weren’t able to, in a 
week’s time, prepare a specific answer. The orders for return were 
asked on September 15, a month and a half ago, and you’re still 
sitting on them. Not one single order for return of your 
government has been tabled in the House that’s been asked. Mr. 
Premier, what is it that you’re afraid of, that you’re hiding, so that 
this information cannot be provided? 
 
Now I know that there were a lot of orders for return, but you 
don’t have to wait until they’re all prepared to table some of them. 
And you could have, you could have prepared this one on 
advertising and the other questions that my colleague asked for, 
because you’ve had sufficient notice on polling. And the only 
thing that we can conclude, and that the public can conclude, is 
that you refuse to provide this information because you’re trying 
to hide something. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — You’re trying to hide something and that’s 
not unusual. Your record of hiding something is pretty wide and 
broad. The record of your deal with the Prime Minister to 
withhold the announcement of the CF-18 contract because there 
happened to be an election going on, that was hiding something. 
And the list goes on and on and on. 
 
Mr. Premier, you have had since September 15, knowing that your 
estimates were coming, to be able to provide this information. I 
ask you again, why have your officials, since you are the one 
who’s blaming them — I’m not; I think they have it — but since 
you’re blaming your officials, will you explain why they have not 
been able to 

provide that information in a month and a half? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I will just say again that the 
request for information from the opposition is very large. It’s 
volumes and volumes. We are providing that information as we 
always do through the normal process, and I’ve even by-passed 
the normal process this morning and given them three-quarters of 
the information right now, and handed them the stuff on salaries, 
told them about charter airplanes. The additional information goes 
through the process as it usually does. 
 
If I could finally say, Mr. Chairman, the hon. members stood in 
their place and said I was hiding my travel information because I 
was hiding something . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Two years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Two years, he says, for two years. And they 
get the information and they don’t ask me a question on it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I mean they’ve said the same thing every year. 
I will provide the information; you will get it. I’ll give as much as 
I can today and the rest of it quickly as we can. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, the 
record that you have of keeping people wondering what’s going 
on in this province is a real legacy. People don’t know, and they 
want to know, and they have a right to know. This is a prime 
example of withholding information that the people of this 
province have a right to know about. 
 
And I’ll just shift into another example, Mr. Minister. That’s the 
$25 production loan that your department put out. Right now 
people in Saskatchewan are two months away from this loan 
maturing, and they don’t know what to do. 
 
They don’t know if you’re going to take their land from them. as 
you said the other day in Agriculture estimates, land was their 
security. If they don’t pay, you can take their land. They don’t 
know if you’re going to forgive the loan, as the rumour that the 
Tory government put out before the last election — because I 
heard it on doorstep after doorstep, and it was heard right around 
this province. And now the farmers of this province are wondering 
what is going to happen. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, we’re in a stage of agriculture now where 
farmers have to know what lies ahead. And time after time, 
whether it be the $25 production loan, whether it be the deficiency 
payment, or whether it be a program for alleviating debt, they 
don’t know because you can’t make the decision as to what to do. 
And because you can’t make a decision what to do, they are going 
to be in the dark and wondering, day after day, what lies ahead. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Minister, farmers have to know, not day by 
day, they have to know year by year or further, what the policies 
of this government are so they can plan their life around it. And 
until you come forward and tell them ahead of time, how can I, or 
anybody else as a  
  



 
October 31, 1987 

 

3774 
 

farmer, expect to budget, to plan crop rotation for two or three 
years? It’s impossible to do. And you won’t tell us what you’re 
doing. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I ask you: what is your proposal? What do you 
plan to do with the $25 production loan when it comes due, 
beginning in January of next year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I thank the hon. member for that 
question. I agree it’s important to provide farmers with as much 
information and as much help as possible. As the hon. member 
knows . . . and I believe he attended the last two days agriculture 
symposium to look for alternatives to help farmers. 
 
In terms of decisions, I think it’s important to remember, and the 
hon. member would probably agree, that we made the decision to 
provide $1.1 billion to farmers at 6 per cent money. We made the 
decision to say that they didn’t have to pay the principal in the first 
year. In fact, we postponed it and they could only pay the interest. 
And we made the decision to go to bat for a deficiency payment, 
and the federal government made the decision to pay $1 billion 
out. And we’ve made the decision to ask for 1.6 to $3 billion 
again, made the decision to beef up the western grains stabilization 
payment, made the decision to expand the cash advance system 
for livestock and to expand it for grain producers, and made the 
decision for drought payments. 
 
I mean, to be fair, I think, Mr. Chairman, we have made a large 
number of decisions with respect to agriculture. I won’t list more, 
but in terms of things like rural distribution programs and 
communication systems and so forth, many, many decisions were 
made. 
 
Now as the hon. member knows, farmers appreciate the fact that 
on average they received, in the month of June this year, about 
$10,000 cash in terms of western grains stabilization payments 
and deficiency payments, and they are looking forward to 
something similar. 
 
So when you look at the announcements to come out from the 
Canadian Wheat Board . . . I believe I heard the minister say 
yesterday that he will be making announcements with respect to 
the size of the western grains stabilization payment. He has made 
an announcement with respect to larger payments on oats right 
now because of market improvements. And towards the end of the 
year, I expect you will hear the decision regarding the size and the 
amount and the timing of a deficiency payment. 
 
Now all that, in terms of billions of dollars, will have an effect and 
some impact on the decision we make. And in talking with 
farmers . . . And we’re going to have a group of MLAs go across 
the province and talk to farmers about the production loan so that 
they can give us their best advice in terms of how capable they are 
of paying it. Some are capable of paying it all right now; some 
aren’t capable of making any more payments than probably just 
the interest. 
 
We want to examine that in the light of grain stabilization 
payments and deficiency payments and interest rates, generally, 
that are going down — thank goodness — and 

we will put all that information together in making the appropriate 
announcements and decisions for farmers. 
 
But if I could say, in all fairness, that we have made a large 
number of decisions, and large financial decisions, for farmers in 
the last few years, and we are quite prepared to make more of 
them and provide as much information as quickly as possible to 
farmers in the future. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, you didn’t answer my question. 
Again you’re saying that you’re going to be going around the 
province to consult with farmers and ask them what they think. 
That doesn’t help now. You’ve had ample time to do that. How 
much time do you need to support the rural economy out there and 
let farmers know what they’re doing, what they can expect? 
You’ve had ample time to let them know. 
 
The two most important things to farmers right now is the 
deficiency payment and whether they’re going to pay the 
production loan, because they have to know if they’re going to 
have that cash in hand so they can tell their banker, who is 
hammering on their door day after day, whether or not they’re 
going to have any cash flow. But no, you’re going to go around 
and ask the farmers what you should do with the production loan. 
 
Well I say, Mr. Minister, you’ve had long enough to make a 
decision. Perhaps if we had a full-time minister of Agriculture, 
we’d have some of these decisions made, instead of gallivanting 
around the world doing whatever you do. The farmers and farm 
groups can’t even get in to see you. A common complaint among 
the agricultural groups: we can’t get to see the Minister of 
Agriculture. And you say you’re going to go around the country to 
see what farmers are saying about the production loan. Well, Mr. 
Minister, when they can’t get in to see you, that doesn’t make 
sense to me, and that’s the common thread. Accessibility is very, 
very limited. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I ask you: what is your policy with regard to the 
$25 production loan when it starts coming due in January of next 
year? What is your policy on it — that some of those loan are 
going to come due, and you’re not going to know from the reports 
around the province what the farmers are saying? But I’d like to 
know right now what your policy is. 
 
(1045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. member 
knows that it will have the month of November and the month of 
December and probably till about January 16 when the first 
payment is due. During that time we are going to hear information 
with respect to the grain stabilization payment and with respect to 
deficiency payments most likely. 
 
I have had good discussions with the SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities), for example, and they 
recommend certain things be done with production loan and other 
agriculture policies, with respect to deficiency payments, grain 
stabilization, crop insurance. The wheat pool board of directors, 
I’ve met with, and they’ve given me their advice on the same 
thing. Now the advice differs from group to group, and I 
  



 
October 31, 1987 

 

3775 
 

do consult with them. And that’s why it’s important to talk with 
them about the kinds of things that they think is important. 
 
I met with SARM last week. Within the last several weeks, I’ve 
met with the wheat pool directors. I’ve met with the livestock 
organizations. So it’s important to consult. And they have advised 
us in the past about the production loan program. 
 
That’s where we got the idea, from the people. They’ve given us 
examples of how we can protect the interest rates — write it down 
to 6 per cent, lock it in. That’s where you get the ideas, from 
talking to the farmers. 
 
Let me just say, with respect to the United States, the number one 
problem in Canadian agriculture is with the U.S. farm Bill. And I 
think it’s a good idea that we have some attempt to try to change 
that. I chair the Canadian side of North American agricultural 
policy group called NASDA (National Association of State 
Departments of Agriculture). So if I can be there in the United 
States — in Nevada or in Atlanta or in South Dakota or in 
Washington and in Reno — to convince agriculture people in the 
United States that the farm Bill and their subsidies and their 
protectionism are hurting us, then it’s a good idea, I would think, 
for Canadians to be there to have some impact on them. 
 
Now if you disagree with that, that’s fair enough. But it’s 
important to consult with local people, and it’s also important to 
consult with the people and advise the people that are wrecking 
the industry, like American treasuries and European treasuries, 
because the problem is not just in Davidson and it’s not just in 
Humboldt; it’s in Washington and it’s in Paris and it’s 
internationally. And the hon. member, I’m sure, must appreciate 
that, and certainly the farm organizations appreciate that. And they 
advise me, yes, we’ve got to defend our market share, and yes, we 
have to do the kinds of things that will defend farmers. 
 
So decisions now with respect to the production loan program, as 
with other things, will come together as we get this information. 
And I would say to the hon. member, we have almost three 
months before the first decision is going to be made in terms of 
payments on the production loan program. And I will remind him, 
the last time we did postpone it so that we only had to pay the 
interest. And people know that we’re sensitive. And we’re going 
out into the country to talk to groups, listen to them. We met . . . 
You and I met with them yesterday, several farm organizations 
and farm groups — different advice. So I think it’s a good idea to 
listen to it. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, you didn’t seem to have a problem 
making a decision before the last election. And you’ve had one 
full year to decide what you’re going to do with the repayment of 
that loan, and farmers in Saskatchewan have not heard a peep out 
of you. You’ve had one solid year. All of a sudden, just before the 
loan comes due, we’re going to make this sweeping tour of the 
province to hear what the farmers say, then you’ll make the 
decision. That’s not good enough. 
 
Farmers should have known last January what they were going to 
be expected to do this January. And the doubt 

that was put in their mind was put in by you and your fellow 
caucus members over there, because the rumour was put out that 
you were going to forgive the loan. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I say to you: the biggest problem is in Regina, 
sitting right across the House from here. That’s the biggest 
problem the farmers have, because they don’t know; they don’t 
hear you saying anything. Over a full year you’ve never said 
anything about the production loan, and all of a sudden now, 
you’re going to do it, just to prolong it a little further — putting 
stress on the agriculture community, adding stress to that 
community. They have to know. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I ask you — you’re going to consult, you’ve 
been in Washington. Mr. Minister, what is your perception of 
what should be done? What is your personal idea of what should 
be done with the production loan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, maybe I can help 
speed it up here. I will say this. It was a good idea to help the 
farmers in providing it. It was a good idea, with a smaller initial 
payment for wheat, to postpone the principal payment. I will say 
all those kinds of things are being considered. 
 
I will say this as well. It will not be forgiven — will not be 
forgiven — because people obviously have to pay their bills. So 
that at any time in the future . . . I mean, if you want to have any 
sort of integrity in any financial system, people must pay their 
bills. What farmers are asking us is, look at that program, it was a 
great deal of help; if some of us can’t make all the payments all 
the time, would you look at some alternatives? And I said, yes, I 
will. Give me your best examples; suggest things to me; and I will 
look at them. 
 
The SARM has suggested things, Wheat Pool has, and other 
organizations. And the farmers know that I’m looking at those. So 
you can count on this: it’s repayable. Secondly, can we look at 
alternate ways of repaying it as we did in the past? Of course we 
can. 
 
And we’re going to be examining those, but I’m not prepared to 
do that today. I don’t know what kind of quota’s coming down. I 
don’t know the size of the cash flow coming in from grain 
stabilization deficiency payments and/or the market from the 
wheat board. And we’ll be putting that information together, 
which I think is fair, for farmers to examine. 
 
So they say, well here’s the size of the cash payments; here’s how 
it fits; and it’s only been six months, again, since we’ve got the 
last payments, in terms of July, August, September, October. I 
mean it’s been less than that that we’ve received western grains 
stabilization and deficiency payments. 
 
So just to be helpful, yes, we’ll look at it, and we are examining it 
as we have in the past. I mean, we have really looked at it to even 
give it $1.1 billion out at 6 per cent. But I mean . . . nothing that 
. . . I don’t think that they’ve ever seen before. And we’ve said, 
we’ll even consider how you pay it back. But let me say very clear 
just so you and I both understand, it will be paid back, as I 
  



 
October 31, 1987 

 

3776 
 

believe any program has to be. Financially, to maintain the 
integrity, it has to be paid back. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well I thank you for that, Mr. Minister, and I’m 
sure the farmers will thank you for that too because it’s been a 
long time coming. And the word and the rumours out in the 
country and the uncertainty propagated by your government about 
forgiving that loan have been running rampant. And I’m sure 
that’s it’s finally time that we have heard at least one thing now 
about the production loan that we know. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would ask you: in your estimation, should the loan 
be repaid back over the three-year period or should that period of 
pay-back be extended to, let’s say, 10 years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, we’ve had several 
recommendations on that and we’re examining them all. The 
SARM recommended, for example, that the pay-back be extended 
from three years over to a longer period of 10 years. Other people 
have said five, some have said, you know, various combinations. 
Maybe there should be an incentive for those that can pay it back 
quickly to get it back; those that are in some difficulty, give them 
more time, look at the combinations. 
 
You know, the hon. member from the Quills has suggested, and I 
think to be fair that maybe we should target some of this for 
certain kinds of farmers. Well there have been several suggestions 
with respect to the production loan or other programs, so we’re 
examining them all. 
 
And again, to talk to farmers, they’ll tell us what they think is fair. 
I believe they’ll say: it should be paid; (2) for some people they 
may need more time, and; (3) that you could look at various 
combinations of things to allow the payment to be made 
depending on their financial circumstances. I think that’s 
reasonable. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, you mentioned some incentives for 
quick pay-back. I’d like you to explain to me what, just what you 
had in mind with relation to those incentives. Would it be a 
reduction in the payment if you paid it back, or less interest, or 
could you explain to the people of this province just what you 
mean by incentives for quick pay-back as opposed to a longer 
pay-out period? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Right now there’s an incentive to pay it 
back quickly because you pay less interest and it’s like any other 
loan. So while some will want some benefit by paying it off 
quickly because they can save themselves money, others say, look 
it, I’ll pay a little bit more for it but can you spread it out so in fact 
I can have the benefit of time? 
 
And that’s precisely the alternatives you could look at. It’s always 
in your interest to pay it as quickly as possible. And for others who 
may not be able to do that, it’s obviously going to cost you more, 
as it does in any program, to rewrite it or reschedule your loan. So 
that’s the basic economic differences and that’s what I’m referring 
to. 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, so what you’re saying, then, 
potential is there for . . . If a farmer pays his production loan back 
over the three years, it will remain at 6 per cent interest. And what 
I hear you saying, then is, if it’s going to be over a longer time 
he’s going to be paying more interest. 
 
So the question I would ask now: will that 6 per cent interest 
remain over whatever length of time that you stretch the 
production loan out, if you do? Or will that interest rate be going 
up to current market rates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well when I said he’s going to pay more 
interest, anybody that prolongs it at the constant interest rates pays 
more interest dollars. Okay, that’s the point. So right now it’s all 
the same to everybody — three years and you pay it back at 6 per 
cent. If you pay it quickly, you save money; if you pay it over the 
six years, it costs you more interest. It’s still at 6 per cent. 
 
My intent is to keep the interest rate the same for everybody, but 
the advantage is to pay it quickly as opposed to . . . If we did 
extend it out it’s going to cost you more in real dollars to pay off 
the loan at any interest rate. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Just let me get this quite clear. You’re saying that 
the interest rate will remain at 6 per cent, regardless of what the 
term is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, that’s where it is now, at 6 per cent. 
And as I envision it, if you did expand it or you did reschedule it 
or anything else — as we did by saying you only have to pay 
interest one year, keep it at the same interest rate, keep it at the 
same interest rate for everybody — now if you stretch it out for 
some that can’t pay, my only point is, it’s going to cost them more 
money because you’ve rescheduled it and they’ve got to pay more 
interest because they’re doing it more years, not because of the 
level of the interest rate, but because of the number of years they 
have to pay the interest. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — You’re not answering my question. My question 
is . . . Let me put it quite simply. Will the interest rate, will the 
interest rate go beyond 6 per cent, Mr. Minister, even though the 
loan would be paid back in three years, or whether the loan’s paid 
back in five years, or whether the loan’s paid back in 10 years? 
will the interest rate remain at 6 per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that’s what I’m trying 
to describe to the hon. member. I think he believes that the only 
way that you pay more interest is if somebody raises the interest 
rate. And that’s not the case. But I could just describe it to him. 
 
If you had a 10-year program at 6 per cent, and if you paid off 
your loan in the first year, you pay less interest to the bank or to 
whoever than you did if you had to pay it over 10 years at 6 per 
cent. Okay? So what I’m saying is that if we extend it from three 
years to six years, or to five years, at 6 per cent, the people that 
pay and pay and pay, over time are going to pay more interest. 
Okay? It’s my intention to leave it at the same interest rate for 
everybody. It’s at 6 per cent right over the three years. As it was 
now extended to four, we left it at 6 per cent. I mean how much 
clearer can I get? It stayed the same. 
  



 
October 31, 1987 

 

3777 
 

It’s three, it’s six, or it’s 10 years, it’s at 6 per cent money, but the 
people who take longer to pay will have to pay more money to . . . 
What else can I say? It’s at 6 per cent now. When we extended it 
the last time, we left it at 6 per cent. As we extend it into the future 
and leave it at 6 per cent, those that pay longer are going to have to 
pay more interest, even at 6 per cent. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, here we go again. You won’t tell 
the farmers of this province whether they’re going to have to pay 6 
per cent or 10 per cent or 14 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — They have to know. They have to be able to plan 
their future and you won’t tell them. so I’m reading between the 
lines, Mr. Minister, that you will be increasing the rate from 6 per 
cent. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well you’ll tell them that anyway, so what 
the hell’s the difference? 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, I will tell them that, Mr. Minister, because 
you won’t tell me any different and I’ve given you ample 
opportunity to do so. so we’ll just leave that one and we’ll have to 
assume that the farmers of this province are going to pay a higher 
interest rate than 6 per cent on their production loan. And if that’s 
not true, Mr. Minister, I invite you to get up and tell me it’s not 
true. And if it is true, I assume you will sit in your seat and say 
nothing. 
 
Mr. Minister, last year the interest was paid by most farmers. I 
would ask you, in how many cases was the interest not paid? And 
in how many cases have you proceeded with legal action in those 
cases? 
 
(1100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Approximately 4 per cent of the individuals 
who took the production loan did not make some of the provisions 
of the pay-back. Some were more or less, but about 4 per cent 
didn’t make any significant contribution. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Could you give me the numbers, Mr. Minister? 
How many farmers paid nothing on their production loan? How 
many in arrears? And how many have you proceeded with legal 
action against? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The information I have here with respect to 
arrears, for the hon. member is, as of August 31, 1987, 6.24 per 
cent of the loans, or 7.59 per cent of the loan volume, is in default. 
If I can give you three categories of how people might be in 
default, the delinquency under this program represents individuals 
who may have the following circumstances: have less than the 
required cultivated acreage upon which the loan was based — so a 
mistake’s made; have failed to sign a payment extension form and 
have not made the one-third principal payment — so just failed to 
sign the form and just didn’t communicate; or have failed to make 
all or part of their interest payment on the production loan. Some, 
for example, have made partial interest payments as we  

postponed the interest payments. So, again, as of August 31, 1987, 
6.24 per cent of the loans were in default. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, I asked for the actual number of 
cases. When I’m finished my comments, I would ask you to give 
me the actual number of cases, the number of loans that were let, 
and the number of loans that are not current or in arrears. I assume 
the 6.2 per cent . . . I would like to know the number. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, just so I have it straight, if a person has signed 
a document saying that they have an orderly payment of the 
interest, they are also included in that 6.2 per cent. If a person has 
made no attempt to pay, they are included in that 6.2 per cent. Is 
that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well just a calculation of 6.24 per cent of 
the loans on 57,000 loans is about 3,500 farmers who have been in 
default in one fashion or another of the three things that I have 
listed in terms of the ways that you can be in default: not making 
the total or large enough payment on the interest, or not 
renegotiating, or having mistakes made with respect to the land 
and the amount of money. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Just so I’m quite clear on this. You said, if they 
didn’t make a large enough payment on their interest. Does that 
mean that if they have arranged an orderly payment of the interest 
from last year, that they have not kept up to that deal, or does it 
mean . . . does it include those farmers who have made an 
agreement for an orderly repayment of interest and have met the 
criteria in the loan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — If they’ve met their obligations, I mean, if 
they’ve rescheduled it and met it, they’re not in the defaults. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Premier, I would then would ask: how 
many are making orderly payments of the interest over a 
scheduled period, as opposed to those who have made their 
interest payment when it came due? So I would like to know, on 
top of these 3,500 in default, how many are making an orderly 
repayment? How many are just paying the interest over a period of 
time, rather than paying the interest in a lump sum when it came 
due? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — When we postponed the payment and 
people only had to pay interest, there was still 10 per cent that 
prepaid principal, paid principal or paid part of the principal. I 
mean, they’re under no obligation to because we extended the 
program so you just had to pay the interest. 
 
About 10 per cent paid the principal regardless, and then the 
remaining 90 per cent broke into the categories where most of 
them paid interest, and then 6 per cent of the entire bunch, you 
know, had some sort of problem with respect to default. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — I just want to get this clear. We had 6.2 per cent 
in default — we’ve established that. And I may be a little thick 
sometimes, but I also thought that there was a number of people 
who have made arrangements to repay their interest over a period 
of time, and they were not included in that default number. So 
what I want to know 
  



 
October 31, 1987 

 

3778 
 

is, how many . . . is that 6 per cent you mentioned the additional 
number that is making their interest payments over a period of 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Maybe this will help. There are, of the 
3,500 that have a problem, there are about 945 that have had their 
payments rescheduled. So they’re included, I guess you can say, in 
that 6 per cent. So that’s what you were looking at. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, we have about 3,500 people in 
arrears with their interest. Will that process continue? These 
farmers have to know now what will happen to them if you extend 
the period of the loan. They have to know what they’re going to be 
looking at. Will they be put back into the, sort of, the pot of 
everyone when this loan is . . . if you restructure this loan to 
everyone, or will they be handled separately than the rest of the 
people involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well of the three categories, if they’ve got 
the wrong kind of acreage, they’ve got a problem, and I think 
you’d appreciate that. If they’ve failed to sign up for any sort of 
extension form, then they’re, you know, they’re not trying, and it’s 
pretty difficult to deal with them. 
 
But if they’ve just failed to make part or all of their interest 
payment on the production loan and it was rescheduled for another 
year or for five years or 10 years, then we would put them into that 
rescheduling program and allocate it appropriately. 
 
If they haven’t made any payments and you extent it for a few 
years, then you just work it over a regular basis on an annual 
payment. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I want to describe to you how I 
think this program’s operating, and I want you to correct me 
where you think I’m wrong. I don’t pretend to represent a rural 
riding; we do, however, have a rural practice, so I see this as a 
lawyer. 
 
In my view, people who are indebted, who are having trouble with 
the agricultural credit corporation, are a lot worse off than if they’d 
borrowed the money from the local credit union or the Royal 
Bank. You are, Mr. Minister, in my view, suing people who are in 
arrears. 
 
Let me go back one step. If you were in arrears and you’ve got a 
problem, then the interest rate goes up. The last thing that farmer 
needs is to have the interest rate go from 6 to, I gather, 11 per cent. 
So you add to the woe of this person. 
 
Then the next thing you do, Mr. Minister, is you’re suing them. It 
appears to me you’re suing everybody in arrears. And every 
lawyer who has a rural practice has several of these clients in their 
office who are trying to ward this off. Mr. Minister, you seem to 
be blindly suing people who are in arrears without regard to 
whether or not they have the means to pay, will pay. You just 
seem to send the whole . . . as soon as the loan gets into arrears, 
you send it off to the law firm. 
 
And as I say, Mr. Minister, you’re doing a great disservice 

to the agricultural industry. They’d have been far better off if 
they’d have gone to the Royal Bank and borrowed the money. At 
least the local manager exercises some discretion, knows whether 
the person’s honest, whether the trouble’s temporary. This doesn’t 
happen with this program. Some letter comes out of Swift Current 
to a law firm in Regina; a letter comes out of the law firm in 
Regina to the farmer, Coronach or Cupar or wherever it is — he’s 
had nobody local to deal with. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, the collection of the arrears on this loan is 
aggressive, it’s simplistic, and you’re driving people off the land. 
It seems to be some sort of view in Tory ranks that the farmers 
who are in trouble are bad managers, and therefore the industry 
would be healthier without them. Nothing could be further from 
the truth, Mr. Minister. 
 
The clients who come into my office, who have trouble with the 
agricultural credit corporation, aren’t the older retired farmer. 
They’re the younger farmer on whom the future of this industry 
depends. And I have had more clients in my office with statements 
of claim from agricultural credit corporation than I have from all 
the other lending institutions combined. 
 
It’s just a blind, bureaucratic system. They’ve fallen into arrears. 
Somebody in Swift Current sends a letter to a law firm in Regina, 
the law firm in Regina sends another letter out, and the farmer has 
no one with whom he can really deal. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’re pushing farmers off the land. I have one 
client, who will go unnamed, but this was the straw on the camel’s 
back — it wasn’t the beginning of his problems. Mother Nature 
was probably the beginning of his problems. But this is the straw 
that’s going to push him off the land, and there’s simply no 
discretion exercised. 
 
You got your forms, you fill them out, and you pay it. If you can’t 
fill them out and pay it, then they get a judgment. And I think most 
rural solicitors have the same experience. They’re getting more 
farmers coming in through the front door with these statements of 
claim from the agriculture credit corporation than all the other 
lending institutions combined. 
 
And it’s a serious problem. A serious problem created, I think, 
partially by your belief that the people who are in trouble are bad 
managers and the whole industry would be better off without 
them. It’s also because you can’t properly administer the program. 
You got the people in Swift Current who have no contact with the 
farmers, the law firm in Regina who aren’t being paid to solve the 
problem, and the farmers all over the province. If you set up a 
different system so that there’d be some local discretion involved, 
it wouldn’t be nearly as serious. 
 
But this, Mr. Minister, is a very serious problem in rural 
Saskatchewan. And I think any solicitor who has a rural practice 
would vouch for that. It is a very serious problem. It’s very poorly 
administered, and it’s causing some real problems. And it’s going 
to drive some farmers off the land. 
  



 
October 31, 1987 

 

3779 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well let me say just a couple of things. One 
is, it would be even more serious if we didn’t have $1 billion out 
to help farmers. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s not relevant. It’s there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Let me finish, okay? I mean, because . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’m just giving you a hand. Try to keep 
you back on the question so we don’t . . . 
 
(1115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I’ll get right to the question. 
 
It is helpful, and every organization will tell you, it’s helpful to 
have that $1 billion out at 6 per cent money. I mean, SARM and 
other people are saying, thank goodness it was there. Fair enough. 
 
Secondly, the problem of high interest rates. The hon. member 
knows when he was a cabinet minister . . . The problem today in 
agriculture is, when interest rates were 21 per cent, the NDP didn’t 
do a think to help folks. And just when they were getting going . . . 
21 per cent interest rates and not a dime. I mean, you have 
relatives who farm and you went through that, and your law firm 
must have saw that. Well I guess you were a cabinet minister then. 
But at 21 per cent interest rates, there was no 6 per cent money for 
anybody. You just kept hitting them and hitting them and hitting 
them. 
 
And now, if I could say to the hon. member, we’ve got NDP law 
firms representing . . . and you’re defending today, saying, better 
have the banks lend them the money than have the government 
give them 6 per cent money. NDP law firms are defending the 
banks . . .(inaudible interjection). . . No, but you’re going to get 
caught in your own petard here young fellow because the NDP 
lawyers are defending banks against farmers, and farmers are 
talking about it across the province. 
 
So first of all, when you raised this 21 per cent interest rates under 
the NDP administration — and not a dime — and so when we got 
a billion dollars out at 6 per cent, and recommended by the wheat 
pool and other, you’re saying, by gosh it isn’t enough, or the 
payments aren’t long enough . . .(inaudible interjection). . . All 
right, but you raised 20 per cent interest rate, and 6 per cent, 
there’s quite a difference. 
 
Under your administration it was over 20 per cent to farmers; 
under this administration it’s 6. Let’s just make that clear. 
Sustained years of 20 per cent interest rates have caused the 
problem today as it does in terms of the deficit — as it does in 
terms of the deficit. If you hadn’t borrowed all that money and be 
charged 20 per cent interest rates on the potash money, we 
wouldn’t have a deficit today. 
 
And you’re sitting over there saying 20 per cent interest rates 
wasn’t the problem, and now you stand up and defend the banks 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . Well I must be touching a nerve 
when you’re sitting there defending banks at 21 per cent interest 
rates, and your 

law firm defends them today — NDP law firms, okay. 
 
I will say, 6 per cent money and a billion dollars is not perfect. 
And as I said to the hon. member from Humboldt, we will review 
that as we have in the past. They didn’t have to make any principal 
payments, isn’t that true? No principal payments, just interest at 6 
per cent, better than any bank rate they’ve got. That’s true, isn’t it? 
And it’s better than any 21 per cent interest rates that the NDP 
offered, and that’s true. 
 
So you tell me about your problem about money out there in 
defending farmers and providing lower interest rates. And you say, 
well, Mr. Premier, it’s not perfect. Well you’ve probably got that 
right, it isn’t perfect, but it is a quantum leap ahead of what was 
there before and at any other interest rate. 
 
And clearly, and you’ve had enough experience in government — 
I mean, years and years as a cabinet minister - to stand there and 
defend banks at 21 per cent interest rates. I mean, you’ve been 
there, you’ve been there. So you may be trying to . . . Look, the 
production loan program is a lot of money out and we’re trying to 
schedule the payments to be fair. And we know that there’s 
problems with it. It’s better to have the money than not have the 
money out there. 
 
The 6 per cent . . . we said, don’t make a principal payment, just 
interest, and we’ve done that. And we’re considering other 
alternatives because the wheat pool, the opposition and others are 
looking at alternatives as well, and we will look at them. 
 
So, I mean, we can have a long song and dance about your law 
firm defending farmers against high interest rates, and that’ll get 
us no place because we’ve been there for years and we understand 
the two different philosophies with respect to interest rate 
protection. We protect them and you did not, and you’re on the 
record for that. So your law firm is in some trouble now because 
people can’t make their payments. I think you better defend 
farmers rather than bankers. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, this is a 
serious issue. It deserves something better than the intellectual 
dishonesty in which you just engaged, and that’s all it was. I didn’t 
say that, and that is not the issue. The issue, Mr. Premier, is that 
your administration is woefully insensitive, it is totally inadequate 
to deal with this problem. 
 
Let’s just go back and talk about the $1 billion. It was needed, but 
you were warned at the time that another $1 billion in debt wasn’t 
going to make the problem any easier, and it hasn’t. And now 
you’ve got farmers, Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, who can deal with 
the credit union because there’s a manager there. They can deal 
with the bank because there’s somebody locally. But you have a 
bureaucratic set-up which results in everybody in default getting 
sued, Mr. Minister. The problem with this whole program is it is 
so badly administered, Mr. Minister. 
 
The farmer starts with a problem — he can’t make his payments. 
You add to that problem by increasing the interest rate from 6 to 
11 per cent, and it makes an awful 
  



 
October 31, 1987 

 

3780 
 

difference to the farmer. And then you make his problem that 
much worse by automatically suing him. Somewhere in the 
department there’s a little book which says, give him the letter, 
give him 30 days, and then give him a statement of claim. And 
that’s your system, Mr. Minister, and it is doing a lot of damage. 
 
Mr. Minister, I tell you, unless and until you set up a more 
sensitive administration, Mr. Minister, you’re going to be the . . . 
the agricultural credit corporation, at the moment, is the single 
most serious credit problem that the farmers in rural Saskatchewan 
have, and I think most people who are familiar with rural 
Saskatchewan will vouch for that. 
 
That’s just happened this summer, but that’s the case. It’s the 
agricultural credit corporation which is breathing fire down the 
farmers’ necks this summer. 
 
And I suggest to you that you cease engaging in the intellectual 
dishonesty of putting words in my mouth which I didn’t say, and 
you deal with what is a very serious problem, that is, your own 
sorry administration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — We can differ . . . Let me put it in 
perspective. We will try to be as co-operative as possible with 
respect to the loans. Two-thirds of 1 per cent, two-thirds of 1 per 
cent of farmers are having legal problems in the production loan. 
Less than 1 per cent — okay? — two-thirds of 1 per cent are 
having legal problems. 
 
Now to put it in perspective, we are providing farmers, by just 
asking them to pay the interest this year, $38.338 million benefit. 
Payments in terms of the farm purchase program benefits are 
$19.15 million. That’s $56 million in interest benefits this year 
alone, which is almost equivalent to your entire agriculture budget 
in 1981-82. So in terms of interest protection and relief, we’re 
providing the same amount of money right now, this year, on 
interest rate protection, as you spent in your entire agriculture 
budget when the interest rates were running at 21 per cent. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You might try living in the present and not 
the past. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I know you’re afraid of the past, 
because you’re responsible for the problems of 21 per cent interest 
rate. And you’re responsible for the deficit because you bought the 
potash mines and never paid for them, and we’re paying the 
interest. Well those two things are true. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’ll give you 100 bucks for every farmer 
who believes that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — You would give me $100. Well let’s get this 
on the record. You’re going to give $100 . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order, please. I think we should give 
the minister the opportunity to answer without continuous 
interruptions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The hon. member says that we should be 
more sensitive with respect to those that are in arrears. I will say I 
appreciate his concern, and I will take 

it at face value that we should be as co-operative as we can and as 
careful as we can in dealing with people who have financial 
difficulty. 
 
I just say in defence, we have $56 million out protecting them 
right now. Fifty-seven thousand farmers are receiving $1.1 billion, 
and we haven’t even asked for a payment except for interest — no 
principal. 
 
So I know that it’s difficult for some, but two-thirds of 1 per cent 
have legal problems on the production loan program. I mean, that 
isn’t unreasonable even for any financial institution. Look at the 
credit unions or look at the banks or look at others — very, very 
big problem. In this one, I mean, if it’s only two-thirds of 1 per 
cent that has a legal problem and we’re writing down interest to 6 
per cent . . . I mean, it’s not perfect but it’s a major contribution. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, I want 
just not to go through the details and the philosophy behind 
whether the production loan should have been targeted — we’ve 
gone through that — but today in this Assembly you’re indicating 
that you’re looking at extending the period of time of repayment. 
And what I’m saying to you here is that you say that two-thirds of 
1 per cent is all that are legal actions. I think that’s what you 
indicated. 
 
The problem that I see with your approach and your 
forward-looking administration of the program is that those who 
need the help the most, what you have done with them, you’ve 
said all they had to do was pay the interest. And that’s fair enough. 
I appreciate that. But there are those farmers, and the crisis is 
great, and what you have done is about 400 . . . The last figure I 
saw, close to 400 were being . . . Legal action was being 
commenced. 
 
Now take it this way. If you then consider renegotiating that loan 
over an extended period, say at the same percentage, what you 
have done is two standards. Those who are in the worst financial 
shape, you have taken legal action. That’s what you’ve done. And 
you said they’re cut out of any possibility of renegotiating it over a 
longer period. I don’t think that’s fair. Because that’s what you 
told my colleague. You said those that the legal action had been 
taken and they’re into the higher interest rate, those who needed it 
most, and if you have subsequently renegotiated, you won’t 
include those which you have already commenced legal action. 
 
That’s concern that I have with it because if you’re going to 
renegotiate the term of the loan over a longer period of time, then 
it seems to me that those who needed it most should have been 
given the first opportunity, not the court action. And that’s what 
you did, you gave them the court action — to those who are in the 
most need — completely demonstrating my fact that when you put 
out the production loan you gave it equally to all, and all didn’t 
need it equally. And by the very demonstration of that, what you 
have is, you’re suing 400 farmers and they’re going to wipe them 
off the farms —no doubt about it — because you won’t even let 
them back into the renegotiated production loan which you are 
indicating. That’s what you said, and I don’t think that’s fair. 
  



 
October 31, 1987 

 

3781 
 

I think what you should have done is look at the assessment of the 
different positions that farmers are in. I think if there’s a third that 
are about to lose their farms, they might need a renegotiating term 
somewhat longer than those that have no problem. But you won’t 
stand up here and defend those who have the major debt. The only 
one conclusion is you’re going to let and wipe out the one-third of 
the farmers or more under the programs that you put in here in the 
production loan. 
 
And so I say to you, Mr. Premier, if you are going to extend the 
loan, why are you proceeding with court case and actions against 
the poorest of our farmers in the worst financial position? It’s not 
consistent. If you are going to renegotiate it, why don’t you cease 
these actions, put them into the renegotiated loan — all of the 
farmers, indeed, those who are poorest off? Will you consider 
doing that - suspending your legal actions, setting up if you’re to 
renegotiate the loan, and allowing all of them the equal 
opportunity when they renegotiate? And secondly, will you give 
special terms to those who are in greatest difficulty as opposed to 
those who are in good shape? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I will say to the hon. 
member that those that have either, or would like to contact the 
government and just say they’re interested in a rescheduling, I 
mean that’s what we’re after. 
 
It’s the people that don’t even apply for rescheduling and won’t 
come into consideration or — let me just make this clear for the 
hon. member — those that didn’t give us the right information in 
the loan to start with, they said they had more acreage than they 
had. 
 
And most of the 394 that we’ve got these problems with didn’t 
give us the right information . . .(inaudible interjection). . . No, no, 
no, come on, they did not. They gave us too much acreage; they 
said they had too large an acreage. And we’re saying, let’s get this 
accurate. Okay? I mean, we can pretty easily measure the acreage 
they farm. 
 
So we’re saying, on those cases, I mean at least come in and 
reschedule your note, or at least work out a payment. And I agree 
with the hon. member. Let’s work it out so that they can pay it. 
But if they won’t talk to you, if they’ve given you the wrong 
information, if they got too much money because their application 
was wrong, I mean we have to talk to them. And we have to say, 
look, come on, we’ve got to straighten this out. We can’t allow 
people to get the wrong amount of money. You wouldn’t endorse 
that — I don’t think you would. 
 
(1130) 
 
I mean if you get $25 an acre, then you’ve got to have the right 
acres. If they got $40 an acre and somebody didn’t, you’d be on 
my case for that. So it’s got to be right and it has to be accurate. In 
most of these 394 cases that we’re talking about, they gave us the 
wrong information and they’ve got too much money. Now we 
should expect that back. 
 
And I’ll be glad to work out a rescheduling, but we can’t 

let it go because it’s wrong and it’s not fair to all the rest of them. 
The 99 and one-third per cent that did it right cannot be hurt 
because we’ve got two-thirds of 1 per cent that perhaps didn’t 
provide at least some of the information in an accurate sense. 
 
So I don’t want to argue with you. I agree with you. We’ll 
reschedule. I mean that’s what we’ve been trying to do, to get 
people to talk about, let’s work it together. That’s what we’ve 
done with even changing the principal to interest. 
 
So don’t leave with the impression, please, that we won’t talk to 
people or reschedule loans. I mean that’s what we’ve been doing, 
and we did it for everybody the first year and we’re still prepared 
to look at it. But people have to co-operate. And I think, even from 
a legal point of view, they have to be accurate and they have to be 
fair, and you have to come to some consensus on how you’re 
going to repay and restructure a loan. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well in respect to your information, I just want it 
accurately provided. Of the 394 that you commenced legal action, 
you say it was essentially a majority was wrong information. could 
you break it down for me and provide me with the information? 
Out of the 394, how many of those was wrong information; how 
many of those are . . . legal action has been commenced as a result 
of no payment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I could put it this way, that over half of 
them have a combination of those three problems that are 
rescheduled, or haven’t made any payment sat all, or have the 
wrong acreage, or the combination of the three things. Now I’m 
advised I don’t have the breakdown of individuals. Some 
individuals have all three problems, some individuals have two out 
of the three, some have one out of the three problems, that put 
them in default. And I don’t have the breakdown of the individuals 
that have all three problems, individuals that have the two 
problems, individuals that have the one problem. Out of the 394, 
it’s not available today. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I think it should be available because it’s a 
very important problem. and I would request that you provide that 
information, and you can put them in different categories because 
I want that information. 
 
I want to ask the . . . Because of the crisis that we have in 
agriculture, Mr. Premier, I’m wondering what is your intention in 
respect to The Farm land Security Act, and whether you intend to 
have it continue to function, because I know that there are millions 
of acres held by the financial institutions, or at least the prospect is 
that about a million acres will be held by financial institutions. The 
Farm Land Security Act certainly provided some delay, some 
protection. And I’m wondering if you could indicate whether you 
intend to continue The Farm Land Security Act or will you be 
following your cousins in Ottawa, where they lifted the 
moratorium on foreclosure in respect to the Farm Credit 
Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well as the hon. member knows, when we 
extended it the last time through legislation we left the possibility, 
through order in council, to extend it for two more years. And it is 
now before cabinet and we will be examining that, as we do the 
production loan 
  



 
October 31, 1987 

 

3782 
 

program, and in the light of several other financial pieces of 
information like the grain stabilization payments and the 
deficiency payments. So it’s part and parcel of the decisions that 
are before cabinet with respect to timing and amount, and whether 
or not that particular piece of legislation is extended into 1988, and 
indeed into 1989. 
 
As the hon. member knows, we extended it out one more year the 
last time, so that if you could look at the history of it, we have 
been quite prepared one, to introduce it, and two, to extend it. And 
it’s before cabinet now, and we will make the decision there in the 
light of several other things that are being discussed with farmers 
in tour and with farm organizations, and in the light of financial 
revenues that are coming in from various kinds of payments. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, I find that hard to believe, that in 
the crisis that we have in agriculture today — the number of 
people that are in arrears, and actions are either . . . they’re just 
farming the land without actions being taken by the financial 
institutions — that if The Farm Land Security Act was needed last 
year, it was needed the year before. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t think you have an option, because I think the 
financial position of farmers today are worse than when you 
invoked it. But I don’t think you can deny that. And you’re sitting 
there saying now that you’re going to open the floodgates of 
foreclosures by putting aside this Act. I don’t think there’s an 
option, Mr. Premier, and you’re saying that there is. 
 
What are the other considerations for not invoking that Act this 
year when the financial crisis on agriculture has reached the 
proportion, as you know, far beyond what it was the years that you 
had The Farm Land Security Act in place? So what options are 
you looking at? What considerations could possibly prevent you? 
Why haven’t you in fact indicated here today, why haven’t you 
invoked The Farm Land Security Act? Because the farming 
community is in much worse shape . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s invoked; it’s in power; it’s an Act. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, and are you extending it? That’s what I’m 
asking you, and you say you’re considering. I don’t think there’s 
anything to consider. Why can’t you stand up here and say to the 
farming community that, I’m not going to let the financial 
institution take your land away; I’m going to defend the farmers? 
Why don’t you say that? 
 
But you got another scheme, and we’ll be getting to it, and that’s 
the equity finance corporation for your real estate and your doctors 
and outside investors. That’s the scheme that you’re going to do, 
but direct help to the farmers that are on the land, you’re hesitant; I 
know that, and we’ll get into the farm land equity financing 
corporation and some of the details. 
 
What I want to ask you, in respect to the committee that you had 
of your caucus last year, just before the election I guess, the input 
cost committee . . . You had a committee of, I think . . . I don’t 
know the make-up of it. You can give me the make-up of that 
committee that went around the province. I would like to indicate 
whether a report was 

prepared and whether that report is public and whether you’ll table 
it. And also I want to know what costs were associated and who 
paid them in respect to that committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — There were five members on the committee, 
including two cabinet ministers. The report is public. It was 
presented to the Standing Committee on Agriculture in Ottawa. 
We will provide you with a document as quickly as we can. And I 
don’t have the cost but we’ll get it as quickly as we can. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you very much. In respect to the MLAs, I 
want a breakdown, whether they were legislative secretaries, all of 
them. And I do need to have the cost, who covered it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The members on the committee were the 
MLAs from Redberry, Morse, and Kelvington-Wadena, and they 
were legislative secretaries. And the two cabinet ministers were 
the members from Melfort and the member from Kelsey-Tisdale. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And in respect to that committee, were any 
payments and expenses of the MLAs, from the government side, 
covered directly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The legislative secretaries’ expenses were 
paid by their departments. And if they were responsible, say, to the 
water corporation or to the minister in charge of water, then that 
would be the department that paid. And the departmental 
expenditures were paid for the cabinet ministers from their 
departments and their portfolios. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And the MLAs, their expenses and/or per diems? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well the three of them were legislative 
secretaries, and they were paid for . . . their expenses were paid by 
their departments. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Okay, I . . . And on the input committee then, just 
so I’m sure, two were cabinet ministers — and I can understand 
that — and three MLAs and each and every one of them were 
legislative secretaries. Can you give me, Mr. Minister, the 
breakdown of the expenses in respect to the total operation of the 
input committee? Because it was ordained, it seems to me, by your 
department, commissioned by your department, and I wonder if 
you could provide me with a breakdown of the total expenses. Not 
just a global figure, but I’d like a breakdown of the total expenses. 
Not just a global figure, but I’d like a breakdown in respect to the 
various items, the rooms and meals and travel and those types of 
things. Can you provide that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well not today. We’d have to go to 
department by department by department and get the information 
from perhaps half a dozen different departments as it was allocated 
by minister and legislative secretary by department, and we’d have 
to bring that together. This is Agriculture estimates, and we will 
get in touch with the various departments that paid for the 
expenditures of their appropriate people. 
  



 
October 31, 1987 

 

3783 
 

Mr. Koskie: — I would appreciate that. I would have thought 
that, being the minister commissioning, you would have had that 
information. But I appreciate that that is not something new that 
you don’t have the information. 
 
On the equity finance committee that you have commissioned 
now, you have another road show. And could you give me the 
make-up of that? Have you any approximation of the cost of that? 
And also indicate in respect to the MLAs who are not in fact 
members, legislative secretaries and/or cabinet ministers, the 
proposed method of payment in respect to their expenses. 
 
(1145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, that committee and that 
process is in the process of being determined and there may be 
several MLAs on it, and they . . .(inaudible interjection) . . . Well 
they may vary. So it’s up to the cabinet minister . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well if you know who they are, then I don’t have 
to give them to you. But I’m saying, Mr. Chairman, that it can 
vary because I’ve made the decision that it can vary. 
 
So if there are names of MLAs who will be travelling across the 
province, I’ll say now, if you want the news this morning, the 
news this morning is that there may be additional members or 
there may be substitution of members depending on where we go 
and depending on the interests, whether it’s a livestock person or 
whether it’s a grain person or whether we’re in an industry of 
mixed farming or an area of that. I mean, we want some 
flexibility. 
 
In terms of how they will be paid, I don’t know today how we’re 
going to allocate that, but I certainly will have to design a 
mechanism that is appropriate to pay for cabinet ministers, the 
appropriate expenditures; and parliamentary secretaries or 
legislative secretaries, the appropriate expenditures; and MLAs. 
And they all have different rules, and we will apply the 
appropriate rules to the appropriate people. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, we’ve 
certainly heard a lot of rhetoric coming out of your side today 
when talking about the past, but we don’t seem to have many 
solutions for the future, and that’s what farmers need. You have to 
let farmers know what’s going on and you’re not doing that. 
you’re withholding information, putting the instability . . . adding 
to the instability of the agricultural community. 
 
As I’ve said, we’ve taken one year to find out that the program . . . 
that there was going to be no forgiveness of the production loan. 
We have taken a full year to find out that the 6 per cent interest 
rate will be jacked up if you stretch it over a few years. 
 
You say, Mr. Minister, that you have less than 1 per cent or 
two-thirds of 1 per cent of the farmers in trouble with the 
production loan. Well I say to you, Mr. Minister, that’s simply a 
figure. There are a lot more than that, when you start calling in that 
loan, and you know there’s going to be a lot more than that who 
are not going to be able to repay it, a lot more than 1 per cent who 
are in trouble. 

And add on top of that another aspect of insecurity, and that is, 
The Farm Land Security Act. Why can’t you tell the farmers 
what’s going to happen with The Farm Land Security Act? They 
have a right to know. And I’m sure all your rhetoric about 1982 
and before is of great concern to them at this time, but I say it 
isn’t. They’re concerned about what you are going to do with the 
problem that’s facing this agriculture community. 
 
If you don’t extend The Farm land Security Act, this barrage of 
foreclosures . . . a barrage of foreclosures will occur. And just let 
me say this: when that happens and the banks take over the land, 
that fits mighty handily into your whole scheme of equity 
financing because the banks will own the land and they will be 
able to put that as an asset into the corporation. 
 
So I am sitting in back in waiting to see if you have the gumption 
to stand up and maintain that moratorium, or if you’re going to let 
the farmers’ land slide into the hands of the banks so the banks can 
have that equity to pump into a corporation — equity finance 
corporation — so that they can make more money on it. We’ll see 
if you’re standing up for the farmers or the bankers. 
 
While I’m talking about the equity financing program, Mr. 
Minister, I would like to know from you what your idea is with 
respect to equity financing. I would like you just to briefly outline 
the major components of an equity finance corporation. I would 
like you to briefly outline the need of the corporation, and who 
you think the corporation will most . . . benefit most from it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member was 
with me yesterday for a couple of days with the other members of 
the agriculture community to review all the financial 
opportunities, problems, and new ideas that are before Canadians, 
and indeed, Americans. In fact, Australia was there to represent 
their views on what we might be able to do. 
 
I can think it’s fair to report — and the hon. member can give his 
summary of what he thought was outlined — but we discussed 
everything from moratoriums, to rescheduling, to deficiency 
payments, to new kinds of equity financing to get money and cash 
in the place of debt, and looked at several alternatives. We did 
review the Australian alternative, the New Zealand proposal, 
what’s going on in the concept by the credit union here in 
Saskatchewan, by the Farm Credit Corporation, and several 
alternatives that farmers could review, and then they were 
discussed. 
 
I think it’s fair to say that most farmers there recognized that if the 
financial institutions, and particularly the banks, have more and 
more of the farm, that the banks’ head offices don’t happen to be 
in Saskatchewan. They are in Toronto, most of them, or certainly 
down East. And the financial institutions from down East are 
going to have a larger and larger share of the land here in the 
province of Saskatchewan as we move farther and farther into the 
debt problem, unless we do something about it. 
 
And so they are asking what possible alternatives could we 
design? And I was very careful to say, farmers should 
  



 
October 31, 1987 

 

3784 
 

suggest what they think is possible. And one of things that are 
being considered by the Credit Union Central, which gave a very 
good presentation as you know, and the Farm Credit Corporation, 
is that maybe we can get some of the savings we have here, and 
some of the pension money, and some of the cash in the province 
of Saskatchewan and in Canada, invested into agriculture, so it 
isn’t just the banks that own the land, that are from Toronto but, in 
fact, Saskatchewan people could invest in agriculture here, and 
relieve some of the debt, and provide lower interest rates to 
farmers, and be a partner with the farmers because right now the 
only partner we have is the financial institution, and the financial 
institution is even going to have more land. 
 
So I know, philosophically, that you would rather have the banks 
from Toronto have control over all this than have anybody in 
Saskatchewan invest in it. 
 
But I would think, at least, for the general public, and if I could get 
the attention from the member from Regina Rosemont, maybe 
he’d learn something about agriculture, the financial institutions 
that lend money . . . Mr. Chairman, the financial institutions that 
lend money to farmers in Saskatchewan have their head office 
outside of Saskatchewan. And I want him to know that. 
 
And if he . . . If the NDP lawyers are going to defend banks from 
Toronto against farmers, and they do, and they do. NDP lawyers, 
NDP law firms defending banks right across Saskatchewan, 
defending them against farmers. And they’re saying no, we can’t 
let Saskatchewan people with their savings and their pension 
funds, or Canadians with savings and pension funds invest in 
agriculture in Saskatchewan, but we let banks from Toronto do it. 
But you can’t let other Canadians or Saskatchewan . . .Then 
they’re saying they will defend the banks, and their record in 
agriculture will be just where it’s been for the last 10, 20, 30 years 
— 10, 20, 30 years — 20 per cent interest rates. The NDP said, no 
help, we’ll just defend the banks. 
 
I will point out, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, that we reviewed all 
the options. And we’re going to be taking this committee around 
talking to farmers, and they can advise us the kinds of things they 
believe would be appropriate to help them restructure their debt, to 
get some cash instead of just debt, so that in fact they can own the 
farm, pass it on from one generation to another, so that in fact 
young people can retire and young people can have access to 
money, and in fact the ownership can stay in the province of 
Saskatchewan and not be concentrated as it is today by the 
financial institutions some place in Toronto or Montreal or other 
places outside the province. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, that was a lot of rhetoric, not 
much substance, and it totally ignored my questions. So I’ll just 
take it one step at a time. Do you, Mr. Minister, agree with the 
equity financing proposal put forward by Peat Marwick in 
Edmonton, a proposal that you paid for? Do you agree with the 
substance of that report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I will say, Mr. Chairman, that the report put 
forward by Peat Marwick to us was to examine the possibilities of 
allowing money to be invested in agriculture to remove some of 
the debt. The report given 

by the credit union offices across Saskatchewan and Credit Union 
Central, the report given by the Farm Credit Corporation on 
providing joint ventures, agricultural people investing in 
agriculture, non-agriculture people providing some equity as 
opposed to the debt, and the suggestions and the operations of 
these kinds of corporations in Australia, New Zealand, all 
presented — all presented — some interesting possibilities for 
farm families facing a burdensome debt that they can’t get out 
from under. 
 
The point was made, more and more debt isn’t going to solve their 
problem. We can restructure some, but if we can replace some of 
that debt with cash in a partnership, a new joint venture, and still 
leave the farmer the option to own the farm and to take hold of it, 
then, Mr. Chairman, we’re going to explore those alternatives with 
farmers. 
 
So I think all of them — all four or five of those reports that were 
given to us the other day —have potential for review. And we’re 
going to explain them to farmers and let the farmers decide. And 
for some it may be quite appropriate to have that loan which they 
are now burdened by replaced with some sort of cash so that they 
can reduce their interest payments and be able to own the farm 
over time as opposed to losing it to financial institutions, banks, or 
credit unions. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, I can see we’re getting 
absolutely nowhere. Again, the people of this province don’t know 
what the Premier is thinking about equity financing. Just had a 
conference on it, and I just asked the question if you agreed with 
the presentation made that you commissioned, and you didn’t say 
anything. So we’re no wiser. I mean we heard all the rhetoric 
again and that’s great, and I’m sure that really puts a lot of comfort 
into the hearts of those farmers today, looking for something that 
they need in order to keep them on the land. I’m sure it really is 
reassuring. So I will not dwell on asking you again because I’m 
sure we’ll get the same speech. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think I would like to know, as a start, would you 
table or make available to me the cost of the Peat Marwick 
proposal, and the cost of the symposium, and the cost of your road 
show, when you have those costs available to you? Because I 
think it’s very important for the people to know what you’re going 
to pay, especially with the fact that you don’t know yourself what 
you’re going to be doing yet. So could you make that available to 
me when it’s ready. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — We’ll provide that information when it’s 
available. I don’t have the costs of the symposium, but I suspect 
we’ll have the costs for the Peat Marwick study, and we’ll provide 
that information. 
 
I just say to the hon. member, I mean, people want to know about 
alternative ways of providing some benefits to agriculture in terms 
of finance. That’s why we had the symposium. One of the 
concepts is equity financing, which means people can invest in 
agriculture, not just banks, but other people can invest, as they do 
with their savings and their pension plans. And we had a 
conference to review all those. I mean, that’s what you do when 
you want people’s input, is you invite them in. And we had cattle 
men and the wheat pool and banks and 
 



 
October 31, 1987 

 
 

 
3784-1 

 

[NOTE: Due to a typesetter malfunction, this portion of the 
verbatim was originally omitted at the end of page 3784. See 
corrigendum on page 3818.] 
 
 
credit unions and people from across the country. We brought 
them together and said, could we explore these opportunities? 
 
Now I don’t know how you could knock that. You were interested 
enough to attend yourself. So you may give it credit by showing 
up and saying, well here’s some good ideas; this wasn’t; 
combinations of these may be helpful for some people. So that’s 
why we do it and, I mean, that’s how we initiated The Farm Land 
Security Act, the 6 per cent money, the deficiency payments, the 
drought payments, was go to the farmers and ask them. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I’m saying that if we hold a symposium to 
provide new kinds of money to agriculture, the NDP’s against a 
symposium. I don’t know why you’d be against it. We had people 
there exploring all the possibilities. If we can get investment 
money, if we can get savings of other people, or retired farmers to 
invest in agriculture so that young people have less debt, and if 
they can get a reasonable return, that would be a good idea if there 
are ways to do that. We’re trying to get new money into 
agriculture to replace the debt. 
 
The NDP’s against that because they’re philosophically bound to 
the fact that it can only be banks. Well it doesn’t have to be just 
banks. It could be people like you and me, other farmers, people in 
the community — invest in agriculture. Well, Mr. Chairman, 
we’re prepared to look at those alternatives. And that’s how we’ve 
come up with the other programs that are popular and useful, by 
talking to people. That’s why we held the conference, that’s why 
we’ll hold hearings with farmers all across the province, to get 
their views and their suggestions how to design the programs. 
 
(1200) 
 





 
October 31, 1987 

 
 

 
3785 

 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, I think you’re being irrational. 
Sometimes you say that the NDP is tied to the government owning 
everything; now you say the NDP’s tied to the banks owning it. I 
mean, it’s totally irrational. 
 
And the problem is, the problem is that you don’t know what 
direction you’re going. And the common underlying theme of that 
whole conference was, open the borders; a buck is a buck; let’s get 
money from wherever we can. And we’ve heard from Australia. 
Australia came and said, here’s what we have — an equity 
financial proposal. 
 
But who do Australia allow in their program? They allow only 
areas with 15 per cent rainfall or greater, and they allow people 
only who have had a plus balance. They look at their records for 
three years and make sure that they’ve been making money or else 
they’re not allowed in the program. Is that what you’re saying 
you’re going to do in Saskatchewan? 
 
And also coming out of that symposium, a number . . . The 
majority of the people were saying, the bottom third or the 20 per 
cent, whoever’s in deep trouble, are gone. This program will not 
address their problems. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, if that’s the case, we also heard a speaker from 
Montana — Montana, who’s lost a huge number of their farmers. 
And they’re going . . . He was telling us, well we have the same 
problems. We have the same problems in Montana. 
 
So the whole argument about losing the third of the people is 
redundant because all you’re doing is cutting a third. When the 
next third get in trouble, you cut them. When the next third, you 
cut them, until you got a half a dozen farmers farming the country. 
Corporate farms. Large farms. And that’s the direction you’re 
going. And that’s what you got out of that symposium. 
 
So I tell you, Mr. Minister, we see a situation here with your 
symposium that you do not know the direction you’re going. 
You’re going to be picking and choosing the farmers who are 
allowed to go into an equity finance corporation, and you’re going 
to supply them with the money to expand, to buy up the land from 
those other third that are in trouble, so you’re promoting the large 
corporate farm. 
 
And I say that is not what we need. The social fabric of this 
province is family farms. The most efficient operation is a family 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The minister says the people don’t 
believe me. Well I am sure that you should know, if you’re in 
touch with the community, but obviously you’re not, because 
that’s what the people out there are saying, and you know it. But 
you’re going to go directly against that. 
 
And another one of the criteria that was involved in the 
symposium is: how do we convince the farmers that this is right? 
This is a major thing to convince them that they’ve got to be a 
large corporate landholder. So we’re going to go out in the 
community and we’re going to convince them, we’re going to 
have a campaign to convince them that this is right. 
 

What kind of responsible government management is that, Mr. 
Minister, to drop the bottom people who are in trouble, to expand 
those who are only the viable operators — to expand them, to bail 
out the banking community? To bring in foreign investment fits in 
quite nicely with your free trade when we asked you whether the 
foreign ownership of land was going to be changed. 
 
And here’s another thing: everyone in there said, if you’re going to 
have this type of a program you’ve got to get rid of the farm 
security Act. That’s very, very nice and tidy when you get rid of 
the farm security Act, to allow outside investment to invest in 
capital, in an equity financing corporation, not mentioning about 
the other people who may invest in land directly. That’s a tidy 
little package you’re putting together. 
 
And I’m telling you, the people of Saskatchewan will not accept it 
because the people of Saskatchewan will not accept it because the 
people of this province know that the best producer is the 
average-size producer on his own farm with his family, and you’re 
not addressing that problem. You’re taking it upon yourself to 
restructure the social fabric and the socio-economic infrastructure 
we have in this province. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I ask you, in the farm equity finance 
corporation, or whatever is set up, will you be changing the farm 
security Act, the farm ownership Act, or will you be leaving it the 
way it is now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, let me make it very 
clear. From any vantage point at all the member opposite must 
check with their now new spokesman in ag policy, Mr. Bob 
White, to find out if it’s going to be workable. Every NDP in the 
country is now listening to Bob White in agriculture policy, in 
trade policy, and so forth. 
 
And if you think, if you think Bob White is going to tell us what to 
do in agriculture, and tell us what to do in trade, and tell us what to 
do in oil, you’ve got another think coming. I mean, Bob White can 
go out and campaign in the Humboldt constituency all he likes, or 
he can go all over the province of Saskatchewan . . . I’ll tell you. 
I’ll tell you, bud, okay? I mean, he saying it would not . . . Trade 
would hurt agriculture. Trade would hurt agriculture, and he looks 
for example, and he says, well General Motors, American firm, 
has invested $4.8 billion in Oshawa in the last . . . since 1980, 4.8 
billion — two and a half billions in the last two years. And Bob 
White says, oh my gosh, we couldn’t have free trade with the 
United States because they’d invest American dollars across 
western Canada. 
 
Well who represents Oshawa? Who represents Oshawa? The 
leader of the NDP party represents Oshawa, and he’s telling us 
what to do in agriculture out West here. He said there’d be too 
much investment, and he’s got tens of thousands of jobs in 
Oshawa as a result of American investment. And the NDP say, oh 
no, we’d better not trade. It’s just fine for Oshawa. The union 
leader says, oh gee, we better not do this because we got $4.8 
billion of new money coming into Oshawa in Ontario. But they’ll 
tell us what to do in agriculture. 
 
The NDP here will stand and defend the banks on one  
 
  



 
October 31, 1987 

 

3786 
 

hand by letting them charge 21 per cent interest when they’re in 
power, year after year after year. And that’s the reason there’s a 
problem today. The NDP will say, well I’ll borrow money from 
the banks and I’ll buy the potash mines because the union leader 
says, buy the potash mines. And then go around say, well if that’s 
not the case I’ll borrow the money and I’ll buy the land from the 
farmers in land bank. 
 
Now you listen to those policies. Is land bank policy popular with 
Bob White? You bet. Nationalizing potash industries popular with 
Bob White? Right on — nationalize the industries. 
 
This, young fellow . . . You won’t buy any changes in agriculture 
unless you check with Bob White, right? Bob White calls the shots 
right across the country now. You phone Bob White and you say, 
Bob, could we have a new policy with respect to agriculture and 
trade? Because each and every one of you say the very same 
things when it comes to agriculture policy. You say the very same 
things: don’t trade with the United States; don’t do any business; 
oh my gosh, they’re going to hurt our sovereignty. 
 
What has $4.8 billion of GM money done for Oshawa 
sovereignty? You tell me that. Are people in Oshawa less 
Canadian? Are people in Oshawa less Canadian because Bob 
White can enjoy $4.8 billion of GM investment? Tell me, are they 
less Canadian? 
 
Well I’ll tell you, Bob White is not going to dictate policy in 
agriculture, he’s not going to dictate policy in trade, he’s not going 
to dictate policy with respect to new farm finance mechanisms — 
he’s not going to do any of that. He may run the NDP party, as 
union leaders across the country run the NDP party, and we all 
know who pays the piper calls the tune. But when it comes to 
agriculture policy, Saskatchewan people will decide, and that’s 
why we’re going to the country. 
 
And we will ask them whether they like to have new money in 
agriculture, whether they want their loans extended, whether they 
want deficiency payments, whether they want interest rate 
protection, whether they want all this stuff. We’ll ask them. And 
that’s what we’ve done in the past and that’s what we’ll do in the 
future. But I’ll tell you, we’re not going to be asking Bob White 
what’s good for agriculture in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — I’ll have to check with Hansard, Mr. Chairman, 
to see if I asked the question about Bob White, but I’m sure I 
never. 
 
Mr. Premier, you keep talking like that and I won’t have to say 
another word because you’ll talk yourself right out of office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — Best speech you’ve ever given for us. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — That’s exactly right. I’m sure every farmer 
 

agrees with you. It’s a sign of a desperate government. The sign of 
a desperate government when you . . . The arguments maybe 
worked in ‘82 for you, Mr. premier, but they’re not working now. 
 
Mr. Minister, that type of rhetoric again does nothing to help the 
farmer who has to know what you plan on doing. I will ask you 
again, and I would encourage you to use all your powers to answer 
the question as directly as you can. The question was, and the 
farmers have to know: will you be changing the farm ownership 
Act in order to facilitate an agriculture equity financing proposal? 
Will you be changing the farm ownership Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, we haven’t introduced any 
legislation with respect to an equity corporation or anything that’s 
associated with it. We may or we may not. That’s why we’re 
going to the farmers to ask them what they’d like to have. This is 
clear. I mean, you were at the symposium. You said, well in 
Australia they can’t help the bottom third. Well that doesn’t mean 
we can’t. We can design it any way we like, and that’s what we’re 
going to do. If there are ways that we can help people in certain 
circumstances, we’re going to do that. We are only limited by our 
imagination. 
 
I mean, that’s what happens when we introduced many of our 
programs. We went out to the people and said, what would you 
like to have? The opposite was the NDP who looked at the banks 
at 21 per cent interest rates and said, well we’ll just let the banks 
collect. And that’s what you did. And you put all these people in 
trouble. You didn’t do a thing. And here when we got 6 per cent 
money out, you’re on my case because we’re not providing 
enough help. I mean, how hypocritical, how pathetic, can you be? 
 
And at the same time, you’re talking about agriculture and trade 
and the things that we make a living at here. The leader, the 
existing leader, of the NDP agrees on a free trade deal in potash 
with United States and Canada and has said so. But you’re all 
singing the tune of Bob White, saying, you can’t do this because 
it’ll wreck agriculture and it’ll wreck marketing boards and it’ll 
wreck the oil patch and wreck investment. Actually Americans 
would invest here, when he’s sitting on 4.8 billion in Oshawa 
alone, in the last six years. I mean, what hypocrites. 
 
You don’t care what’s good for the country. You just care what’s 
good for the NDP. You don’t care about Canada. You don’t care 
about the jobs. You don’t care about the future. You don’t care 
about farmers. When there was 21 per cent interest rates, you 
didn’t care at all. 
 
I mean, why don’t you come clean? When tariffs go down, jobs go 
up, and history supports that as long as you can remember. In 
1929-30, they passed a Smoot-Hawley Act. You saw tariffs 
double and there was depression world-wide. 
 
When you want to hurt a country, you apply sanctions against 
them to hurt them, to stop the trade. Everybody knows that. What 
fool would apply sanctions to themselves? Why would you apply 
sanctions to yourself? Well Bob White would apply sanctions to 
western Canada. Bob White would supply sanctions against  
 
  



 
October 31, 1987 

 

3787 
 

everybody in this country. Well let me just say, he’s not going to 
apply sanctions to western Canadian agriculture. And if you boys 
listen to him, you’ve got a bigger problem than I thought. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — So I think we’ve got a little bit further. There’s a 
good possibility you’re saying, Mr. Minister, that the farm 
ownership tax is going to be removed, leaving Saskatchewan farm 
land wide open to anyone who sees fit to come and buy up the 
land at a time when the farmers have no choice but to divest of it 
because they’re in so much trouble. This is what you’re saying. 
You’re going to open her wide up; don’t worry about those 
people. 
 
Mr. Minister, let’s take this example. Let’s take this example 
related to an equity financing corporation. In 1978 or ’79 or ’77, 
whatever, a farmer has four quarters of land and he buys four more 
quarters. land was selling for about $100,000 a quarter. Okay? So 
he’s got eight quarters of land. 
 
(1215) 
 
Now he’s in financial difficulty and for many of those farmers 
their debt is about the same as when they started in, or very little 
less. So now you’re going to say, okay, that farmer can sell his 
land or a portion of it to the equity finance corporation. So he 
takes those four quarters — because you say he needs this cash in 
hand to continue farming — so he takes those four quarters and he 
sells it to the equity corporation. The equity corporation is going to 
buy it at what price, Mr. Minister? Maybe 50,000 a quarter, or half 
what he paid for it? But he’s got cash in hand, $200,000, and his 
debt’s $400,000. So a few more years will go by because he’s still 
carrying this debt and it’s going to get worse and worse, and the 
next thing you know, the corporation is going to have all his land. 
 
And here’s my point, Mr. Minister. With all the deliberations that 
we’ve had the last couple of days, the majority were saying, and 
your own commission report said, that the land would be placed 
on the stock market. So what kind of intelligent process are we 
looking at here, where we’re going to take the farmer, slowly push 
him out, put the land on the stock market? Who in Saskatchewan, 
which Saskatchewan farmers tell me, Mr. Minister, are going to 
agree to that? 
 
And that’s the kind of thing you’re proposing. That’s the direction 
you’re going — putting the land on the stock market, open the 
borders for outside investment. It’s a great thing. A buck is a buck, 
but it’s not going to work for the farmers in this province, and you 
know it’s not going to work. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, do you deny that it’s a possibility that the land 
will be placed on the stock market through an equity financing 
corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The NDP administration borrowed 
$184.436 million from the banks . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where? 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — From central Canada, from Toronto, and 
bought land across Saskatchewan, pushing up the price of land — 
neighbour against neighbour against neighbour — forcing it up. 
The government was in there buying land from farmers and 
bragging about it, that they’re going to buy it at this, and that it 
would appreciate, and the more they bought, the higher it would 
go up. And the former minister of Agriculture, Mr. MacMurchy 
from Last Mountain Touchwood, bragged about all the money he 
was making because he was buying low and he was going to be 
able to sell it high some day. And he bought over a million acres 
and he borrowed the money. And not a cent has been paid back, 
and it costs us 20 million a year just on the interest on that. 
 
And you’re sitting there talking about some kind of new 
agriculture policy. Your record is so pathetic . . . Keep it up. I 
mean, what do you . . . You provide 20 per cent interest rates to 
the banks and you defend them. You’ve got NDP lawyers running 
around defending banks now against farmers. You won’t let us 
trade with the United States. You let Bob White have all kinds of 
American investment for jobs in central Canada, but not here. 
 
And you’re saying, well it’s fine for the banks to own the land 
because they’re here; they have a little office here. But their office 
is in Toronto, their head office, and they’re traded on the stock 
market. Then you’re going to go out and mislead the public and 
say, all the land in Saskatchewan is going to be traded by banks on 
the stock market. I mean, they don’t buy that . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well I know what you mean. You don’t want to 
tell them the truth. You didn’t tell them the truth about land bank, 
and you didn’t tell them the truth about 21 per cent interest rates. 
You didn’t care. Why wouldn’t you care for them? You didn’t 
care. 
 
I never heard one NDPer stand up and say that we should defend 
people against their homes. Urban residents saw their mortgages 
double, and the NDP, not one dime for them — we’ll build you 
government housing. 
 
I mean, that record is clear. That record is clear. If we can get 
more money into agriculture, if farmers want more money into 
agriculture, and if they want fellow farmers or people with 
agriculture money or non-agriculture money to provide some 
equity as opposed to debt, and the farmer still owns the farm — as 
he does today because he can get title when it’s paid for; he still 
has that option — why would you deny other Saskatchewan 
people, or other Canadians, the same right that you’re now 
prepared to give banks? It doesn’t make any sense. Why just let 
the banks have it? They all live down East. Why not let other 
people that are close to agriculture invest? Why not you and me 
and farmers design a financial instrument that would allow all of 
us to invest in agriculture to help it? Why just leave it banks? Why 
have you always been so afraid of the banks? 
 
My gosh! I don’t understand. I mean you wouldn’t . . . when they 
had very high interest rates, you wouldn’t defend the farmer. 
When they hurt home owners, you wouldn’t defend them. Now 
you’re standing up and you don’t like my program because I’ve 
got money out for farmers . . . 
 
  



 
October 31, 1987 

 

3788 
 

An Hon. Member: — At 6 per cent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — At 6 per cent money. And I didn’t even ask 
for principal; I just said, pay the interest. And then we’re saying, 
are there other ways to get community funds, pension funds, 
savings, invested in agriculture? You said, oh, no. You’re afraid to 
look at it because you’re hidebound by your philosophy. And the 
philosophy, I come back to, just to make my point, is so clearly 
represented by Bob White who is an absolute radical — absolute 
radical — and you know that . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
 
Well, the members opposite know . . . And the members opposite 
defend Cuba, and that’s fair enough. They defend socialist and 
communist countries. I mean the member from Rosemont stands 
on his feet and he talks about, oh, how great it is in the socialist 
countries around the world. And he makes absolutely no sense at 
all, but he believes it. 
 
Now maybe the people from Rosemont believe that communism 
and socialism is really good. Well they could see it any place. You 
can go off the tip of North American and find a country where you 
can’t even get in and get out. People don’t have freedom of 
speech, do they? They don’t have freedom of the press, do they? 
They don’t have freedom to buy farmland, do they? Well the 
member from Rosemont doesn’t want to listen to the truth, but 
why doesn’t he try to farm in Cuba? Why don’t you try that? Why 
don’t you look at the agriculture record in the Soviet Union? 
Sixty-seven crop failures in a row, okay? 
 
Well he defends communism over Americans all the time. He has 
never defended Americans. And the NDP hate Americans so bad 
that they can hardly stand to live beside them, and that’s what Bob 
White does — Bob White exactly. Bob White says, I’m going to 
take my union out of the American union — and I’ve got to share 
this with the people here, because I think it’s important. 
 
When you talk about agriculture policy, when you talk about trade 
policy and you talk about educational policy and democracy, they 
say, oh my gosh, you should have a vote on it all the time — 
right? Social democracy, social democracy. 
 
When Bob White is asked to vote, when his union members want 
a vote in taking the union out of North American markets, you 
know what Bob White says? This is what he says in the Globe and 
Mail: 
 

A few thought we should not proceed without a referendum 
vote of the entire membership. (This is Bob White, the great 
social leader, democratic leader; and he says) I couldn’t let 
that vote happen. If went out to the locals (this is to the 
people) opening the door for corporate interference and 
internal politics and personality clashes, by the time we 
counted the votes the union would be split to pieces. 

 
He doesn’t trust the people. He doesn’t trust democracy. Well 
that’s exactly the case in the socialist and Soviet  
 

countries around the world — they don’t trust the people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — And you guys believe in that; you believe in 
it. Stand up there and say, oh, I’m the right guy — right? Just like 
Bob White, just like the leaders in Cuba, just like the leaders 
behind the Iron Curtain — every single, solitary one of you. 
 
And you want to tell us about agriculture. Why in the world do 
you think we left Europe? We came here to this country for 
freedom, democracy, freedom of speech. We went to two world 
wars to defend it, and you want to take us out of NATO (North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization). 
 
You’d have no more idea of what makes this country tick than that 
watch over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — So when you want to defend farmers . . . the 
government isn’t going to own the farm land as it does in Cuba or 
any place else, and the government isn’t going to own the farm 
land as it did under the NDP. 
 
The government is going to provide protection for farmers. We’re 
going to provide long interest rate loans. We’re going to provide 
lower interest rates. And we’re going to go to the wall to get new 
money into agriculture if farmers want it. 
 
You may not like it, but we’re going to do it if it helps farmers and 
if they like it. And certainly we’re not going to be restricted by 
anybody like Bob White or anybody that believes in his 
philosophy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I might turn 
the topic to the agricultural estimates. Mr. Chairman, I’ll wait until 
the member of Weyburn . . . I’ll give way to him if he wishes to 
speak. 
 
My questions deal with the question of an equity corporation. Mr. 
Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I want to ask whether I interpreted 
you right: that you believe that there may well be a place for 
significant foreign investment in Saskatchewan farm land, that 
money may come in and provide for substantial ownership or 
investment in Saskatchewan farm land by non-Canadians? I’m not 
saying . . . I thought that was the logic of your suggestion — that 
money coming into Canada created jobs, therefore, money coming 
into Canada would be good for Saskatchewan agriculture. I may 
have misinterpreted you. My question is relatively simple. I will 
allow you to answer it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — What I said is that we will explore 
alternatives that will allow Saskatchewan people . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I smell a dodge coming up. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Look it. Our people were quiet enough 
when your leader was speaking. Could you just let me answer the 
question? Okay? I mean, fair enough? 
  



 
October 31, 1987 

 

3789 
 

We will explore alternatives that will allow Saskatchewan people 
to invest in agriculture land that don’t now, or, in fact, other 
Canadians to invest in agriculture that don’t do now. Not 
non-Canadians, not people from outside of Canada, but people 
that are in Saskatchewan and in Canada. Okay? 
 
Now the same argument will apply . . . you could make the 
argument that banks invest here but they get their money from 
outside the country. Okay, well, I don’t think we need to make that 
longbow, but today Canadians generally, in most provinces, can 
invest in agricultural land. To date, it’s very difficult for them to 
invest their savings and their pension funds into an agricultural 
agribond or agriculture instrument that would remove some of the 
debt and replace it with cash. 
 
If we could do that to help farmers, then I will entertain that 
possibility by having Saskatchewan people or Canadian people — 
as we do now with banks — allow them to invest in agriculture 
through an instrument that we could design together, that you 
might think would be fair or that the farmers might think would be 
fair, so that pension money or other money could help replace 
some of the debt that is out there with some cash. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Premier and Mr. 
Minister. Mr. Minister, it is the view of our party that the best 
solution with respect to the ownership of farm land is, to the 
largest extent possible, that the farm land be owned by 
owner/operators, by individuals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Now we all are aware that that can’t be 
true in every case. We are, I think, anxious, however, to put in a 
system which encourages that type of ownership and discourages 
the systematic ownership of farm land by non-producers on a basis 
which makes it hard for the operator to acquire the land. Now we 
start with that proposition. 
 
I want to look at this from the point of view of the farmer, not 
from the point of view of somebody having an opportunity to 
invest. There are many opportunities to invest. And we don’t say, 
for example, that a gold mine should be owner-operated. Nobody 
suggests that. We say it ought to be investor-operated . . . 
investor-owned and somebody else operates it. So we’re not 
looking at a pattern of owning farm land similar to that of a gold 
mine. 
 
We start out with the proposition that gold mines are 
investor-owned and operated by people who may or may not own 
shares, but usually don’t, or trifling amounts. That is not the model 
which we believe ought to apply to farm land. Therefore, we 
would like to see farm land owned, to the largest extent possible, 
by the people who operate it. 
 
To the extent that they can’t finance it, we would like to see 
money put up by someone on a mortgage or debt basis so that the 
farmer could pay it off and own the land. And only as a very last 
resort — only as a very last resort — do we think that it is a good 
idea for investors to own farm land as an investment. And when I 
say “own,” I mean  
 

have legal title to it. 
 
(1230) 
 
No one is quarrelling with an investor having a mortgage on farm 
land. It would be better if it weren’t true, but . . . Better if the 
farmer owned it without a mortgage. But leave that aside; all 
farmers don’t have that option. But we would very much like to 
see a situation whereby, when times get better, a farmer could pay 
off the loan and own the land. 
 
Now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay. Now do we all agree 
that there’s no way to pay off a share, there’s no way to pay off 
equity — that if someone owns the land that I farm and has an 
equity ownership, then I can’t pay him off unless he wants to be 
paid off? 
 
A loan . . . If someone has a loan or a mortgage on my land and I 
have the money, I pay him off and there’s nothing he can do but 
take it, and the mortgage is gone and I own the land. However, if 
there are shares, I can’t go to him and say, I’m going to pay off 
your shares. he says to me, I don’t want to sell my shares; I like 
the way farm land is going up in value and I’m going to continue 
to own your farm. And there’s nothing you can do about it. 
 
Now that is the difference between a loan or a mortgage and a 
share. And we all realize that there can be many structures where 
by a company could have the loan but someone could have shares 
in the company. We all understand there are many structures. 
 
I want to look at it from the farmer’s point of view. And I want the 
Premier to give me the assurance that any scheme he is talking 
about for equity financing, or whatever, will involve a situation 
whereby, so far as the farmer is concerned, he will have title with a 
loan that he can pay off, or alternatively that he will have a lease, 
although that’s less desirable, but with a clear option to buy, so 
that when things turn around, as we hope they will, and the farmer 
gets some money, he can either pay off the loan or buy it pursuant 
to the firm option and then own the land, and that nobody — 
nobody — will have an equity interest in the land which they can 
hold against the interest of the farmer. 
 
Now that is the situation we think is desirable. We believe that, as 
farm land increases in value, as we think it will, then it is 
important that the owner-operator . . . the operator will be able to 
be the owner-operator, and that he be able to pay off a loan, if it’s 
there, or exercise his option to buy, and that nobody will be able to 
say to him, no, I don’t want to sell; I want to continue to be the 
equity owner of that farm land, in part. 
 
Now I ask you, Mr. Premier, are all the schemes you are 
considering, ones which involve giving the farmer the clear right 
to become the absolute owner without any right of any equity 
owner to deny him that right to be the clear unencumbered owner? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I believe that, given what 
I’ve just heard from the Leader of the Opposition, that we could sit 
down with a group of farmers and design a mechanism to allow 
new money into agriculture and  
 
  



 
October 31, 1987 

 

3790 
 

leave the hammer — the control, the option to buy and own — 
completely with the farmer. 
 
Now if you look at — and I say this in all respect — the new 
instruments that have been designed under a Labour government, 
Mr. Bob Hawke, just re-elected as a Labour government . . . and in 
New Zealand, a Labour government are looking very favourably 
on these, because the farmer has the option to purchase it at the 
end. 
 
Now what he gets that he hasn’t got today is the following. What 
he gets . . . You just borrow money from a bank; they have to 
charge the going interest rate. They have to. They follow the bank, 
or the world rates. If you can have part ownership in the 
agricultural land base, if you can, two things happen. You can 
receive less interest because you might be able to pick up some 
benefit in the long run in terms of some of the capital appreciation 
over time. And that’s what pension funds and mutual funds and 
others look . . . They will look at a lower rate now, and they will 
look at some appreciation over time, and they buy stocks and they 
do that. 
 
Now a bank can’t do that because a bank is supposed to lend 
money, and they can’t own money. So if you designed an 
instrument somehow — and we can look at various things — that 
would allow the debt to be replaced to a large extent by cash, 
which would facilitate a lower interest rate and drop the operating 
money . . . And the member from Humboldt, your colleague, went 
through all these yesterday and he could give it to you in detail. 
But it drops their payments and over time the farmer has the 
option to purchase part, all, or whatever, and at a discount — at a 
discount so that he is below the market and there is some 
advantage for him to take a hold of that property and that land. 
 
Now what you have is a partnership. And we have father-son 
leasing agreements, purchasing agreements, agreements for sale, 
and several of them. Much of the land today in Saskatchewan, but 
not nearly as much as in Europe, is leased from a father-son 
arrangement with an option to purchase — with an option to 
purchase. 
 
Now I just make this point to the hon. member. If you’re just 
going to deal with financial institutions, under the way they 
operate now you’re stuck with the interest rate, total payment, and 
they have the title. You don’t have the title. If you finally pay it 
off, you get the title. But if you don’t pay it off, they got the title. 
And it’s owned by some outfit in Toronto. And that’s been that 
way for a long time. Or the alternative was your proposal where 
the government owned it, and borrowed the money and had it. 
 
Now what I’m saying is, if we could design something that would 
allow all of us or any of us, as Saskatchewan, or Canadians, to 
invest in agriculture, receive a lower interest rate and charge a 
lower interest rate so that we can replace some of the debt with 
equity, and some appreciation of that value over time with an 
index or whatever — as they do, say in Australia — then we find 
that it’s helpful to the farmer because he has lower interest rate 
payments. He is out from under the burden of debt, and as you 
say, as things improve in terms of income and  
 

so forth over time, everybody’s going to make a little bit of money 
and he can handle it. 
 
Now if you leave it with him, as we could — we can design it any 
way we can — leave him with the hammer, with the option to 
purchase the whole thing, and the right of first refusal, or any 
combination of your things to make people comfortable, then I 
think we should at least explore that possibility to really cut the 
interest rate, sometimes maybe in half, and reduce that debt burden 
and still make money for investors, people who have security, you 
know, savings and pension plans, and others. They invest in much 
less when they buy stocks and all kinds of things. 
 
Even those . . . I mean, Peat Marwick, Pemberton Houston 
Willoughby, McLeod Young Weir, looked at this and said, you 
know, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool pension fund might like to 
do this. It’s an investment in agriculture. You lock it in at 7 per 
cent. You saw the credit unions’ different scenarios there. If you 
want it locked in at 7 per cent, if you want to put the land in at this, 
you can say it will break even over 20 years and the farmer has a 
tremendous break. 
 
And the credit union has looked at it very, very careful. Their 
biggest hand-up, of course, is the political side because people are 
saying, ah well, you know, it wouldn’t fit the glove. Well, let’s 
make it fit, that’s what I’m saying. If it’s possible to make it fit, 
let’s do that. If you could be satisfied that farmers felt comfortable 
— and I could — and we could get billions, literally, potentially, 
into agriculture now that the banks have, it seems to me that’s a 
good idea and we should at least explore that. 
 
So it would reduce the cost to farmers. It’s a way to invest in 
agriculture. It’s an instrument we don’t have today, but they do in 
other places, and even under socialist governments. And I think 
that we should at least explore it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It’s nice to 
hear the Premier acknowledge that Australia . . . He acknowledges 
that they may have a good idea there, and it’s a socialist 
government, and you’re still free to come and go and that sort of 
thing. 
 
So I just . . . But I want to come back to what you’re saying. 
Everybody, of course, likes the idea of an instrument which does 
everything; which gives somebody who is investing his money a 
chance for a capital appreciation, but the farmer a fixed purchase 
price and all the rest. But I think that that is the nub of the 
problem, that is the nub of it. Sure, it makes sense to provide 
farmers with a lower rate of interest now and they’re going to have 
to pay for it in the future. That’s the proposal when the value of 
the land goes up. Everybody understands that and it makes some 
sense. 
 
I must say, when leases provided that the right to purchase was 
dependent upon the current value of the land when you bought it, 
we heard a great number of criticisms. But we’ll leave that aside. 
We’re heading into the same situation now, the same situation 
now where land is low in value, or we hope it’s low in value, and 
we hope that it’s much more valuable 10 years from now. 
 
  



 
October 31, 1987 

 

3791 
 

And the clear problem is this, Mr. Premier: how do you give the 
person who puts his money in at half the rate of interest in the 
hope of making some substantial money, substantial profit, when 
the value of the land goes up, how do you give that to him and still 
give the farmer a chance to buy at a fixed, or a fixed and 
calculable price that no one can say, no, I won’t sell? 
 
If you’re going to give the farmer a firm option to buy — and this 
is the key, in my judgment — then you can’t give the owner, the 
person who’s putting in his money, the so-called pension fund, the 
right to ride up the value to the extent that that pension fund wants 
to. If the farmer has the right to say, okay, I buy and I buy now; 
and the pension funds says, I don’t want to sell now, I financed 
you at the low end of the scale, I’m going to pick up my money as 
the land rises in value, I want to ride it up — and I think you’re 
saying the pension fund just won’t sell. And if that’s true, then it 
means the farmer can’t buy, and that’s the key. 
 
I think we need a system which gives the farmer an absolute right 
to buy, not necessarily at today’s price — not necessarily at 
today’s price — but an absolute right to buy which the pension 
fund can’t refuse. And I want to hear what the proposal is because 
everything else is simple. Everybody else . . . Oh, there’s no 
shortage of capital in this country; there’s no shortage of money to 
invest in agriculture if the return is right. But obviously the return 
isn’t right on today’s production. The only way there would be a 
return, I’m . . . The only way there would be a return is if the . . . I 
say, production and prices . . . I’m sorry, Mr. Premier. The only 
way there would be a return is if the value of our produce went up. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It will. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — And I hope the member for Saltcoats is 
right. He says it will. Then the value of the land will go up and that 
increase in the value of the land is what we’re talking about. 
 
And who has the right to off? Well too often, when I hear this, I 
hear it that there are going to be shares, that there’s going to be 
partnership, there’s going to be equity in the farmer’s land, and 
that I don’t like to hear because a partner doesn’t have to sell out; 
an equity owner doesn’t have to sell out. 
 
The farmer has no absolute right to buy; he’s got a partner for life, 
and for his kids’ life, if you sell shares. It is that that I want to hear 
the Premier comment on. How are you going to give the farmer 
the absolute right to purchase, and still reward the person who puts 
his capital in at too low a rate of return, judged by today’s interest 
rates, and seeks to get his money back by riding up the increased 
value of the land? I want to hear the Premier say that because it’s 
absolutely key. Everything else is fluff; everything else is fluff. 
 
(1245) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well it’s just to point out, it’s not fluff. In 
all respect, if we could design a way to get a great deal of money 
into agriculture that it isn’t in there now, and to replace some of 
the debt, and to lower interest  
 

rates, that would not be fluff. So if you could do it, okay, so we’re 
going to try to do this. 
 
But let me just come back another way and say, we can design it, 
on the advice of farmers, your advice, my advice, your colleagues’ 
advice, to do what you want to do. If you looked at the fact that 
somebody that was your partner would share in the price of wheat, 
the risk and the price of wheat as it went up and own, and the risk 
in terms of what the land values would do up and down, your 
payments — and some farmers have suggested this; your annual 
payments linked to the price of the commodity — you could do 
that. 
 
And in terms of the value of your bond, or your investment, your 
share, would be linked to the price of the property. Now you know 
as well as I do that if a framer wanted to go into the market . . . 
And what they can do now in Australia, is they can say: here is 
couple of quarters of my land; I throw it in as shares; here’s the 
share value; if I buy equivalent number of shares back, I get my 
land back and I just go farm it. And what they’ve done in 
Australia, they’ve got land all over the country. 
 
So you’ve got . . .You know, it’s like any other investment in a 
market. You’ve got this kind of farm here, and one over there, and 
one over there, and the share isn’t identified with anybody 
particularly, but you get your equivalent shares and you’ve got 
your farm. Now we can design it that way. 
 
You say you want the right to own that farm on that land because 
you put this quarter up for this Agribond investment. Then you 
provide the equivalent amount of money and those shares, 
whatever, if they went down or if they went up, and you’ve got 
that land. I mean we could design it that way, any way you like so 
the farmer has the hammer, so that he can get a hold of it. Now the 
investor doesn’t care which farm if they can say, I know that I’ve 
got 7 per cent locked in, and I’ve got some appreciation in capital 
gains that might be there in agriculture. 
 
Now if you were ever going to invest in agriculture, it’s getting 
pretty close to the right time. Right? I mean, and that’s exactly 
their experience in . . . And the pension funds are telling us, you 
know, they look for things as they go down; then they might go 
up. So they buy them here and they invest in them for over 25 
years or 50 years. So if we could do that and provide the investor 
with the opportunity of a fixed return plus the opportunity for 
capital gains, and farmers with the right to purchase the land when 
he wants, and even give him a discount so he purchases it, or then 
the faster he purchases it, the bigger the discount on the market. 
 
You have got his land tied up so he says, my get to own that land 
when I want to purchase it; I’ve got out of the debt problem; my 
payments are at half because I’m paying 7 per cent interest rate, 
not 15; and this partner of mine is sharing in the capital gains, and 
I hope it does go up because I’d like to get some appreciation 
myself. And his share values that he’s got in there will rise like 
anybody else’s. 
 
I mean, seriously, the presentation made by the Australians and 
others who have looked at it is very  
 
  



 
October 31, 1987 

 

3792 
 

intriguing because it attracts that money that now can’t come in. It 
still allows the farmer to manage — total management. He’s the 
manager, he’s the owner, he can run it as he likes, and he can lever 
it as he likes because he can put some land into this instrument. 
And he can watch the value and you can tie his payment to the 
price of wheat. And you cut the interest rate in half because you 
don’t have to just charge full interest. There’s some investors who 
would like to have fixed rate of return and some capital gain. Now 
if there are combinations of that or some other ways that you 
might suggest, or others, by all means. I mean, I’m quite sincere, 
and I would like to get . . . As you point out, there’s lots of capital 
in the country. Let’s get it to where it could be helpful because 
more debt, and just more debt — in my view and I’d believe you’d 
share this — in agriculture is not the solution. I mean we can 
rewrite some of it, but just put more debt on the backs of farmers 
is not going to get the job done. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I 
fear again you’re reciting what all the wonders of an instrument 
could be, without telling us how you square that circle of giving 
the investor the right to ride up the increased value of land, which 
. . . And ordinarily, with any other investor, he, the investor, 
decides when he wants to get off. Now that’s the nature of owning 
a share or equity, that you can decide, you, the owner of the share 
or equity, can decide when you sell. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It can only go up with people buying and 
selling, as any market does. So it’s the buyer and the seller, and 
the same when it goes down. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Well, I hear you say that. I’m afraid I’m 
not following this, and I understand why I don’t because I hear all 
of the buzz-words about, it will be lower interest rate. And let’s 
give that and let’s not mention that again, because we agree on 
what we’re doing. 
 
What we’re trying to figure out is how the investor can have his 
normal rights of an investor, of riding up the investment and 
deciding when he is going to sell, and how the farmer can have the 
right, which we want to give him, of any time buying his land at a 
fixed or ascertainable rate. 
 
Now I hear you talking about the possibility of the farmer buying 
in shares and then turning in his shares in order . . . and the land 
and all that sort of thing. What I would like the Premier to do is to 
outline, not necessarily here or now, but to put down on paper, not 
the objectives — not the objectives; anyone can put down the 
objectives, anyone could . you know, we all have our Christmas 
list — but the mechanism, how it’s going to work, so we can run it 
through and see whether it’s going to work for the investor, and if 
it isn’t there’s going to be no money, and whether it’s going to 
work for the farmer and whether it gives him the right to choose 
the time he buys. And I, frankly, can’t see an easy way of doing 
that. 
 
If you say now, oh, we will accept the 4 per cent or 6 per cent or 7 
per cent, I think was your figure, on our money, and some shares 
because we believe the shares are going to go up in value and you 
allow the farmer to pull the  
 

trigger next year, and the shares haven’t gone up in value and the 
investor says, hey, I haven’t had a chance, I’ve lost one year’s half 
interest on your analysis. I put my money in at 6 per cent when I 
could have got 12, and I got the shares, and I was going to ride 
them up over five years or 10 years. And here’s the farmer two 
years from now, wanting to buy his land — hey, hey, I want my 
chance. That’s not fair pool. I want a chance to ride it up. 
 
I understand the investor saying that’s dirty pool for the investor. 
On the other hand, when the farmer says, two years later after he 
goes into this, I now want to buy the land because I’m able to, and 
the investor says no, no, no, I want to ride it up, obviously there is 
a problem. There may well be solutions. 
 
There may well be solutions, and what I would like to do is for the 
government to put out some sort of a paper with the mechanism 
— not with the objectives; as I say, everybody knows what the 
objectives are. We’d all like a way of getting the debt load off the 
farmer’s back, and about the only way now of doing it is to 
capture the increment over the years and split it with the farmer 
and the person who’s now putting up the money. We all agree 
with that. It is the “how” which is the trick. And I am fearful that 
the government is thinking of investor-owners of farm land in the 
sense that individual parcels will be . . . investors will have an 
interest which the farmer can’t get rid of. And I would think that 
unwise. 
 
And I would like to ask the Premier whether he would put down 
on paper the mechanisms that he is thinking about for this 
operation, because it’s by now means easy to figure out how you 
can play fair with both the farmer, if you want him to have an 
absolute right to buy, and with the investor who is foregoing 
current income in the hope of future income. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Let me just try this out. We’ll be glad to 
summarize several specific mechanisms, and we can include in it 
our conversations about what you would like and I would like, but 
certainly the conference will be summarized. 
 
The credit union had a very good explanation of how they would 
do it with four or five scenarios. And they made it very clear. And 
the slide show was there and they had the slides and the rest of it. 
But let me give you an example. 
 
Say that if you had a quarter section that you had debt on — a 
quarter section, 160 acres — and you said, you can have this for 
160 shares. Then you value those shares. Those shares will 
decrease or increase. And over time if there’s thousands of shares 
and people want to buy shares, if enough of them want to buy the 
price goes up, and if enough of them don’t then the price will stay 
the same. And if more people want to sell, the price will go down. 
And there’s liquidity in that market. I only want 160 shares 
because each one of them represents an acre, and that will be my 
farm — equivalent. So I’ll buy it. I’ll put it in at this price, and 
then later when I’m making more money, I’ll hope to buy it back. 
If I buy 160 shares, I got the equivalent of my farm and I own it, 
that’s it, I’m not in the game any more. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The quarter section or the shares? 
 
  



 
October 31, 1987 

 

3793 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — The quarter section. Design it for the quarter 
section. You put up your land for the share value, you buy any 
number of 160 shares, you got that land back in your family. 
 
Why can’t you do that? I mean, you can design this any way you 
can. Now you could say, you’ve got thousands of shares, you’ve 
got people who are selling and people who are buying. When the 
farmer puts up some land to get a partner in there, and he buys the 
equivalent number of shares back at any particular time, he’s got 
that piece of land back — put it right in there, not difficult. That’s 
the way it would work if we did it here. Say, that’s it. They can do 
it other ways in other places, but here, when I put agriculture land 
up by Saskatchewan farmers, when they are issued so many 
shares, and when they buy back those shares, they own the land. 
 
Now you’ll say: that’s pretty close to the banks because the banks 
say when you finally pay your mortgage then you’ve got title, 
okay. But the problem is with the banks is they’ve got to hit you 
with all this debt and these high interest rates. The advantage of 
this cash . . .(inaudible interjection). . . yes, the advantage of this 
cash is, you get half the interest rates, replace your debt. And 
you’re saying to the member, I’ll fix the return as a pension fund 
at seven, and over time you run the risk with me of maybe some 
capital appreciation or capital appreciation, one way or the other. 
And pension funds do that, we know they do, that’s why they buy 
stocks — guaranteed rate of return, and it might go up, might go 
down, but you can get in and get out. 
 
And if you linked it to the land, so that you buy the equivalent 
amount of shares that your land had in there and you got it back, 
and just make it law, that’s the way it is, you could see, I’m told 
by the investing companies, the pension funds would go for it 
because there are people who would like to invest in agriculture to 
help it. And if they’re guaranteed a fixed return plus take some 
risk, they’ll say: oh well, why not, the stock market’s pretty risky 
anyway. 
 
And for farmers it could be a real benefit, as was pointed out day 
before yesterday — interest rates and half the debt off their back 
and the opportunity to purchase. And then write in a discount, say, 
you purchase it in the first three years you get a 15 per cent 
discount on the current value, and then longer, maybe 10, and then 
maybe down there, a 5 per cent discount. 
 
So we just have to have the courage to use our imagination. If you 
would like it designed so the farmer has the hammer and always 
the ability to own the land, let’s design it that way. And if you 
want sufficient liquidity so you can get in and get out, I mean, I 
think you could do that too. I don’t know why not, every other 
market, usually, I mean some are thin but most markets have 
enough people, if you want to, you know, and your pensions move 
in and out; you can buy and you can sell. 
 
Now, well I could outline that in a conceptual sense, and we’re 
going to be doing that and taking it to farmers all over the 
province, and say: you want to own the farm, you want the 
absolute assurance that you can buy it when  
 

you want to do it, design the mechanism so there’s liquidity in the 
market. And he’s got the equivalent number of shares, and he’s 
going to hope there’s some appreciation too, probably, because 
he’s an investor as well as a farmer. But his cash flow could be 
improved and the debt burden off his back. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. I won’t 
belabour this but clearly on that design, if the farmer sells his 
quarter section in your analysis, and gets back, oh let’s say 160 
shares in your analysis; then he leases the farm from the . . . or the 
quarter section from the trust; and he then is . . . and the terms of 
the lease are key. You’re just saying that some way you’ve got to 
provide that the lease will provide less of a burden than the interest 
would. And so that is key. 
 
And then the question of whether or not, by simply turning in 160 
shares at whatever their value may be one year or two years hence, 
he can get back the quarter section. I would like to see that put 
down, not all totally spelled out, but all set down so that people 
can figure out. On this basis I think it has lots of attractions for 
farmers and precious few for investors right at that stage of the 
game. But we will see. 
 
And it’s no good if it doesn’t offer some attractions to both. And 
that’s why I’m inviting you to put that down so that people will 
know what you’re talking about, and I won’t burden the 
committee with this further. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I will provide that information as 
quickly as we can. And we’d be glad to share it with you and we’d 
look forward to your suggestions. 
 
(1300) 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. One more question, 
Mr. Chairman, if I would be allowed to ask the minister if he 
could make available the document prepared by Peat Marwick out 
of Edmonton, by Mr. Day, I believe, and whoever. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And the credit union proposals. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Yes, and the credit union proposals, and the 
federal farm credit corporation proposal. Could you make those 
available to me as soon as possible? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, all the verbatim and all the 
charts and all the presentations that were presented the last two 
days at the conference are being put together, and we’ll get them 
to you as soon as they’re finished. And that’s the best summary 
that I know because it has all six of them, and with their charts and 
their explanation and everything there is. We’ll get that to you just 
as quickly as we can. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, you 
have the copies of their speeches, no doubt. Will you just make 
those available, on those three presentations, to us, as soon as 
possible without . . . and also the other package. But I just want the 
copies of the three presentations that were there. And I believe 
they were all on a text, so it shouldn’t be very hard to make them 
available. 
 
  



 
October 31, 1987 

 

3794 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well we’ll give you everything that we’ve 
received from all those presentations, and if we have some of them 
that were in advance so that we can just hand them over to you, 
you’ll get them. And if we have to go back and get the verbatim 
and type it up, obviously we’ll just get that to you as quickly as we 
can. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It’s just on this item. Do I assume, Mr. 
Premier, that there was a transcript kept of the conference which is 
being typed up and which can be made available to us. Did I 
understand the Premier to say that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — There is . . . Some of it is transcribed and 
some of it is not. Where we have some of the questions and 
answers and some of the dialogue and everything else, where we 
had workshop recorder groups and what not, it is not transcribed. 
But as I understand it, much of the presentation and the summaries 
of those, and everything else that . . . everything that was recorded 
or transcribed will be summarized. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:05 p.m. 
 
 


