


















































November 5, 1987 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 November 5, 1987 
 

4027 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Public Service Commission 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 33 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members of 
the committee. To my right, I have Jim Armstrong, the chairman 
of the Public Service Commission; to his right, Gary Reid, the 
executive director of employment services division; and behind 
me, Jane Eibner, director of administration and information 
services division; and probably joining us shortly tonight will be 
John McPhail, assistant chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. I begin, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 
Minister, with a letter I wrote you on October 28. I asked for some 
information, a list of questions, that I indicated if it were provided 
would considerably speed up these estimates. I sense the mood 
around here is to speed up the estimates, so if you’ve got the 
answers that will help us a bit. 
 
Wonder never cease, Mr. Minister. It appears that at least some of 
the questions are answered. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want then to begin with what is undoubtedly the 
overarching issue in the public service of Saskatchewan, and that 
is the abysmal morale. Mr. Minister, each year that I’ve done these 
Public Service Commission estimates, and this is the sixth time 
now, each year I think it can’t possibly get worse, and each year 
the morale in the public service gets worse, the stress loads get 
higher. Mr. Minister, areas that never had morale problems begin 
to have morale problems. 
 
It doesn’t strictly come within your jurisdiction, but I indicated in 
the estimates of SaskTel, for years that had just been a model 
employer. Everybody who worked there wanted to spend the rest 
of their working life there; all they wanted to do was work for 
SaskTel. And the last two years, there’s nothing but complaining. 
 
Mr. Minister, that is true as well in the public service. The morale 
is just terrible. I would be interested, Mr. Minister, in knowing 
what the sickness rate is. I’ll bet that public servants are taking 
more time off for problems related to stress than they ever have in 
the past, and in my experience, it’s quite valid. Mr. Minister, the 
morale comes from a . . . for a variety of reasons. 
 
First and foremost is that you people have no understanding of 
what a professional public service means. The public service in 
Saskatchewan is losing its professionalism. There was an era, Mr. 
Minister, which ended about the time you people left office for the 
last time — it ended about the Second World War — when the 
way you conduct the public service was the typical  

way of doing it. So long as you were in office, it was a private 
fiefdom. You filled up with your friends, you got rid of your 
enemies, and I’m not sure whether the public service functioned 
very well, or whether the problems were just simple enough that it 
didn’t matter. But, Mr. Minister, that hasn’t been the norm in 
Canadian public life for decades except in Saskatchewan. In 
Saskatchewan that is the norm, Mr. Minister — rid of your 
supposed enemies, many of whom are just simply career public 
servants who want nothing more than to serve the public, Mr. 
Minister, and you fill them up with people who don’t begin to 
have the competence to do the job. 
 
I know you are going to stand up and you’re going to list off all 
the Koskies who worked for the government and all the other 
supposed political hacks. Mr. Minister, let me say by way of 
explanation, Mr. Minister, that some degree of patronage is almost 
inevitable in the public service. To rid the public service of 
patronage is like trying to rid the human race of any disease or 
illness, a state of perfection we’ll never achieve. Mr. Minister, it’s 
a matter of keeping the patronage within reasonable degrees, and 
you’ve long since violated those reasonable bounds. 
 
Mr. Minister, any one of my colleagues here could testify to the 
experience in the last election of knocking on doors and when you 
find out the person’s a public servant, you know that they are a 
very, very angry person. And it is without exception, Mr. Minister, 
that public servants are angry, experiencing high stress loads, and I 
just simply cannot believe are as productive as they could be if 
they looked forward to going to work in the morning — and I 
think many of them do not. It comes about, Mr. Minister, because 
you people don’t understand what a professional public service is. 
You think the public service is a private playground within which 
you and your friends revel for so long as you happen to be lucky 
enough to win another election. 
 
Mr. Minister, it comes about because of your almost endless war 
with the public service. You began in 1982 by firing large 
numbers of people, some of whom were sympathetic to the 
government of Allan Blakeney — I should not have used the name 
— were sympathetic to the government of the day, some of whom 
were not, but a lot of whom just got canned for no apparent 
reason. I think it’s fair to say that within two years virtually every 
deputy minister or . . . one exception and one of them was in the 
Legislative Assembly today, but with very, very few exceptions, 
in a couple of years all the deputy ministers changed, most of the 
senior staff changed. You got rid of everybody. You began to fill 
the public service up with people who just simply weren’t 
competent, didn’t know what they were doing, had no concept of 
how a modern public service works. And it continues with 
lay-offs, threats of privatization, some of the most unbelievable 
stunts I’ve ever heard of. 
 
Again, I go back to SaskTel, not entirely within your jurisdiction 
but it does illustrate the attitudes you people have. Everybody in 
SaskTel had to bid on their own job. Now that really is a clever 
way of ensuring that people are confident, secure, and prepared to 
do their very best — just to have them all bid on their own job. 
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4028 
 

Mr. Minister, the lay-offs, the early retirements, are part of the 
same problem. You have just conducted a ceaseless war with the 
public service. I venture to say, today, scratch a member of the 
government benches and you have someone who doesn’t trust the 
public service, think they’re all a bunch of pinkies down deep. 
None of them have any sympathy for you and that is most 
unfortunate. 
 
I think the majority of public servants in 1982 voted this 
government into office. It didn’t last very long, Mr. Minister. You 
came into office with a reservoir of goodwill from the public 
service. They looked forward to a change in office, welcomed 
you, prepared to give your government their very best. What 
happened? You began a war with the public service that just 
simply hasn’t ended. It goes on and on and on and on. 
 
Mr. Minister, I fully expect you to stand up, put your head in the 
sand and deny the problem exists. I’ll probably get a lot of silly 
nonsense about how terrible it was in the ’70s and how much 
better it is now, how many Koskies are on the public service, and a 
lot of other tripe which may or may not mean something to the 
average person, but to the public servant, it’s going to be a bad 
sign because it will mean that you are no better than those who 
preceded you. You’ve learned nothing, you’ve listened to nothing, 
and you allow these problems in the public service to fester. 
 
Mr. Minister, if I were to pick out the most serious problem in this 
government today, it would be your problem with the public 
servants. I regret, Mr. Minister, taking a long time at this stage of 
the session, but this is just too serious a problem within this 
government to allow this matter to pass up without commenting 
on it. 
 
You have the worst problem with the public service I have ever 
seen. I thought the morale was bad in the dying days of the 
Thatcher government. Well it wasn’t anything compared with 
what you people have got. You’ve got an angry, hostile, frightened 
public service that’s overloaded with stress. I’d like to know how 
many public servants have trouble sleeping with the stress load 
that public servants are experiencing, and I bet it’s very 
considerable. And the most alarming thing is, Mr. Minister, there 
is no sign whatsoever that you people have any understanding of 
the damage you’ve done. 
 
I’d like some comment from you, Mr. Minister, and any 
recognition that there is any improvement to be made would be a 
vast improvement over any of your predecessors. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the hon. member covered a 
number of points there, Mr. Chairman, and I guess if I was to give 
some background or some sense of the situation relative to the 
public service of Saskatchewan, I would back right up to about 
one year ago when our Premier put together the Executive Council 
of the new administration after the ’86 election. And with that 
there was a cabinet struck of 16 members, which I think . . . and a 
throne speech with a commitment to efficiency and productivity, 
and I think the fact that we ourselves were prepared to tighten our 
belts and do more for all the people of Saskatchewan was to set 
the tone for our expectations across the public service. Certainly 
we  

didn’t expect them to carry on their backs only the kinds of 
challenges we face, any more that we expected any other sector 
out there, whether it be teachers or nurses or doctors or lawyers, or 
clerical staff across this province, or whatever sector people work. 
 
But the reality is, we were faced with a situation where we had to 
decrease the size of government by some 2,000 positions. I think it 
would have been unfair of us to expect the people of 
Saskatchewan to tighten their belt if the government couldn’t 
show the people of Saskatchewan it was prepared to tighten its 
belt first, and that’s what we did — a cabinet of reduced size, and 
then we said we would reduce the size of the civil service by 
2,000. 
 
Now I’m not so naive as to think that when you undertake a goal 
like that of reducing the size of the service by 2,000 that somehow 
you are not going to have insecurity and somehow you’re not 
going to have some uncertainty, and I recognize that. I recognize 
very much that those were stressful times for everyone involved. 
 
At the same time, the undertaking was that we would do it in a fair 
and even-handed and compassionate manner because we 
recognize very much that you’re dealing with individuals and 
individuals’ lives, and that’s why we embarked on the strategy we 
did in terms of having the majority of those positions, that 
down-sizing, accomplished through voluntary means, whether it 
be early retirement or position abolishment. 
 
And in fact I think it’s a tribute to the officials at the Public 
Service Commission that they were able to put together a plan, 
that at the end of the day, I think you have to admit was a very 
reasonable plan, a well thought out plan, and a very compassionate 
plan, given that this is not an easy task. And in fact I would go so 
far as to say that I think other jurisdictions who had to contemplate 
similar measures have looked at us with some envy. 
 
And I don’t think . . . Don’t distort my words for a minute or take 
them to mean that somehow anybody enjoys a down-sizing 
exercise of 2,000, because we do not. But the reality is, that was 
the task we were faced with. We were able to do it by voluntary 
means as much as possible, and I think that’s a tribute to the 
thoughtfulness that went into the plan. 
 
I am also not so naive as to think that any time you make changes, 
going from the known to the unknown, that you’re not going to 
create some uncertainty, because you do. But having said all of 
that, I would say this, and I think I myself have had the experience 
of being a minister of some three, four departments now as well as 
the commission, and I can say, as I think my colleagues would 
say, that through all of this we’ve had absolute tireless dedication 
by all of the employees who have just continued to give their 
absolute best in some difficult circumstances sometimes. And I 
think that’s a tribute to the service. 
 
(1915) 
 
Uncertainty, insecurity at times, yes, but I can say as well that 
that’s behind us, and we’ve reached our goal and it’s onward and 
upward. And in fact it’s not all bad, in that  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4029 
 

when you go through early retirements, for example, yes, you lose 
some of your valued long-time experienced employees who opt 
for that option. But at the same time it opens up in the ranks some 
new positions for some of those, as I would call them, young 
broncs, if you like, those people that have got a lot of talent and 
needed a chance to move up on the career ladder and find their 
wings, if you like, and certainly that’s one of the advantages of an 
early retirement program. 
 
So I continue to be impressed by the dedication and the service. 
They are always there. I find the officials, whenever you need 
them, no matter how hard the task, no matter how frustrating 
sometimes, they continue to give and to give and to give. And 
certainly not an easy time that we’ve had this last year in face of 
the challenge we face, but it’s been a matter of providing 
responsible government. 
 
In addition though, to address specifically the whole question of 
professional development and the morale and the positive effect 
that that can have on morale, I am happy to tell you that we have 
tripled the number of programs offered to our employees since we 
took office in terms of staff development. I am also happy to tell 
you that we’ve been the first government to sponsor a conference 
for support staff, and we’re planning another one. And I’m also 
happy to tell you that we were the first government to introduce 
corporate-wide participatory management approach, something 
that’s been recognized as being one of the best in the field by 
some of the more eminent authors. 
 
So yes, we recognize there’s been some uncertainty; yes, it’s 
behind us; and yes, we’ve tried to respond with staff development 
programs and that sort of initiative. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, your comments in a sense 
confirm what I said: you don’t understand what is meant by 
professionalism. 
 
Professionalism is not professional development. It’s a public 
service which stays in place with . . . no matter how much the 
government . . . no matter who’s in office. It’s a public service 
which doesn’t change with the government. When I say this public 
service lacks professionalism, that’s what it lacks. 
 
You regard this public service, as I say, as a private playground. 
You forget that you’re dealing with the lives of real people when 
you weed people out — to use the current parlance — when you 
weed people out you don’t like. You’re dealing with real human 
beings who have the hopes and dreams and the aspirations that all 
the rest of us do, and you dash those without, I think, ever 
realizing that you’re not dealing with chess pieces, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think the key thing, the key error that you made in 
your down-sizing . . . I don’t in itself quarrel with the down-sizing; 
don’t get me wrong. I wouldn’t have done it. It’s not my 
philosophy, but it’s yours, and I think it’s consistent with what 
you’ve done. When the public elected you, they must have known 
they took this risk or they wanted it. So it’s not out of character, so 
I don’t quarrel with the down-sizing. I think you had a mandate to 
do that, as much as I disagree with it. But I heartily  

quarrel with the way the down-sizing was done. 
 
First, and perhaps most important, it was done in a crude fashion. 
Some departments and agencies are clearly understaffed. We have 
raised repeatedly the problem of the understaffing of the 
Department of Social Services. I could name others. One always 
hates to do that, for fear that someone in the department may get 
fingered for talking to me. So I’ll leave that at the Department of 
Social Services, but here are some agencies which are grossly 
understaffed — can’t begin to do their jobs. And if you wanted to 
cut staff, then in some areas you should have cut programs, but 
you didn’t have the intestinal fortitude to do that. You did not have 
the intestinal fortitude to be honest and admit that if you cut public 
servants, you’re going to cut services, and you’ve got to at some 
point in time cut some programs. And, Mr. Minister, that just 
didn’t happen in the areas where it should have. 
 
The second thing I want to say, the second comment I want to 
make, Mr. Minister, is the crude fashion that the public service, 
that the public servants were fired. I found it reminiscent of a 
Fascist state to have employees terminated and then they’re given 
the red box, which became infamous. The red-box treatment — 
walked into their office with some person who serves the purpose 
of a hulking guard. He stands over them while they dump the 
contents in the red box and out they go. Mr. Minister, the 
treatment of the public servants is less than I think what a criminal 
would get, less respect for their rights. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t quarrel with your down-sizing. I wouldn’t 
have done it. It won’t happen if we’re in office if I’ve any 
influence on affairs, but I think it’s consistent with your mandate. I 
heartily quarrel with the way you do it. You’ve no mandate to treat 
any human being in the way you treated some of those public 
servants you fired. 
 
The Department of Education, you stopped just short of tying a 
ball and chain on their ankle. You stopped just short of doing that, 
and other departments were just as bad. The Department of 
Education got a bit of publicity because they happened to be one 
of the first departments to go. 
 
You’ve treated public servants abysmally. You say you disliked 
firing people. Well, Mr. Minister, you didn’t act like it. 
 
I recall the former member from Wilkie, Mr. Garner, who fired 
public servants, fired employees of the Department of Highways, 
and then had the bad sense and the crassness to laugh about it with 
reporters in his office afterwards. No one caught you laughing, 
Mr. Minister, but no one saw any real sympathy or compassion 
when you did it. You acted like a Roman centurion when you fired 
those public servants. 
 
As I say, you wouldn’t treat a criminal like that and most of us 
wouldn’t treat a dog like that that we had any respect for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I guess first of all I’d say, you know, I’m 
happy that the hon. member recognizes that we were faced with 
some challenges that did require us to down-size government, and 
I think that was quite a  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4030 
 

different situation that we found ourselves in compared to the 
heady days of the ’70s when civil service, corporations generally, 
had found themselves getting larger and larger in response to 
inflationary times. 
 
I guess I quarrel somewhat with your choice of words to describe 
how we did this. You used words like: a crude fashion; 
reminiscent of a fascist state; described somehow a hulking guard. 
I mean, I don’t think the hon. member really believes his own 
rhetoric, because the reality is we used the services of two or three 
very professional firms whose expertise is in dealing with the 
human relations side of people who face lay-offs and who have 
extensive programs in place to help them. 
 
And all the words you used to describe that — crude fashion, 
fascist state, and hulking guard — are really absolutely untrue. I 
can’t put it any more bluntly. Even if you don’t buy that, I would 
ask you in terms of just being a normal, reasoned individual, how 
do you square those comments with the fact that 86 per cent — at 
least as far as the ones that the Public Service Commission directly 
administered — how do you square that when 86 per cent of the 
2,000 down-sizing that we administered, in fact, were achieved by 
voluntary means? 
 
I mean, obviously that doesn’t include the situation in Health. It 
doesn’t include the situation in health, but we had 1,264 take early 
retirements, and we have 561 positions that were vacant and that 
we just abolished. We had to back-fill 396 . . . or identified 396 for 
refilling that took early retirement because they were critical 
positions. 
 
But I ask you, and I ask all reasoned people across the province, if 
you look at the numbers, we didn’t go out there and just hand out 
2,000 pink slips. We said, first of all, there are 560 positions that 
have been in many instances vacant for a long time. Obviously 
they’re not that critical; they have no person in them right now. So 
if you’re looking for, if you like, an easy way to reduce the size 
and it’s not going to affect government, let’s abolish those 
positions. I think there was something in the order of 700, roughly, 
that were vacant, but obviously some of them were critical. So 561 
position were abolished, no hardship to anyone personally. 
 
The next step was this early retirement program. I think we had 
something close to an 80 per cent participation rate on our early 
retirement program. So there we were, a long ways to meeting our 
goal, and not one pink slip had been given. And that’s as it should 
be in this day and age, and we can do things in a reasonable, 
humane fashion. And that was the approach we took and one of 
. . . a voluntary approach; one that allowed a lot of flexibility for 
the individuals; one that keyed on the management sectors. 
 
The early retirements . . . That particular approach was taken 
because many of those positions, in a relative sense, were heavier 
on the management side and not the front line side. And that was 
another big positive for the government, that you weren’t going to 
jeopardize your front line service because of the relative weighting 
of this. 
 
And as well, in so far as how we determined, if you like, at  

the end of the day, position lay-offs over and above that, it was 
because of the budget process that was going on at the same time. 
And where programs were cut — which you said that was not the 
rationale — indeed that was the rationale because where programs 
were eliminated, that was how the positions were decided upon. 
And it was unfortunate that any programs, I suppose, had to be 
eliminated other than if they were serving no useful function. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, again you continue to retreat 
into a defence — and that’s what it is; it’s a retreat into the defence 
of the staff cuts. I don’t agree with it. I think this public service 
was already stretched a bit thin, but I don’t say this — that you had 
no mandate. I think it’s consistent with your philosophy and 
behaviour. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, the gravamen of my charge against you is not 
the cuts themselves but the way it was done. Would you just deal 
with the red box, the infamous red box — how you justify 
marching, giving public servants their walking ticket, marching 
them into their office, giving them a box, standing there not a lot 
further than the member is from me, while he fills up the box, then 
marching them out of the office. You give a criminal . . You place 
more trust in a criminal than that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, some of these people had spent years, and in some 
cases, decades, serving the public. Didn’t do it because it’s an easy 
road to riches. I think in many cases they spent their lives in the 
public service because they genuinely enjoyed serving the public. 
The thanks they got was that, the red-box treatment. It just became 
infamous. Not only did it become infamous, Mr. Minister, it 
symbolized the whole attitude of this government towards the 
public service. You don’t trust them. You have, I think, very little 
appreciation of their importance. 
 
There is, Mr. Minister, in rural Saskatchewan an unfortunate 
antipathy towards the public service. there are a distressing 
number of people, by no means a majority, but a distressing 
number of people who believe that all public servants are 
overpaid, underworked, and the vast majority of them serve no 
useful purpose and the world would go on a great deal better 
without them. Little do they know, Mr. Minister, that the public 
services which they take for granted are delivered by those public 
servants. The public servants in a sense are the conduit between 
the government in office, with some ideas and programs, and the 
public who receive the services. 
 
Mr. Minister, you see to . . . The red-box treatment symbolized all 
of the worst about your relationship with the public service —your 
distrust of them; your lack of respect for human beings, and them 
in particular; your lack of understanding, Mr. Minister, of what 
these career public servants have done during most of their lives; 
and the whole war that’s gone on between the public service and 
the Government of Saskatchewan.  
 
It’s one of the major reasons . . . Your failure to work with the 
public service, to understand them, is one of the major reasons, 
Mr. Minister, why this government has been so unsuccessful in so 
much of what it has done. So I ask you, Mr. Minister, not to retreat 
into a defence of the cuts. Let’s talk about the red boxes and how 
you justify treating any  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4031 
 

human being in such a fashion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I know that you, in your own 
mind, have some view that the process that went through the day 
that a number of lay-offs occurred . . . I think one of your 
colleagues called it — the people, the professional people we 
brought in — called them professional terminators, and I think 
what an unfair characterization that is of firms like . . . In fact, I 
think he was specifically referring to Stevenson Kellogg Ernst & 
Whinney. And they took some fair except to that comment, albeit 
that it was made inside the House with the immunity that that 
provides. 
 
(1930) 
 
And, in fact, they went at some fair length to try and meet with 
your leader, your current leader, to try and set the record straight, 
because I think they felt that their firm had been severely . . . their 
reputation had been somewhat jeopardized by those comments. 
 
And as well, I was aware of the commentary at the time relative to 
this red box. And so because of that, I put my office into a meeting 
with and investigating — and my officials — this whole notion of 
the red box. You know what I found out? And you know what I 
found out? You know what I found out? No such thing. Now how 
does that . . . Why is it that I get a different story than you get? 
 
What you’re saying to me is that my officials and that Stevenson 
Kellogg Ernst & Whinney and Life Management of Regina are 
somehow trying to mislead me and the public of Saskatchewan, if 
we were to buy your line. So we don’t know where this red-box 
story came from. But I’ll tell you how it was handled and how it 
was handled very reasonably and humanely. 
 
When, in fact, the supervisor of a given department notified the 
employee who was to be laid off, virtually immediately a 
counsellor from one of these firms, Stevenson Kellogg Ernst & 
Whinney — I think Murray Axsmith and Associates as well was 
involved, and a firm called Life Management, Regina — was 
there on the spot to help provide those employees with a sense of 
. . . and to provide them with help and to let them know that this 
isn’t the first time that this has happened to somebody and to give 
them some guidance and direction and the kinds of things they 
might want to attend to. 
 
And it didn’t matter whether we had government employees in 
Toronto; in Kingston, Ontario, in Vancouver; or in London, 
England. Where, in fact, we had some lay-offs occurring, there 
was a representative of one of those firms there to counsel them on 
the spot. Now I think that a very reasonable, compassionate 
approach. And if in fact they wished to come back later and be 
accompanied or helped to gather up their personal belongings and 
to have to face the trauma of the employees around them that very 
given moment, arrangements were so made. 
 
So you create this atmosphere of somehow it was a hard-hearted, 
sinister kind of goings on. I want to tell you that this is a first — 
never an easy job — and if you’re going to try and suggest that I 
think it’s easy or that the  

people think I enjoy doing it, you’re wrong. And that’s why we 
called in experts to help us and to be there in every corner, 
literally, of this world, whenever we had an employee that was 
affected — London, England; Vancouver; Kingston; Toronto; 
Regina; wherever in Saskatchewan — they were there to help 
them. And in so far as a process as tough as it is, I think it was 
handled very professionally and with the best interests of those 
who were personally affected. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. Minister, you 
said that this matter of terminations was handled very 
professionally. I’m wondering if you could tell me how many 
counselling staff were employed by the firm of Stevenson Kellogg 
Ernst & Whinney? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Stevenson Kellogg Ernst & Whinney, 
we’d of had about 20 of their people that day. And just to give you 
some idea of their track record, when we were looking at sort of 
the best options to use on this, one of the things that impressed me 
when my officials brought forward the services of a firm like this, 
was their successful track record in terms of placing these people 
in new careers. And I was very impressed with the numbers. In 
fact, they’re so high, you find it almost hard to believe. 
 
But I want to give you an example as to the best numbers we have 
today. There were 82 people who wanted to use the counselling — 
and they hold seminars and all those kinds of things. Presently, 
there are 27 who are clients of Stevenson Kellogg Ernst & 
Whinney, and 55 have found new careers. So of those who wanted 
to use this service, 67 per cent have found new careers. And what 
are we, about six months since the lay-off notices were given? 
Now, I think that probably even is further ahead than they 
normally expect to be. 
 
They give you kinds of numbers over — after one year, after two 
years. Sixty-seven per cent have found new careers. And that’s the 
kind of professionalism you can get out of these firms who deal 
with these kinds of situations and know how to deal with it: 
making offices available for them; making phones available; 
making job ads available from all over the country available to 
them; secretarial services; counselling on what their insurance 
does or doesn’t buy or what severance pay does and doesn’t buy 
— all those kinds of things. And I continue to be impressed by the 
quality of their work. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, how many counsellors were 
employed by the firm of Life Management Centre? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Life Management was the firm who 
particularly helped us with the in-scope side — five individuals 
particularly — and of course the difference there is the whole 
bumping process. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Sir, could you give me the names of the 
counsellors who were employed by Life Management Centre to 
do this counselling? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — We don’t have that but I would 
undertake to provide to you. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Could I reasonably expect to receive that 
information within the next week? 
 
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4032 
 

 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I would think so, and I don’t think Life 
Management has any difficulty with us providing that to you. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Was there any subcontracting done by either of 
these two firms, Stevenson Kellogg Ernst Whinney or Life 
Management Centre, in terms of provision of counselling 
services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Not as far as we know. There were a 
couple of other firms that were involved. I think one of them I 
mentioned earlier, the Murray Axsmith and Associates, and as 
well, Coopers & Lybrand, who didn’t particularly take part in the 
operational side of it, but who gave commentary on the process 
that we thought would work the best. And I guess you could say 
we used them as a safety value to check what we thought was the 
best plan and to have any commentary from them. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — So outside of the firms that you have 
mentioned, there was no subcontracting for the counselling 
services themselves. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well we’re not aware of any, but we can 
check with the firms if you like. 
 
I mean, this may help answer some of your questions. I’m just 
looking at Stevenson Kellogg Ernst & Whinney, a relocation 
calendar of special meetings. For example, we had leaders on . . . 
these special workshops for things like this: job search workshop; 
health care industry; the market opportunity; telephone techniques; 
making information and advice, interviews work for you; effective 
interviewing; marketing as your skills strategy, should you set up 
your own business; opportunities for senior management in the 
federal government; pitfalls of small business; individual 
interview. Those were some of the kinds of seminars that these 
people could attend to help them looking at new career options. 
 
Some of the leaders were people like Tom Hale of Regina, Ron 
Scott, Calgary; Charlene Mason, Toronto; Barbara Billings, 
Ottawa; Ken Adie; Lynn Pearson. Some of those were the people 
involved in putting on the seminars that these people could attend. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. minister, could you give me a list of those 
leaders and where they were from, and which firms they 
represented if they were firms other than a Stevenson Kellogg 
Ernst & Whinney, Life Management, or the other firms that 
you’ve mentioned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — For example, you know, opportunities for 
supervisors in the federal government, the leader there. And 
obviously a key resource person is listed was Lynn Pearson from 
Regina, Government of Canada, Barb Billings; obviously, they 
have some sense of what’s available there. So I can send this 
across to you. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you very much. That would speed the 
process up considerably. 
 
On a very different subject, Mr. Minister, I’d like to inquire 
concerning a memorandum I received from the Public Service 
Commission regarding student summer  

employment. There is really no date on this memorandum 
received from the commission, but I take it this was sent out to 
MLA constituency offices indicating the number of students from 
individual constituencies across the province who were successful 
in obtaining summer employment in 1987. And it’s only logical to 
assume that each MLA received such a letter. 
 
I’m wondering if you could provide me with the information as to 
how many students were employed across the province this past 
summer, and in which constituencies they were employed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — To September 30, 1987, there were 856 
students hired in executive government and 373 students through 
Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Could you give me a breakdown as to which 
constituencies the students were from, the information that I 
received form my constituency office for the other constituency 
offices across the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I don’t have a breakdown like that 
and so . . . I don’t believe we even have a breakdown like that. I 
would suspect that, you know, a goodly percentage — give that 
873 were in executive government, and given the size, if you like, 
of government that exists in the city of Regina — I would suspect 
a goodly percentage of them found work right here in the city of 
Regina, albeit I have no doubt they were spread across the 
province. But I suspect it would be that kind of distribution, 
wherever there’s Crown corporations and governments that 
needed summer help. 
 
Sask Power, I suspect, has traditionally hired students, and I think 
many of them go back to the same jobs they maybe even had the 
year before. So I don’t have what you’re looking for because we 
don’t generate it that way. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Would you endeavour to generate that for me. 
The information is there; it’s simply a matter of generating it. And 
again, I don’t expect it tonight, but if I could have that within a 
week, that would be fine. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I can send you a sheet. I’ll have to get 
this one redone because we have some wrong totals in the column 
for 1986. But it gives you a breakdown by department, which 
departments hired them, that’s the basis we have — Agriculture, 
Health, Highways. For example, Highways had 150 summer 
students; Parks, Recreation and Culture, I think are traditionally a 
big employer — 141. Those are some of the kinds. I can get this 
done up for you and ship it to you. 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well, Mr. Minister, I fail to understand why it’s 
so difficult for you to generate that list when it must have been 
generated at one time in order for me to learn how many students 
were employed in my constituency. And presumably every other 
MLA received a similar letter indicating how many students were 
employed in their constituency. So I simply ask you if you could 
endeavour to break the list down by constituency as it obviously 
had to have been broken down at the beginning of this summer 
when I received the letter from  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4033 
 

the Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I can endeavour to give you what 
we’ve got if it’s by constituency, if it’s by centre, if it’s . . . I know 
what we have here is by department. If we have something more, 
I’ll endeavour to get it for you. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m asking for a 
commitment that you will generate the information by 
constituency. That can’t be that difficult. It was done once only 
three or four short months ago. Surely that information can be 
generated again with minimal trouble. I’m asking if you can give 
that to me. I’ll even receive it in two weeks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I give you the undertaking to see what I 
can provide you in that regard. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m asking if you will 
provide it. I’m not asking for you to . . . an undertaking to see if 
you can provide it. I’m asking you if you will provide it. It was 
provided once. Will you not provide it for all constituencies across 
the . . . What’s the big problem to provide it for constituencies 
across the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — If it was provided once, I’ll provide it 
again. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well thank you. I appreciate that commitment 
then. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you people are fond of quoting 
resolution passed at our convention. Surprising they do you so 
little good. You apparently pour over those conventions and get 
none of the wisdom out of them. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the conventions which you might have read . 
. one of the resolutions which you might have read is a resolution 
which endorses the concept of pay equity, a concept whereby men 
and women are paid equal amounts for similar work. Easy to state 
and sometimes difficult to actually apply. 
 
Mr. Minister, the idea is not as revolutionary as it once was. it’s 
been adopted by the Government of Manitoba, and I see in a 
recent edition of The Globe and Mail, it’s been adopted by the 
Government of Ontario. Mr. Minister, I wonder when the 
Government of Saskatchewan is going to join the 20th century and 
adopt this principle. 
 
The principle itself, I think, is impossible to argue with, that 
women should be paid the same amount as men. I wonder, Mr. 
Minister, when you’re going to make this obvious change, which 
could make the work place of the government so much fairer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well some background and then a 
specific comment relative to the issue you raised, at least relative 
to some of the points you make relative to what other jurisdictions 
have done. 
 
As you probably know, the Government of Saskatchewan through 
the Public Service Commission, I think is fair to say, we very 
much strive to establish fair and equitable compensation for all of 
its employees. All classification  

systems within the public service are gender neutral and do not 
discriminate on the basis of sex. 
 
As well, a recently introduced management and professional 
classification plan embodies pay equity principles by allowing for 
comparisons of diverse occupations; example — nurses and 
engineers. Single salary ranges were established for different 
occupations deemed to be of comparable worth. All pay ranges for 
in-scope classifications are negotiated with employees with the 
employees’ authorized union representatives, are gender neutral 
and do not discriminate on the basis of sex. 
 
Further to that, the pay equity concept, I can say, is under 
examination and study by a number of government agencies, and 
the experience of Canadian jurisdictions who have implemented 
pay equity legislation is also being evaluated and monitored. As 
you may well be aware, the Labour Standards Act provides for 
equal pay for similar work, and clearly this government, I would 
say, has achieved this objective. 
 
I guess the essence of your question is . . . You made mention of 
Manitoba. Yes, we are evaluating and monitoring that, and I’m in 
no position to make any further statements at this point in time 
except to say that it is something that’s under active consideration. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Chairman, I would beg leave of the 
Assembly to make an introduction. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Chairman, and members of the Assembly, 
I want to welcome through you, former MLA from Prince Albert, 
a good friend of mine and a good friend of many of the people 
who are sitting in the House right now, Mr. Mike Feschuk, who 
represented the constituency that I now represent; and with him is 
his good wife, Helen Feschuk; and their good friend John 
Constantine. Welcome to the Assembly, Mike, it’s good to see 
you back here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Public Service Commission 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 33 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — I have a question to the minister. Mr. Minister, 
is pay equity a concept that you could personally endorse? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In response to your question, I guess, I 
would deal with it this way. In terms of the public service, I think 
it’s fair to say — albeit that we have contracts and negotiations in 
so far as what’s worked out there relative to the classifications, etc. 
— I think it’s fair to say, yes, we’ve embraced it because I think 
everybody’s  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4034 
 

interested in fairness and equity and all of those kinds of things. 
 
As it relates to the larger question of pay equity operating in 
society as a whole, I guess I would repeat what I said to your 
colleague. There are some other jurisdictions that have made some 
changes there. I think it’s fair to say that in Manitoba, for example 
. . . As I understand what’s been in Saskatchewan versus 
Manitoba, we were ahead of them, certainly ahead of them in 
some of our legislation here in terms of how we treat our own 
employees. And I think maybe it’s fair to say we were ahead of a 
lot of jurisdictions. 
 
There are some plans that have come forward addressing the 
whole question of pay equity in the larger society. As I said 
earlier, they’re under review, evaluation, being monitored, and I 
don’t know as I can say much more than that tonight except they 
are under active review. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, if I were the distaff 
side of the public service, I wouldn’t be very heartened by that 
comment, that you’re looking into it. 
 
We have become somewhat numb to this government’s processes, 
but you gave birth to the phrase, “paralysis by analysis.” Mr. 
Minister, you’ve raised the art of procrastination, you’ve raised the 
whole business of procrastination to a fine art. You people can 
study something for years. 
 
I will venture to say, Mr. Minister, that when we’re back in six 
months doing your estimates, I’ll be asking you your position on 
pay equity, If I’m still the critic, and I’ll venture to say, I’ll get the 
same thing — we’re looking into it; that’s a concept we’re 
considering seriously; and what can I say. Well, I’ll say it for you, 
Mr. Minister. You don’t seem to have much interest in the subject. 
No one can quarrel with the principle that if they’re doing the 
same work, they should get the same pay, and they don’t. The 
statistics, Mr. Minister, on women in the public service, are not 
much different than the statistics for women in the private sector. 
They get about 60 per cent of what the average male makes, and 
that’s true . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member from 
Swift Current fine tunes the figure for me. Thank you very much. 
But the point remains, Mr. Minister, that women are paid a good 
deal less than men. there’s nothing fair about it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They’re worth more. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Some hon. members say they’re worth more. 
That may not be universally shared . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
We’re getting into, I fear, a little debate here, Mr. Chairman, and I 
suppose that’s good. The member from Swift Current may well 
endorse pay equity. I suspect she does, although she may be too 
politic to say so. I just wish it was shared by some of your 
colleagues. I just wish you people had some concept of fairness 
when it comes to pay equity. 
 
Before I go on, Mr. Chairman, and before the opportunity is lost is 
lost by the departure of Mr. Feschuk, I want to join in welcoming 
him. Mike Feschuk was my desk mate for four years in the 
legislature, and I came to appreciate Mike’s shrewd political 
sense. And I say to members opposite if  

. . . Mike lost in 1982 by a mere handful of votes, an 
immeasurably small number of votes. He almost made it. I say to 
you people and the public that I think this government would have 
been not quite as bad if Mike had made it into the legislature and if 
you’d had the benefit of his advice over the years. So welcome 
back, Mike. Nice to see you again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you’d give us some 
time frame within which you think you might fine tune your 
thinking on this question of pay equity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’m not going to throw out a specific 
day, week, or month except to say again that some of what is 
happening in other jurisdictions we’re keenly interested in. We 
recognize that it’s an issue that must be implemented carefully and 
properly and I guess what I would say quite simply . . . Maybe the 
best way that I could give you is we’d be in a hurry to do it right. 
 
I want to pick up on one other comment that you made and that 
was relative to women and women in management and somehow 
that we have an appalling track record there. And what I want to 
do tonight is destroy that myth that the NDP somehow think that 
the Tories have no sense in this issue . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Yes, I think you ought to listen to this because I think you’re 
going to be somewhat startled by the statistics and in fact how they 
point to the dismal record of the NDP, which continually flies in 
the face of rhetoric. 
 
Let’s talk about statistics, the hon. member from Regina Lakeview 
says. Let’s talk about them. In 1981 when the NDP were in 
government in this province, we had 7.7 per cent women in 
management, 7.7 per cent. Do you know what that same number is 
today, hon. members? It’s 21.3 per cent. Now that’s performance 
— 7.7 to 21.3 . Overall in the civil service, 52 per cent of our 
employees are women. That’s a record to be proud of, I would 
argue. Not one that we stop with, not that we don’t continue to go 
forward because we will, but I would say significant strides 
forward form the NDP’s number of 7.7 to 21.3 per cent. Triple. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I don’t accept . . . I question whether or not 
the figure was accurate, but if it were accurate, Mr. Minister, it’s 
not nearly good enough. 
 
Mr. Minister, I accept the fact that 52 per cent are women, but I 
say again that they make about 60 per cent as much, and that, Mr. 
Minister, is why you people ought to be endorsing the concept of 
pay equity. It’s a stated attempt to come to terms with an equity 
which simply can’t be justified in this day and age. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’ve heard you pat yourself on the back with 
respect to the promotion of women. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you 
could give us similar figures with respect to native employment in 
public service. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, I could, Mr. Chairman.  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4035 
 

Although we haven’t tripled there from the NDP years, we have 
more than doubled. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would give me 
the percentage figures. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, 2.4 per cent in March of 
’81; June ’87, 5.2 per cent. Once again, not that that one stops 
there or rests on one’s laurels, but I think it puts a fly to the notion 
that the NDP somehow are the only ones with a track record here. 
I would say to you that our performance record is clear. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I say without in any sense 
defending a record which is now some seven years old, that the 
concept of affirmative action was just taking shape in . . I think it 
was introduced in about 1980 and was just taking shape when we 
left office. 
 
Mr. Minister, I say that I don’t regard either 2 per cent or 5 per 
cent . . . I regard them both as abject failures. Mr. Minister, neither 
one should be touted as anything but a complete and total failure. 
Mr. Minister, if there is anywhere in this province in which natives 
ought to get a fair shake, it’s in the public service. Mr. Minister, 
there ought to be here an understanding of our social responsibility 
and, indeed, our social self-interest, just our self-interest, in trying 
to deal with a problem which cries out for redress. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would just admit . . . It would be a 
huge step forward if you’d just admit that 5 per cent is no better 
than 2 per cent. They both represent a complete failure to integrate 
natives into the work-force of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well as I already said before you got up 
and replied, we do not intend to rest on our laurels. And I want to 
tell you about another landmark event in this province as it relates 
to native people and our view in so far as their importance, and 
how we in fact have them not only in the ownership roles relative 
to institution across this province, but as well in management 
positions. 
 
And I want to tell you, because I haven’t had a chance to tell the 
members of the legislature, about an agreement that we signed — 
my Department of Education signed — with the Gabriel Dumont 
Institute. Because we recognize, one, that about 40 per cent of 
native children today are under the age of 15. And what that 
means is that by the year 1990 something like about 20 or 25 per 
cent of your job market entrance will be native, and that it’s 
important for them, if they are going to have jobs in the world, to 
have training — to have post-secondary education, skill training. 
 
We have, with this agreement, put in place a mechanism to not 
only have a new vice-president, a native vice-president who has a 
dual position between the executive director at Gabriel Dumont 
Institute and as a vice-presidential appointment of a native services 
division at the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology — a management level position, a  

vice-presidential position held by a native person who will give 
that sense in the curriculum, if you like, and as well to other 
employees and other educators there. But even more importantly, 
there will be one sitting on the board of governors. That’s our kind 
of commitment and that’s just one example. And I would point out 
to you that as far as we know, that’s a first in North America. And 
so it should be, given the statistics I quoted to you about the age of 
these young people, and as well, the numbers that we’d be looking 
at in the year 1990. That’s what we talked about. We talked about 
planning for the year 2000. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, unless . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Come on, Ned. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, I am coming; I’m coming with my 
question. If the minister will be patient, he will get the full brunt of 
my question. I know that’s what the member from 
Souris-Cannington wanted, was my question in all its detail. So if 
he could show a little patience, I will give you the question. 
 
Mr. Minister, without trying the patience of all concerned at this 
stage, at this juncture, let me say that I do not believe an 
affirmative action program is going to work unless there are solid 
support services there to ensure that the native is hired, and that 
once they’re hired, that they successfully integrate into the public 
service. It just simply won’t work to write a letter to all the deputy 
ministers saying, I wouldn’t mind if you’d hire a few natives. It 
just won’t work. 
 
You need stern incentives to hire them, and you need strong 
support services when they get there. There is a cultural shock of 
sorts when they arrive. They don’t feel entirely at home. There’s 
some difficult problems for a native who comes to work in any 
work environment, and that’s particularly true of the public service 
— perhaps even more so than it might be in a private 
environment. 
 
Mr. Minister, on a non-partisan note, I’ve had some experience 
with this. When we introduced the affirmative action program, I 
was for a short period of time in government. I sent a note to the 
department of culture and youth, and I said I think this is a 
department which ought to hire some natives, and I would like it 
to happen. Six months later, there were two natives hired in the 
department; they both worked in my office. I left eight months 
later and that was it — it just did not happen. I don’t think it had 
anything to do with my relationship with the department — they 
just didn’t happen anywhere. 
 
Mr. Minister, if all you do is include a little section in your annual 
report saying, I think there ought to be . . . saying, we have an 
affirmative action program and we’re giving it some 
encouragement — and that’s the sole extent of your efforts — 
you’re going to remain at a figure, at a percentage figure for 
employment of natives which, as I said in the beginning of this 
discussion, represents total abject failure. 
 
Mr. Minister, you don’t have those structures in place nor do you 
have the inducement to the departments to hire natives. You 
simply, once again — and I guess perhaps this is a microcosm of 
your whole department, whole  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4036 
 

problems with the public service — you simply don’t have the 
structures in place or the people in place to make this happen. I 
have one question. The member for Souris-Cannington may stop 
his frowning. I am winding down. 
 
Mr. Minister, it has to do with the early retirements. I wonder, Mr. 
Minister, if any actuarial studies were done with respect to the 
increased cost of those early retirements — with respect to the 
increased cost of those early retirements. To a casual observer who 
was not entirely, I must admit, not entirely familiar with the 
intimate detail of those early retirements, it appears to me that 
those retirees were getting an enriched pension without anyone 
making an additional contribution to the pension fund. You were, 
therefore, increasing the unfunded liability,. In effect you’re 
borrowing from future generations. 
 
Now if I’m wrong, Mr. Minister, I’m happy to be wrong, but I 
think that’s an accurate statement that they got an enriched 
pension without any additional contributions being made to the 
superannuation fund. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: I’m getting into some of this technical stuff. 
I’m not real conversant on it, but PEBA (Public Employees 
Benefits Agency) looked at it relative to the actuarial soundness. It 
was obviously something that had a great . . . was given a great 
deal of attention. The projected annualized savings over five years 
is $226,380,000. And I mean, the essential element in this early 
retirement scheme, I think for myself and many others, if you look 
at it very conceptually, is early retirement only works if you don’t 
back-fill one for every one that takes early retirement. 
 
At the same time we recognized that we had to make sure we had 
the critical functions covered. And we set for ourselves a goal of 
only back-filling, one-third across government. That means that 
some departments might fill three out of three, others might zero 
out of three, and that’s the basis for how it works, if you like. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I’m just simply not interested in 
those figures as to what you think you’ve saved. That was not the 
question I asked. The question I asked, Mr. Minister, is what is the 
additional cost to the superannuation fund of the enriched 
pensions. 
 
It will suffice, Mr. Minister, if there was an actuarial study done, if 
you simply undertake to supply it to me. If there wasn’t an 
actuarial study done, then there’s a couple of more questions 
which follow. But if you have an actuarial study and will give me 
a copy of it, that will suffice for this evening, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I mentioned it comes under PEBA, the 
Minister of Finance, as I understand it. And I can undertake to see 
if in fact that they can make it available to us. I don’t have any 
difficulty with it, except that I don’t have it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, are you saying — whether or 
not a copy was done — nobody bothered to give your Public 
Service Commission a look at it? I just can’t believe that, Mr. 
Minister. I can’t believe you’d do  

this without an actuarial study, and I can’t believe that your 
commission doesn’t have it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As I understand it, they made the 
recommendation to it. We didn’t enter into this exercise in 
isolation, but they’re the pension experts and it made good sense 
to use them, and if they were satisfied, we were satisfied. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 33 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Public Service Commission 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 33 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Are there any questions? 
 
That, it is my pleasure to inform the Assembly, is the end of the 
1977-78 estimates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, just before we close off 
Public Service Commission, I’d just like to thank my officials for 
not only their help tonight but their help over a particularly 
strenuous year since I’ve been minister in charge of the Public 
Service Commission. It’s been a year of challenges, and I think 
it’s fair to say that some of that uncertainty and insecurity is well 
behind us now. They’ve performed above and beyond the call of 
duty, if you like, and I just would want you and other members — 
indeed the people in Saskatchewan — to know how much we 
appreciate their efforts over the last year an indeed over the last 
several years, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I also 
want to thank their officials for their courtesy in attending this 
evening and assisting us. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’m interested in your comment that there are no 
more estimates to be done. legislation? Did we do that this 
afternoon . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, I may have missed 
that. All right. 
 

Motions for Supply 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1987, the sum of 
$380,295,180 be granted out of the Consolidated Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1988, the sum of 
$1,042,379,600 be granted out of the  

  



 
November 5, 1987 

4037 
 

Consolidated Fund. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman: 
 

Resolved that toward making good the supply granted to Her 
Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public service 
for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1987, the sum of $20 
million be granted out of the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman: 
 

Resolved that toward making good the supply granted to Her 
Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public service 
for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1988, the sum of 
$269,036,300 be granted out of the Saskatchewan Heritage 
Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
move that the resolutions be now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the resolutions 
read a first and second time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
move: 
 

Bill No. 98, An Act for the Granting to Her Majesty certain 
sums of money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Years 
Ending Respectively on March 31, 1987 and March 31, 
1988, be now introduced and read a first time. 

 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The Minister has indicated that the Bill be read 
with leave later this day. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I was under the impression, and I 
apologize to the Chamber, that we had not gone into the 
committee on this Bill and I thought we had, and I understand that 
it’s been already . . . that’s already been done. And the resolution 
. . . and so we’re down to simply the final speeches with regard to 
the budget and I apologize for that. And I would be prepared, with 
the permission of the House, to proceed with that at this point in 
time. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This particular 
session clearly has been a very long, and in many ways, a difficult 
session, I think, for members on all sides of the House. What we 
. . . We began this session later than usual, and that was as a result 
of an election coming and, of course, the process that follows after 
an election in reorganizing the government and preparing a 
budget. 
 
I think what this budget did, as presented by the Minister of 
Finance, who is unable to be here tonight, Mr. Speaker, because he 
is in Toronto attending a meeting of Finance ministers from across 
the country, raising the concern, Mr. Speaker, at that meeting 
about the new tax reform proposal that the federal government 
would impact upon Saskatchewan farmers with regard to a new 
system of accounting that would have serious and significant 
ramifications on Saskatchewan farmers at a time when 
Saskatchewan farmers can ill afford to have a system that brings in 
their inventory into income and therefore have to pay significantly 
more taxation. So from that point of view, I will stand in his place 
tonight. 
 
I will be very brief at this point in time, Mr. Speaker. let me say 
this: as we set about this year to deal with this particular budget, 
the problems we faced were no different than the problems that are 
faced by many farmers in the province of Saskatchewan — a 
situation where their revenues, being the price of wheat, had fallen 
and fallen dramatically. It had fallen dramatically because of 
events, not of their making, but of events that were of the making 
of the greater part of the world. And that, to a degree, was the 
trade wars between United States and Europe. They had the 
significant effect of driving down the price of wheat, and we all 
understand that, those who are in any way associated with rural 
constituencies or those of us who have members of our family in 
the farming industry. 
 
They are faced with the same type of problem that the government 
is faced with, and that’s because government reflects that 
particular situation on the farm, which is such a large part of our 
economy. The farmer has been faced with the problem of revenues 
dropping, expenditures still continuing, the interest rates still 
ticking, the cost of fertilizer going up, the cost of chemicals going 
up, and the same type of thing exists with government. Revenues 
drop when you have that problem in the farm economy and other 
economies. And that’s what is, in fact, seen and that’s what has, in 
fact, happened. 
 
And we as a government, not unlike the farmer, had to face up to 
that reality — and as hard many farmers have had to do of 
tightening their belt, pulling in and making cuts. None of those are 
easy. Just as you cut back on maybe as much fertilizer as you’d 
like to use or cut back on the chemicals or the ability to buy a new 
tractor or a new combine, government also had to pare down and 
cut back. 
 
And like the farmer you can say, well we could solve that problem 
if we just didn’t take a holiday this year. All farmers know that 
that doesn’t work. The reality is you’ve got to get to the issues and 
to the items that cost, and cost significantly. And you have to try 
pulling those down just as government has to try to pull the 
expenditures of  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4038 
 

government down in a way that one preserves the basic farm, just 
as we have to do it, that we preserve the basic and fundamentals of 
what government provides. And that’s what we’ve attempted and 
tried to do today. That’s exactly what this budget has been about. 
 
And cuts there were, and nobody ever likes making cuts that is a 
politician. But whether you like it or not, you have to do it. You 
have to do it in the interests of today, but most importantly you 
have to do it in the interests of tomorrow, just like the farmer has 
to make those cut-backs if the farmer wants to preserve that farm 
and preserve that way of life. And that’s exactly what we’ve done. 
We’ve had to say in the field of health care and education, which 
are two very fundamental questions a government must provide, 
that you must try to get by with what you had last year. We’re not 
going cut it back, but can you live with the same amount of money 
that you has last year. 
 
And we thought that wasn’t that much to ask. We knew it was 
going to be some stress involved in that, and we knew that there 
was going to have to be some uproar, and there was, but we had to 
do it, just as a farmer had to do it. 
 
We made sure that we preserved health care spending, and we 
made sure that we preserved spending in education, and we made 
sure that we did what we could for the farm community of this 
province, and we’ve done . . . I think anybody, if they wanted to 
be fair in the analysis of this government, would be wrong if they 
said that his government has not stood and helped and assisted the 
farmers of this province through some very difficult times. I think 
that would be a fair statement by anybody to make. 
 
Some, obviously, say we’ve give them too much, and then there’s 
others on the farm that are pressed, say we haven’t given them 
enough and need more and more. And you must find a balance, 
and that’s what it is to be a responsible government in this 
particular time and this particular cycle. 
 
And we had to, as well, look at trying to contain that debt, and I 
think that the moves made in this budget certainly cut down the 
debt that was growing in a very, very difficult and troublesome 
way in this province. 
 
And if you’re going to cut down that debt, Mr. Speaker, as you 
must do, as the farmer must do, there’s no easy way of doing that. 
We can sit and say, you shouldn’t have done this and you 
shouldn’t have done that and you shouldn’t have taxed and you 
shouldn’t have cut. But is that really responsible and is that really 
realistic to the problem that you have to do? 
 
In simple mathematics, Mr. Speaker, the reality is if you’re going 
to pull down the debt of government, there’s only two ways of 
doing it. You can raise additional revenues, or you can cut 
expenditures that you have there. In this budget, we sought to try 
to seek a balance. Neither one of those are very popular politically, 
and neither one of those are likely to draw many votes for you or 
many praises for you. The average person will say, well why tax 
me? Tax the other guy. And he will say, don’t cut my program; 
cut somebody else’s program. And that’s the reality that we must 
face up to. 
 

(2030) 
 
This debate on the budget, I think to a degree did not focus on, and 
I think should have focused on, the reality and the economic 
realities that we face in this province and in this country. We can 
spend hours and days and days on estimates as it related, let’s say, 
to the Department of Environment. I don’t know what it was, 30, 
almost 30 days. It seemed like for ever, and we didn’t address 
those fundamental questions, Mr. Speaker. We spent, in this 
Assembly dealing with this budget, Mr. Speaker, 15 to 20 times, 
more times, more hours of this legislature’s time on the 
Department of the Environment than we did on the Department of 
Agriculture. Now coming from a rural constituency and 
representing farmers, I wonder if we should pat ourselves on the 
back. And I say to the members of the opposition, should they pat 
themselves on the back that they have given small attention to that 
field of agriculture? 
 
The issues, Mr. Speaker, in modern society are complex. The 
issues of modern society, Mr. Speaker, are not going to be dealt 
with by rhetoric; they are going to be dealt with by proper 
assessment of the problem and action. I think that’s what people 
want. People don’t like, and have not become accustomed in this 
province for a long period of time, to have to face up to that. What 
we’re facing up to is the same thing that the rest of the country is 
going to have to face up to. How do we deal with our farmers? 
How do we deal with education that is so fundamental to deal 
with, and change it because it needs changing and deal with the 
whole area of health care, and at the same time, Mr. Speaker, find 
ways by which we can diversify the economy of our province? We 
can no longer simply rely on the fact that we can grow wheat on 
summer fallow, and that we can pull oil out of the ground, or pull 
potash out of the ground, and all will be well. We must seek ways 
to diversify and that is an effort that this government has made. 
And I think the success of this government has been the capacity 
to develop those additional projects, whether it’s an upgrader in 
the city of Regina; a new paper plant in the city of Prince Albert; a 
new recreation vehicle manufacturing plant in the city of North 
Battleford; Marubeni-Hitachi in the city of Saskatoon. And the list 
goes on and on and I won’t dwell on it tonight in this late hour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what this budget was about is the following things: 
protect our health care system; reform our education system; 
protect our farmers; and build and diversify our economy. That is 
not an easy challenge, Mr. Speaker. That is what this budget was 
about, that is what this legislature was about. I believe it is a good 
start, Mr. Speaker. I believe that the people will see the way it has 
to be done and the direction that we’re going to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that this budget put a change in the 
direction of the fundamental politics of this province and, Mr. 
Speaker, I believe in the long run that the people of this province 
and the system of government in this province and the system of 
providing services in this province will be better for it. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4039 
 

address this Bill with a few remarks this evening, because, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that what we have witnessed, during this session 
and during this budget debate and during the consideration of 
these estimates, deserves the attention of the members of this 
House in the same way that it has received attention by the public 
throughout all of Saskatchewan. 
 
They have not received it well, Mr. Speaker. They have received it 
with disappointment and with a sense of betrayal. 
 
Now the member began, opposite, by saying that this has been a 
difficult session. yes, it has been a difficult session. For whom has 
it been a difficult session? it’s been a difficult session for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — It’s been a difficult session for the people of 
Saskatchewan because they have been faced with the harshest and 
the cruellest cut in essential services that this province has ever 
seen in its existence, while the government at the same time has 
been imposing on them the highest tax increases that this province 
has ever seen in its history. 
 
Oh it may have been difficult for the government members. The 
opposition does not complain, because in the opposition we 
believe we have a responsibility to raise the issues that the people 
are concerned about. It may have been difficult for the government 
members, but the polls and where they stand on those polls are 
their concerns, and they created the kind of situation that they find 
themselves in. 
 
Now I found it really ironical — I would have said laughable, but 
this is not a laughable matter — when I sat here and listened to 
that minister get up and he said, the farmer . . The problems faced 
by government are no different than the problems faced by the 
farmer. Well they are different, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want the member from Cut Knife to know that they are 
different in this way. That the farmers of this province have 
serious problems is true. That’s why in the opposition we have 
asked time after time after time for that government to tell them 
when they’re going to get their deficiency payment, and they’ve 
refused. They have refused. The Premier put on the order paper in 
the early part of July a resolution which said very clearly: 
 

That this Assembly call on the Government of Canada to 
continue support of agriculture (by) announcing immediately 
its intention (for) . . . a deficiency payment of $1.6 billion . . . 

 
They put that on the order paper in July and to this day this 
government has never brought that item up for debate in this 
legislature. That’s how much priority they put in the problems that 
the farmer faces. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Farmers of this province have problems, 
but it is not because they’re bad managers.  

They are the most efficient farmers in the world. The difference 
the members opposite should understand is that the government 
has problems because they have mismanaged the affairs of this 
province to the extent where they have created those problems for 
themselves. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — That’s the difference, Mr. Speaker, because 
of mismanagement, because of dishonesty. The farmer’s revenues 
dropped drastically while his costs went up. But the revenues of 
this government did not drop. The revenues of this government 
went up. The people have paid more income tax and continue to 
pay more income tax than they did in 1982. People have paid 
more property tax when they took away the property improvement 
grant. The people are paying many millions of dollars more in 
sales tax. 
 
The oil revenues that this government had available to it did not 
drop for the longest period of time. In 1981, oil revenues to 
Saskatchewan were $533 million, and the government of that day 
balanced the budget and ran a surplus of $140 million, but in 1984 
this government had oil revenues of $740 million and they ran a 
massive deficit. That’s mismanagement. That’s the difference, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a fallacious argument to say that the problems of this 
government and the problems of the farmer are the same, because 
they’re not. The farmer has managed; this government has not 
managed; and it has wasted money and has handed out in 
patronage to the extent that now they have created a debt for the 
people of Saskatchewan of $3.4 billion. And they are to blame for 
that deficit and that debt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now the minister opposite says that there 
was not an addressing of the fundamental issues. Well I want to 
say to this House and through you, Mr. Speaker, what were the 
issues? The issues were: is this government fair? That was the 
debate in this House and the resounding conclusion was, no, this 
government has not been fair with the people. The issue is: has 
this government been sensitive? No, it has not been sensitive. Has 
this government been honest? No, it has not been honest. Has this 
government been competent? It has been extremely incompetent. 
Has this government been secretive? It has been so secretive, Mr. 
Speaker, that it has not provided public accounts when they should 
have been provided. It did not provide the budget until June 17, 
months after the fiscal year began. It has instructed officials in the 
Crown corporations not to provide information to the Provincial 
Auditor which by law he is required to have. This is a secretive 
government. The issue is: has this government been, and is it 
credible? And the answer is no. 
 
On all of those measures, Mr. Speaker, the report card records 
failure. They have failed the people of Saskatchewan. The people 
of this province were shown something during this debate. The 
people were shown what this government’s real agenda is. A 
significant thing that has come out of this session is, the public of 
Saskatchewan know what the PC agenda for the province of 
Saskatchewan is. The people have been deceived and  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4040 
 

they have been betrayed and they have been disappointed. They 
were promised tax cuts. Instead they have received massive tax 
increases in an unfair way, while friends of the government have 
tax decreases at $300 million a year in the oil industry. 
 
The people were promised improved health care, and instead our 
health care programs have been ravaged by this Conservative 
government. The people were told that jobs and education would 
be improved. Instead, Mr. Speaker, we have record unemployment 
and students are being turned away today from our universities 
and our technical schools. That is the agenda of this government 
that has come forward and the people have known to understand. 
It has been revealed. 
 
But what makes it even worse is that the agenda of this 
government is tied to the agenda of the Mulroney government in 
Ottawa. The Premier showed, in this session and in this debate on 
this budget, that he is completely tied to the Mulroney agenda on 
any and every issue. He’s prepared to sell out this province as he 
has on some occasions. He’s prepared to sell out this province to 
carry out the wishes of the Prime Minister because he thinks he 
owes him something. And as a result, Mr. Speaker, one has to ask: 
who speaks for Saskatchewan? The Premier doesn’t speak for 
Saskatchewan. He’s prepared to give in on every issue that’s 
important to Saskatchewan and western Canada and betray the 
people who elected him to be the Premier. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the public of Saskatchewan is demanding 
honesty. It’s demanding competence and it’s demanding fairness. 
And instead, what this government has shown in this debate is that 
it’s arrogant, that it’s secretive, that it’s incompetent, and that it’s 
dishonest. Those are some of the fundamental issues that have 
been debated and discussed in this budget. 
 
Let’s go to the beginning. Why, Mr. Speaker, was the budget so 
late? Oh I know the Minister of Finance said, well the budget had 
to be late because they were doing so thorough an analysis. And 
yet when he came to this House with his legislation in committee 
on the gasoline tax, he couldn’t answer one single question that 
was asked by the critic from Regina North West. He took all this 
time to prepare so carefully and yet he didn’t have the answers. 
 
That’s not the reason for the delay in the budget. The reason was 
because they wanted to hide as much of that Tory agenda from the 
people of Saskatchewan as possible, and they knew that the 
moment they called this House into session, that agenda would be 
exposed, as it was. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Speaker, this government did not 
finally come forward with a session and a budget until the New 
Democratic Party had a legal opinion and forced the government 
to call a session and introduce the budget under threat of having to 
be taken to the courts to justify what they were doing. Only then 
did they act, Mr. Speaker. 
 

(2045) 
 
There’s been a cruel betrayal. There’s been a betrayal of the trust 
that the people have given to this government and other 
governments with regard to health care. In this year of the 25th 
anniversary of the introduction of medicare, one would have 
thought that we would have been able to celebrate this great 
achievement on the North American continent, and instead there 
was no reason to celebrate because the government had served 
notice that it intends to undermine medicare and our health 
programs until, in their view, they are privatized and are much like 
those in the United States. 
 
And we saw an example today in question period, when the 
example was brought by the Leader of the Opposition, that 
chronically ill patients are now being charged when they get their 
medication dispensed. Now how can anyone defend that as being 
the kind of medicare and hospitalization programs that the people 
of Saskatchewan built and cared for and developed? 
 
Is building medicare and improving it, cutting back on the 
prescription drug plan so that people have to pay hundreds of 
dollars a month? People who have to pay up to a half of their 
monthly income for prescription drugs and then hope that the 
government might return some of it in five, six, seven weeks? 
 
It isn’t building medicare when you take thousands of children and 
you say to them, you will no longer have a dental plan like you 
used to have under the children’s dental program because they’re 
going to privatize it and they’re going to fire 400 dental therapists, 
and now people have to drive 60 or 70 miles to see a dentist and 
they used to be able to send their children to the school and get the 
care? That budget destroys that program. 
 
Is it building medicare, Mr. Speaker, and the hospitalization and 
the health programs, when we see, in the city of Saskatoon alone, 
the waiting lists growing to 11,000 people who are waiting for 
surgery? That’s not building our health care program, Mr. 
Speaker; that’s destroying it. That’s a betrayal of promises made 
by each and every one of those Conservative members since 1982. 
 
It’s a betrayal, Mr. Speaker, and what has been the response of the 
government? Seven thousand people in June came to this 
legislature to say to the Premier they did not agree with the 
approach that he was taking. Did he listen? No. He stood up and 
he said, they’re a bunch of radicals. 
 
One hundred thousand people signed petitions expressing their 
concern about this devastating attack on our health programs, and 
what did the Premier say? He said, they’re all childish. They’re all 
childish, he said. 
 
Today the Premier threatened to slap people around who didn’t 
agree with what he had to say — in this House, this distinguished 
Premier. Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say this to him. this 
government and this Premier has slapped our senior citizens 
around; he has slapped our sick people around; he has slapped the 
poor around; he has slapped our students around; he has slapped 
workers  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4041 
 

around; he has slapped our farmers around — and people of this 
province are sick and tired of being slapped around. And come the 
next election, they’re going to slap him right out of office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Is it any wonder that it’s now over four 
months since the Conservative member in Saskatoon Eastview has 
resigned, leaving those people without representation, and the 
Premier has still not called a by-election? 
 
It shouldn’t matter so much whether the government will lose a 
member or the opposition will gain one. I think the results on this 
one are pretty evident. What should matter is: are the people in the 
democratic state being represented by their member? And in this 
case, they’re not. And when the Premier is asked, when will you 
call a by-election; he laughs it off and says, whenever he wants to. 
It shouldn’t be solely his decision. It should be a decision based on 
what the needs of the people are, it should be based on fairness, 
and it should be based on honesty. 
 
Now what we have seen also in this budget debate, Mr. Speaker, is 
a huge deception — a huge deception. A year ago last March the 
Minister of Finance stood in this House and he said to the people 
of Saskatchewan that he had the budget under control. He had the 
budget under control and it was going to be $389 million. In 
August . . . That’s what the deficit would be. 
 
In August of 1986, I said, and other members said, the deficit was 
going to be much more than that, and the Minister of Finance said, 
absolutely not. And the Premier went around the province during 
the election and he said, absolutely not more than $500 million. 
And guess what it was? It turned out to be $1.2 billion, and they 
knew it all the time and they didn’t tell the public what it was 
going to be. They deceived the people of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s one of the fundamental issues that was 
debated in this budget debate. 
 
Another broken promise, Mr. Speaker, was that of the promise of 
jobs. What does this budget provide in job creation? It provides 
nothing. As a matter of fact, it cut back by 70 per cent the summer 
job creation program for students so that students this summer, in 
many cases, went all summer without a job. Not only did they cut 
back on the assistance that students could go to university, but 
they cut back on the job programs which students used to rely on 
so they could fund their way back into university. Another broken 
promise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is a betrayal of the people of 
Saskatchewan. It betrays the election promises made in 1982 and 
in 1986. It betrays Saskatchewan young people from whom hope 
has been taken away. It betrays medicare and our health programs. 
It betrays rural Saskatchewan and our family farmers. It betrays all 
of those things that they, opposite, promised the people of 
Saskatchewan that they would do. 
 
And what’s the legacy? The legacy is this: this government took in 
1982 a surplus of $140 million,  

which they had in the kitty that they could have put to good use, 
and they have run that $140 million surplus into an accumulated 
deficit of $3.4 billion since 1982 — five short years. And the 
result of that is that this year and every year forward, under that 
deficit, the people of Saskatchewan have to pay $300 million of 
interest to the loaning companies and the banks in Eastern Canada 
and the United States before they can spend a penny to repair their 
roads or pay nurses’ salaries or pay for people who are waiting for 
surgery in our hospitals. 
 
What is the other legacy? Well, Mr. Speaker, in March of 1982, 
this province had an equity of $1.09 billion — $1 billion. That was 
net equity. Putting it into simple terms, if the Minister of Finance 
decided to sell off everything that the province had, there would 
have been an equity left . . a surplus left of $1 billion. Do you 
know today, Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Finance did that in 
1987, disposed of all the assets of the province, we would be still 
left with a debt of $1.9 billion. That’s the kind of debacle that this 
government has brought about because of their mismanagement. 
 
The issue in this budget hasn’t been the things that the minister 
announced in this budget speech. The issue has been the things 
which I mentioned a little earlier. It’s been the Tory, conservative 
agenda. It’s an agenda which says, tear everything down, tear 
everything down the generations of Saskatchewan people working 
together have built so that they could better their life and so that 
their children could have a better life. Tear it down and ask 
somebody from outside to come here and build it in their own 
way. 
 
The Mulroney-Reagan trade agreement is a good example. Tear 
down the security that farmers used to have and invite American 
investors to come in and buy up the farm land. Let them buy it up 
and let the farmers be the serfs of the landowners who won’t even 
live in this country. That’s the Conservative agenda. That’s the 
Conservative agenda. 
 
They never believed in a universal health care program. People 
have been told, people have known that for some time, but they 
now are reconfirmed in that belief because of what this 
government has done to health care. It is clear that this 
government is destroying health care because they don’t think that 
it’s an appropriate thing for people to do — to share so that 
everybody is protected as best they can. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a budget of betrayal. It is a budget that tells us 
which direction this government is heading. It is not a budget that I 
or any other member on my . . . of my colleagues on this side of 
the House can defend. And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
going to oppose it here in the House, we’re going to oppose it 
throughout all of Saskatchewan, and we’re going to continue to 
oppose it until the day when this Premier finally calls a by-election 
in Eastview and then one in . . general election in Saskatchewan so 
that the people can be rid of this government before they 
completely destroy the things which they have built and developed 
throughout the generations which we now have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4042 
 

(2103) 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 32 
 
Muller Martin 
Duncan Toth 
Andrew Sauder 
Berntson Johnson 
Taylor McLaren 
Smith Hopfner 
Swan Petersen 
Muirhead Swenson 
Maxwell Martens 
Hodgins Baker 
Gerich Gleim 
Hepworth Neudorf 
Hardy Gardner 
Klein Kopelchuk 
Meiklejohn Saxinger 
Pickering Britton 
 

Nays — 23 
 
Blakeney Atkinson 
Prebble Anguish 
Brockelbank Hagel 
Shillington Lyons 
Koskie Calvert 
Tchorzewski Lautermilch 
Thompson Trew 
Rolfes Smart 
Mitchell Van Mulligen 
Simard Koenker 
Solomon Goodale 
Kowalsky  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Bill read a second and third time and passed under its title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Bill No. 55 — An Act to provide for the Division of 
Saskatchewan into Constituencies for the Election of Members 

of the Legislative Assembly 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, my official is Doug Moen, 
co-ordinator of legislative services, Department of Justice. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. Chairperson, 
ordinarily when we put a new Bill in to substitute an old Bill, it’s 
done for the purpose of improving upon the old Bill, and it usually 
isn’t done unless there are very major and substantial changes that  

are necessary to improve the old Bill. 
 
Now the problem we have with this is the government has come 
forward with a new Bill that does absolutely nothing to improve 
on the old Bill. In fact we submit, Mr. Chairperson, that it goes a 
long way to destroying the principle of representation by 
population, and to destroy the good that was in the old Bill. 
 
The old Act, for example, provided for the establishment of an 
independent commission and now the government is proposing to 
politicize the commission that describes the boundaries of 
constituencies in the province of Saskatchewan. The old Act 
provided for the two northern ridings and 63 southern ridings to be 
divided up with a variation of 15 per cent only in terms of number 
of population. The new Act now comes along and it subscribes 
and it limits urban constituencies to 29 in the Act, and it subscribes 
exactly how many rural, 35; exactly how many urban, 29. It 
enshrines this in legislation and does not give the commission the 
power to determine how many urban or rural constituencies there 
should be in order to meet, as closely as reasonably possible, the 
principle of representation by population. The government has 
chosen to sway from that principle and move substantially far 
afield in their new Bill. 
 
The old Bill provided for public hearings on the matter and for 
public involvement. The old Bill provided for that, Mr. 
Chairperson. And when one takes a look at the old Bill, one would 
readily come to the conclusion that the piece of legislation that we 
now have, that’s now before us on the books, is a fair and just 
piece of legislation. But instead the government has to come 
through with a piece of legislation that totally repeals the old Act, 
puts in its own Act for prescribing the constituency boundaries, 
politicizes the commission, moves away from the principle of 
representation by population so that the variation is 25 per cent 
now — which comes to a total of 50 per cent when you consider 
the fact it can vary on either side of the provincial quotient by 25 
per cent. You could have a constituency in Regina, for example, 
with 7,500 voters and the one next door with 12,500 voters, some 
50 per cent variation. So there’s absolutely no question that this 
new Bill does nothing, absolutely nothing to improve the law, Mr. 
Chairperson — nothing. It is simply designed to be a blueprint for 
a gerrymander by the PC government. And so my question to the 
minister is: could he please tell us what was wrong with the old 
commission that was provided for in the old piece of legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, the opposition has argued 
very eloquently on the principle of equality of vote, but they have 
not once touched on the principle of quality of vote. And, Mr. 
Chairman, the constituency boundaries commission of 1979 even 
recognized that there must be a balance between quality of vote 
and equality of vote. And I simply quote, Mr. Chairman, from that 
report of April 1980. And the first quote I will present to you 
concerns equality of representation, and it reads as follows: 
 

The right to vote is a cherished right, hard won in the past 
through resolute conviction. Stemming from this right to 
vote is the justifiable expectation  

  



 
November 5, 1987 

4043 
 

that one elector’s vote should, within reason, weigh equally 
with another elector’s vote elsewhere in the province. 

 
The second quote, Mr. Speaker, deals with quality of 
representation as opposed to quality of representation. And it’s as 
follows on page 4 of the report of April 1980: 
 

Government today is complex and sophisticated and 
constituents need ready access to the elected representative. 
Agricultural Saskatchewan has a relatively large populated 
area with a relatively sparse population. This makes the 
process of contesting elections and representing of the 
constituency by the successful candidate after the election a 
markedly different problem from that experienced by 
prospective candidates and the successful candidate in an 
urban constituency. 

 
Those two principles, Mr. Speaker, were recognized by the 
commission of 1979-80. They were recognized as well, Mr. 
Speaker, and have long been recognized, as it relates to the 
sparsely populated area of northern Saskatchewan. They have 
been recognized in other jurisdictions, and particularly in Canada 
as a whole, where, for instance, the province of New Brunswick or 
the province of Prince Edward Island constitutionally has no less 
than four members in the federal House of Commons, and by a 
simple arithmetic calculation based on a Canadian quotient, they 
would deserve fewer than that. 
 
(2115) 
 
As well, Mr. Chairman, Saskatchewan is guaranteed 14 . . . 
constitutionally no less than 14 seats in the House of commons. 
And recognizing the principle of quality of representation as well 
as equality of representation, Saskatchewan has been guaranteed 
14 members in the House of Commons. And by a strictly 
arithmetic calculation based on the Canadian quotient, my guess is 
that Saskatchewan would, in fact, have much less representation in 
the House of Commons. 
 
In addition, Mr. Chairman, the member argues that the 25 per cent 
variance to the quotient is somehow out of line and that it ought 
not to be. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, British Columbia has a 25 per cent variance; 
Manitoba, north of the 53rd parallel, of course. Ontario has a 25 
per cent variance; Quebec has a 25 per cent variance; Canada has 
a 25 per cent variance; and, Mr. Chairman, Newfoundland has a 
25 per cent variance. So what we’re talking about here, Mr. 
speaker, are two principles recognized by the electoral boundaries 
commission back in 1979-80, and by others in other jurisdictions, 
Mr. Speaker, where quality and equality of vote must be 
considered. And with the growing urban populations, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s right and proper that that be taken into consideration. So with 
the growing urban populations in the two major centres there has 
been recognition of that, and it is therefore recommended in this 
legislation that each of Saskatoon and Regina have one more seat 
added to those particular centres. 
 
It’s also recognized, Mr. Speaker, that the urban  

population — as was recognized for the northern population for a 
long time in this province — that the urban population is flat at 
best and, in some areas, may be declining. It’s recognized that 
while the principle of equality of vote is very important, the 
principle of quality of vote must also be taken into consideration. 
And therefore, Mr. Chairman, we have done just that and taken the 
principle of quality and equality into consideration in drafting this 
legislation. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, that is just a red herring and you 
know it. For you to go into this long explanation about equality 
and quality, the 15 per cent variation that existed in the old piece 
of legislation met those principles fully. and the only reason for 
the increase to 25 per cent is to meet your party’s personal 
political agenda. 
 
So let’s be up front about this. It wasn’t necessary, Mr. Minister, 
for the purpose of meeting both principles. 
 
What I want to know, which was my question, Mr. Minister, and 
you didn’t answer it, is: what was wrong with the old 
commission? What was wrong with the old commission the way it 
was established? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, in the 
view of many, particularly those that were the drafters of the 
throne speech that talked about this kind of legislation coming 
forward in this session almost a year ago, I would guess — I don’t 
recall just exactly what day the throne speech was tabled — but it 
was important, it was important to those people, Mr. Speaker, that 
particularly in rural Saskatchewan and in northern Saskatchewan 
that the principle, the two principles, of equality and quality of 
vote be recognized and dealt with. 
 
And with urban growth and with either flat or declining rural 
populations, it was the belief of those people that there was some 
adjustment necessary to accommodate the urban . . . or pardon me, 
the rural populations in this province. 
 
Now let me give you an example, and this is as simple as I can 
make it. In the city of Regina under this new legislation you will 
have 11 MLAs, 11 MLAs to deal with one city council, two 
school boards, you know, and the several interest groups that exist 
in the city of Regina and so on, and you do all that within a 
20-mile or a 10-mile radius. 
 
In Souris-Cannington, this constituency that I represent, I have 
probably four school boards, 20-odd urban municipal bodies, four 
hospital boards, eight, I think, rural municipalities, plus all of the 
interest groups. East and west, I have about 110 miles to cover; 
north and south, I have about 80 miles to cover. 
 
What we’re talking about there, Mr. Chairman, is quality of 
representation — quality as opposed to equality. And, I mean, you 
don’t have to be, you don’t have to be too smart — even some 
members opposite should be able to figure this out — that the 
quality of vote in our sparsely populated areas deserves 
consideration. It has been recognized in other jurisdictions. It has 
been recognized by Canada as it relates to our northern 
populations, and Prince Edward island, and even Saskatchewan — 
and it  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4044 
 

should be recognized by Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairperson, what the minister refuses to 
realize is that we are not arguing about quality of representation as 
he claims he has in his constituency of Souris-Cannington. What is 
happening in the cities is that they aren’t being properly 
represented. We’re not suggesting that you should have a larger 
area to cover, necessarily, but what you could do is increase the 
number of seats in urban centres. You don’t necessarily meet 
quality of representation in rural Saskatchewan by keeping the city 
seats, the number of city seats down. That doesn’t meet the 
principle of quality of representation in rural Saskatchewan. That 
argument’s totally illogical. 
 
So you keep it down to 29 urban seats because that’s going to give 
you better representation in Souris-Cannington? That’s your logic, 
Mr. Minister, and that just doesn’t work. You still haven’t 
answered my question. What was wrong with the old 
commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I went through it once. But 
let me tell you, Mr. Chairman, what other people are saying, what 
other people are saying about this legislation. And I have . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Let’s talk about Dr. Norman Ward. What 
did Dr. Ward say? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’d like to talk about that a little later. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, this is the Leader-Post of Friday, October 30. 
This says, in part, “This has the opposition crying foul.” We’re 
talking about the 25 per cent variance and the 29 urban seats 
versus the 35 rural seats. 
 

This has the Opposition crying foul and the government 
defending the changes on (the) grounds of greater distances 
. . . (sparse population, etc., etc.) 

 
In fact, (they say) the 25-per-cent variance is in keeping with 
the provision of the Electoral Boundaries Readjustment Act, 
which allows deviations of that magnitude from the average 
constituency population when setting (federal) boundaries 
. . . 

 
It goes on to say, Mr. Chairman: 
 

While the concept of each vote having an equal weight 
squares with the ideal of one-man-one-vote, it has long been 
recognized that absolute adherence to the principle of 
representation by population is impractical under our 
electoral system. Within that voting regime, there is implicit 
the notion that in addition to representing individual voters, 
an MP or MLA represents a community of interest reflecting 
the distinct human and geographic characteristics of a 
constituency — be it urban, rural or suburban. 

 
An unwillingness to recognize this on the provincial level — 
say, in terms of the role  

agriculture and rural life play in this province — could make 
it all the harder to press home that point federally. 
 
Measures built into the federal electoral laws prevent a 
reduction below 14 (in this province, the House of Commons 
representation in 1976) in the number of Saskatchewan MPs, 
even though by strict mathematical reckoning, we (should) 
have less. 
 
In pressing its case for what it contends is a (fair) distribution 
of seats provincially, the Opposition (and this is that 
chronicle of truth and honesty, the Leader-Post, the 
opposition) inadvertently may be playing right into the hands 
of those who would like nothing better than to pare down 
this province’s political representation in Ottawa. 

 
Mr. Chairman, the only point I make here — and the major point 
to be made relative to this Bill — is that there are two principles to 
be recognized and a balance to be found between the two 
principles; and that is the principle of equality of representation 
and the quality of representation. 
 
It’s not new; it’s not new. It exists in Canada; it exists in 
Newfoundland and in Alberta and in Ontario and in Quebec, and 
we don’t claim any originality to the concept. We think it’s right, 
we think it’s fair; we think that rural Canada makes a 
disproportionate contribution to the economy and the life of our 
province and should therefore be recognized through quality of 
vote for that contribution. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Well that’s a very nice lecture, Mr. Minister, but 
you still haven’t answered my question which was: what was 
wrong with the old commission? And I’m rapidly coming to the 
conclusion, Mr. Minister, that you don’t want to answer the 
question. But I’m going to give you one more chance. What was 
wrong with the old commission, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, far be it from me to suggest 
that there is anything fundamentally wrong with the old 
commission. I just happen to believe that the new commission is 
better. And that’s not my opinion alone. 
 
And I want to quote, I want to quote again from another chronicle 
of honesty and truth, the Star-Phoenix, when it talks about the new 
Act would change membership on the commission. 
 

The next Act would change membership on the commission 
from one judge, the Clerk at the legislature, an appointee of 
the Speaker, selected in consultation with government and 
opposition leaders, to the two judges, (pardon me, two 
judges), and the chief Electoral Officer. The latter ( and they 
acknowledge — the latter), although a government 
appointee, should have the technical expertise which would 
recommend him to the job while the impartiality of the 
commission as a whole with the two judges (Mr. Speaker, 
Mr. Chairman) remains unchallenged. 

 
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4045 
 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, what the old commission consisted 
of — which was a very independent commission — a judge 
appointed by the chief judge for Saskatchewan, the Clerk of the 
Legislative Assembly, which is a non-political person, an officer 
of this Assembly, and one member appointed by the Speaker after 
consultation with the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition. So 
there was even consultation with the Leader of the Opposition 
under the old commission. 
 
(2130) 
 
This new commission however removes the Clerk of the 
Legislative Assembly — he is no longer there — and substitutes it 
with a person who is appointed by cabinet and who is a political 
appointment, and that’s the Chief Electoral Officer. And there is 
absolutely no question in the minds of the public or any 
right-minded person in this province who . . . There’s absolutely 
no question that that politicizes the commission. There’s no 
question about that. 
 
And for you to deny that, Mr. Minister, is not being up front with 
this House, because that is now a political commission. There was 
— and the answer to my question is — there was nothing wrong 
with the old commission. The old commission was good and 
workable, and you wanted to change it in order to politicize the 
commission. That’s why you changed the commission. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — And you’ve been quoting at length at some 
editorial in the Leader-Post that you’ve read. And I just want to 
say, Mr. Minister, that Dr. Norman Ward, a political scientist from 
the University of Saskatchewan, does not agree with you. He is so 
appalled by the way this Bill has been set up that he has said he 
wouldn’t sit on this commission even if he was asked to. And I 
might suggest that I think he’s been involved in former . . . has he 
not? . . . He’s been involved in former constituency boundary 
reviews. He said he wouldn’t even sit on this commission if he 
was asked. That’s how fair he thinks your commission is and your 
Bill is. 
 
Now with respect to another point that you’ve been making about 
representation by population and taking it too far. We have said 
we agree with a variation, and that’s the 15 per cent, but we also 
say that your 25 per cent variation wasn’t necessary in order to 
meet the two principles of equality and quality. It wasn’t 
necessary. But even more so, if you want to meet the principle of 
quality of representation in rural Saskatchewan, fine, we have no 
problem with that. We want quality of representation in rural 
Saskatchewan, but that doesn’t mean that urban centres should 
suffer in as much as their vote counts less in order for you to meet 
these standards. The two don’t follow, Mr. Minister. They don’t 
follow, and it’s not necessary that one suffers in order for the 
others to meet their standards. 
 
So I would like to know also — with respect to determining the 
provincial quotient, what the old legislation did was to take 
northern Saskatchewan population for calculating the quotient for 
northern Saskatchewan, and the southern quotient was calculated  

by looking at the southern population. Now, Mr. Minister, why 
have you changed that formula? Could you please tell us what was 
wrong with determining the provincial quotient in the old manner? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We’ve come quite a distance since we 
started here several minutes ago. We have the member now 
acknowledging that there are two fundamental and important 
principles to be considered in designing, if you like, constituencies 
or constituency boundaries. When we began it was the equality 
principle that she acknowledged, and that was it. Now she’s 
acknowledging that yes, quality, quality of vote is also important, 
and she acknowledges that now. 
 
And the question as it relates to the 25 per cent variance in the 
quotient difference between the North and the South as it 
previously existed, we are saying that the quotient, the provincial 
quotient should be the provincial quotient. And because of the 
unique situation in the North where distances and scarcity are 
considerably different than they are in the South, and where in the 
South rural they are considerably different than they are in the 
South urban, we have said that we will have the provincial 
quotient, but in the North there will be a 50 per cent variance, in 
the South rural there will be a 25 per cent variance, and in the 
south urban there will be an 25 per cent variance. 
 
A couple of examples of how wonky things got between the filing 
of the last report and the legislation of the old commission was 
tabled, and the last election. In the city of Saskatoon, it was . . . 
Mayfair . . . Mayfair was well beyond, like well beyond the . . . 
And in the old scheme of things, Mr. Chairman, in the old scheme 
of things, there was a review every eight years, and that was it; 
then it was fixed, and it was rigid. Now, when any constituency 
gets beyond the 25 per cent variance, it triggers a review, and so it 
can be adjusted from time to time to maintain, Mr. Chairman, not 
only equality of vote, but quality of vote. 
 
So I hope the member understands those two very important 
principles: the provincial quotient, the reason for the higher 
quotient in the North, and the reason for the urban and rural 
distinction in the South. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, we have always acknowledged the 
need for a variation, for some allowance with respect to distances 
in rural Saskatchewan, but you’re eroding the principle of equality 
of vote, and that’s why we’ve been concentrating on that because 
you’re eroding that principle by enshrining in your legislation only 
29 urban seats. You’re eroding that principle, Mr. Minister. 
 
And with respect to the northern constituencies, here is what you 
have done. You’ve established a provincial quotient now that goes 
right across the province, and in order to allow for the differing 
populations in the North, you have put in a 50 per cent variation 
which, Mr. Minister, amounts to 100 per cent variation. It could be 
100 per cent variation when you look at the fact that one of those 
northern constituencies could be 50 per cent below the provincial 
and the other could be 50 per cent above. 
 
So in the two northern constituencies, one could be 100 
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4046 
 

— there could be 100 per cent more voters in one than the other 
one. That’s what this Bill does. It allows you to draw up 
constituencies in the North that make the population in one 100 
per cent larger than the population in the other, whereas under the 
old method, you used the provincial quotient for the North and 
then determined the variation off that quotient, which made a great 
deal more sense, Mr. Minister. It made a great deal more sense. 
But now you can carve up the North the way you want and the 
variation, the 100 per cent variation is legal under your Bill. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I would like to know why you have set the 
number of urban and rural constituencies in the Act, and why you 
haven’t left it up to the commission to determine how many urban 
or rural constituencies there should be. And I’m asking you why 
you’ve done that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — It’s in recognition, Mr. Speaker, of the 
report of the . . . or the principles in the report of April 1980 when 
they talked about equality and quality of representation and 
community of interest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And to the extent that it’s possible. I think it’s right and proper that 
rural seats, to the extent that they can be rural, ought to be. And 
likewise, urban seats have a community of interest, and to have 2 
or 3 or 4,000 voters out of the south-east corner of Regina bump 
out into rural, surrounding Regina, probably isn’t a compatible 
community of interest. 
 
So it was determined that there would be 29 urban that we 
traditionally view as urban with Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, 
Moose Jaw, Yorkton and North Battleford and Swift Current, I 
believe, and they are wholly urban, all of those seats. And each 
constituency, I expect, that would be designed by the commission 
within those boundaries would have a common community of 
interest. Likewise in those seats that are defined as rural, would 
have a common community of interest within the boundaries 
designed by the commission, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m pleased to enter 
into the questioning on third reading of this Bill. And as I stand in 
this legislature for the first term, Mr. Chairman, I begin to notice 
that there is a pattern that develops, and I think the pattern that is 
kind of clear is that there is reason to be cautious when you’ve got 
a Bill that’s got a five in it. 
 
I notice the distinct similarity between Bill 5, that was passed in 
the wee hours of the morning on Christmas Eve in December, and 
Bill 55 that we have before us here. Both of these Bills have in 
common the fact that they represent a hunger for power and a lust 
for control and a disrespect of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan. And I find it kind of interesting, Mr. Chairman, 
that when we debated Bill 5, and as we debate Bill 55 in this 
Assembly, that not a single individual other than the minister who 
introduced the Bill had the courage to stand on the other side of 
the House and to defend the principles behind Bill 5 and Bill 55. 
 
Not a single individual had the courage to stand. And I wonder, I 
just wonder what kind of courage and commitment to principles in 
defence of the democratic  

principles of this province, what kind of courage does it take to put 
forth principles to move into secrecy and manipulation of the 
democratic function and to sit on your tongues and not even have 
the courage to put forth your arguments. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, 
that there is not a great deal of courage demonstrated by that. 
 
We saw in Bill 5 the passing of a Bill which moved out of the 
Legislative Assembly and in behind closed cabinet doors, the 
shaping of the structures of government, the shaping of 
departments of government. And on Bill 55, the one before us 
today, we have a Bill which can be concluded to be nothing other 
than a gerrymander Bill. I don’t know how you can look at the 
implications of this Bill and draw any conclusion other than that. 
 
The Bill is attempting to put in place a commission replacing an 
individual who is perceived by absolutely no one as partisan, the 
Clerk of the Legislative Assembly, and to replace that individual 
with someone who is perceived by everyone as being partisan, the 
Chief Electoral Officer, and I don’t know how anybody can 
conclude that that is not an attempt to gerrymander, to bring about 
a gerrymander in the interest of the government of the day. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Chairman, we also see a change in the rules, a change in the 
rules to move away from a deviation of 15 per cent from the norm 
for the size of ridings and to shift to a 25 per cent deviation. And I 
don’t know how anybody can conclude that that is anything other 
than an attempt to gerrymander. 
 
Everyone of us in this Assembly, and I would suggest every adult 
in the province of Saskatchewan, in our social studies, be that in 
grade 7 or wherever, learned about the principles of democracy 
and the importance of representation by population, an extremely 
important principle that has been defended over centuries — not 
just decades, but over centuries. And what we see in this Bill, Mr. 
Chairman, is the distinct denial of the principle of representation 
by population and a devious devastation and destruction of that 
democratic principle. And I say that that is a shame. 
 
Mr. Minister, as you present this Bill, we get your flowery 
explanations about quality of representation and equality of 
representation. Under the guise of both, we are destroying in this 
Bill the respect for the quality of representation that you put forth 
as a noble objective. And I wonder, Mr. Minister, why it is that 
you haven’t considered another alternative. Because as you 
present this Bill, what in effect you are saying is that the only way 
that you can have quality of representation . . . and let me put that 
into, I think, more colloquial terms, Mr. Minister, equal 
representation within this legislature. 
 
I don’t think there is anyone in Saskatchewan who believes that 
their legislative opinion, that their legislative opinion should be 
worth more than anybody else’s. I believe that the people of 
Saskatchewan strongly defend the principle of one person, one 
vote. And we all know, those of us in this House, that there is no 
one who will influence us more in our thinking, in our 
deliberations  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4047 
 

that we bring to the Legislative Assembly than the constituents in 
our own riding. And it is simply unacceptable that any one of us 
— any one of us, no matter which side of the House — that any 
one of us will be sitting in this Assembly representing 50 per cent 
more opinions than another member of the Legislative Assembly. 
And clearly the principle of representation by population demands 
that we all come to this House representing approximately the 
same number of persons, the same number of opinions that we 
bring to our legislative deliberations. 
 
Now the other issue you bring forward, Mr. Minister, and this is 
where you tried to cloud it, is in what you call the quality of 
representation. The first is the equality of representation, the 
second you call the quality of representation. That seems to me, 
Mr. Minister, to refer to nothing more, nothing more than the 
access of each of our constituents, no matter what constituency we 
represent, the access of each of our constituents to their 
government through their member of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now you and I know, Mr. Minister, that the representation that we 
give to our constituents does not depend 100 per cent on our 
effort. Now as I look across the benches, I recognize that we have 
sitting there some of the masters of incompetence, but I don’t 
believe that there is anyone on the other side who is so 
incompetent in your representation of people that you make it your 
business to take care of 100 per cent of the constituent concerns 
that come to you. 
 
An Hon. Member: — At least we get our stories straight. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Oh, the member here from Wascana, he thinks that 
that is not a noble objective, and I just wonder what kind of quality 
of representation as well as equality of representation that he 
brings to this Assembly. But, Mr. Minister, you and I both know 
that if we got our acts together that a great deal and large 
percentage — in fact a large majority — of the constituency work 
that we do is done by our constituency staff out of our 
constituency offices. And it seems to me to be a very practical 
consideration when you’re saying that some members have more 
difficulty to be accessible to their constituents in dealing with their 
problems than to deal with in a practical kind of way. 
 
Now do you do that by saying, well we just give those, some 
members, fewer people to represent so that they can have more 
access. Or is it possible to say, Mr. Minister, that a way of 
improving that access perhaps is to consider that those members 
who have more difficult ridings to serve because of geography or 
some of the other things that you’ve referred to should perhaps be 
entitled to a larger allowance, by way of office allowance or 
communications or travel allowance? 
 
We all know that in this Assembly each of us is entitled to 
allowances paid for by the taxpayers to assist in serving our 
constituents. And it would seem to me that an argument could be 
made to say that those members who represent an equal number of 
constituents, as compared to other ridings, have the right to expect 
perhaps a larger allowance, because if you’ve got a constituency 
office, as  

I have, one constituency office in Moose Jaw, I can serve all of my 
constituents. 
 
But I recognize what you said, that in your constituency you can’t 
have just one office if you’re going to be accessible to all of your 
constituents in the same kind of way. And we both know it costs 
the same to rent space whether you’re open every day or whether 
you’re open just one or two days a week; it costs the same to rent 
the space. And it would seem to me then, Mr. Minister, that if it is 
truly our objective to provide equality of representation, the riding 
should have approximately the same number of constituents. And 
if we want to provide quality of representation, then we can look 
at the allowances, in terms of office functioning and constituency 
staff, to assist in the solving of problems. And that’s the real 
world. That’s the real world by which we serve our constituents. 
 
Mr. Minister, then my question to you is this: in light of your 
concern for equality of representation which would be addressed 
by having a smaller variance than 25 per cent each way off the 
norm, and in light of your concern for equality of representation or 
accessibility to members of the Legislative Assembly by 
constituents, why did you not, or did you consider — answer 
either of these questions — did you consider addressing the 
quality of representation by looking at a formula that would 
impact on the allowances of members by way of office staff and 
offices through our ridings. Did you consider that? If not, why 
not? 
 
And I would ask you if you would consider that; do you not see 
that as being a better way, a more practical way, of defending the 
principle of representation by population and at the same time 
equal access to service by MLAs for constituents? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I think, Mr. Chairman, the member 
makes a fair point, and I think that there should be some 
consideration for those kinds of allowances for those . . . as there 
already is, I might add, for the northern seats as it relates to travel. 
And there’s some consideration . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — And the larger urbans. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Exactly. Now what this legislation does 
is, essentially it protects the principle of equality of vote, but not at 
the expense of quality of vote. And it’s no different . . . Well, it is a 
little different because we think it’s an improvement. The old 
legislation provided for a review once every eight years. This 
legislation calls for a review — a committee of the legislature will 
be able to review the boundaries and the numbers of urban, rural, 
and north, etc. after every second election. So it’s not that this is 
carved in stone for all time. After every second election, a 
legislative committee will have the opportunity to review that. 
 
You know, I’m not just standing here spouting what I believe as 
that arrogant person that designed all of this; there are lots of other 
people that believe the same thing. Again, going back to the 
Leader-Post, they say that the redistribution plan is imperfect, and 
I acknowledge that. It is imperfect but fair. You know, and I agree 
with that as  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4048 
 

well. 
 
Now when you talk about defining the urban community, if you 
like, and defining the northern community and defining the rural 
community — in which the commission can define the boundaries 
within all of those larger communities — that’s not a new idea 
either. That’s happened in other jurisdictions. And one example 
that I bring to you is the current legislation in Alberta where it 
proposed that there be 42 urban electoral divisions and 41 rural 
electoral division. And then it goes on to define the city of 
Medicine Hat as one urban electoral division; the city of St. 
Albert, likewise; the hamlet of Sherwood Park, likewise; the city 
of Lethbridge, two urban electoral divisions; the city of Red Deer, 
two; the city of Edmonton, 17; the city of Calgary, 18. And so this 
idea isn’t new, and it works well in other jurisdictions; and I agree 
with what is said by other people, that the redistribution plan is 
imperfect. I agree with that, but I also agree with them when they 
say that it is fair. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, could you lay on the Table 
any representations you’ve received from recognized community 
groups or recognized independent individuals with regard to the 
change in the commission that had brought about your thinking on 
this. Do you have any representations to lay on the Table? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Are you talking about the make-up of the 
commission? If you’re talking about the make-up of the 
commission as it relates to the membership of the commission . . . 
Is that what you’re asking? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — No. Primarily I’m wanting to find out, Mr. 
Minister, where the need came from to change this legislation, and 
I want to find out if there are any people, who would be 
recognized as independent public individuals, approached the 
government and said, we’ve got to change this. Did the 
commission, for example, make representation and say, this 
formula is not working? Did SARM (Saskatchewan Association 
of Rural Municipalities) approach you and say, look, Mr. Minister, 
you’ve got to do something about this independent boundaries 
commission? Any of those groups? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I don’t know, Mr. Chairman, if there 
were written reports. There was certainly a recognized concern as 
early as a year ago when the throne speech was read in this 
Assembly, when the Lieutenant Governor talked about bringing in 
new legislation relative to electoral boundaries. 
 
And I think it was in recognition of the fact that the old Bill simply 
took a snapshot of the demographics of the day and said, this will 
be the boundary, without recognition for the kinds of things that 
happened between the time the boundaries were drawn, at that 
time, and the growth that took place and the decline that took 
place in other areas — and growth in some areas — during the 
intervening eight-year period, or two elections or whatever, to the 
extent that we now have some small, in terms of population, small 
core seats in the urban centres, and very, very large suburban seats 
in terms of numbers of votes. 
 
And in the past there was, you know, no way to make  

those adjustments, short of waiting for every two elections and 
starting the whole process all over again. That’s been recognized 
in this legislation, and with the variance that now exists . . . or with 
the possibility to have the larger variance, there can be a greater, I 
expect, a greater recognition for the growth areas in the urban 
centres. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I think it’s fair to say, Mr. Chairman, that 
the minister has said to me that no recognized, independent public 
individual and no recognized, independent public organization 
thought this was a serious enough problem to make a formal, or 
even a written. letter of concern to the minister. So that’s what the 
minister has told me, quite clearly. 
 
(2200) 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to deal with your equality of vote. You 
believe in the equality of vote, because I’ve heard you talk about 
it. And it’s the new principle which you’re advancing here, or at 
least you’re advancing it . . . you’re advancing the quality of vote 
ahead of the equality of vote. Now if the minister believes in the 
equality of vote, can he tell me why he doesn’t apply the equality 
of vote as between Regina and Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I suppose we can split hairs. I think it’s 
reasonable to assume that our two major centres who have 
historically kind of grown in lock step . . . and I heard your 
argument the other day, as it was so eloquently presented, that the 
growth in Saskatoon has been significantly greater than the growth 
in Regina. I would hope that Regina gets its act together and starts 
growing to the same extent that Saskatoon is. 
 
But I think it’s fair and reasonable because there has been growth 
in both cities — there has been growth in both cities, and I think 
it’s fair and reasonable to recognize that growth. And you find the 
balance, Mr. Chairman, you find the balance that must exist in a 
province like Saskatchewan between the equality of vote and the 
quality of vote. And so there will be some variance, at least today, 
between the city of Saskatoon and the city of Regina, and 
probably between the city of Moose Jaw and the city of Prince 
Albert, and I haven’t made that calculation, but I expect that 
variance will exist. 
 
The key to it all though, Mr. Chairman, is that after every second 
election — and the variance is not that great today — but after 
every second election there can be a legislative committee set up 
to take a look at those very things. And not only the number, urban 
versus rural, but the number between our urban centres or, in the 
event that there’s decline or growth in the North, that can be 
looked at as well. 
 
Well the argument was advanced very eloquently the other day. I 
think that in the scheme of things, this is not unreasonable. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Minister, I thank you for 
recognizing my eloquent argument the other day. And if I may 
restate it, Saskatoon is one of the fastest growing cities in Canada. 
It has passed Regina and Saskatoon should in fact have two more 
seats based on population,  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4049 
 

and Regina should have one and one-half seats based on 
population. 
 
The minister says he believes in equality of vote, yet he won’t 
even apply equality of vote between urban centres. And I think if 
you take other urban centres, Swift Current and Battleford, and 
compare them, you’ll find the same situation, that equality of vote 
does not apply. So the minister uses the principle as long as it’s 
convenient, then he abandons the principle. 
 
Now I wanted to just read one more thing about the Chief 
Electoral Officer versus the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly. 
And I’m going to quote from the same editorial you quoted from, 
Mr. Minister, that’s the one in the Leader-Post. I believe it’s the 
same one, it’s October 30, Leader-Post. And it talks about the 
Chief Electoral Officer being a partisan person . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . That’s right, we’d like to wind you up, but 
apparently we’re not going to be able to. 
 
It says the Chief Electoral Officers are partisan persons and it’s 
recognized as such, and nobody denies that — no one denies that. 
And it goes on to say: 
 

The political taint of this office could rub off on the electoral 
commissions, which by rights should be considered beyond 
partisan influence. 

 
So what you’ve done is you’ve put the impartiality of the 
commission into question. And the Leader-Post, in the very article 
you quoted from, recognizes that. So, Mr. Chairman, I cannot 
support this Bill. I’ve said it before, and I’m more concerned now, 
and I agree that I can’t support it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, just a brief response. I’ve, 
I think, advanced the argument for Regina versus Saskatoon and 
the representation each . . or the seats each being increased by one. 
And the member argues that that’s unfair. I suppose in the very 
strictest of calculations, Saskatoon might not be precisely as well 
represented as Regina, and I won’t say that it has anything to do 
with the quality of the people that are representing the people in 
Saskatoon. 
 
But I wonder if the member would have been arguing the same for 
those many, many years that there were more people living in 
Regina than in Saskatoon and they had an equal number of seats, 
ten seats in each. I wonder if the member would have been 
arguing the same then? Obviously he didn’t when the last . . . eight 
years ago, whenever the last, or seven years ago when the last Bill 
was tabled in this House. 
 
And the point you make about the Chief Electoral Officer perhaps 
tainting the commission, and it’s an argument and it’s one that 
many will accept as being valid. The Star-Phoenix, that other 
chronicle of truth and honesty, that one — who many people agree 
with — have said that, well that may be true, well that may be 
true. His technical competence qualifies him for that position, and 
the impartiality of the commission is guaranteed by virtue of it 
being made up in addition with two judges. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, my final comment  

on this issue is this: from the time we brought in the first 
independent boundaries commission in Saskatchewan, I kept my 
cotton-picking political fingers out of it, and I left it up to the 
independent boundaries commission to do the job. And that’s not 
what you’re doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, I have a question to the minister 
relating to the obvious population changes that are taking place in 
the province. 
 
Earlier today, my colleague, the member from Quill Lakes, 
pointed out to you, Mr. Minister, that assuming a 3 per cent a year 
population change between rural and urban centres, which has 
been the rate at which changes have been taking place over the last 
decade, the average size of an urban seat would be 12,130 voters 
approximately, and the average size of a rural seat only 8,090 — a 
very major difference in terms of the right of each person in this 
province to be represented approximately equally in this 
legislature. That will obviously not result in equal representation. 
 
But the question, sir, that I want to direct to you follows from that, 
because under your proposed legislation in the urban centres, not 
only is there no justification for you not increasing the number of 
urban seats in this province beyond 29 — which you obviously 
choose not to do for purely partisan reasons — there’s absolutely 
no basis for instance, Mr. Minister, for not saying that urban 
centres aren’t entitled to 31 or 32 or 33 seats — absolutely no 
basis for that at all, given the inequities that this Bill will result in. 
 
But beyond that, Mr. Minister, you give yourself the right to set a 
differential over and above that average of 12,130 in the urban 
centres — a differential of 25 per cent either way. So what that 
means in terms of urban centres, Mr. Minister, is that in 1991, in 
the election of 1991, an urban centre will be able to have a 
population base as large as 15,160 or as small as 9,098. 
 
Now what that will allow you to do, Mr. Minister, is to take a 
centre like Moose Jaw, for instance — and you will no doubt look 
at Moose Jaw and say, well . . . Your appointed members will look 
at Moose Jaw. Your Chief Electoral Officer, who’s appointed by 
you, will no doubt look at Moose Jaw and will say, oh well, the 
New Democratic Party base of support in Moose Jaw is 
concentrated in the southern part of the city, and the strength of 
Progressive Conservative support in Moose Jaw, to the extent that 
it exists in that city at all, is concentrated in the northern part of 
Moose Jaw. Therefore we’ll make the northern part of Moose Jaw 
9,100 voters, and we’ll make the southern part of Moose Jaw 
15,100, which is not unlike what Ross Thatcher chose to do in 
1970, Mr. Chairman. And you’ll no doubt do the same in 
Saskatoon and Regina. 
 
You’ll no doubt take a favourable spot for the PC party like 
Saskatoon Lakeview, and you’ll make that a small seat, and you’ll 
no doubt take a favourable part of Saskatoon for the New 
Democratic Party like Saskatoon Riversdale and make that a big 
seat. And what this plus or minus 25 per cent variance does, Mr. 
Chairman, is it  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4050 
 

gives the minister a free hand to do that. 
 
So my question to you, sir, is: in urban centres how can you justify 
passing legislation that will create a differential of plus or minus 
25 per cent so that some seats in Saskatoon will be as large as 
15,160 in 1991, and other seats will be as small as 9,100? How 
can you give your appointed members of this new commission, 
which is clearly going to be partisan as a result of the presence of 
the Chief Electoral Officer on the commission replacing the Clerk, 
how can you give that commission this kind of flexibility to create 
obvious inequities within the city of Saskatoon, within the city of 
Regina, within the city of Moose Jaw, within the city of Prince 
Albert? That’s obviously what you intend to do. That’s obviously 
what your Chief Electoral Officer is there for, to ensure that that 
goes through. And I ask you: how do you account for creating 
these sorts of inequities which your legislation is obviously 
designed to put into place? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of points ought to 
be made here. If we were to accept the arguments of the member 
opposite, we would have to accept that they were dead wrong in 
all the years that they gave special recognition to northern 
Saskatchewan. We would have to accept that Canada is dead 
wrong in giving special recognition to the North and to the Yukon 
and to Prince Edward Island, and even to Saskatchewan. We 
would have to accept that other jurisdictions are dead wrong. For 
instance, Newfoundland gives special recognition in terms of 
quality of vote, the principle of quality of vote, to Labrador. B.C. 
gives special recognition to Vancouver Island in terms of quality 
of vote. 
 
And so to accept your argument tells me that not only all of those 
other people were wrong, but that you were wrong in giving 
special recognition as it relates to equality of vote to northern 
Saskatchewan. So I think that . . . I don’t agree with your 
arguments, and I don’t think that you were wrong when that 
recognition was given to northern Saskatchewan, and I don’t think 
the other jurisdictions were wrong when they recognized that there 
was a need not only to recognize the principle of equality of vote 
but quality of vote. 
 
(2215) 
 
As it relates, Mr. Speaker, to the suggestion that this commission 
— and I would have thought better of that member — but as it 
relates to the suggestion that this commission would somehow 
operate in a way that was anything but impartial, Mr. Speaker, 
calls into question the integrity of two judges that are appointed by 
other than the government, and I would have thought better of that 
particular member, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Just a brief response to the minister. Mr. 
Minister, you are demonstrating in the comment that you’ve just 
made that not only are you being intellectually dishonest; not only 
can you not defend the point I just made in an intellectual sense; 
obviously, therefore, your only purpose in doing this is purely 
political. 

 
You explain to me once again, Mr. Minister, what the justification 
is, in a city like Saskatoon, for having a differential of plus or 
minus 25 per cent with respect to the allocation of the voters and 
the seats. You answer this question again, based on the growth of 
the urban ridings, in 1991 why it is that in the city of Saskatoon, 
under this legislation, you will be able to create some seats that are 
larger than 15,000 and other seats that are as small as 9,000. You 
explain that, Mr. Minister. That’s got nothing to do with quality of 
representation. 
 
It’s just as easy to represent the southern part of Saskatoon as it is 
the northern part of Saskatoon, Mr. Minister. It’s just as easy to get 
around Eastview as it is to get around Silverwood, Mr. Minister. 
This has got absolutely nothing to do with quality of 
representation. The only way to ensure fair representation and to 
ensure good quality representation is to make sure that every urban 
seat is approximately the same size, and what you’re doing in this 
Bill, Mr. Minister, is ensuring that there could be massive 
differences of as much as 6,000 persons in the size of an urban 
seat in the same city. And I ask you, clearly, is that not because 
you intend to gerrymander the seats in Saskatoon and Regina in a 
manner that will allow the big seats to be NDP support areas, and 
in a manner that will allow the smaller seats to be your last 
strongholds of Progressive Conservative support in those two 
cities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to say that the 
hon. member is out to lunch —right out to lunch. 
 
I don’t draw the boundaries; I don’t draw the boundaries; the 
commission draws the boundaries. And if you’re calling into 
question the integrity of two yet-to-be-named judges, I think that’s 
unbecoming of you, and I expected far more of you than that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, had you read the legislation . . . and, Mr. 
Chairman, had the hon. member read the legislation, the things 
that can be taken into consideration when you’re talking about the 
allowable variation are things like scarcity, density or relative rates 
of growth of population of any proposed constituency. And, Mr. 
Chairman, I think that’s fair; I think that’s reasonable. And I’m not 
alone in that thought as I’ve already said. I’ve already said and you 
speak of the city of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, redistribution plan is 
imperfect, and I acknowledge that. But they also say, Mr. Speaker, 
but it is fair. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Amendment to clause 2 of the printed Bill, 
moved by the Deputy Premier: 
 

Amend clause 2(a) of the printed Bill by striking out “a 
Constituency” and substituting “an Electoral”. 

 
Amend clause 2(g) of the printed Bill by striking out 
“comprised” and substituting “composed”. 



 
November 5, 1987 

4051 
 

 
Clause 2 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 3 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Amendment to clause 3 of the printed Bill, 
moved by the Deputy Premier: 
 

Amend subsection 3(1) of the printed Bill by striking out “A 
Constituency” and substituting “An Electoral”. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Another amendment to section 3 of the 
printed Bill, moved by the member for Regina Lakeview: 
 

Strike out subsection 3(3) of the printed Bill and substitute 
the following: 

 
(3) A commission consists of: 

 
(a) a chairman nominated by the Chief Justice of 
Saskatchewan from among the judges of the Court of Appeal 
or, after consultation with the Chief Justice of the Queen’s 
Bench, from among the judges of Her Majesty’s court of 
Queen’s Bench for Saskatchewan; 

 
(b) the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly; and 

 
(c) a resident of Saskatchewan nominated by the Speaker 
after consultation with the president of the Executive Council 
and the Leader of the Opposition. 

 
Ms. Simard: Mr. Chairperson, what this amendment does is it 
deletes the commission as set up by the government with the Chief 
Electoral Officer in there, and it substitutes the commission as it 
was described and set up under the former legislation. And we feel 
that if this amendment was made, Mr. Chairperson, that it would 
go a fair ways to establishing an impartial commission. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Is the amendment agreed? 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — There’s another amendment . . . Order. 
Amendment to section 3 of the printed Bill, moved by the member 
from Regina Lakeview: 
 

Strike out clause 3(3)(c) and substitute the following: 
 

(c) The Clerk of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairperson, the clause at 3(2)(c) that now is 
in this Bill that the government has brought before the House 
makes the Chief Electoral Officer, appointed pursuant to The 
Election Act, appointed by cabinet, and who is a political 
appointment, it makes that person a member of the commission. 
 
We are proposing that that provision be deleted, and in there we 
substitute, instead of the Chief Electoral Officer,  

the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly, who is a non-political 
person who has sat on commissions like this in the past and who 
should properly be the person on the commission as opposed to 
the Chief Electoral Officer. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Is the amendment agreed? 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 3 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 4 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 14 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Proposed House amendment, moved by the 
member from Regina Lakeview: 
 

Amend section 14 of the printed Bill by adding the following 
after clause (c): “or any other numbers that will confirm the 
principle of representation by population.” 

 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairperson, what this amendment does is 
confirms that when the commission is prescribing boundaries, that 
they should look at the erosion under this Act as it now stands of 
the equality of votes principle. They should be looking at the 
erosion of that vote, and we’re therefore suggesting this 
amendment in order to confirm the principle of representation by 
population. We recognize, however, that we agree with the fact 
that you may need to take into consideration the large areas out in 
the country. We don’t feel that that should detract from the 
equality of votes in urban centres; that the two principles can be 
upheld. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 14 agreed to. 
 
Clause 15 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Amendment to clause 15, moved by the 
Deputy Premier: 
 

Amend subsection 15(2) of the printed Bill by striking out 
“comprised” and substituting “composed.” 

 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, just one quick question of the 
minister. I want the minister to explain to me why it is that 
Saskatoon and Regina are only getting one additional seat when 
it’s more than obvious that the growth and population in those 
areas, if there was to be any fairness at all in this Bill, would 
require at least two more seats in each of those cities? Why are 
you denying those additional seats, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We’ve already gone through the 
argument, Mr. Chairman, and it’s in recognition of finding the 
balance between equality and quality of vote, and we’ve talked 
about it for some time. And I think that because of the growth in 
the urban centres, it’s right and proper that that should be 
recognized, and therefore one additional seat for each of those two 
centres. Recognizing that the rural population is either flat or 
declining we  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4052 
 

don’t want to see any erosion in the quality of that representation, 
Mr. Chairman, and so Regina and Saskatoon get one additional 
seat, and rural areas stay the same. 
 
Clause 15 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 16 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 20 
 
Mr. Chairman: — House amendment to clause 20, moved by the 
member from Regina Lakeview: 
 

Amend subclause 20(a)(i) by striking out “25 per cent” in the 
last line and substituting “15 per cent”. 

 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairperson, what that does is it would 
eliminate the 50 per cent discrepancy between constituencies that 
is now written into this Bill. It would prevent the situation that my 
friend from Saskatoon University described where right here in 
Regina or Saskatoon you could have one constituency with 50 per 
cent more votes than another constituency, right side by side, and 
it reduces the variation down to 15 per cent, which we think is 
much more fair. 
 
We, therefore, would urge the government to reconsider the 25 per 
cent in the Bill and to pass the amendment. 
 
(2230) 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The second amendment to section 20 of the 
printed Bill, moved by the member from Regina Lakeview: 
 

Renumber section 20 of the printed Bill as subsection (1) and 
add the following subsection: 
 
(2) A commission shall determine the area to be included in 
and fix the boundaries of all proposed constituencies so that: 
 
a) no proposed urban constituency’s voter population varies 
from the voter population of any other proposed urban 
constituency by more than 10 per cent, or any greater or 
lesser variation that preserves the principle of “one person; 
one vote,” and 
 
b) no proposed rural constituency’s voter population varies 
from the voter population of any other proposed rural 
constituency by more than 10 per cent, any greater or lesser 
variation that preserves the principle of “one person; one 
vote.” 
 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairperson, I know the member from 
Regina South would be against this particular amendment, but I 
want to suggest to you . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — How do you know? How do you know? 
 

Ms. Simard: — Well we’ll see shortly, won’t we? 
 
I want to suggest to you, Mr. Chairperson, that it should be 
impossible for the government not to pass this amendment. Why 
should any rural constituency, side by side, have more than a 10 
per cent variation in vote over the provincial quotient? Why 
should any urban constituency, side by side, be larger than that? I 
would ask the minister why he feels — if he refuses to pass this 
amendment — why he feels this indeed is not a fair proposal? 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 20 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 21 and 22 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 77 — An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Simard: — This Saskatchewan power Bill, Mr. chairperson, 
has a very interesting feature in it inasmuch as it reneges on the 
minister’s commitment not to repeal the grants in lieu of taxes 
section in The Power Corporation Act, which requires users of 
electrical energy in a city, for example, to pay a 10 per cent tax, 
and that goes to the municipality as a grant in lieu of taxes because 
the government doesn’t pay taxes on its buildings in the city. 
 
This Bill reneges on that commitment, Mr. Chairperson. it reneges 
on that commitment because what it does is it allows some 
industrial companies in particular, and in general any other 
industrial customer of electrical energy, that cabinet may, by 
regulation, prescribe. 
 
So the door’s wide open, Mr. Chairperson, the door is wide open 
to allow cabinet to exempt any industrial customer, and that is 
going to cost the taxpayers in municipalities a considerable 
amount of money, Mr. Chairperson. 
 
When this money is no longer available for the municipalities, 
somebody else is going to have to pay for it. So when 
Weyerhaeuser gets an exemption in P.A., somebody else will have 
to pay for it. And the Bill specifically sets out the name of 
Weyerhaeuser. This means that the taxpayers of P.A. are going to 
be making up that deficiency, Mr. Chairperson; the taxpayers of 
P.A. will have to make up that deficiency. 
 
And we object to that particular principle, and in spite of the fact 
that the minister has advised in Crown Corporations Committee 
that he had no intention of repealing the grants in lieu of taxes 
provision, he is now attempting to come through the back door on 
that matter. And he may say that there’s money available for the 
municipalities, but we’ve all seen over this period of a short year 
just how much money is available — very little, Mr. Chairperson. 
 
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4053 
 

And it’s easy for them to make a promise today and break it 
tomorrow, because this has been a pattern of pathological 
behaviour on the part of the government. They make a promise 
today, they break it tomorrow. We’ve seen a long string of broken 
promises in this session. And I can stand here and spend an hour 
just talking about the broken promises, but we’ve done it on a 
number of occasions before, and I won’t do it again tonight. 
Suffice it to say that, notwithstanding their broken promises, we’re 
paying record taxes in this city, and suffice it to say, 
notwithstanding their broken promises, we’re paying record taxes 
in this city, and suffice it to say, notwithstanding their broken 
promises, we are paying a gas tax at the pump; we are without a 
public utilities review commission. 
 
So, Mr. Chairperson, my question to the minister is: how much is 
this going to mean in the city of P.A. with respect to lost taxes 
under the provision of The Saskatchewan Power Corporation Act. 
Could the minister please reply? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, it will mean nothing as it 
relates to lost taxes for the city of Prince Albert. 
 
Let me explain what this is all about, and the Leader of the 
Opposition will be aware of this. We had an aborted Bill, maybe 
as long as two years ago now, that was supposed to accommodate 
this particular desire of — not us, although in part, but of the 
industries and of the cities that they are part of. 
 
In the case of Ipsco, Ipsco was planning about an 80 or $90 
million expansion. I think it’s a toss-up as to which is the largest 
input cost for Ipsco, labour or electricity. In the event of 
annexation, if Ipsco were annexed into the city of Regina and the 
surcharges applied to their electricity, they simply couldn’t 
continue to operate in the competitive world because electricity is 
such a large component of their input costs. 
 
So the expansion would not happen unless they were given 
reasonable assurances that that surcharge would never be effected, 
as it were. So we said that, well, Regina may want to annex these 
folks at some time. that’s fine. But we will give that industry the 
protection of legislation to make them — or to the extent that that 
would — competitive in their particular industry with their 
competitors, of course. The same is true for Saskatoon Chemicals, 
and Saskatoon Chemicals likewise is a very large consumer of 
electricity. And we thought, after some consideration and 
discussion with the cities of Saskatoon and Regina, that it’s right 
and proper to give them that kind of protection in the event that 
they would find themselves in a position where the surcharge 
could be applied. The fact is, as I understand it, that in all cases 
that are named here there is no surcharge now in place that this 
will roll back; that’s not the case. In all cases, this will prevent a 
surcharge in the future. And in the case of Saskatoon Chemicals, 
there is an expansion planned, and a surcharge would simply make 
them uncompetitive, and the expansion would go elsewhere 
without this kind of accommodation. And I think that even the 
hon. member would say that this isn’t a bad way to go to get that 
kind of expansion, job creation and diversification in the province. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky; Well, Mr. Minister, with all due respect,  

if you think that Weyerhaeuser or PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp 
Company) mill can’t make any money without paying taxes on 
their power, you’re badly mistaken. They’ve got a record of 
approximately $25 million per year profit, and I would venture to 
say that according to information I’ve received from their workers 
this year, according to the production, and according to the prices, 
they’ll be making well over 50 million this year. And the problem 
here is, and my question to you is: I would like to know how much 
money the city of Prince Albert could get under the agreement if 
they applied a 10 per cent surcharge on the power that PAPCO 
(Prince Albert Pulp Company) uses. What is the potential amount 
that is going to be lost, that the city is collecting in another way, 
but what is the amount? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — It’s 10 per cent of the cost of the energy 
use of Ipsco, and I don’t have Ipsco’s . . not Ipsco, Weyerhaeuser 
in P.A., and I don’t have Weyerhaeuser’s bills here with me, so I 
can’t tell you. I suppose I could dig it up and make the calculation, 
but I don’t have that information here. But it’s not a loss, it’s 
foregone in the event that they decided to charge. 
 
But we have an obligation and a stated commitment to develop the 
province economically, to diversify the economy of the province, 
and if it takes this kind of accommodation to bring expanded 
Ipscos to town and expanded Saskatoon Chemicals and paper 
mills, at no loss of revenue to the cities, we’re prepared to do it, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Was PAPCO paying the surcharge before the 
mill was sold to Weyerhaeuser? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m not entirely sure, Mr. Speaker. But in 
any event, if they were, this in no way will impact on that. It’s 
designed only to deal with the incremental consumption if they 
were paying the surcharge before. That’s the intent. If PAPCO 
was paying a surcharge before, that would continue even after the 
passage of this Bill. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well, you see, PAPCO was paying . . . Now 
this year we may have an agreement between the city and 
Weyerhaeuser as to a certain amount of money instead of a 
percentage, but what you are doing with this Bill is removing the 
right of the city of Prince Albert to assess the surcharge on 
Weyerhaeuser, on one exclusive, and any others that you might 
decide that you would favour. Now that’s completely unfair 
because what it does is, it removes the tax burden from the 
corporation that is using the product, and using the product of 
northern Saskatchewan, and exempting it from paying taxes. 
Somebody else is going to have to pay those taxes while the 
profits all go down to Tacoma, Washington. 
 
And that’s the problem, and I have a hard time buying an 
exemption of that type because it just completely goes counter to 
all the principles of fair taxation in this province. I want to know 
whether you consulted with the city of Prince Albert before you 
brought in this legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I, firsthand, did not consult with the city 
of Prince Albert. I can’t tell you whether officials at power 
consulted with Prince Albert. I personally  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4054 
 

consulted with both Saskatoon and Regina in respect to this, and I 
might just point out that while the member talks about the 
foregone revenue that Prince Albert might suffer in terms of 10 
per cent of the power bill of Weyerhaeuser, the foregone revenue 
that Prince Albert would suffer if this surcharge were put on and 
made them uncompetitive and they had to put a lock on the door 
would be far worse. And if you compare . . . if you compare rates 
for rates, industrial rates, Saskatchewan to Manitoba to Alberta to 
British Columbia, industrial rates are — well, they’re pretty tough 
to compete with in those jurisdictions. So if we want this kind of 
industry in our province, if we want this kind of industry in our 
province, we better be selling them energy — energy, Mr. 
Speaker, and not heaping taxes on top of taxes on top of energy. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, we have some problems here. 
First of all, we haven’t had an answer as to whether PAPCO was 
paying the 10 per cent surcharge to the city of Prince Albert. And I 
believe they were. And I want to say to you, of course they were. 
And you haven’t said whether they have or whether they haven’t. 
And they survived when the markets were low. You know that 
they were paying the 10 per cent surcharge and you also know in 
the sales agreement to Weyerhaeuser that you exempted 
Weyerhaeuser. And that’s why this Bill is before us. 
 
You deregulated the gas, and now you’re doing it with power. 
And I want to know from you, and I want to know from your 
officials, what amount of dollars were going to the city of Prince 
Albert in terms of the 10 per cent electrical surcharge from 
PAPCO. I want to know: was Weyerhaeuser paying since they’ve 
been in there, and since they’ve bought from PAPCO. 
 
And I want to know, still, what amount of dollars were going to 
the city of Prince Albert, and what they’re going to lose, and what 
the rest of the business community and the taxpayers of that city 
are going to have to pick up. And we’re going to be asking you 
here for a very long time. It’s late in the evening; it’ll get a lot 
longer. We want an answer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, whether or not PAPCO was 
paying the 10 per cent surcharge in the past, or Weyerhaeuser was 
paying the surcharge in the past and, you know, I accepted what 
you say. If they were, they were. But the intent of this legislation, 
Mr. Speaker, is to exclude or exempt any incremental energy 
consumption from the surcharge. 
 
(2245) 
 
Now I suppose you can sit there and chirp and squawk and say 
that this is a bad deal. I suppose the people of Prince Albert would 
be really happy if the paper plant wasn’t there, you know, but 
that’s what you’re talking about; that’s what you’re talking about. 
Because we have to compete . . that paper plant has to compete 
with paper plants in Quebec, paper plants in Ontario, British 
Columbia, and so on, and if they can’t compete . . . and we’re 
committed to diversifying this economy, and so large energy users 
like Ipsco, Saskatoon Chemicals, and  

Weyerhaeuser, who are considered to be very large energy users, 
were given this kind of accommodation. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, the city of Prince Albert, 
through that surcharge on electrical use, gains about $3 million in 
revenue per year. And you’re talking about incremental use. And 
what you’re saying then is, is that the new paper mill is going to be 
exempt from this tax, and that the city council in Prince Albert — 
and I’ll wait till you’re listening if I have to — and what you’re 
saying then is that the business community in Prince Albert, the 
renters and the home owners and everybody who has a power bill, 
is going to have to pay extra taxes, because what you call 
incremental, to me means that you’re exempting the new paper 
mill form this 10 per cent surcharge that you’ve exempted 
Weyerhaeuser from, that PAPCO used to pay. They’re going to 
have to pick up . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Well you haven’t explained it, and you 
haven’t given an answer. And it’s pretty clear, either you know or 
you don’t, or they’re going to have to pay, or they aren’t. And 
from what I can see if they’re going to have to pay. And we’re 
asking you how much they’re going to have to pick up from this 
new incremental — I don’t know what you referred to it as, but 
what I’ll call it is an exemption of the tax. 
 
Well maybe I don’t understand, and I will tell you that the people 
that are listening to you tonight don’t understand either. So maybe 
you can explain that to me. Maybe you can tell me how much the 
people in Prince Albert are going to have to pick up from this new 
exemption, and perhaps even your officials could figure out what 
it’s going to mean on the business tax and the mill rate. Because 
I’ll tell you, I would suggest to you that out of the $3 million that’s 
collected — you say they’re big power users, and I agree with you 
— if it’s 40 per cent of the 3 million, that could amount to $1.2 
million at 40 per cent or . . . I think that’s the figure — 1.6 it 
would be at 40 — that they’re going to have to pick up. And that’s 
what we’re asking, and that’s all we’re asking you; just explain. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — You see the member doesn’t understand 
that the citizens of Prince Albert will have to pick up nothing as a 
result of this exemption. It is not a source of revenue to the city of 
Prince Albert now, and by virtue of this legislation it will not be a 
source of revenue for them in the future, because we decided that 
in the interests of the economic development and the 
diversification of the province we were going to give very large 
energy users an exemption from the surcharge. In the case of 
Weyerhaeuser it is incremental energy, I assume; in the case of 
IPSCO and Saskatoon Chemicals, since they pay no surcharge 
now, they will pay none in the future. They pay none now; they 
pay none in the future. 
 
Now, if you say . . . and I have a little difficulty with 
understanding how you can misunderstand this. If you say, what 
are the people of Prince Albert, what are they going to have to 
pick up because of this —it’s because of this that they have the 
kind of activity going on in their economy today that you may not 
like, that you may not like, but I venture to say that the vast 
majority of the  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4055 
 

business community in Prince Albert and northern Saskatchewan 
are very happy with. Now I don’t know what’s so difficult about 
that. I don’t know why the hon. member can’t understand that. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Minister, I can see there’s no sense 
going on here, because what you’re going to say is you’re talking 
economic diversification, and the Weyerhaeuser welfare Bill that 
you’ve just put in here today is the reason that Prince Albert . . . 
You know, the people of Prince Albert will pick up these extra 
taxes and be happy and because it’s part of your economic 
diversification. The fact is that there are going to be hundreds of 
thousands of dollars that the taxpayers in Prince Albert are going 
to have to pick up. 
 
And in the interest of shortening this debate — because I can see 
it’s going to go nowhere — you want to talk economic 
diversification; I want to talk what it’s going to cost the taxpayers 
of the city of Prince Albert. And it’s not only just Weyerhaeuser, 
it’s whatever you might do with any industrial user that you deem. 
 
And so there’s no sense carrying on the debate. I think the point’s 
been made. The point is that you’ve give a big tax concession on 
the backs of the people of Prince Albert and on the backs of any 
other area that you deem one of your corporate friends should be 
exempted. That’s what this Bill is about — whether it’s in Moose 
Jaw, Swift Current, Estevan, it doesn’t matter. The point is that the 
taxpayers in the cities and in the towns and the rural municipalities 
of this city are going to be picking up extra tax dollars because of 
this Bill. 
 
And so, as I say, I think the point’s been made. If you want to 
respond, you go ahead. But I just don’t see what you want to say. 
You’ve given the money, the people are going to pick it up, and 
that’s where it’s at. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I simply respond by saying that the 
business community and the people of Prince Albert have a higher 
degree of comprehension as it relates to this particular issue than 
the member that represents them, and thank God for that. 
 
Hon Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, I want to ask a couple of 
very direct questions. Does the minister deny that the pulp mill — 
I’m not talking about any future paper mill, but the existing pulp 
mill — has heretofore in the last year paid a surcharge on its 
power bills? Do you deny that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — No, Mr. Chairman, I do not deny that, 
and I haven’t to this point. 
 
Hon Mr. Blakeney: — Do you deny that when this Bill is passed 
they will no longer have to pay? Do you deny that? Do you deny 
that this Bill exempts any 10 per cent surcharge on the pulp mill 
— leave aside the paper mill; on the pump mill — and that no 
other rational interpretation is possible? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I believe that the legislation is broad 
enough that that could in fact be the case. The intent, however, Mr. 
Chairman, is that only that incremental energy used at 
Weyerhaeuser shall be  

accommodated in this way, in that it won’t attract a surcharge. 
 
Hon Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, we’re 
not here passing intents, we’re passing laws, and it just says that 
when this is passed, the city of Prince Albert cannot legally collect 
that. Your intent is not relevant. Weyerhaeuser won’t pay. Well 
why would they, unless they want to make an ex gratia payment? 
That’s what the Bill says. And you may well think that that 
doesn’t put any extra burden on the city of Prince Albert, but as I 
would calculate it, it would. 
 
Now I want to say one further thing. You will recall that in 1985 
the mayor of Regina wrote to you, saying, in effect, that he wasn’t 
too exercised about the Ipsco matter, but that he was exercised 
about your right to add anyone else to the list. And I will quote his 
letter, dated September 23, 1985. 
 

We are extremely concerned about the generality of the 
proposed amendment. The amendment does not address 
Ipsco per se, (this one does) but has the potential negative 
impact of exempting any SPC user in Regina by provincial 
regulation. 

 
Now this one, I admit, restricts it to industrial user. But with that 
qualification, everything the mayor said in 1985, and said he 
objected to it strongly, is still true. You can pass orders in council 
knocking off all sorts of taxpayers off the tax roll of every city and 
town in Saskatchewan, and that is big money. That is big money. 
 
We are talking about the manner in which taxes are paid to cities 
and towns. Now, Mr. Minister, whatever you may argue about 
Ipsco and Saskatoon Chemicals and Weyerhaeuser — and it is my 
submission, by the way, that if you’re going to give incentives to 
those people by way of industrial development and diversification, 
it ought to be paid for by the provincial taxpayer and not by the 
local taxpayer . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon Mr. Blakeney: — I leave that argument aside and ask you: 
how can you justify giving the cabinet power to strip the tax list, 
the tax rolls, of every city and town which has an industrial 
customer? I say to you, Mr. Minister, there are all sorts of them 
out there. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I assume Manalta Coal is next, in 
Coronach. 
 
Hon Mr. Blakeney: — Well I would expect that anybody . . . Let 
me put it very bluntly. All sorts of industrial customers exist and 
have paid taxes for a number of years, and there seems no earthly 
reason why you should be permitted by order in council to strip 
those companies off the list of taxpayers in any city and town in 
this province. And I ask you, Mr. Minister, leaving aside the three 
companies that are specifically named, why do you want power to 
strip taxpayers off the tax rolls of cities and towns without the 
consent or even possibly the knowledge of those cities and towns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, of course the hon.  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4056 
 

member is absolutely right, and we had this debate, I think, two 
years ago or 18 months ago. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You withdrew the Bill. And do it again. 
 
(2300) 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — And I don’t intend to withdraw the Bill, 
but the difference this time, Mr. Speaker, is that the legislation that 
came in before wasn’t dealing with The Power Corporation Act. It 
was dealing specifically with some exemptions that it couldn’t 
properly do outside of The Power Corporation Act. So now we’re 
back here dealing with The Power Corporation Act, where it 
properly should have been dealt with in the first place. 
 
Unfortunately . . . I was going to say something in humour that 
might be misinterpreted, so I won’t say it. But why don’t I, 
anyway, since I’ve already warned you that it’s humorous? We 
still have the same drafters today that we had then, and that you 
had when you were here, and in their eagerness to acquire all 
control unto themselves, they went a little too far in this section 9. 
And I am prepared to amend the Bill by deleting, in 9, the 
amendment to section 9 where it relates to “and any other 
industrial customer of electrical energy that the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council may be regulation prescribe,” and then in (4) 
following that, “The Lieutenant Governor in Council may make 
regulations prescribing industrial customers of electrical energy 
for the purpose of subsection (3),” And I think that will take of the 
concern that both of us have. 
 
Hon Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, I think that would improve 
the Bill very considerably. May I just say in passing that the Bill I 
was previously referring to was Bill 102, introduced on June 7, 
1985, being an Act to amend The Power Corporation Act. But I 
would invite the minister to put in that amendment, and we would 
welcome it. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well, Mr. Minister, while we’ve got you in a 
good mood and got you going in the right direction, will you also 
consent to deleting the part where it exempts Weyerhaeuser. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m not prepared to do that, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, I’m not here to humour you, 
but I’d like some questions, and unlike the other Bill we were 
considering about electoral boundaries, this one I think you can 
give me some answers on. You didn’t on that other Bill, but you 
maybe can on this one. 
 
It’s mentioned Saskatoon Chemicals Limited, and I believe you 
said, Mr. Minister, earlier, that you had discussions with the city of 
Saskatoon about this, and the city of Saskatoon said okay, we’re 
with you. Did the city of Saskatoon say, we’re with you, on this 
Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — My discussions were with the mayor, 
Mayor Cliff Wright in the city of Saskatoon, and what he said was 
that he agreed with the need for Saskatoon Chemicals to remain 
competitive and that we  

should move legislatively to make that accommodation. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Okay, Mr. Minister. The minister says that 
the mayor of Saskatoon agreed that Saskatoon Chemicals should 
have this concession. Now the last time I looked, Mr. Minister, 
Saskatoon Chemicals was in the Rural Municipality of Corman 
Park. Could you explain to me why you’re getting agreement from 
the city of Saskatoon when it’s in fact in the Rural Municipality of 
Corman Park? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — You see, Mr. Chairman, as I explained to 
the member for Lakeview . . . Well you may or may not have been 
in the House, but if you were, obviously, you weren’t paying 
attention. The R.M. of Corman Park is not in the same situation as, 
say, the urban centre of Saskatoon or the urban centre of Regina. 
The R.M. of Corman Park cannot levy a surcharge on energy 
consumption. The city of Saskatoon can. 
 
Now the city of Saskatoon can also do some other things, like 
annex that area where Saskatoon Chemicals is now located. So 
what this does is, in the event of annexation, the surcharge on 
Saskatoon Chemicals that would ordinarily apply if it were 
annexed will not apply. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Does the Saskatoon Chemicals Limited 
obtain their power from Sask Power Corporation or the franchise? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — From Sask Power. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well then, why should it involve the city of 
Saskatoon? What you’re doing here is, you’re dealing the 
possibility of annexation. There is no immediate concession of any 
kind, or no immediate benefit. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — That’s absolutely right, and that’s what 
I’ve been trying to explain since I got here. There is no immediate 
concession; there is no immediate benefit. This is protection, as it 
is here in Regina with Ipsco. 
 
We convinced these folks to make major investments. In the case 
of Ipsco, I think it was 90 or $95 million that they invested in a 
continuous caster and rolling mills — Steckel, I think it was, the 
rolling mill — and the latest in technology. They have an excellent 
plant out here, and they couldn’t find it in their 
best-thought-through interests to make this expansion in the city of 
Regina, or outside of the city of Regina, if there was any 
possibility of the city of Regina annexing the area that Ipsco is 
situated in, thereby attracting a 10 per cent surcharge on one of 
their highest input components. So we said to them, right, we will 
give you — and we talked to the city of Regina. And we said, we 
will give you the protection from that surcharge in the event of 
annexation. 
 
So Ipsco went ahead and built this expansion, and today I 
understand they’re doing quite well, and they had a ribbon cutting 
and a media presentation here maybe a month ago or thereabouts. 
But it’s in operation and doing very well. It never would have 
been built if there was any risk of them attracting an energy 
surcharge of 10 per cent. The situation is similar in Saskatoon. 
They do not now pay a surcharge; they are not now in the city 
limits of  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4057 
 

Saskatoon. 
 
But in the event that they were annexed by Saskatoon, or that area 
was annexed by Saskatoon, they could attract the 10 per cent 
surcharge. They are simply not able to be competitive because 
they are very high energy users, very large energy users. If they 
were to attract at 10 per cent surcharge, they simply couldn’t 
operate, and there would be a lock on the door, and all of those 
constituents of yours that now work at Saskatoon Chemicals 
would not longer be working there. 
 
That’s what we’re trying to do with this legislation, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well there is quite a difference between the 
city of Prince Albert, which encloses within its confines the pulp 
mill, and the city of Saskatoon, which does not include Saskatoon 
Chemicals Limited. 
 
But my final question, which the minister may not wish to 
comment on, but it has to do with the public utilities review 
commission. Now I would suggest to the minister that the public 
utilities review commission’s view on this would be negative. 
Now the minister may stand up and take the defence that, what am 
I talking about? The public utilities review commission doesn’t 
exist, and this is a hypothetical question, but leaving that aside that 
it doesn’t exist, if they existed, Mr. Minister, what would their 
position be on this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The public utilities review commission, 
when they existed, they had no jurisdiction over surcharge. Their 
jurisdiction was only over energy costs, electrical or gas or in the 
case of SGI or SaskTel rates, but surcharge were not part of or a 
component part of the rates. 
 
I wonder if we shouldn’t get this amendment through before we 
all forget about it. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. The amendment will come up at 
clause 9. We’re still on clause . . . 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have just one 
question for the minister, and it relates directly to the question of 
an exemption for Saskatoon Chemicals. Now, Mr. Minister, 
you’ve already given to Weyerhaeuser, who happens to own 
Saskatoon Chemicals, a free rein on our northern forests, about $9 
million a year from the Highways budget to build roads in their 
lease area; you’ve already exempted them from special surcharges 
with respect to natural gas. You’ve given them just about every 
possible incentive that one could imagine, Mr. Minister, which 
you certainly don’t consider giving to the average small-business 
person in this province. 
 
Now you’re telling this Assembly and the people of Saskatoon 
that in the event that Saskatoon Chemicals is annexed by the city 
of Saskatoon, while every other business man in the city of 
Saskatoon has to pay the surcharge on electricity, Weyerhaeuser, 
who’s already been given every possible tax exemption in the 
book and has just been handed the Prince Albert Pulp Company  

and the Saskatoon Chemicals plant without having to pay one 
penny in the form of a down payment — and I’d be grateful if I 
could have the minister’s attention — Saskatoon Chemicals has 
already been purchased by Weyerhaeuser without have to pay one 
penny in the form of a down payment. You’re now telling us that 
in addition, Saskatoon Chemicals, namely Weyerhaeuser needs 
this special exemption from the surcharge. 
 
My question to you is: how can you justify, in light of the massive 
give-aways to Weyerhaeuser, exempting them from this surcharge 
if they’re annexed by the city of Saskatoon, while every other 
single business man in Saskatoon has to pay the surcharge? Isn’t 
that, Mr. Minister, just an example of the kind of political 
favouritism that you’re handing out to Weyerhaeuser while you 
ignore small business in the city of Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well you know, Saskatoon Chemical is, I 
think, the second largest employer in Saskatoon. And I don’t know 
how many of them are your constituents, but if one was your 
constituent, I would be a little more concerned about the viability 
of Saskatoon Chemicals in the competitive environment that they 
work in. 
 
What you’re asking us to do is to run the risk of annexation. and 
the member, your seat-mate, tells us that the growth rate is so 
phenomenal in Saskatoon — and I think it’s significant, but not 
phenomenal — but if we take his argument to its extreme, it’s so 
phenomenal that in no time we will be annexing for miles and 
miles around Saskatoon, and Saskatoon Chemicals will come into 
the Saskatoon city limits, then attract a 10 per cent surcharge, then 
become non-competitive, or it simply won’t be able to compete in 
the market-place with the competitors in British Columbia and 
Manitoba, and it will have a lock on the door, my friend. It will 
have a lock on the door. The second largest employer in Saskatoon 
will be made non-competitive because you insist that it shouldn’t 
enjoy the kind of accommodation that we’re talking about here. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s nonsense. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — And the member says it’s nonsense, 
which is a pretty good indication of his understanding of the 
market-place, Mr. Chairman. You understand nothing. What you 
understand is big, bad multinational, and profits are all four-letter 
words, and you have nothing to do with them. You’re hateful and 
spiteful, and you don’t like them and you want to see them fail. 
But you should think the next . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Eric is becoming a four-letter word. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Eric is a four-letter word. you should 
think the next step, the next logical step. If it fails, your 
constituents fail, because they won’t have the employment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4058 
 

 
(2315) 
 
Clause 4 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you. With respect to clause 4, I just want 
to direct the minister’s attention to clause 4(1)(d) which adds a 
new clause (j). And this clause says: 
 
Gives cabinet the power to designate further powers of the 
corporation by regulation. 
 
In other words, what we have here, Mr. Speaker, is Bill 5 
revisited. Cabinet can go behind closed doors and designate 
further powers and objects for the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation without it being open to public debate. Now the 
reason why we have the powers prescribed in legislation is so that 
there’s some control over the powers of a corporation, so that the 
public knows what the mandate of this corporation is. 
 
And now what the government is proposing to do by this 
amendment is to allow cabinet — behind closed doors, in secret, 
without accounting to the public — to add to the powers of 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation. It, in effect, by that section, 
could add whatever power it wanted to add. It could have 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation selling shoes, or it could have 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation doing any other thing it chose 
that’s not related at all to electrical energy and the supply of 
electrical energy. 
 
And I want to know from the minister why he thinks it’s necessary 
to do that, and what powers does he feel he wants to prescribe to 
the corporation, in secret, behind closed cabinet doors. What 
powers does he have in mind, and why does he need that section? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m told, Mr. Speaker, that this section is 
no different than exists in other legislation relative to other Crown 
corporations that were established by that party when they were 
sitting over here. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Which ones? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Oh, I don’t know off the top of my head, 
but it’s a very long time since this legislation has been updated. 
For instance, it’s been so long since it’s been updated that we’re 
talking about brand-new, different kinds of energy that weren’t in 
existence when this legislation was first passed, back whenever it 
was first passed. We’re now having to make amendments because 
previously it was very cumbersome for us to purchase electricity. 
We had to go through very complex machinations to purchase 
electricity because we didn’t have the power to purchase 
electricity. We can sell it, but we can’t buy it; we have to produce 
it. So we got into all kinds of swaps and exchanges and other 
kinds of things to get electricity to provide for peaking, or in some 
instances base load when our own capacity was kind of hitting its 
peak, and so I guess the short answer to your question is, this is a 
normal kind of a clause in other Crown corporations legislation. 
 
Clause 4 agreed to. 

 
Clauses 5 and 6 agreed to. 
 
Clause 7 
 
Ms. Simard: — Subsection 13(2) is being repealed by clause 7 
and what that section does . . . As I understand 13(2) in The Power 
Corporation Act, it allowed SPC to incorporate other corporations 
which were subsidiary corporations with objects similar to the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation. What this amendment does is 
repeals that section 5, right? In effect repeals that subsection, and 
in effect says that what Saskatchewan Power Corporation can do 
is incorporate subsidiaries that have objects entirely different from 
those of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation because the objects 
and the powers no longer have to be similar. 
 
So I’m going to ask the minister why he feels that power is 
necessary, in what sort of corporations does he intend to 
incorporate that don’t have the same objects and powers, i.e., the 
supply of electrical energy, as the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, an example of a 
possibility might be to separate the two utilities, the gas utility 
from the electrical utility, to perhaps accommodate the desire of 
PURC, back when it existed, to prevent cross-subsidization and 
that kind of thing, to operate them as separate entities so that they 
can be run more efficiently as separate entities, etc. I’m not 
entirely sure why the drafters wanted that section in there, but I’m 
giving you an example of what my guess is that it would be. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Well, Mr. Minister, what it does is it reduces 
accountability of Saskatchewan Power Corporation to the 
legislature. It reduces accountability inasmuch as Sask Power 
corporation can go out and create any kind of a corporation it 
wants, any sort of a corporation, without it having any 
resemblance to the purpose of the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation. 
 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation, in effect, could become a shell 
with a number of subsidiaries that are totally unrelated to what the 
legislature anticipated Saskatchewan Power to do. And there’s no 
question that it reduces the accountability of the corporation. And 
so what are you going to do, privatize those subsidiaries some way 
down the line? Is that what the government’s intending to do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, a similar provision exists 
in other Crowns as well. I think of one that I’m very familiar with 
is Agdevco, where they set up companies that will go into joint 
ventures with other companies to manage a project in some other 
part of the world. And we’ve done lots of that. Another one is 
SaskTel where they have set up a company that is called SaskTel 
International that was designed to export technology, and I 
understand they’re out in the world doing that. 
 
I don’t think that we have done it at Sask Power yet, but we were 
looking very seriously at exporting technology to India, our 
single-wire earth return technology some time ago. And in the 
event that we were to land that project, I  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4059 
 

expect that we would have to have a subsidiary organization to 
give us the kind of risk protection that we would need. Going out 
into other parts of the world, you don’t want to put the whole 
utility at risk, so to speak. 
 
SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) is the 
same, and potash is the same. They all have a similar provision in 
their legislation, so it’s nothing startling or new; it’s just if we’re 
going to export the technology, this is one of the ways to do it, and 
of course that’s to the advantage of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Clause 7 agreed to. 
 
Clause 8 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you. What section 8 does is repeals the 
section that required SPC to provide funds for natural gas 
incinerators. could the minister please advise me what the practice 
has been in that regard? I believe in your second reading speech 
you said that it didn’t have any significance or make any 
difference. Could you please tell me whether you were funding 
these things and what the practice was? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — There was never, ever, any up-take. 
 
Ms. Simard: — What? I’m sorry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — While that provision existed, it was never 
used. There was never any funds supplied. 
 
Clause 8 agreed to. 
 
Clause 9 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the section 9 of 
the printed Bill No. 77 be amended. 
 

By deleting the words “and any other industrial customer” of 
electrical energy that the Lieutenant Governor in Council 
may by regulation prescribe,” and by deleting subparagraph 
(4). 

 
Are you happy? 
 
Clause 9 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 10 agreed to. 
 
Clause 11 
 
Ms. Simard: — What clause 11 does, Mr. Chairperson, is lift the 
30-year limitation on . . . the 30-year period for borrowing is lifted, 
and it says that Saskatchewan Power Corporation can borrow for 
an indefinite period of time. Now I understand from the minister 
that they want to do this in order to take advantage of some certain 
market conditions and to refinance the corporate debt, which has 
risen to, I think, something like $2.5 billion for SPC 
(Saskatchewan Power Corporation) alone — 1.1. from 1981 to 2.5 
to date — and they have to borrow in order to manage the 
corporation. 
 
My concern about a longer term is that I’m concerned that  

we’ll end up paying more interest on that amount of money over a 
longer period. We’ll probably be paying a higher rate of interest 
because it’s over a longer period, and we’ll be putting off today’s 
debt for tomorrow’s generation in even a worse fashion than what 
has been done in the past. 
 
And I’m concerned that this is a bad trend for the province to be 
taking, and it just puts off the inevitable. And I ask myself how it’s 
going to affect our credit rating in this province, and therefore the 
interest rates that we pay. And so I’d like the minister to comment 
on the need for that section and give us a few more details as to 
why he feels it’s necessary. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We have some similar concerns. We 
worry a lot about putting off today’s debt to tomorrow’s children, 
and we’re having some experience with that right now. We’re in a 
situation right now where power lines that were built in 1949 and 
’50 and ’51 were never paid for — never paid for. That constitutes 
part of our debt today. We’ve got transmission and distribution 
lines going all over the province that the way things were 
structured back then, we looked after the interest, but never, ever, 
ever took care of the principal. And so we’re refinancing now to 
take care of some of that. 
 
Having said that, that has nothing to do with this. This particular 
section is to finance things like hydro projects where the unit life 
far exceeds the 30-year limit that we’re stuck to now. So if you 
can take 30-year or a 40-year project, or a project that has a life of 
40 years and finance it over 40 years as opposed to 30, you can see 
that that would have a lesser impact on rates when it comes to pay 
for the project. So what this simply does is to accommodate the 
longer life of today’s projects. 
 
Clause 11 agreed to. 
 
Clause 12 agreed to. 
 
(2330) 
 
Clause 13 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairperson, what this clause does is it 
increases the amount that the corporation may borrow from 3.5 
billion to $5 billion. The corporation now wants, the minister now 
wants to be able to borrow $5 billion on behalf of SPC, and I 
imagine that’s to accommodate projects such as the Shand project 
which we see in the Estevan constituency of the Premier. 
 
I could ask the minister tonight whether he has pursued the offer 
made by Manitoba Hydro that they would look at a rate that would 
be suitable to Saskatchewan and less expensive than the Shand 
project, for example. I won’t get into those questions tonight. The 
fact of the matter is there is an expensive project taking place in 
the city, in the province, for which the government will inevitably 
have to borrow money, and therefore it’s increasing its borrowing 
limited from 3.5 billion to 5 billion. 
 
I want to ask the minister: other than Shand, what projects does he 
have in mind for which he requires this increase in borrowing 
limit? 
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4060 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, we projected — and 
projections are just that; they’re not absolutes — but we projected 
a year ago that the growth rate in energy demand would be about 
2.5 per cent. In fact, growth in energy demand has, over the last 
year, been about 5 per cent. And over October, October this year 
over October last year was 7 per cent. So the growth rate is 
significant. And Shand, there’s no doubt that the demand for the 
Shand capacity will be on us in a big way of 1992, and that’s the 
target to have that particular project on stream. 
 
If growth continues — and we expect that it will because of the 
things that we’re doing in the province, like Weyerhaeuser and 
Ipsco and Saskatoon Chemicals and so on — but if growth 
continues at that same rate, we will be back into the market for 
another 300 megawatts very quickly. And I don’t know whether it 
will be a Coronach or a hydro project in the North or whatever, but 
suffice to say that in the next 5 to 10 years our capital project 
expenditures will be 3 to $4 billion. So we have to bump the 
borrowing levels. 
 
Ms. Simard: — And I hope, Mr. Minister, they’re not all 
patronage projects. 
 
Clause 13 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 14 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 94 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical 
Care Insurance Act (No. 2) 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I’d be pleased to 
introduce the officials that will be helping me in explaining the 
Bill to the members. John Heath is seated beside me, is the 
associate deputy minister of Health. And seated directly behind 
me is Bryan Middlemiss, who is the acting executive director of 
the Medical Care Insurance Commission. Behind John Heath is 
Gerald Tegart, the Crown solicitor for the Department of Health. 
And to my right is Michael Littlewood, the administrative 
co-ordinator in the Department of Health. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. 
Minister, as we all know, this is the Act to basically destroy the 
Medical Care Insurance Commission of Saskatchewan, and the 
Bill itself raises a number of important questions. Mr. Minister, I 
would ask you to explain to the legislature why the Department of 
Health decided to roll the Medical Care Insurance Commission, 
which was an independent commission, into the Department of 
Health? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I take a bit of exception with the 
members’ statement saying that it’s an attempt to destroy the 
Medical Care Insurance Commission. I don’t accept that at all. 
 
It’s being moved into the Department of Health for  

basically, I guess, two reasons. Number one would be that we feel 
that there are some certain budgetary efficiencies and savings of 
money by having it within the Department of Health, and I think 
the hon. member would support those kind of initiatives. 
 
I hear her from day to day rising in the House concerned with 
health care expenditures, asking in one situation for why are you 
cutting back, and then on the next breath saying, you should 
expand services here. So I think any attempt to try and use the 
dollars designated to health more efficiently would be something 
that you would support. 
 
And it is my belief, from the best of the knowledge that’s provided 
to me, that certainly there are more efficiencies with the 
commission within the Department of Health. 
 
But secondly, as a reason for why this would be wrapped into the 
Department of Health rather than being an independent 
commission, is that there is the opportunity for better 
co-ordination between the department and the services of MCIC 
(Medical Care Insurance Commission). 
 
And I guess one of the things, and I’m sure you would ask me this 
question, so I will cite one as an example, and that is the rural 
medical practice study, which, when I was the minister, was 
undertaken, which came up with some very, I think, strong 
suggestions as to how medical practice in rural Saskatchewan 
could be strengthened. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And there’s going to get stronger 
suggestions tonight. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — And the member from Regina City is 
chirping again tonight, but we’ll . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Regina Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Centre. I’m sorry. And I would think there’s 
better co-ordination, and I cite the rural medical practice study as 
one area where the Department of Health, with the MCIC within 
their mandate, they could carry out some of the recommendations 
of that more easily, shall I say. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, one of the concerns that has been 
expressed about this decision to destroy the Medical Care 
Insurance Commission is the fact that there will no longer be an 
arm’s-length relationship from the Minister of Health and from the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you explain to us what sort of provisions have 
been made to insure that the medical records of people across this 
province will not become public information should this 
independence that has been historical no longer be there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The officials indicate to me that section 
37(1) of the existing Act, The Medical Care Insurance Act, is one 
which indicates that: 
 

A person employed in the administration of this Act shall not 
communicate to any other person information brought to his 
attention during the  

  



 
November 5, 1987 

4061 
 

course of his employment specifying: 
 
And we can go on with “the name” and so on . . . the 
confidentiality that you’re referring to . . . And I concur with you 
that the confidentiality of medical records is a very important 
aspect, and I can say that I believe, in Saskatchewan, under our 
administration and under the administration of the party that you 
support, that that has been safeguarded. And what my officials 
indicate to me here is that exactly the same type of requirements 
for employees, as was under the old Act, will be under the new 
one. 
 
So there really is no change. And I thank you for asking this 
question because I concur with you that that is something that is of 
extreme importance, something that people want to be assured that 
there would be no legislative change that would in any way, shape 
or form have that confidentiality of medical records breached. And 
I feel assured to say to you that under the new Act it will be as 
well safeguarded as it has been for many years in the past. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, it has been safeguarded for 
the last 25 years because the Medical Care Insurance Commission 
has been independent and at arm’s-length from the government. 
The Medical Care Insurance Commission has been free to hire its 
own administration and personnel, and with the provisions now, 
where the Medical Care Insurance Commission is rolled into the 
Department of Health, I question whether or not we could have a 
situation where a number of political appointees and supporters of 
your political party could now be hired by the Department of 
health in this particular division, which was the Medical Care 
Insurance Commission, and we could have a situation where the 
Minister of Health, or anybody else in government, in your 
cabinet, might want to have access to someone’s medical record. 
And with the proper people who support the Progressive 
Conservative Party in the proper place, they could very well have 
access to people’s health records. And even though we have this 
provision of secrecy under 37(1) of the legislation, we are 
concerned that with the independence of the commission now 
being done away with, that there is nothing really to protect the 
public from Conservative snoops. 
 
(2345) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I believe, in answer to your question, 
that basically it is —let me put it this way — it’s the legislation 
that protects that confidentiality, rather than the organization. And 
had anyone wanted to perhaps probe into this, that opportunity 
would have been there within the MCIC commission. But I think 
both you and I agree that that hasn’t taken place. 
 
But I want to illustrate a little further to you how, I believe, under 
the Department of Health that the track record of the past, when 
we go back as far as we want — 20 years or 25 years — would 
illustrate that the fears that perhaps you feel have no grounds. 
Because if you look at the Department of Health, which has been 
responsible for the drug plan, which has been responsible for the 
SHSP, the Saskatchewan hospital services plan — and in both of 
those there are some information that is confidential. 

 
And the employees of the Department of Health, I believe, have 
not over the years spilled that confidentiality, at least in the years 
that I was in there as a minister, and the only ones I can speak for, 
and I can say as the years I’ve been an elected member, I have 
never had a constituent or a person of Saskatchewan come to me 
and criticize an employee in the Department of health for, shall I 
say, spilling confidential information. 
 
And let’s go to one that’s even, I suppose, even a little more 
sensitive and that’s the whole Department of . . . we call it the 
mental health department now; it used to be called psych services, 
and I changed the name of that. And that’s very sensitive — and 
that’s very sensitive — there’s some very confidential information 
there about people, about people who, through no fault of their 
own, had a mental illness. 
 
And a mental illness, in my mind, is no different than a physical 
illness except it affects a different part of the body. And people 
recover forma physical illness, thank goodness, as they do from a 
mental illness. And you and I both probably know individuals who 
have had some mental treatment and are today very productive 
citizens in our society. And that confidentiality should remain 
there. I can say over the years, and with my experience in the 
Health department, I never had one — not one letter or one phone 
call, or brought to my attention that there was any spilling of 
confidential information from what used to be called psych 
services branch or the mental health branch of the department. 
 
So I say to the member, although MCIC is coming in under the 
Department of Health, I believe, and from my association for a 
number of years, that those people who work in health care are 
dedicated people; they’re professional people; they know that the 
information that they are handling is sensitive information; they 
know that it is information that is important to the lives of the 
people who have been treated, whether physically or mentally or, 
with prescriptions, through drugs. 
 
And I can say, and I will say to you and to the members of this 
Assembly, those people who are in that department — and I think 
the member from Saskatoon, I forget his seat now, but who was a 
former minister of Health, would say exactly the same thing, that 
under his tenure as a minister of Health, he never had a great 
problem with confidentiality. so with MCIC moving into the 
Department of Health, I see that same professional conduct that 
Saskatchewan Health is proud of being conducted there. 
 
So I guess to sum up to the hon. member, I do not feel, and I will 
stand here and say that I do not think that anyone who is an 
employee of the Department of health will in any way, shape or 
form disclose confidential information regarding one’s health 
records. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I would just reiterate again 
that under the former minister of Health’s tenure we had an 
independent Medical Care Insurance Commission. 
 
And while I realize that there is confidential information  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4062 
 

contained within the Department of Health through SHSP 
(Saskatchewan hospital service plan), the prescription drug plan 
and mental health services, nowhere else in the Department of 
Health is there such a vast record of medical care that individuals 
have received in this province because, Mr. Minister, we have 25 
years of medical records contained on each person who was born 
and raised in this province in the Medical Care Insurance 
Commission. 
 
So I simply flag for you a concern that many people have in this 
province about your government’s decision to roll the Medical 
Care Insurance Commission in to the Department of Health. And 
the concern is that the commission was independent in the past; it 
had the ability to hire it’s own persons. I’ve never heard of the 
Medical Care Insurance Commission of being accused of ever 
being partisan or political. I don’t think that could be said for a 
number of other departments in your government where we’ve 
had example after example of patronage appointments. I think that 
the Medical Care Insurance Commission quite clearly has not 
been riddled with Conservative patronage appointments, and that 
has happened because it has been independent. It’s had its own 
commission, it’s had its own director, and now, Mr. Minister, that 
no longer is the case. The Minister of Health replaces the 
commission in terms of role and function. 
 
So I guess my question to you, Mr. Minister, is: what assurances 
can you give the people of this province, even with section 37 of 
the Act still being there, that the commission will not be riddled 
with Conservative patronage appointments, and therefore the 
public of this province can be assured that their medical records 
are not going to become public information or, at the very 
minimum, Conservative information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, I think, in answer to your question, that 
basically it’s the same people doing the same job as they did 
before under the commission, now in the Department of Health. 
Those people, from my experience with them, were very 
professional, abided by section 37 of the Act, and I believe they 
will continue to do exactly the same thing although they’re under a 
different structure. 
 
And again, without elaborating and going on in great detail, and I 
could tell you from my own personal experience that the people in 
the Department of Health, when I had the pleasure of being the 
minister — and I think the member from Saskatoon South would 
support me in this when he was the minister — were there because 
they were dedicated people. People who serve in health care are 
people who really have a feeling and a care for the well-being of 
their fellow man. That’s why they move into that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — And women. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — And women. That’s right — why they move 
into that type of work. And I believe that the people of MCIC, the 
people of SHSP, the people in psych (psychiatric) services, the 
mental health branch, people in community health — and I won’t 
go through them all — but I work closely with those people, and I 
can say most sincerely to you that those people delivered service  

because they believe in the betterment of health. And they did it, 
and they were proud of their job, and they acted professional. 
 
And I believe the people at MCIC did that. They did it in the years 
that I worked closely with them. And I believe, even though 
they’re under a different structure, that you will see that same 
dedication to professionalism continue. I can understand you 
questioning me on that part of the Bill, and it is logical that you 
would do that. But all I can do is give you my assurance from five 
years of experience in there that I believe that confidentiality will 
be maintained as it has been in the past. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, you assure me that the 
confidentiality will be guaranteed, but I’m not so sure about your 
guarantees. We had a guarantee signed by the Minister of Finance 
in 1978 that the deterrent fee for prescription drugs would be 
eliminated. And the dispensing fee has not been eliminated, Mr. 
Minister. What, in fact, you have done is introduced a deductible 
system for the citizens in this province, so the guarantee is worth 
nothing. And that guarantee was made some nine years ago. 
 
We had a guarantee in 1982 that you people would make health 
care in Saskatchewan number one. And that guarantee has not 
happened. It’s another betrayal. So you can stand up in this 
legislature and you can assure us all you want, but the people of 
this province know full well how you stand when it comes to 
carrying through with your promises and commitments. And they 
no longer trust you, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I think that’s the essence of the problem here, is that you 
assure us that medical records will not become public knowledge, 
or won’t become the knowledge of the Conservative Party of 
Saskatchewan. But your assurances mean very little to the people 
of this province because you have assured the people of this 
province a great deal in the past, and we’ve seen where those 
assurances have led the people of this province. 
 
You assured us we’d have the top health care system in the 
country, yet we have 11,000 people in Saskatoon waiting to get 
into hospitals. You assured us that there would be a removal of the 
deterrent fee or the dispensing fee of prescription drugs, and we 
now have a situation where we have a deductible. And we’ve had 
cut after cut after cut that have been laid on the people of this 
province when it comes to the delivery of health services. So your 
assurances mean very little. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, one of the things that’s become quite clear to 
me in the last couple of days is a practice that the Medical Care 
Insurance Commission has engaged in for some time, and that is 
the practice of reimbursing Saskatchewan residents who go out of 
province to receive certain forms of medical treatment. 
 
And I’m thinking of one particular clinic in Calgary, Alberta, 
where they are able to perform cataract treatment on citizens. And 
I am told that the doctor that is performing this treatment has opted 
out of medicare in Alberta. And I’m wondering why it would be, 
Mr. Minister, that we are reimbursing Saskatchewan citizens  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4063 
 

who get treatment from this particular doctor when he has opted 
out of medicare; and yet in Saskatchewan, if we have a doctor 
who has opted out of medicare, the patient who goes to that doctor 
receives no such reimbursement. Can you explain the discrepancy, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
(2400) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — There were a number of questions there, so 
I’ll try and go back over them all. 
 
First of all, about the assurance that I gave you, again I can only 
go back to my good years with the Health department, and can 
assure you that from my experience there everyone acted 
professionally and was very confidential. 
 
However, I want to indicate to you that if you don’t accept that 
assurance, really that the Act in section 37, as it was in the old Act, 
and what the new Act will indicate, shows that employees are to 
be confidential, and they will be bound by the legislation. So I 
don’t think there’s any real worry about the confidentiality. 
 
We now move on to the question of insured services out of 
province. That was, I think, the third part of your question. And 
I’m going from memory here as to what we do is pay for services 
outside of the province as we would pay here in Saskatchewan for 
services that are not provided here . . . And we pay for the services 
outside of Saskatchewan at Saskatchewan rates, and I think you’re 
aware of these things. But if it is a service that is not provided 
here, then we will pay at the out-of-province rate. 
 
Oh, excuse me, I should say, the correct terminology is, we would; 
for services that are not insured in Saskatchewan, we do not pay 
for those. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I think you’re aware of the clinic 
that I’m referring to. Are you telling this House then that that 
particular medical procedure is not available in Saskatchewan, and 
therefore, even though this doctor has opted out of medicare in 
Alberta and we won’t pay opted out doctors in Saskatchewan, why 
would it be, Mr. Minister, that that doctor in Alberta . . . or, pardon 
me, that the patients who go to that doctor in Alberta are being 
reimbursed at Saskatchewan rates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Really we have no control as to whether a 
person is opted in or out in Alberta, and I think you will realize 
that. We pay for insurance services in Saskatchewan or out of 
Saskatchewan for what would be insured services. So whether the 
individual in Alberta is opted in or out of the plan, we have no 
control over that. But the service that he provides is an insured 
service in Saskatchewan, so therefore we pay at the Saskatchewan 
rate for that service. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, it doesn’t seem very fair to 
a number of doctors in Saskatchewan that if they were to opt out 
of the Medical Care Insurance Commission, that their patients 
would not be reimbursed the Saskatchewan rate. 
 
And at the same time we have a situation that has  

developed, particularly in reference to the clinic in Alberta — 
Calgary, Alberta, where an opted out doctor in Alberta, treating 
Saskatchewan patients is, in a way, reimbursed by the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers because those patients come back to 
Saskatchewan, they apply to the Medical Care Insurance 
Commission, and then they’re reimbursed by the Medical Care 
Insurance Commission, or the taxpayers of this province, for a 
procedure that they obtained from an opted out doctor in Alberta. 
Now is that fair, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Now I guess all I can say there is, we don’t 
make the rules in Alberta. A patient who went to this clinic 
received satisfactory treatment, and we pay at the insured rates of 
Saskatchewan. But whether he is in or out in Alberta, I have no 
control over that, nor does my department. The service is a service 
that is being performed there, that is an insured service in 
Saskatchewan, and therefore we pay at that rate. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, the point is this: that if that doctor 
were practising or was practising in Saskatchewan and had opted 
out of medicare in Saskatchewan, and if that same patient were to 
see that doctor in Saskatchewan, that patient would not be 
reimbursed by the Medical Care Insurance Commission, nor 
would the doctor receive any payment from the Medical Care 
Insurance Commission. 
 
So my point is this, that there are doctors in this province who 
believe that that’s an unfair situation. And I believe, Mr. Minister, 
that if you wish to correct the situation, that you would have the 
legislative power to do that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, the situation in Saskatchewan here — 
and I remember back to the negotiation of Saskatoon Agreement II 
and back to the 1962 medicare agreement — is that the doctors in 
Saskatchewan argued strongly for an opting-out clause. There are 
certain doctors who, and I think there were some since 1962 who 
said, we opt to not serve under the plan. And when we negotiated 
Saskatoon II, there was a strong lobby to say there should be an 
opting out clause, and we allowed that to happen. And there are, as 
you know, certain physicians who have chose to opt out. And 
opting out in Saskatchewan means exactly that, that if you opt out 
you are not covered as an insured service. 
 
So I guess in the short answer to you: yes, there are people in 
Saskatchewan who choose to opt out of the plan and bill their 
patiently directly, and under Saskatoon Agreement II they have 
the right to do that. 
 
In Alberta there are doctors who are providing the insured service. 
As minister of Health previously, and the present Minister of 
Health, we have no say over who is in or out in Alberta. We look 
at the quality of service, the quality of service of the individual in 
the clinic that you are referring to, and I think you would agree 
with me is a good quality service, and we can’t say whether he’s in 
or out of the plan; we pay for that service at the Saskatchewan 
rate. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, we’ll just go over this again 
so that we’re clear on this. I believe that the man in Alberta, the 
doctor in Alberta, is an ophthalmologist. And I believe that there 
are a couple of ophthalmologists  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4064 
 

in Saskatchewan who have opted out of the Medical Care 
Insurance Commission. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, as you know, it takes a long time in this 
province to get in to see a doctor to have cataracts removed. Some 
individuals in Saskatchewan are going to Alberta because this 
procedure is done very, very quickly at this man’s clinic, and this 
doctor has opted out of medicare. 
 
Now we won’t pay opted-out doctors in this province any kind of 
reimbursement for the treatment that they provide patients, and 
that’s fair enough. I don’t think we should. On the other hand, we 
have a situation that has developed where we are reimbursing 
Saskatchewan patients who go to Alberta for treatment by an 
opted-out doctor. Now somehow, Mr. Minister, that just doesn’t 
seem fair. 
 
And I’m wondering whether or not you can assure the people of 
this province, plus a good number of physicians, that you are 
going to do something about this situation that has developed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I think we have a fair assessment of 
the situation. The only thing I’d correct you on is that there’s only 
the one doctor in Saskatchewan, to my knowledge, that has opted 
out of the ophthalmology. And I go back to the situation that we 
have no control in Alberta as to whether a person opts in or out; I 
think you’ll accept that. 
 
I think your argument is: why should we be paying an opted-out 
Albertan ophthalmologist and not a Saskatchewan one? I guess as 
a little bit of understanding to what you’re saying, and my officials 
tell me that there are ongoing negotiations for reciprocal billing 
arrangements which they hope to have in place by maybe the 
spring or next summer between the provinces which might, and I 
want to underline “might” might be able to alleviate the problem 
that you are suggesting. 
 
Let me give you an example, and I think this is along your line of 
questioning, and I can’t say with any assurance this will take 
place. But it’s the kind of thing that may be discussed, is that if 
you have a reciprocal billing arrangement, that then you play by 
the rules of the area in which the billing takes place. So if that 
were to come about, then I think some of the concerns that you’ve 
expressed here regarding the clinic in Calgary vis-a-vis the doctor 
in Regina that has opted out would somehow be rectified. I can’t 
say that’s going to come about, but my officials indicate that 
discussion towards reciprocal billing amongst the provinces are 
taking place. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Okay. Mr. Minister, I think we’ll just carry on 
and get on to another section of the new legislation that you’re 
introducing, and that section or the sections that I’m referring to 
are 18(1.1), 18(5), 18(6), 18(7). And I’m wondering if you can 
explain to me why reference to the Swift Current Region is being 
deleted from the legislation? 
 
(0015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I think in the case of the Swift Current  

region, and I think some of the reasons for them having, shall we 
say, a little bit of special treatment, goes away back in the history 
of Saskatchewan health care where they were health region 
number one, and for some time they were allowed to process their 
own claims. 
 
My officials indicate to me that in the last while they have been 
really kind of acting as a middle man, just collecting the claims 
and having the department process them. So in looking at ways in 
which we could be more efficient and use the dollars in health care 
in better methods, it was felt that there could be some savings by 
eliminating that middle step. 
 
I want to indicate to you that to the best of my advice, that there 
had been consultation with them saying that this would take place. 
And I guess the basis for it was efficiency and saving of money 
and eliminating that role of a middle man. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Section 20 refers to 
the anti-tuberculosis league. And, once again, the league is being 
deleted from the new legislation, and I wish you to advise me of 
the reason for that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — There have been discussions with the 
anti-tuberculosis league over the past while, and some of the 
functions that they had done previously that would impact on the 
Medical Care Insurance Commission have been taken over by the 
Department of Health. And the anti-tuberculosis league, basically, 
has changed to the lung association. And the lung association, 
which I had some dealings with, I remember are basically in the 
educative and the preventative aspects of disease that would affect 
the lungs, and therefore the dealings that they would have with the 
Medical Care Insurance Commission have ceased to take place. 
So that would be the reason for the exclusion in that portion of the 
Act. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Under the old 
legislation, section 36 required that the Saskatchewan medical care 
insurance fund be audited by the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Now I realize that the fund has been deleted and the section 36 has 
now been changed that: 
 

The minister shall, in each fiscal year, prepare and lay before 
the Legislative Assembly in accordance with The Tabling of 
Documents Act a report of the transactions made under this 
Act during the immediate preceding fiscal year. 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, there is no reference to the Provincial Auditor, 
and I’m wondering why reference to the Provincial Auditor has 
been deleted from the legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — With the change, the medical care insurance 
fund has evaporated, shall I say, and now the funding will be in 
the Consolidated Fund, and of course the Consolidated Fund is 
automatically subject to scrutiny by the Provincial Auditor. So it 
goes without saying that it will be audited by the Provincial 
Auditor. I’ll go through it again if . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, I understand. 
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4065 
 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — All right, fine. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, just so I’m clear, now the 
minister will lay before the Legislative Assembly a document. 
Will the document basically be the type of document that we used 
to have in relationship to the Medical Care Insurance 
Commission? As you know, each year MCIC lays before the 
Assembly a document, or its annual report. Will we still have the 
same kind of accounting under the Department of Health that we 
did have when the commission was independent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, there are no changes in the legal 
requirements, and there’s no plan to change the way that it has 
been done in the past. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — So just so I’m clear, Mr. Minister, are you 
saying then that as we have now with the Saskatchewan hospital 
services plan, we have an annual report, we will have an annual 
report for what in essence is the Medical Care Insurance 
Commission, even though it’s been rolled into the Department of 
Health? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It’ll be the same information, and there’s no 
real plan to change it. Now whether it will be in the same form or 
not, I cannot give you that assurance — whether it will be in 
exactly the same form, but the information is the same, and my 
officials indicate to me that there’s no intent to change what would 
be tabled. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now under section 40 
of the old legislation there was a procedure for hearing complaints, 
and with the amendments to the legislation we now have a 
situation where the Lieutenant Governor in Council may provide 
for the establishment of an appeal procedure pursuant to 
complaints. 
 
Under the old legislation the Lieutenant Governor in Council had 
to provide for an appeal procedure, and I’m wondering why now 
we have a situation that is a “may” provide, and not a “shall” 
provide. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Under the existing provision where it’s a 
“shall” clause, there can be appeals that are basically meaningless 
appeals. With the “may” provision, the officials indicate to me that 
that would be permissive, where certainly there would be 
substantive type of appeals and can’t take place. If you wanted 
some examples, I would be willing to give you some. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m just simply going to 
flag the possibility that we now have a great deal of discretion 
with this change to the legislation in this particular clause. And 
prior to this amendment, the Lieutenant Governor in Council had 
to provide an appeal procedure, and that no longer is the case. And 
I think this is another example of the anti-democratic nature of 
your government. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to now go to section 49 of the 
legislation, and probably, Mr. Minister, that this is the most 
difficult change to the legislation. And I just want to put on the 
record a concern that I have over your lack of consultation, 
particularly with the Saskatchewan Medical Association. 

 
Now as I understand it, the Minister of Health advised the medical 
association that they would have at least two weeks consultation 
with the Department of Health after the legislation had been 
drafted. Mr. Minister, that in fact did not happen. The SMA 
(Saskatchewan Medical Association) did not receive a copy of the 
draft legislation until Friday, October 30, and they met with 
officials of the Department of Health on the Sunday following, or 
November 1, and, as I understand it, they spent from 3 o’clock in 
the afternoon to well after midnight discussing the details of the 
legislation. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan Medical Association, and a 
good number of doctors that they represent, have a great deal of 
difficulty with your changes to section 49 of the legislation, and as 
you know, this is the section governing the establishment of a joint 
professional review committee. Mr. Minister, we now have in this 
legislation the ability on behalf of that review committee to fine a 
doctor up to $50,000 for over-billing. 
 
Now I’m asking you, Mr. Minister, what sort of consultation did 
your officials have with the Saskatchewan Medical Association, 
and why the stiff fine and why the section that makes it very, very 
difficult for doctors to appeal the findings of the joint professional 
review committee? 
 
(0030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — In consultation, the department tell me they 
spent from 3 till 12:15 on Monday discussing this with the SMA. 
And the minister spent three hours on Tuesday in consultation 
with the SMA, and I believe that the minister indicated that there 
was quite a discrepancy in their views, and they could have been 
consulting for ever, but they were quite a ways apart on where 
they thought they should be. 
 
It’s true that the fine can be up to — up to — $50,000. It 
automatically doesn’t mean it’s $50,000. It is set by a review of 
their peers, and there is an appeal procedure. So I hope those three 
things have helped answer your question on that section. 
 
So there was some consultation and, secondly, the minister felt 
that they could consult and consult, but there’s quite a difference 
in opinion, and maybe more consultation wouldn’t have brought it 
any closer together. Thirdly, it’s a fine up to $50,000, set by a peer 
review. And fourthly, there is an appeal procedure. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, the changes to the legislation are 
very, very great. I’d like to know this: now that you’ve introduced 
legislation where there is now a fine of up to $50,000, why is it 
that there isn’t a hearing process contained within the legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well there’s a complete hearing by the 
peers. That’s the first step if there’s a discrepancy. There’s a 
complete hearing by the peers, and then following that, if there 
isn’t a satisfactory resolution, there is an appeal procedure through 
the courts. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, what we have here is a  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4066 
 

peer review committee — not even a peer review committee; I’m 
going to call it the joint professional review committee — who can 
level a fine of up to $50,000, and the doctor does not have the 
ability to appear before a hearing. In many respects, Mr. Minister, 
this is like a Star Chamber operating here, and you haven’t 
answered my question. 
 
My question is this: why is there not a hearing? When this 
committee has the power to levy a $50,000 fine, why wouldn’t the 
doctor have the right to appear before a hearing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — For your information, there is a complete 
hearing with the doctor present, with his peers there, and the 
doctor can have his lawyers there for that hearing. And if that 
doesn’t take place, the Court of Queen’s Bench will make sure 
that it does take place. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s not written into the 
legislation, so there are no provisions for a hearing. And as far as 
we’re concerned, on this side of the House, that doctors should not 
have to be subjected to this kind of arbitrary discretion, 
particularly when there is a $50,000 fine that can and could be 
levied. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, as far as we’re concerned, this joint 
professional review committee, and the legislation that you have 
drafted, and the legislation that you are presenting here tonight, 
does not live up to the principles of natural justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly there have been a number of cases 
in Saskatchewan over the past few years where this type of thing 
has taken place, and it is required that you follow the rules of 
natural justice, and you do not have to specify that in the Act. It’s 
implied that that’s what takes place. So there’s no necessity to 
state that within the Act. 
 
I mean it’s just understood from precedent that that’s what’s going 
to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well it’s very difficult when the 
member . . . if you want to get in the debate, please rise and get in 
the debate. It’s very difficult to explain it to your seat-mate when 
two of you continue to chatter. So I’m telling you that it is not 
necessary for it to be in the legislation. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I was not chattering while 
you were chattering to the legislature. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I’d like to know this: why is it that there’s no 
reference in this legislation to doctors having access to information 
that this joint professional review committee used against them in 
assessing whether or not this doctor had over-billed, or whether or 
not this doctor should be fined up to $50,000. Why can’t that 
doctor have access to the information used against him or her? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Simply put, there’s no need to spell all that 
out. If we don’t treat the doctor fairly, the Court of Queen’s Bench 
will intervene and make sure that fair treatment takes place. So 
there’s no need, as I said before, it’s implied, it’s well established 
practice, and there’s no need to write it into the Act. 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, we have a great deal of 
difficulty with the procedure that radically alters past practice. 
And, Mr. Minister, the legislation has been altered to such an 
extent that a doctor can face up to a $50,000 fine without ever 
having had the opportunity to go before a hearing and without ever 
having had the opportunity to know what the information the joint 
professional review committee used in assessing the penalty, and 
we do not think that is a good procedure. 
 
We think there needs to be some reference in this legislation to a 
hearing process, and we also think there needs to be some 
reference in the legislation to doctors having access to information 
that is used against them in assessing these kinds of heavy 
penalties. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I have a 
number of questions that I would like to direct to the minister 
tonight. And I will start, generally speaking, on the subject matter 
that he was just dealing with. 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Chairman, that the minister and the 
government have created for themselves a rather large and serious 
credibility problem in relation to this Bill, particularly as it relates 
to the Saskatchewan Medical Association. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ll recall that it was six or seven months ago, in 
the spring, when the Minister of Health announced his intention to 
abolish the MCIC, to roll its function into the mainstream, 
administratively, of the Department of Health. And at that time the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association protested that they had not 
been consulted about that change when it was announced six or 
seven months ago, and a change obviously that could very 
profoundly affect them. 
 
If I recall correctly, the minister replied in the spring that the SMA 
should not get so excited. It was still very early, he said. There 
would be lots of time for serious consultations about what the 
legislation would do and how it would do it. And in any event, the 
minister suggested at that time that whatever was finally included 
in the legislation would be merely of a technical, administrative, 
and largely housekeeping nature, and that it would really have 
very little substantial impact beyond that mere administrative 
change of converting what used to be the function of the MCIC 
into the mainstream of the administration of the Department of 
Health. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Minister of Health was taken at his word by the 
SMA, but late last week it would appear that the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association found that that word was not reliable, 
because there were in fact no meaningful consultations. And I 
think in some answers that you’ve given earlier here, you 
indicated the very brief, almost cursory nature of those 
consultations. 
 
Any talks on the subject of Bill 94 between the government and 
the SMA only began over this part weekend at the earliest, and 
now the government wants to pass the Bill through all stages four 
or five days later. And so obviously whatever consultation there 
was, was virtually of no possible use. 
 
And secondly, on the substance of the legislation, it’s not  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4067 
 

just the technical, administrative, housekeeping abolition of the 
MCIC. The provisions in this Bill, I think as the minister has 
indicated in his answers already this evening, go far beyond that 
mere administrative matter, to touch on several rather serious 
professional matters and, in fact, to give the government more and 
more power. 
 
And so on both of the things promised by the minister, on the 
consultation and on the substance, he has effectively reneged on 
the word that he gave to the Saskatchewan Medical Association as 
much as six months ago. And I suggest, Mr. Minister, that is not 
merely just an ordinary problem with the breaking of a political 
promise, because in the circumstances of this situation, I think the 
minister’s stature with the medical association has been damaged 
as a consequence of what’s transpired in relation to this Bill, and 
perhaps some other matters, in the last six months. 
 
(0045) 
 
The association’s confidence in the minister’s credibility has 
obviously been shaken. And whether the minister would admit it 
or not if he were here this evening, I think the minister has a 
growing and a serious problem with Saskatchewan doctors. And I 
suggest to you that that is a not a healthy state of affairs. If the 
doctors have the impression that they can’t rely upon what the 
minister says to them; that promised consultations will not be 
forthcoming; that what is suggested to be merely administrative 
turns out to be farm more substantive; if the association constantly 
has the impression that they can’t rely upon what the minister says 
to them, then I think that minister has a very serious problem with 
one of the most important professional groups with which he has 
to deal in his ministerial capacity. 
 
And I would ask, as my first question, for the minister to respond 
to that predicament because he must know that, as Minister of 
Health, it’s obviously important for the Minister of Health to 
maintain the trust and the respect of the professional organizations 
with which he must deal in a professional capacity. 
 
And from what I’ve heard, most particularly in the last few days 
— although the feeling has been growing over the last few months 
— but most particularly in the last few days, it seems to me that 
some professional health associations in Saskatchewan, and 
particularly this one relating to doctors, have some grave doubts 
now about their relationship with the minister. And if that turns 
out to be the case, then it’s not a healthy or a productive or a 
constructive situation to exist in the Saskatchewan health care 
system. 
 
And I wonder what the minister would suggest his colleague, the 
Minister of Health, might do to repair the obvious damage that’s 
been done. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I believe that there has been some 
consultation with the Minister of Health. My officials indicate that 
from what the first draft of the Act was as to what is here today, 
there has been considerable change, and that has come about 
through some consultation. I suppose whether there has been 
adequate consultation or not depends from which stance one views  

it. 
 
I did say, and the member was in the House the other day, that in 
regard to the cap and the payments and so on, there is a meeting 
set up on November 11 for further consultation. And in discussion 
with the Minister of Health, I know that from time to time he has 
had consultation both here in Regina in his office, and has gone to 
Saskatoon to meet with the SMA. 
 
So I guess it depends from which stance you’re looking at it. One 
side can say, well we haven’t had adequate consultation. The 
either side can say, well we certainly have. 
 
But I think when we see that there have been some changes from 
where the first Bill — and the officials indicate that to me — 
where it was first drafted as to what is introduced here in the 
legislation, that there has been considerable change, would be an 
indication that there has been consultation. 
 
You infer in your question that continued consultation and good 
relationships with the SMA is important to health care in 
Saskatchewan; I don’t dispute that at all. And I have every faith 
that the Minister of Health will continue in those types of 
consultations. 
 
And as you and I both know, with the ruling of the arbiter on the 
salaries of doctors there is going to have to be a continued 
consultation between the SMA and the Department of Health. And 
I feel very confident, and can assure you that that type of 
consultation, to my mind, will take place. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would urge the minister 
to keep that point uppermost in his mind because, from what I 
have heard lately, the relationship between the minister and the 
medical association is certainly far from the best, and far from 
what it should be. And it could well lead to the difficulties that the 
minister has just alluded to in relation to an even larger problem, 
having to do with the money running out already this year for the 
payment of doctors’ fees. And that is an issue that is obviously 
going to take a tremendous amount of ingenuity and creative 
goodwill to deal with. And a good relationship between the 
minister and the medical association is critical. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to turn to the matter of the joint professional 
review committee. And the minister, I’m sure, knows that this is a 
serious issue. It has important implications for the profession. this 
is one of the substantive matters that seems to be bootlegged into 
this legislation, not the merely administrative matter that the 
legislation was originally described as being, but a very 
substantive matter sort of slipped in at the tail-end of the 
legislation. And that’s obviously one of the things that has 
concerned the profession. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m sure you know that the profession itself, quite 
apart from what the Department of Health was doing, the 
profession itself was working on the drafting of a proposal for the 
revamping of this professional review committee. All of that work 
was going on by the doctors themselves. And all of a sudden, now 
they find that kind  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4068 
 

of review that they were doing to modernize and change and 
improve these provisions, that all of that is now pre-empted by this 
arbitrary legislation that comes before them without the proper 
kind of consultation or advanced knowledge. And it is a serious 
matter, Mr. Minister, because obviously in the legislation the 
minister takes control of this review process by having the 
authority to appoint the director of professional review. 
 
Some major new fine levels are authorized. There is a very limited 
right of appeal. There is no clear right on the part of a physician 
who is accused of something to obtain advance information about 
the accusations against him. One body seems to be established 
here as the investigator, the prosecutor, the judge and the jury, and 
there is no proper procedure specified in the legislation that clearly 
indicates that the principles of natural justice will be followed and 
applied. 
 
The minister earlier suggested, well that’s all true, but you can rely 
on the principles of natural justice and the common law. I think, 
Mr. Minister, the profession would be far happier with this 
situation if you were prepared to be a little more specific about 
that in the legislation. There is precedent for that specificity with 
other pieces of legislation, and I would urge you very seriously to 
consider including some of those written guarantees and 
protections for the profession right here in this Bill, so the worries 
that are affecting the SMA can be alleviated. 
 
And if you’re not prepared to do that, I would ask the minister: 
what happens then if the SMA looks at this Bill, considers the lack 
of consultation, considers the fact that the government appears to 
be trying to pull a fast one, and what if the SMA basically says 
then, well we’re not going to participate in your joint professional 
review committee. You can have your kangaroo court, and we’re 
not going to have anything to do with it. What happens if the SMA 
takes the position that this procedure is so unacceptable that 
they’re going to boycott your procedure? Then I think you’ve got 
a big credibility problem, Mr. Minister, and I think it would be 
wise to address it in advance so that that credibility problem 
doesn’t literally blow up in the face of the Department of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I guess in reply to your question is that 
the department feels certainly that, and they want to have 
something that is fair and that works, and they feel they have 
designed that. Also that the SMA wants to be an integral part of 
this because they have the opportunity to be there as peers for their 
members. 
 
And I think if . . . I cannot see them opting out and not taking part 
in this because they are one of three aspects of it, and the other 
ones are the College of Physicians and Surgeons, the professional 
body of the medical profession in Saskatchewan who support this 
Act and the review, and the Department of Health. So if the SMA 
decided not to take part, I’m sure the other two would go ahead. 
 
But I cannot see the SMA, when they have the opportunity to 
come in there as peers to judge their own members, why they 
would withdraw from the procedure. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, just one final question for  

the minister, and that has to do with a change in the legislation that 
the government has apparently decided not to make. And once 
again they seem to be falling down in terms of meeting the 
expectations of the Saskatchewan Medical Association. It’s my 
understanding that where this legislation touches upon the right of 
a qualified physician to set up a practice in Saskatchewan, that the 
legislation is, in effect, permissive; that is, that the government is 
not obliged to provide the physician with what I will, for 
shorthand purposes, call a billing number — although that’s not 
what we call it in this province — the government is not obliged to 
provide the physician with a billing number. The government may 
provide the physician with a billing number. 
 
Now I am not aware, I am not aware of a circumstance in 
Saskatchewan, yet, where the government has arbitrarily turned 
someone down. But with rumours of what might happen in this 
province and what is certainly happening in other provinces, I 
think it’s understandable that those in the profession would have a 
fear or a worry that that might occur in Saskatchewan, and 
therefore I think it is reasonable of the profession to ask the 
government to put in the legislation a guarantee that a qualified 
physician would not be turned down for that “billing number.” 
 
I want to ask the minister if the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association specifically asked for that type of a provision to be 
included in this legislation, and why the government chose, if the 
request was made, why the government chose to turn it down? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, the SMA did ask for that clause within 
the Bill. It has never been included within Saskatchewan, and we 
prefer to stay with that. 
 
The other side of that, if you wrote it in in legislation, that is the 
right to give an automatic billing number. That’s why it would 
really boil down it, and that hasn’t been the practice. 
 
(0100) 
 
Mainly, they have been granted. In the main they have been 
granted, but I think it is the decision of the department and of the 
government not to write that in as an automatic right that a billing 
number would automatically be given to any doctor who applied. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, in terms of the possible 
cancellation of what we’re referring to here as billing numbers, I 
understand the legislation provides for billing numbers to be 
cancelled on 30 days notice. 
 
Can I ask why provisions are not included in the legislation to 
require that any cancellation be for cause, and not just an arbitrary 
decision by the government — that there must be good reason, 
good legitimate cause for the cancellation of any billing number? 
And why is there no guaranteed right of appeal against the 
cancellation of a billing number? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — They indicate to me that there never has 
been a billing number pulled without cause. There always has 
been cause, so the fact that there might be one done without cause 
never has happened, and we don’t  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4069 
 

see that taking place in the future. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Just one final question then, Mr. Minister, and 
I’ll leave it at that. Do I take it from your answers, with respect to 
these questions about billing numbers, that you have no immediate 
plan, or plan in the near future or foreseeable future, that would 
arbitrarily restrict the numbers of practitioners based on location or 
type of practice or any move that might in any way parallel what 
has been done with respect to billing numbers in the province of 
British Columbia. Will you just confirm that there’s no such plan 
afoot in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — In answer to the member, I can say that 
there are no immediate plans to do that, but I could not give you 
the assurance that somewhere in the future that consideration may 
not be undertaken. At the immediate time I can tell you it is not on 
the drawing board, but I couldn’t stand here tonight in all honesty 
and say that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — By the year 2000. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, for the next five or 10 yeas that would 
never be considered because it may; it may. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. Minister, could 
you please advise us whether or not you’ve taken a look at the 
constitutional aspects of the Bill, the fact that you’re creating a 
body which can levy a penalty of $50,000; the fact that you 
haven’t written in a guaranteed hearing, which is . . . really then 
depends upon the good will of the joint professional body. could 
you please comment on those two aspects and whether or not 
you’ve looked at the constitutional concerns that may arise with 
respect to the Bill; and if you’ve received a written opinion, 
whether you would table that opinion and give us an opportunity 
to review it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly there has been constitutional 
considerations taking place in the drafting of the Bill. We have no 
written confirmation of the constitutionality of the Bill. We feel 
quite confident that it is constitutional, and we know if it isn’t, the 
courts will tell us pretty quick that it isn’t. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Earlier the . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order. Let’s allow the member 
to ask his question. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Earlier the 
minister indicated that we should not evince any concern about the 
fact that the data bank which was formerly in the hands of the 
MCIC will now be in the hands of Health department officials and 
that proper security would be maintained. I wonder if the minister 
would be willing at some early point to issue public guide-lines so 
that the public will know who the authorized users will be of that 
data base, and under what conditions access can be obtained to 
that data base, and which departmental officials will not have 
access to that data base. 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well as I told the member from Saskatoon 
earlier this evening, nothing has really changed. I mean, it’s the 
same people processing the same material, and they have done it 
in a confidential manner for years and years, and I am very 
confident that that will continue in the same way. So I don’t see 
any need for guide-lines or anything of this nature. 
 
The Act stipulates the confidentiality, as it did in the old Act, as it 
is in the new Act. So to the member, I don’t see the necessity for 
guide-lines. I believe very, very strongly that the confidentiality 
will continue as it has in the past. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 14 
 
Mr. Chairman: — House amendment made by the Acting 
Minister of Health, section 14 of the printed Bill: 
 

Amend subsection 18(1.2) of the Act, as being enacted by 
the subsection 14(3) of the printed Bill, by striking out “to” 
where it appears for the third time in the third line and 
substituting “of”. 

 
Clause 14 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 15 to 20 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 21 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Amended as the printed Bill: 
 

Amend clause 21(h) of the printed Bill by adding “wherever 
it appears” before “in” in the first line. 

 
Clause 21 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 22 to 26 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 27 
 
Mr. Chairman: — House amendment to the printed Bill, by the 
Acting Minister of Health: 
 

Amend section 27 of the printed Bill: 
 
(a) by striking out subsection (2), and substituting the 
following: 
 
(2) Subsection 40(3) is amended by adding the following 
after “Act”: 
 
“, 1981, the Board of Chiropractors under The Chiropractic 
Act or the Council of the Saskatchewan Association of 
Optometrists under The Optometry Act, 1985”; and 
 
(b) By striking out “49.9” in the last line of subsection 40(4) 
of the Act, as being enacted by subsection 27(3) of the 
printed Bill, and substituting “49.91”. 

 
Clause 27 as amended agreed to. 
 
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4070 
 

Clause 28 agreed to. 
 
Clause 29 
 
Mr. Chairman: — House amendment of the printed Bill: 
 

Amend subsection 29.1 of the printed Bill: 
 
(a) by striking out “(1)” in clause (a); and  
(b) by striking out clause (b) and substituting the following: 
 
(b) by striking out “commission” wherever it occurs in 
clause (b) and in each case substituting “minister”. 

 
Clause 29 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 30 
 
Mr. Chairman: — We have another House amendment: 
 

Amend clause 30(e) of the printed Bill by striking out “By 
striking out” and substituting “by repealing”. 

 
Clause 30 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 31 agreed to. 
 
Clause 32 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Amendments to clause 32 made by the Acting 
Minister of Health: 
 

Amend sections 49.1 to 49.3 of the Act, as being enacted by 
section 32 of the printed Bill: 
 
(a) by striking out “49.9” in the last line of subsection 
49.1(1) and substituting “49.91”; 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — And: 
 

(b) by striking out “he” in the third line of subsection 49.2(2) 
and substituting “a physician”; 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — There’s a further amendment made by the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana on section 32 of the printed Bill. 
 

Amend section 49.2 of the Act, as being enacted by section 
32 of the printed Bill by adding the following subsection 
after subsection (9): 
 
(10) In making an order pursuant to this section the 
committee shall observe the rules of natural justice. 

 
Amendment agreed to on division. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Further amendment to section 32, part  

(c): 
 
And we’re back now to the Acting Minister of Health’s motion on 
part (c): 
 

(c) By striking out subsection 49.21(2) and substituting the 
following: 
 
(2) The judge hearing the appeal shall consider only the 
record of the proceedings of the committee with respect to 
the order appealed from and the evidence presented at those 
proceedings and may make an order: 
 
(a) affirming or varying the order appealed from; 
 
(b) referring the matter back to the committee with directions 
to reconsider it; or 
 
(c) quashing the order appealed from and substituting any 
order that the judge considers the committee ought to have 
made. 

 
Mr. Shillington: — May I ask a question, Mr. Chairman, before 
the question is put? In your view, Mr. Minister, does this allow an 
appeal on a question of law and fact? Would you . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
(0115) 
 
Mr. Chairman: — We have another amendment to section 32 of 
the printed Bill, made by the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
And I’m going to have to rule that amendment out of order, 
because the changes that have been made, it is no longer possible 
to do something and make an amendment to something that no 
longer exists. 
 
And we have a further amendment made by the Acting Minister of 
Health on section (d): 
 

by striking out “subsection” in last line of section 49.22 and 
substituting “section.” 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Further amendment to (e): 
 

by striking out “letter” in the third line of subsection 49.3(4) 
and substituting “mail.” 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Section 32 as amended agreed to. 
 
Sections 33 to 36 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I’d like to thank my officials that helped me 
put this piece of legislation through tonight. Thank you very, very 
much. And thank the member opposite for her questions. 
 
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4071 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. I, too, would 
like to thank the officials that have accompanied the minister 
tonight. I just want to remind the minister, the Acting Minister of 
Health, that last December when we were here into the wee hours 
of the night, we were also debating the Medical Care Insurance 
Commission and amendments to the Act. And it’s quite odd that 
once again, at the wee hours of the night towards the end of the 
session, the last few seconds of the session, that we are once again 
debating an Act to amend The Medical Care Insurance 
Commission. And next year we won’t have any amendments 
before the legislature because the Medical Care Insurance 
Commission is no longer. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 55 — An Act to provide for the Division of 
Saskatchewan into Constituencies for the Election of Members 

of the Legislative Assembly 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 
be now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill, with leave, 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
(0125) 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 31 
 
Muller Martin 
Duncan Toth 
Andrew Sauder 
Berntson Johnson 
Taylor McLaren 
Smith Hopfner 
Swan Petersen 
Muirhead Swenson 
Maxwell Martens 
Schmidt Baker 
Hodgins Gleim 
Gerich Neudorf 
Hepworth Kopelchuk 
Hardy Saxinger 
Klein Britton 
Meiklejohn  
 

Nays — 24 
 
Blakeney Atkinson 
Prebble Anguish 
Brockelbank Goulet 
Shillington Hagel 
Koskie Lyons 
Tchorzewski Calvert 
Thompson Lautermilch 
Rolfes Trew 
Mitchell Smart 
Simard Van Mulligen 
Solomon Koenker 
Kowalsky Goodale 
 

The Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 77 — An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 
be now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, with leave, that the 
Bill now be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 

Bill No. 94 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical 
Care Insurance Act (No.2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move the amendments 
now be read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, with leave, that the 
Bill now be read a third time. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 
Bill No. 99 — An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act (No. 2) 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave for first 
reading of an Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Act (No. 2). 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I beg to inform the Assembly 
that his Honour the Lieutenant Governor, having been informed of 
the subject matter of this Bill, recommends it to consideration of 
the Assembly. And I move a Bill, An Act to amend The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, be now read a 
first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, and by leave of the Assembly, The Bill ordered 
to be read a second time later this day. 
 
(0130) 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Bill No. 99 — An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act ( No. 2) 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, we are moving tonight 
second reading of a Bill to amend The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Act. This is an Act, as we all know, that deals 
with the salaries and the benefits paid to members of the 
legislature. This, over a period of time, has been always very 
contentious, and a difficult matter for members of the Assembly to 
deal with. 
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4072 
 

This Bill, I hope, and in consultation with the members opposite, 
will perhaps put that concern to rest for some period of time. What 
this legislation will do, and what it contains, is two fundamental 
changes to the Act. First of all, it will delegate from this Assembly 
the question of members setting their own salaries, and, I think, a 
question and a problem faced by legislatures and parliaments 
across the country. 
 
What this particular piece of legislation does is delegate to a panel, 
consisting of not more than five people, to determine the salary 
levels for members, indemnity for members, and indemnity for 
special duties — that is, the Premier, the cabinet ministers, the 
Leader of the Opposition, whips, Speaker, and a variety of other 
issues. The panel will then report back to the Speaker as chairman 
of the Board of Internal Economy. 
 
The people on this committee will be agreed to, will be appointed 
by Executive Council, with the approval of the opposition. The 
members of this committee will be selected of prominent people 
within our province, with the only caveat being that anybody that 
sits on this committee can in no way have a connection or interest 
with the government — let me give you an example of that: a 
president of the university or somebody working in the university 
who draw their revenue from grants from government — so that 
there can in no way be a suggestion of conflict of interest. 
 
When that panel reports to the Board of Internal Economy, the 
Board of Internal Economy will have three options. It will be 
allowed to accept the report, to reject the report, or to amend the 
report, but only in a downward way. In other words, the board will 
not be allowed to increase any of the recommendations. 
 
This board will, in reviewing the salaries of members, will look at 
the entire parameter of what members make by way of duties, and 
special duties, and that type of thing. The second thing that this 
legislation does is delegate to the Board of Internal Economy the 
various matters of members dealing with themselves. 
 
About seven or eight years ago this particular Board of Internal 
Economy was first structured in this province on an experimental 
basis. In most jurisdictions where there is a Board of Internal 
Economy, things like member services — your travel back and 
forth to your riding, your telephone, your communication 
allowance, that type of thing is dealt with in the Board of Internal 
Economy, and that’s for members collectively to decide what that 
should be. That of course, as you know, is reported through your 
office when the budget is produced and presented each year. 
 
The second thing, and while not mentioned in this legislation, is 
that we’ve had some discussions between members of the 
government and members of the opposition that we will make a 
concerted effort between now and the beginning of the next 
session by which to reform some of the rules of this Assembly. 
 
Now we all know and have experienced that process, and perhaps 
in this session. It has been difficult at times. I think there is the 
will, and I anticipate the will, by  

members on both sides of the House, to try to deal with the rules 
to the betterment of all. This is an important open forum by which 
we debate, but it also changes as times change — witness the 
introduction of television some five or six years ago. And I think 
we look at the way we might deal with rules looking at other 
jurisdictions and that type of thing. 
 
I might also say, Mr. Speaker, that prior to the introduction of this 
legislation it has been discussed with the members opposite and 
the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. And this particular 
legislation has been introduced with the agreement of all sides, 
and that’s the way it should be, and that’s the way it must be when 
we deal with the question of rules or deal with the question of 
salaries. This legislation will change the way we deal with salaries 
of ourselves, and I think that’s an important step forward, and I 
think it’s a proper step forward. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move second reading of an 
Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 
Act. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, it’s late and I’m rapidly 
losing my voice, but I do want to say a word or two about this 
legislation. The Bill we have before us, Mr. Speaker, on the 
surface may appear to be very mechanical and very technical in its 
appearance, but it contains what I consider to be an important 
principle and a principle that’s applied, I believe, in many, if not 
most, other jurisdictions. And I’m glad to see that a principle is 
being applied here in Saskatchewan with respect to the salaries 
and the benefits of MLAs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the principle that I refer to is simply this: that we, in 
our favoured position in this House, should not sit in absolute 
judgement and with complete control over our financial position 
and rewards. Instead, the substance of what is done from time to 
time in relation to these matters affecting all MLAs is referred by 
this legislation to an outside panel of impartial Saskatchewan 
citizens, and they will set the standard, according to their 
judgement of what is proper and what is appropriate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they will examine all factors affecting our 
remuneration, affecting our remuneration directly or indirectly in 
any way, and they will make a report. And we in this House, or 
rather in the committee on internal economy, will abide by that 
report or we can vary it. But if we choose to vary it, any variation 
would have to be in a downward direction only. An external panel 
will therefore, Mr. Speaker, effectively set the maximum for MLA 
remuneration. It’s a cap, and we can accept that or less. 
 
And I think that way of doing things is important. It removes from 
MLAs a serious conflict of interest problem. And it involves 
representatives of the public in setting a monetary value on the 
services rendered by those elected to this institution. And that is, 
Mr. Speaker, I think, as it should be, we should not be, in this 
House, the financial adjudicator on how much or how little we are 
worth. 
 
In future we will not legislate numbers to establish our rate of pay 
or other benefits after this legislation. We will  
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4073 
 

simply list the various categories by which MLAs are paid, and 
others with external judgement will fill in the numbers, taking into 
account the public interest, including general economic 
circumstances and all the various pay categories involved and how 
they relate to each other. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that is a significant change. I think it’s a good 
change for the better, and I will support the legislation. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to make just a 
brief comment in respect to this legislation as the night wears on. 
As has been indicated by the previous speakers, the Bill before us 
sets up a method of payment . . . method whereby the payment to 
MLAs will be established. 
 
And as has been indicated, that will be done by a panel. Up to five 
members can sit on the panel appointed by the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council, and that is done with the consultation . . . the 
choice of those in consultation with the Leader of the Opposition. 
As has been said, it’s always very difficult for legislators to 
address the question of remuneration for the members themselves. 
But I think that we should all note that this Bill this evening comes 
at a end of a long and arduous session. 
 
Members have here worked over 100 days and fully participated 
in the debates and in the business of the province. And let’s 
acknowledge the facts that we have disagreed, we have debated, 
and sometimes hotly, and sometimes at length, but throughout it 
all each member of the Assembly on either side of the House has 
sought to represent the best interest of his or her constituents. And 
that’s why we are here. 
 
For each of us is obligated, and it’s a solemn obligation of being 
elected, to represent our respective constituents to the best of our 
ability. We must meet with them where they are. We must travel. 
We must meet with them when they call, and we must listen to 
them. And we must bring their concern and their views to this 
Assembly. 
 
And this Bill deals with the ability of the members of the 
Legislative Assembly to serve their constituents and to have the 
resources to do that effectively. And that’s the question that this 
Bill addresses by setting up the independent panel. The Bill before 
us provides, as I said, an independent panel to examine and assess 
these issues. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, without further comment, I believe that 
these issues should be reviewed and addressed by such an external 
panel. And I believe that this is the most appropriate way to 
review it, and we will support the legislation. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time, and by leave of the 
Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this day. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 100 — An Act to amend The Members of the 
Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act, 1979 (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave to move 
first reading of An Act to amend The Members of the Legislative 
Assembly Superannuation Act, 1979 (No. 2). 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I asked for leave, and I thought that’s what 
you asked the Assembly as well. I took it that’s what you asked. 
 
I beg to inform the Assembly that His Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor, having been informed of the subject matter of the Bill, 
An Act to amend The Members of the Legislative Superannuation 
Act, 1979 (No. 2). 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill ordered 
to be read a second time later this day. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 100 — An Act to amend The Members of the 
Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act, 1979 (No. 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, this is an amendment with 
regard to The Superannuation Act with regards to pensions. It 
allows pensions to . . . the flexibility to go from age 55 down to 
age 50. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this day. 
 
(0145) 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 
Bill No. 99 — An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act (No. 2) 
 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Chairman, there is a number of House 
amendments there. I have passed them to the members opposite 
and to the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. I have indicated 
what this Bill in fact does. So I leave those House amendments on 
that side and I would add nothing further. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 9 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Amendment to clause 9 of the printed Bill: 
 

Amend section 58(12) of the Act by: 
 
Being enacted by section 9 of the printed Bill: 
 
(a) by striking out clause (c); 
 
(b) by striking out clauses (a) to (c) and the second  

  



 
November 5, 1987 

4074 
 

line of clause (d) and substituting clause (a) or (b); and 
 
(c) by renumbering clauses (d) and (e) as clauses (c) and (d) 
respectively. 

 
Clause 9 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 10 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 19 
 
Mr. Chairman: — House amendment to section 19 of the printed 
Bill: 
 

Amend section 67(1) of the Act by: 
 
As being enacted by section 19 of the printed Bill: 
 
(a) by striking out “July 1 of each year” in the first line and 
subsection 3 and substituting “July 1, 1988, and thereafter as 
required by resolution of the Assembly”; 
 
(b) by striking out the last two lines of subsection 3 and 
substituting “allowances, disbursements and other 
payments”; 
 
(c) by striking out “and substituting its own 
recommendations” in clause 4(b); and 
 
(d) by adding “so as to reduce to recommended level of 
allowances, disbursements or other payments” after “report” 
in clause 4(c). 

 
Clause 19 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 20 to 22 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 100 — an Act to amend The Members of the 
Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act, 1979 (No. 2) 

 
Clauses 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
Bill No. 99 — An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act (No. 2) 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move the amendments be 
now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, with leave I move that the 
Bill now be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 100 — An Act to amend The Members of the 
Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act, 1979 (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Justice, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 
day it shall stand adjourned to a date and a time set by Mr. 
Speaker, upon request of the government, and that Mr. 
Speaker shall give each member seven clear days notice, if 
possible, by registered mail, of such date and time. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 
 
At 1:57 a.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to 
the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 26 — An Act to amend The Notaries Public Act 
Bill No. 28 — An Act to provide for the Postponement of the 
Tabling of Certain Documents (No. 2) 
Bill No. 32 — An Act respecting the Emission of Air 
Contaminants 
Bill No. 46 — An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology 
Bill No. 47 — An Act respecting Regional Colleges 
Bill No. 29 — An Act to amend The Legal Profession Act 
Bill No. 38 — An Act to amend The Prairie and Forest Fires Act, 
1982 
Bill No. 39 — An Act to amend The Law Reform Commission 
Act 
Bill No. 40 — An Act to facilitate Economic and Social 
Development in Rural Areas 
Bill No. 54 — An Act to amend The Vital Statistics Act 
Bill No. 59 — An Act to amend The Animal Protection Act 
Bill No. 61 — An Act to amend The Department of Parks and 
Renewable Resources Act 
Bill No. 33 — An Act respecting Veterinarians 
Bill No. 34 — An Act to amend The Prescription Drugs Act 
Bill No. 51 — An Act to provide for the Imposition of Taxes on 
and the Collection of Taxes from Certain Purchasers of Certain 
Fuels and to provide for Rebates of Taxes to Certain Purchasers 
Bill No. 52 — An Act to amend The Department of Revenue and 
Financial Services Act 
Bill No. 53 — An Act to amend The Uniform Building and 
Accessibility Standards Act 
Bill No. 57 — An Act to repeal The Scrap Vehicles Act 
Bill No. 60 — An Act to amend The Forest Act 
Bill No. 63 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Insurance Act 
Bill No. 64 — An Act to amend The Partnership Act 
Bill No. 65 — An Act to amend The Business Names Registration 
Act 
  



 
November 5, 1987 

4075 
 

Bill No. 80 — An Act to amend The Members of the Legislative 
Assembly Superannuation Act, 1979 
Bill No. 56 — An Act to amend The Litter Control Act 
Bill No. 58 — An Act respecting the repeal of The Agricultural 
Research Funding Act 
Bill No. 62 — An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation 
Bill No. 81 — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments 
resulting from the enactment of The Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation Act 
Bill No. 95 — An Act to provide for the Registration and 
Regulation of Persons Engaged in the Real Estate Trade 
Bill No. 55 — An Act to provide for the Division of 
Saskatchewan into Constituencies for the Election of Members of 
the Legislative Assembly 
Bill No. 77 — An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act 
Bill No. 94 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care 
Insurance Act (No. 2) 
Bill No. 99 — An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Act (No. 2) 
Bill No. 100 — An Act to amend the Members of the Legislative 
Assembly Superannuation Act, 1979 (No. 2) 
Bill No. 98 — An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums of 
Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Years ending 
respectively on March 31, 1987 and on March 31, 1988. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:02 a.m. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this draws to a close 
our spring session. And before adjourning the House, Mr. 
Speaker, I just want to wish yourself and all members a very 
happy summer, and we hope to see you all again next fall for 
another exciting time in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now adjourn. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Before I officially adjourn the House, I too 
would like to reflect on the past 100-and-some days, certainly 
historic length, and the historic legislation that has been brought 
in, and the tribute today which was paid to the Leader of the 
Opposition, which is also historic. I believe that this session has, 
from many different perspectives, been an historic one. 
 
Before I officially adjourn the House, however, I would like to 
dispel any rumours that the Deputy Premier may have been 
circulating that the fall sitting starts on Monday. 
 
This House now stands adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 2:04 a.m. 
 
 


