


















































July 22, 1987 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 July 22, 1987 
 
 

1315 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Deputy Clerk: —I beg to advise the Assembly that Mr. 
Speaker will not be present to open this sitting. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to give notice that on 
Friday next I would intend to move the following motion: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
recognizing that the Meech Lake accord puts the issue of 
Senate Reform on the agenda for constitutional change - 
immediately establish an all-Party committee of the 
Assembly to examine all proposals for Senate reform in 
Canada and to produce recommendations for this 
Assembly to consider, before December 31, 1987, to: 

 
(a) sustain and increase the public momentum towards 
Senate reform which, after Meech Lake, will require 
unanimity among all the provincial legislatures and the 
Parliament of Canada if it is to be accomplished; 
 
(b) respond to the growing body of opinion in western 
Canada that a reformed Senate could help to alleviate 
some of the root causes of western alienation; and 
 
(c) develop a broad-based consensus in Saskatchewan 
and in this Assembly about the exact nature and extent 
of the reforms to the Senate that are desirable; including 
specific recommendations to: (i) render the Senate more 
legitimate in the eyes of all Canadians; (ii) provide more 
balance in provincial and regional representation in the 
Senate; and (iii) enhance the Senate’s role in protecting, 
defending, and promoting the legitimate rights and 
interests of western Canadians; 

 
and further, 
 
That the committee be empowered to hold public hearings; 
to sit during the intersessional period and during sessions 
except when the Assembly is sitting; to send for persons, 
papers and records; to examine witnesses under oath; and 
to hold meetings away from the Legislative precincts. 

 
ORAL QUESTIONS 

 
Justice Minister’s Trip to Calgary 

 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, my question, of 
course, is to the Minister of Justice. It deals with the misleading 
information that the Minister of Justice has provided to this 
legislature about your June 20 flight on a government plane to 
Calgary - a trip made at taxpayers’ expense to attend a wedding. 
 

With a great deal of difficulty, you have now given the people 
of Saskatchewan three different versions of the arrangements 
for this trip, each version inconsistent with the previous one. I 
believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the taxpayers of this province 
have a right to know the truth, so I have a number of detailed 
questions about this particular trip. 
 
First, can the minister please give us the time of his June 20 
breakfast meeting with Soviet officials here in Regina, and can 
he tell us when the meeting ended. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I believe, to the hon. member, I 
answered that question yesterday. The meeting with the Soviet 
officials was at 9 or 7:45 a.m. - in the morning - and that I 
departed to Calgary at 9:30. I believe the meeting lasted about 
an hour - I can give you to or fro from there, but the meeting 
was set for 7:45. It’s a breakfast meeting, so we had breakfast 
and the meeting with the Soviet official and delegation. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Minister. 
Yesterday in the Assembly the minister told us the meeting was 
at 9:45; he now tells us it was at 7:45. And he tells us the 
meeting lasted about an hour, the breakfast meeting. Now could 
the minister clarify whether the meeting began at 7:45 or 9:45, 
and whether it ended at 8:45 or 10:45? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The meeting started at 7:45. I departed 
for Calgary at 9:30. In Hansard . . . I checked that, it said 9:45. 
I was under the impression I said 7:45; if I said 9:45, I meant 
7:45. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, you can understand 
the problem I’m having with the minister’s answers. 
 
Now the minister said he departed from Regina at 9:30. I asked 
him specifically in supplementary; when did the meeting end? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I recall, and I will . . . to be the specific 
time. I recall I left the meeting which was held at the Hotel 
Saskatchewan, I drove home, picked up my family, went to the 
airport, and immediately left for Calgary. And I think the 
departure time was 9:30, which is pretty close to the time of 
departure, as I understand it. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — The minister is telling us, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that the meeting lasted approximately one hour, was 
over at 8:45, and he left Regina - actually left on his flight - at 
9:30. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — That’s . . . I indicated that the breakfast 
meeting was at 9:45, departure time was 9:30 when I left 
Regina . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I think it was 7:45. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — 7:45 . . . 9:30 when I left Regina, and 
that the meeting was about an hour in duration. I think went 
home, picked up my family, went to the airport - that should 
take approximately 20 minutes - and we left. 
  



 
July 22, 1987 

 

1316 
 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Can the minister, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
supplementary, tell us what time the government aircraft arrived 
in Calgary on June 20th? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I can’t give you the precise time. I will 
undertake to find that information. I assume it takes about an 
hour and a half to fly to Calgary. I could be wrong on that, but I 
will find out specifically for you. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Further supplementary, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. You claim that while you were in Calgary you had a 
meeting with a business man interested in investing in 
Saskatchewan. when did that meeting take place? Where did 
that meeting take place? And how long did this business 
meeting last? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The meeting took place . . . Again, I 
can’t be exactly specific as to the name of the hotel, but it was a 
hotel in Calgary, at the lobby. I can find out the exact times if 
you want. The particular individual was a Mr. von Sass. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister has 
carefully not answered one part of that supplementary I put 
forward . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m looking for 
information for the people of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — What time did your personal business in 
Calgary, i.e. the family wedding, begin, and what time did you 
leave Calgary for Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I think again - I will find out this to be 
specific - I think the wedding was a 2:30 wedding and I 
returned home at 11 o’clock that evening. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Supplementary to the minister, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Let me say, by way of background, this isn’t an easy 
supplementary since I was last here on Monday. But given the 
story as I now understand it . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Does the member have a 
question? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — If you had gone to Calgary on government 
business only, Mr. Minister - you said it was a short meeting - 
you would have been in a position to return to Regina right after 
that meeting. But you did not because you had a wedding to go 
to. Where were the flight crew and the aircraft crew during your 
time in Calgary? Did they return to Regina, or did they wait in 
Calgary for you, and at what expense? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The flight crew and the airplane 
remained in Calgary with me. And during the time that they 
were there, they took that opportunity to get the necessary 
repairs to the airplane - the balancing of the propeller, as I 
understand - and they used that time to get the repair . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: On a Saturday, oh yeah. 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — They used that time - if the member 
wants to listen - they used that time to get proper repairs to the 
airplane, that can only be done in the city of Calgary. That’s 
what they were doing at the given time. So they were able to 
use that time to accomplish that purpose. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I want to know how long 
your meeting with this business man in the hotel took. How 
long was it? Was it 10 minutes, 15 minutes? How long did it 
take? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I would . . . I can find out precise. I 
would guess, and I’m only guessing here, probably an hour to 
an hour 10 minutes, hour 15 minutes, give or take, give or take 
10 minutes off of an hour, one way or the other. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, would the flight crew for this 
trip have been on overtime? And are you aware of whether or 
not the taxpayers were paying this crew overtime to sit and wait 
while your wedding finished in Calgary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I have no idea whether they were on 
overtime or not. If you want me to find that out, I would find it 
out. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the obvious question to you 
is why you didn’t take the commercial aircraft which was freely 
available. I remind you, Mr. Minister, that the Canadian 
Airlines flight 341 leaves Regina at 10:20 on a Saturday, gets to 
Calgary at 1:45, in plenty of time for you to get to your 
wedding that afternoon. Why didn’t you do the obvious and 
take a commercial airline, or did you just not want to pay the 
price of a commercial airline ticket? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — No, I in fact checked that with my staff. 
I was advised by my staff that there was flights to Calgary on 
that Saturday at 7 o’clock in the morning, at 2 o’clock in the 
afternoon, and at 4 o’clock in the afternoon, which would not 
accommodate. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well you staff, Mr. Minister, missed the 
obvious flight you should have taken at 10:20. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you again: since the furore arose, have you 
checked to find out the full cost of this trip by your family to a 
family wedding? The taxpayers would be interested in knowing, 
and I want to know whether or not you’ve considered doing the 
obvious and honourable thing, and that is at this point in time 
paying for the cost of this trip yourself? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated in the 
.c.c. or Deputy Speaker, as I indicated in the House yesterday, I 
believe what I did was perfectly within the rules and was 
perfectly proper, and I do not intend to resign from my seat, and 
I do not intend to make the payment out of my own pocket. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, would you t least come  
  



 
July 22, 1987 

 

1317 
 
 

clean with this Assembly and lay before the Assembly all of the 
documents which pertain to this flight? Will you give us the 
document which authorized the flight? Will you give us a copy 
of the trip sheet which is, as I understand it, a report that the 
pilots file with the department? Will you give us a copy of the 
document billing the department for the flight? And will you 
give us a copy of the document authorizing payment for the 
flight? And will you give us a copy of the journey log of the 
aircraft so that we’ll know what portion of these documents, if 
any, are actually accurate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and hon. member. What I can advise the hon. member is what 
took place is exactly as I set out as to what took place. With 
regards to what a log is or anything else, I don’t really know 
what that is, and you might direct that question to the minister 
responsible and not to me. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, the minister is not responsible for 
this, Mr. Minister; you are. It was you who apparently 
authorized this flight, so the questions are being put to you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I want to know what time 
this meeting with the business man, unnamed business man, in 
the unnamed hotel, for the unnamed purpose has been . . . when 
was it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — How you indicated the particular 
question. I can advise the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I left 
Regina at 9:30. I got into Calgary at whatever time it takes to 
fly to Calgary. I then went down to this hotel. I had a meeting 
with this particular member. I will find out the precise times for 
you and answer that question. If I was to miss it by 10 or 15 
minutes, you’d somehow say I was trying to mislead the House. 
I do not want to do that. I will bring back that information back 
to you. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, if you came within 15 
minutes of anything, you’d be a lot more accurate than you 
have been to date. That would be a substantial improvement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I want to know when the 
meeting was arranged. When was the arrangements for this 
meeting finalized? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The meeting was arranged with this 
particular individual. I believe, about four to five days prior to 
the 20th . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, but I mean . . . It 
was arranged by my office, you know, the exact time. As I 
understand, it was arranged when it was determined . . . The 
facts as they unfolded were as follows. I was originally going to 
go to the wedding and drive there; the fact that the Soviet 
delegation required my attendance there on Friday night and 
Saturday morning. I arranged for a meeting with a company in 
Calgary, changed a meeting that I was going to have to do in 
the future, up to that day, and then the office booked  

the flight. The office both booked the meeting and booked the 
flight in this particular situation. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The question, Mr. Speaker. May I remind 
you, Mr. Minister, of your comments of yesterday. This is 
yesterday’s version. We’re all having trouble keeping it 
straight, but I’ll give you some assistance by reading it: 
 

Number one, I was required, I was required, and I think, 
importantly, Mr. Speaker, I was required to attend to, I 
was required to attend to the Soviet delegation. Very 
important. So what I proceeded to do was I (proceeded to) 
set the meeting with Mr. von Sass in Calgary on June 20 to 
met with him in Calgary on the 20th of June. 

 
Now that isn’t what you told us today. Now which is the correct 
version? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I set the meeting prior to . . . I set the 
meeting for the 20th of June. The office arranged the meeting 
for the 20th of June, prior to arranging for, prior to arranging 
for the government plane. So that’s exactly what happened. The 
meeting was arranged prior to, prior to the 20th. It obviously 
had to be arranged prior to the 20th; you can’t arrange a 
meeting in half an hour’s notice. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Will you 
admit what is obvious to everybody in this province, and that is 
that the meeting in Calgary was a fabricated excuse to cover a 
personal trip to a wedding in Calgary on a government plane? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The meeting . . . The meeting, my 
friend, was not a fabricated meeting. I had met with Mr. von 
Sass in Regina on the 8th of June, the 8th of June of 1977 - or 
1987. I undertook at that time to a follow-up meeting with him 
in Calgary. No specific date set. I had to get some information 
and some ideas as to whether or not we were interested in the 
type of venture that he was pursuing. We further met, through 
the Crown Management Board, with this particular individual 
and other members of his company on July 8, 1987, and are 
pursuing an investment opportunity in this province of 
Saskatchewan with this particular company. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And will you admit something else that is 
obvious to the people of Saskatchewan: that is that you 
wouldn’t have gone to Calgary that weekend had it not been for 
the wedding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I indicated to the House yesterday that 
number one, had it not been for the Soviet delegation, and all 
things else not existed, I would have taken my family and my 
automobile and travelled to Calgary to that wedding. I don’t 
make no bones about that. 
 
However, what happened is that the Soviet delegation  
  



 
July 22, 1987 

 

1318 
 
 

came. I was required as Trade Minister to meet with the Soviet 
delegation Friday night and Saturday morning. I arranged, then, 
a meeting in Calgary that I was going to have at some future 
date - brought that meeting forward so it coincided with the 
same date. I could go up to Calgary in the government airplane. 
I could cover all three things in one day, including going to a 
wedding. I made that very clear as to what the intentions were. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question. It’s not clear, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Minister, it’s not clear whether or not you breached 
government policy, because it is anything but clear what the 
government policy is. What is clear is that you have misled this 
House. We have heard different versions in this Assembly of 
this trip. I ask you, Mr. Minister, are you going to do the 
honourable thing and resign, having misled this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — You indicated . . . your last question 
was: would I pay the thing back? I indicated that I thought I was 
properly performing my job as Minister of Trade; that I 
believed what I did was correct and proper. I intend to stay in 
my seat, and I intend to remain as a member of this legislature 
and serve the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I address a 
question to the Premier, and it concerns the answers given in 
the House by the Minister of Justice on the matter of a trip to 
Calgary, and I want to quote from the Hansard of July 20, 
where the minister said, at page 1269, and referring to this trip: 
 

I had clearance to travel to Calgary. I made that very clear. 
I’m very above-board with that, and that’s how it 
unfolded. 

 
Mr. Premier, yesterday you indicated to us that the clearance 
that the minister had, came from the minister himself, which 
surely is a different impression than he gave the House. He 
indicated to the House that he had clearance. You tell us he had 
clearance from himself, and himself only. Does this meet the 
level of candour and frankness that you think is appropriate for 
a minister of the Crown to display in this House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the authorization to 
use executive air service is at the discretion of those in 
Executive Council, and they make those decisions. 
 
The request to have the minister stay here was as the result of 
the Deputy Premier saying, did we have this Soviet delegation 
and you should stay here, because we need you here Friday and 
Saturday. Now when you decide to use . . . If the hon. member 
is interested in the answer, then they could be quiet long enough 
to listen to it. All right? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order! Allow the Premier to 
answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m sure the  

children that are in the audience would appreciate the decorum 
on the opposite side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will respond when I have the co-operation of the 
members opposite. The Leader of the Opposition has asked a 
question. At least his members could respect him long enough 
to listen to the answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members of Executive Council have the 
authority to make the decisions with respect to executive air 
service, and they do that. The Deputy Premier can certainly 
request people to go to meetings, and he does that. So if the 
hon. member has to stay here, because the Deputy Premier says 
you have to stay here, then he’s likely going to listen to the 
Deputy Premier. 
 
From that point on, if he has to make an executive decision, he 
has the authority to make the executive decision to travel to 
Calgary to a business meeting. I mean, he has that authority and 
he exercised it. It’s not too complicated. He has to respond to 
the Deputy premier, and he has to make the decision, and he has 
the authorization to do both. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Premier, the minister said this in the House: 
 

I had clearance to travel to Calgary. I made that very clear. 
I’m very above-board about that. 

 
Do you think any single person who was listening to that would 
have taken the meaning that the minister had clearance from 
himself; or do you not think that the fair and reasonable 
interpretation of that was that somebody had checked it against 
the rules, the Deputy Premier or somebody else, and that he was 
acting in accordance with a set of rules that someone else had 
passed upon, rather than his own decision to take the executive 
aircraft to Calgary for that wedding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the response 
is the same. The members of the executive make the decision 
with respect to the executive aircraft, and he has to check with 
the Deputy Premier whether he is responsible . . . has to stay 
here and be responsible for those meetings. And yes, he had to 
be. Subsequent to that, he has to make the decision to use the 
executive air service to go to a second meeting in Calgary, and 
we’ve already been through that. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the answer is: he responds to the 
Deputy Premier; he has clearance to go to meetings; he’s 
checked. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he’s advised the airport that 
he’s going to make the executive air service decision, and he 
certainly has that responsibility. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Premier, you advised us yesterday that the regulations 
regarding the use of government aircraft were all set down, and 
you held up a pamphlet or folder which I noted you held up 
again today. The Deputy Premier outside the House indicated 
that he had no knowledge of what these regulations were, and 
that he was quite amazed . . . he simply didn’t know that there 
were any regulations. 
  



 
July 22, 1987 

 

1319 
 
 

Now, Mr. Premier, can you offer any explanation as to why, if 
in fact you have rules governing the use of government aircraft, 
that those rules wouldn’t have come to the attention of the 
Deputy Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m sure that 
there isn’t anybody in the legislature that can quote this 
verbatim without going back and reading. So he’s asked, do you 
know the rules. Well the rules are laid out and the rules are 
essentially the same as they’ve been for probably a decade in 
the province. And we have said that the discretion with respect 
to these rules should be watched as carefully as possible. And 
that’s precisely the rules that we apply now, so that the 
executive committee, members of Executive Council, have the 
decision and the right to use the executive aircraft, as does the 
Lieutenant Governor. And it’s laid down very clearly. 
 
Now if you want the Deputy Premier or anybody else to quote 
the rules, I mean we can send across the publication and 
everybody can memorize them, if that’s the intent. 
 

Legal Aid Commission Fees 
 

Mr. Mitchell: — I have a question to the Minister of Human 
Resources and Labour and whatever else he’s called. And it 
deals with the Legal Aid Commission and the incredible 
decision of the commission to begin forcing those who qualify 
for legal aid to pay fees up front before any legal services are 
provided. 
 
Mr. Minister, you know that the whole idea of legal aid is to 
guarantee the right to counsel for those who cannot afford to 
hire a lawyer. You don’t qualify for legal aid unless you can 
prove that you can’t afford a lawyer on your own. Yet effective 
August 3, the Legal Aid Commission proposes to institute a fee 
schedule that will require people to pay for legal representation 
in advance and in cash. 
 
Now my question is: has the minister contacted the Legal Aid 
Commission about this plan; and are you looking for ways to 
prevent this unfair decision from being implemented? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with respect 
to the Legal Aid Commission, I believe the member opposite 
knows that I have no direct control over the Legal Aid 
Commission and very little influence over what they do. I am 
merely the minister who sends cheques to the Legal Aid 
Commission to pay the bills. 
 
And possibly the member opposite knows more of what’s going 
on at the Legal Aid Commission than I do. Maybe he has better 
sources of information or more influence and control over the 
Legal Aid Commission. However, they have not as yet 
communicated that information to me. And I understand from 
the media, and maybe you have better sources, that they’re 
considering some charges, and I will study them when they 
send them to me. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. 

STATEMENT BY MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER 
 

Rules on a Point of Privilege 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I have a 
statement. On July 21 a point of privilege was raised by the 
member for Saskatoon Westmount to the effect that the 
Minister of Economic Development and Trade had deliberately 
misled the House in certain remarks he made in question period 
on July 20 with respect to his use of government aircraft in a 
recent trip to Calgary. This matter was dealt with at length in 
question period yesterday, and comments were received when 
the point of privilege was raised. 
 
There still exists substantial confusion and dispute over whether 
certain things said in the House were contradictory, or things 
said outside of the House. It’s clearly not possible for the Chair 
to determine which of either of the statements was misleading. 
 
Order. Order. Order. 
 
On page 1293 of July 21, the minister stated the following: 
 

If the statements from Hansard yesterday, and if the 
statements from the media seem to be in conflict, then I 
apologize for trying to in some way lead different facts to 
the hon. member. 

 
I believe this statement adequately conveys the member’s 
apology to the House for the confusion and appearance of 
conflict of statement of cause. 
 
I refer members to citation 322 of . . . Order. Order. Order. I 
refer members to citation 322 of Beauchesne’s Parliamentary 
Rules and Forms, Fifth Edition, page 114, as follows: 
 

It has been formally ruled by Speakers that a statement by 
a Member respecting himself and particularly within his 
own knowledge must be accepted . . . 

 
I accept the member’s explanation and apology and find the 
matter has been resolved. Therefore, there is no need to 
consider further the point of privilege raised yesterday. 
 
Order. Order. 
 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 
would like to raise a matter of privilege, Mr. Speaker, and it has 
to do with the precision of the language used in this Chamber in 
question period, both in questions and in answers. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, today the member for Regina Centre 
suggested that it would have been possible for the member from 
Kindersley, or the Minister of Economic Development and 
Trade, to leave on a Canadian flight at 10:20 to Calgary on June 
20, the date in question. 
  



 
July 22, 1987 

 

1320 
 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have had my staff check to see whether in fact 
that flight was in fact available or not. They tell me, Mr. 
Speaker, that Canadian Airlines on June 20 of 1987 had no such 
flight. Mr. Speaker, I ask that you check the record and see if in 
fact the member for Regina Centre was in fact misleading this 
Chamber. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order! Is there any comments 
from the opposition? Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t believe 
that the comments from the Deputy Premier merit any reply. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Anyone who suggests that there’s any 
element of privilege there is surely going well beyond any 
known parliamentary rule, and we all note that the Deputy 
Premier quoted no Beauchesne’s and no Bourinot’s and no 
Erskine May’s, but just the member for Souris-Cannington, 
who has visions of being a Speaker, but I don’t think is every 
going to make it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — All I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
is that it requires no defence from me to make very clear that 
what the Deputy Premier was talking about was a debating 
point, and he couldn’t fine a place to debate it. 
 
Now I hope you will rule that there is no substance to this, and 
we will have an opportunity to deal with your earlier ruling in 
which there was a great deal of substance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order! On the point of 
privilege by the House Leader: 
 

A dispute arising between two members as to allegations 
of fact does not fulfil the conditions of a parliamentary 
privilege. 

 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I move this House do now adjourn. 
 
The division bells rang from 2:44 p.m. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — It being now 5 o’clock p.m., the 
motion to adjourn the House now lapses. This is pursuant to 
Rule 3(3) which stipulates the hour of automatic adjournment of 
the House. 
 
Once the hour is reached that the House is supposed to adjourn, 
the motion to adjourn lapses and becomes a nullity. 
 
This practice is the same as that which prevailed in the House 
of Commons, Ottawa, prior to the latest rule change. I refer 
Members to the Debates of the House of Commons, May 17, 
1983, p. 25,530 and on May 24, 1983, p. 25,686 and March 30, 
1984, p. 2569. This practice in no way interferes with the 
indefinite ringing of the bells when substantive motions are 
before the House. This practice applies only to dilatory motions 
which  

includes adjournment motions. 
 
Therefore, this House now stands adjourned until 2 p.m. 
tomorrow. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 


