


















































April 19, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 19, 1988 
 
 

681 
 
 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk: — According to order, and under rule 11(7), I find the 
following petition in order and lay it upon the Table. The prayer 
of the petition is as follows: 
 

Of certain residents of the province of Saskatchewan 
praying that the Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 
urge and call upon the Governor in Council and the 
Government of Canada to allow the appeal against CTC 
(Canadian Transport Commission) order, and to have that 
order changed in accordance with the wishes of the people 
of Killdeer and district. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to the members of 
the Assembly, 25 grade 8 students from Thompson School, 
located in my constituency. They are accompanied by teachers 
Randy Glettler and Estelle Anthony. 
 
I look forward to meeting with them after the question period to 
try to answer any questions that they may have for me, and I 
would ask that you and members of the Assembly join with me 
in welcoming them here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Saxinger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you, and through you to the members of this Assembly, 
Some guests seated at your gallery. We have Christina Massey. 
I met her the first time last fall when I was in my economic 
development trip to Germany. I met her in the Anuga, the 
world’s biggest food fair. 
 
Also we have Tom Taylor who’s got Taylor Honey Farm, from 
Nipawin. I also met him in this Anuga, in Koln at this food fair 
for the first time. It was the time when everybody was giving 
honey away in Nipawin when I left. But Tom took the initiative 
and went to Europe, spent Some money, and promoted honey. 
 
Last but not least, we have Mr. And Mrs. Keller from La 
Ronge. I promoted their products, blueberry and cranberry, in 
Europe. And they also are processing mushrooms. 
 
So would you please help me welcome these people to this 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my real 
honour to introduce a large group of students here from two 
schools in my constituency, totalling 117 students, 

who are here today. 
 
First of all, let me bring to the attention of the House a group of 
students who are seated in the east gallery, numbering 65 grades 
7 and 8 students from Judge Bryant School. They’re 
accompanied by Wayne Wilson, Nancy Morrell, and Al Chase, 
who is their vice-principal. 
 
This school, Judge Bryant, has each and every year a model 
legislature which I think, Mr. Speaker, all members of this 
House, if they could, would learn a great deal from. I want to 
commend them on it, and I look forward to going to that again 
this year. 
 
And in the Speaker’s gallery, Mr. Speaker, there is a group of 
52 students from grades 4 and 7 from what I like to refer to as 
my school, because that’s the school I taught in, St. Theresa 
School. They’re accompanied by their teachers, Audrey Bruch 
and Darrell Baumgartner. 
 
I’ve already met with Some of the students for pictures — with 
the students from Judge Bryant. They can’t stay after question 
period because they have other things to do. But I will be 
meeting with the St. Theresa students afterwards for a 
discussion of the legislature and the question period. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it’s just been pointed out 
to me that we have a special guest in the west gallery, Mr. John 
Gruell of Caron. I think Mr. Gruell is known to most members 
of the Assembly — he’s the retired civil servant who’s been 
maintaining a lonely vigil outside the Assembly. And I think we 
should make him feel welcome here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Salary Increases to Ministerial Assistants 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the 
Acting Premier, Mr. Minister, your government has imposed a 
two-year wage freeze on the salaries of public servants; you 
have provided an increase of 25 cents on the minimum wage in 
the last six years; you have destroyed the children’s dental 
program in Saskatchewan; you’ve frozen, or you’ve cut back, 
the funding for school boards and municipalities in the 
province. In light of that restraint policy, Mr. Minister, and in 
light of your unconscionable increases in the taxes imposed on 
Saskatchewan families in this budget, how can you explain why 
a number of political staff to cabinet ministers last month 
received salary increases of 15 per cent? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, two points: number one, I 
don’t accept a great deal of what he said; number two, the 
Premier took notice of that question of the same minister last 
week and I see that it’s still. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Member. 
  



 
April 19, 1988 

 

682 
 
 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — . . . or that member last week, and I see 
that it’s still the most urgent and compelling issue of the day. 
The Premier did take notice, and I don’t accept for a moment, 
Mr. Speaker, that there were 15 per cent increases. The Premier 
will be back tomorrow and I fully expect that he will answer the 
questions at that time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the minister 
opposite that 15 per cent increases for political assistants in 
ministers’ offices when this government cuts back the 
children’s dental program is an urgent and important issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — A new question. Mr. Minister, what you 
have just said here today is a bunch of bureaucratic nonsense 
which is Something that you can’t use to hide what the facts are 
and that is that you’ve had salary increases for your staffs in 
your offices of 15 per cent and, in fact, in Some cases 22 per 
cent. The only difference that is happening here is that you’re 
calling it by Some other name. How can you justify that kind of 
an increase to those ministerial assistants when you’re telling 
people who are working on minimum wage that in six years 
they can have a grand increase of 25 per cent and you can tell 
school boards . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Twenty-five cents. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Twenty-five cents during that period of 
time, and you can tell school boards that in Some cases you’re 
cutting their grants back by $700,000 this year. How can you 
justify that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, I caught my 
coat on the key to my desk and it kind of caused me to trip. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member is, number one, 
over-reacting a little when he says that I responded to his first 
question with a bunch of bureaucratic and political rhetoric. In 
fact, I said I’d take notice and I don’t think I said much beyond 
that. And the hon. member, of course, I think, can’t be excused 
for that because he knows what rhetoric is because in his second 
question he gave us a pretty good demonstration of what that’s 
all about. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, he talked about ministerial 
assistants getting 15 and, in Some cases, 22 per cent increases, 
or raises in salary, he says. I think that’s what he said. I don’t 
accept that, not for a moment, and if it’s true I would be very 
upset. 
 
There is from time to time a ministerial assistant . . . there is 
from time to time a ministerial assistant that will get a 
promotion, Mr. Speaker. The promotion . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . and so does the civil service, Mr. Speaker. If 
Someone is moving from a director to an assistant deputy, or 
from an assistant deputy to an associate deputy or to a deputy, 
promotions are Something different from just normal increases 
in the same category, Mr. Speaker. 

 
And as I said earlier, and as the Premier said last week, he will 
take notice of that question, provide him with the answers that 
he’s asked for, and perhaps, Mr. Speaker, there should be an 
explanation of the rules to the members opposite because when 
the question . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. The minister, of 
course, fully realizes, being an experienced minister, that he 
shouldn’t give a long, relatively long answer and then indicate 
at the end he’s taking notice of the question. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the same 
minister. I have here a pile of orders in councils which provided 
those increases, Mr. Minister, that I’m asking you about. 
 
I also have here a letter signed by your Minister of Finance 
which shows the kind of double standard that you’re applying 
here, and it’s a letter which your provincial government has sent 
to pensioners in this province, people who were former public 
servants, and here is what the Minister of Finance says to their 
request for an increase in their pensions to keep up with the cost 
of living. He said: 
 

There is not only a desire but a critical need for 
government to get by with less. This reality, as unpleasant 
though it is, is affecting everyone. 

 
Mr. Minister, how is it that this standard applies to senior 
citizens living on low pensions, but it does not apply to cabinet 
ministers and political staffs in their cabinet offices? How can 
you justify this kind of large increase for your political staff 
while you provide these kinds of backhanded answers to the 
people on pensions in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, teachers get increments 
— he should know that; professors get increments; civil 
servants get increments; ministerial assistants, I think, can get 
increments; members of the media may even get increments — 
Some of them shake their heads; I heard them. 
 
As it relates to pensioners, Mr. Speaker — and I’m sorry that 
the hon. member chooses to muddy the waters by mixing the 
issues — but as it relates to pensioners, Mr. Speaker, our 
Minister of Social Services has many, many times in this House 
talked about the kinds of support that this government has 
offered for pensioners, and it is second to none in Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
He’s talking about a specific pension and a specific issue, and 
I’d be happy to have the Minister of Finance take that up — 
he’s unfortunately not here today. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
unfortunate that the hon. member chooses to muddy the waters 
with this narrow, specific issue, and take the broad brush to the 
whole sector. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, the minister may want to 
make light of this . . . my new question, I address a new 
  



 
April 19, 1988 

 

683 
 
 

question. The minister may want to make light of this, but this 
is a shameful double standard that this government is applying 
on the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — These documents show, Mr. Speaker, 
that the ministerial assistants who were reclassified, so-called 
reclassified, are still working for the same cabinet ministers and 
are still the same ministerial assistants, writing the same letters 
that they wrote before this massive increase of 15 to 22 per 
cent. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you answer this question which you have yet 
not addressed: how can you justify that kind of increase to your 
political assistants in your offices, when you can’t provide even 
a minimal increase for people who are on pensions and have 
requested at least an increase with the cost of living, which is a 
lot less than what you’re giving your political hacks? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — At the risk, Mr. Speaker, of upsetting 
those in the opposition party that happen to be schoolteachers, I 
think Some of them may have been around long enough to get 
an incremental increase or go to the next category, or whatever, 
and in the same school, without leaving the school, Mr. 
Speaker; they would be in the same school; they would go into 
the next level of pay, or whatever, and so he’s . . . I mean, he’s 
just not coming clean at all on the issue. 
 
As it relates to the support that we give pensioners, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to point out that very recently the Premier 
communicated to all seniors in this province that they would 
soon be receiving their heritage program support from this 
government, depending on whether they are single, or a married 
couple, or whatever. It would be $500 in one instance, $700 in 
the other instance. And the only thing you have to do to qualify, 
Mr. Speaker, is to be a senior. Tell me, Mr. Speaker, if that is 
support for our seniors or not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Deposits for Application to SIAST 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — My question is to the Minister of Education. 
The acting principal at Saskatoon’s Kelsey Institute has 
confirmed that your department ran newspaper ads on March 26 
in Saskatoon urging students to apply for a number of fall 
courses at Kelsey. Many of those classes already had five to six 
times the number of applications on hand as compared to the 
spaces available. 
 
Knowing that, Mr. Minister, your government still charged 
those students a $25 non-refundable application fee to apply for 
courses that they had no hope of getting into. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you see to it that those students are refunded 
that $25 application fee, and will you guarantee that in the 
future when your department runs newspaper ads that students 
will be advised of the number of spaces 

in courses, and will they also be advised the number of 
applicants ahead of the 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well in those instances, Mr. Speaker, 
where a course is taking 20 students, the question the hon. 
member is asking is: should you cut off applications after 50 or 
after 100? And if you’ve cut if off after 100, that 101st person 
might indeed by the person who has the highest qualifications 
and indeed should be one that gets one of the spaces. And that’s 
the point that has been forgotten by the hon. member. It’s not 
first come, first serve, that you just take the first 20 who put 
their application in. They’re judged on merit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It was no different than when I was going to college. I think 
there was 31 spaces, 400 applications. They judged the 
applications and admitted the 31 students they thought most 
qualified, Mr. Speaker. So that’s a point that has been 
consistently overlooked by the hon. member. 
 
Now the second question is: should you refund the $25 fee? The 
$25 fee, like at other institutions, is a processing fee. It does 
cost Something to run the computers and do the administration, 
Mr. Speaker, and indeed it’s a service to the students as well as 
to the institution. Now one could . . . certainly one could refund 
it, but in many instances those students are going to want to 
apply for another course in the event that they do not get into 
that particular course. And if they do apply for another course 
in that calendar year, there is no additional $25 fee required. So 
I think that’s fair, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — I’d just like to remind the minister that when 
he went to school there wasn’t a $25 non-refundable application 
fee . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. New question or 
supplementary? 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — New question, Mr. Minister, the acting 
principal at Kelsey institute, Mr. Larry Dinter, agreed that this 
ad was unfair to students who put down their $25 application 
fee. Mr. Dinter told reporters, and I quote: 
 

Perhaps students should know how many applicants they 
will have to compete against before they commit their $25 
fee. I think our approach has to be reviewed in the future. 

 
Mr. Minister, on behalf of students who were charged this $25 
non-refundable fee, a rip-off of Saskatchewan students, will you 
refund that $25 fee, and will you change your advertising policy 
so that students won’t be ripped off in the future? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the 
double standard that the NDP are showing. Last week in this 
House they said, whatever you do, don’t interfere with the 
autonomy of the university and legislate the 
  



 
April 19, 1988 

 

684 
 
 

professors back to work. Don’t interfere with their local 
autonomy; that’s the decision of the university. You stay out of 
it; do not interfere. And they criticized me roundly for 
interfering. 
 
Today they say, you should usurp the powers of a local board 
and make a decision on a $25 fee. Don’t leave it to the board; 
interfere, Mr. Speaker. Now you can’t have it both ways. On the 
one hand they say, don’t interfere on an issue of Some fair 
magnitude, and today they say, interfere on a $25 fee. 
 
These decisions are made by the new, autonomous 
Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology. 
And I’ll tell you what: your rhetoric is hollow because I asked 
the students of this province. Where were you when they 
couldn’t get their exams because of striking professors? Where 
were you? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary. I notice that the minister is a 
little upset. I notice that, but, Mr. Minister, the buck stops with 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — And if I was charging students a $25 
non-refundable fee, I’d be upset too. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you haven’t answered the question: will 
you or will you not refund the $25 non-refundable fee that 
students have paid to get into courses that have five to six times 
the number of applications per spaces? Will you do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, in so asking, is the hon. 
member also prepared to have me instruct the universities to 
stop charging the same kinds of fees? The argument that they 
would like to put forward is a question of fairness. Well, is it 
fair to do it in one institute that has its own board of governors 
and yet not in another? 
 
I’ll offer up another example of maybe that Some would say is 
unfairness. The hon. member would suggest that the 
government isn’t supporting the students with this onerous $25 
fee. The reality is, Mr. Speaker, the cost of educating a student 
at a technical institute of this province, the government . . . the 
taxpayers of this province pick up approximately 95 per cent of 
the total cost. And we’re proud to do that, Mr. Speaker — 95 
per cent of the total cost. And they’re suggesting that asking the 
students to pick up 5 per cent of the total cost, plus 25, is 
Somehow unfair. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Legislation on Canned Beverages 
 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
the Environment, and it concerns the state of confusion that he 
and his government have created in this 

province over the introduction of the sale of canned beverages. 
The confusion has extended to retailers, to consumers, to 
producers, and the latest example of it has to do with the 
fund-raising efforts being now undertaken by the Saskatchewan 
Roughriders. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is simply this: when does your 
government plan to introduce the legislation legalizing the sale 
of canned beverages, and have you finalized a deposit, return, 
and recycling process to ensure that these cans will be recycled 
and not become litter on the landscape of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Let me reply to the hon. member simply by 
saying that we are working very carefully on that particular 
issue. There is really no confusion. There are opportunists in the 
market-place who would like to take advantage of a situation 
and step in before the program is finalized. 
 
When we’re finished making our plans, we will announce it to 
the public. I hope that it’ll be in the near future. I can’t give you 
a date at this point in time, but there is no confusion. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary, Mr. Minister, 
will you assure this House that canned beverages will not be for 
sale in this province until a process of deposit and return and 
recycling is in place? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, that would be a little bit 
difficult to do. I think if the hon. member would come out of his 
cloistered home and take a look around, what’s happening in 
the province, you might see that there are canned soft drinks in 
many of the stores today. Now they’re not legal, and I’ve told 
you in this House many times that they’re there and that they’re 
not legal, but we’ve had them. Something like three and 
one-half million cans were sold in Saskatchewan in the last 
year. 
 
So what we are doing is putting in place a program that will 
handle that situation, but make the situation legal and allow the 
sale of canned soft drinks and canned beer across our province. 
Until we have that recycling system in place, we will not be 
opening up the sale of the canned soft drinks or beer. So that’s 
the problem. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I submit the problem is over 
here. Mr. Speaker, then a further supplementary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell me today, will there be a deposit on 
aluminum cans, and will you tell us who the collection agency 
will be? Are those plans finalized as of today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I told the hon. member in 
answer to his first question that we’re working to put a plan in 
place. And when the plan is ready, I will be pleased to 
announce it to the hon. member. I’m not ready 
  



 
April 19, 1988 

 

685 
 
 

to announce it today. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, new question to the same 
minister. We’ve had an example here today of the incompetence 
of this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, one of the very serious concerns 
among Saskatchewan people about the shift to canned 
beverages is the threat which this shift poses to Saskatchewan 
jobs. Mr. Minister, can you tell us what specific steps your 
government is taking to protect the jobs of Saskatchewan 
people in the bottling industry, and can you give us an 
assurance that no Saskatchewan jobs will be lost because of this 
change? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member asks for 
assurances that there will be no job loss. Indeed, as the 
recycling goes ahead, I can’t guarantee that the people will have 
the same jobs, but there may indeed by more jobs, and that’s the 
part that I think the member should be looking at is the job 
creation part of the new program when it comes into place. 
 

Funding for Cumberland House Program 
 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Minister of 
Social Services, my question is to the Deputy Premier. The 
mayor of Cumberland House has been told by the chief of staff 
to your colleague, the Minister of Social Services, that his 
community will not be receiving any new funds from that 
department until Cumberland House has settled its 
long-standing lawsuit with SPC (Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation). 
 
Can the Deputy Premier tell us if this is in fact government 
policy? Is your government trying to force and intimidate 
Cumberland House into abandoning its case with SPC by 
withholding government assistance from the Social Services 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — No, Mr. Speaker. It’s ludicrous to even 
make such a suggestion. What you’re doing is talking about a 
$200 million lawsuit that has been around for about 20 years, 
and compare that, Mr. Speaker, to my guess would be quite 
small sums of money in the program help that they’ve been 
asking for. 
 
I can’t comment for or about the chief of staff of that minister. I 
know nothing of what he might have said. I know that from 
time to time I have talked, Mr. Speaker, with the mayor of 
Cumberland House. 
 
We, a couple of years ago, Mr. Speaker, offered a mediation 
process to resolve the difficulties that existed in that 
community. Mediation hasn’t proven to be successful to date. 
We are currently looking at another process, Mr. Speaker, that I 
hope to have an announcement on very soon that we are hopeful 
will go some way towards resolving these differences, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, another question, Mr. 

Minister, this is not the first time Cumberland House has been 
denied assistance. They’ve tried to get a curling rink project 
going, a local museum built. They’ve tried to get a similar 
project such . . . we’re working on a golf course such as La 
Ronge received, and Par Industries in the area of wood-cutting 
operations, and so on. 
 
Why is it that your government is being so unfair and putting 
pressure on it, and what are you going to do to work with the 
minister to indeed rectify this ludicrous situation, as you put it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not familiar with all 
of the things he’s talking about, but I do know that Cumberland 
House in recent history has received some support for a major 
investment in a water treatment system. And I don’t remember, 
but I think it was somewhere around a million dollars went into 
that water treatment system. And Cumberland House isn’t 
ignored in the scheme of things. 
 
We have lots of communities in the province with lots and lots 
of demands, and not all of them can be met, Mr. Speaker, today 
or tomorrow. It takes time and, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the 
community of Cumberland House, I have taken a rather 
personal interest in what goes on up there, and I fully expect 
that the next process that we can agree to resolving some of the 
matters, and I hope to have an announcement on that quite soon, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 3 — Financial Problems of Farmers and 
Proposed Solutions 

 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, at the close of my remarks I will 
be moving a motion which I think addresses one of the key 
problems here in Saskatchewan, and in essence it will read: 
 

That this Assembly regrets the failure of the present 
Saskatchewan government to develop effective programs 
to deal with the farm debt crisis and for its equity 
financing proposal which does not address the heart of the 
problem of farm indebtedness. 

 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that that farm debt crisis is 
undoubtedly the greatest problem facing Saskatchewan today. 
And let us take a look at some of the details, at the nature of 
that problem. 
 
There’s no doubt that the government identified this as a major 
problem, and certainly back in his budget address in ’87-88 the 
Minister of Finance at that time indicated that he recognized 
that there was a debt crisis. And he said, on page 9 of the 
previous budget, this, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Farm debt in Saskatchewan is now estimated to be over $5 
billion. It is a serious problem that requires a response. 

 
That was not this year, not this spring, but that was a year 
  



 
April 19, 1988 

 

686 
 
 

ago. And I want to say that the problem has increased in its 
magnitude, and the Government of Saskatchewan has done 
virtually nothing. 
 
Indeed, the nature of the problem is illustrated in the recent 
report by a MLA committee report on farm finance for the 
future. And I want to go through the nature of the magnitude of 
the problem, the debt crisis. And they quote a source which was 
brought to the attention of the legislature some time ago that 
says: 
 

The recent Angus Reid opinion poll indicated that over 
one-quarter of Saskatchewan farmers do not believe that 
they will be in agriculture three years from now. Many of 
the farmers are leaving the industry or will be forced out. 
The Farm Credit Corporation estimates are insolvent, 
while an additional 28 per cent are having considerable 
cash flow difficulty. 

 
That indicates some of the extent of the problem of the debt 
crisis. The Farm Credit Corporation in its statistics are 
indicating that we are on the verge of losing 40 per cent of our 
farmers — 11 per cent insolvent, 28 per cent in serious financial 
trouble. 
 
And what did this government do in its throne speech? In the 
throne speech the government indicated again that debt, farm 
debt, was of crisis proportion. And before they . . . and they 
indicated in the throne speech no solution, no way of dealing 
with this crisis. All they had to say is, to the people of 
Saskatchewan, is that hard times come and hard times pass. 
People will learn to live with adversity. That was their solution. 
 
So we waited and we thought that in the budget, in the recent 
budget, the ’88-89 budget, that the Minister of Finance would 
indeed address this major crisis, which he identified in ’87-88, 
and which he reidentified in the throne speech. But before he 
brought down the budget, he went out and he said to the public 
— before we even had the budget brought into this House, the 
Minister of Finance on March 26, I believe it was, indicated 
this: he said, don’t expect much from the standpoint of 
agriculture; we may have some rearranging of the programs. 
That’s what he said. 
 
And he went on to say that the debt crisis which faces 
Saskatchewan farmers today, he said, is far too big for the 
provincial treasury to approach or to rectify. And I ask you, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s probably true, but only because of the 
management on the other side. 
 
I say to the members opposite, when you threw out this year in 
your budget a $35 million tax decrease for the big corporations, 
that was your priority, it wasn’t addressing the debt; when you 
gave to the oil companies a $1.7 billion in royalty and tax 
holiday, that’s why you can’t address the farm crisis; when you 
take a million dollars in a letter from the minister of . . . then 
minister of Finance, to Canada Packers . . . a grant of a million 
dollars, well obviously your priorities are not the farmers. 
 
When you spend here, in the last seven years, in excess of $150 
million in self-serving advertising, well obviously 

you can no longer meet the crisis that looms here in 
Saskatchewan. You know, this government, as I’ve said in the 
past, Mr. Speaker, has no credibility and has lost all its 
credibility. 
 
Just before the last election, Mr. Speaker, they ran another . . . 
the first road show, the first act of their road show, and they 
went out around this province and they indicated that they were 
going to look at the input costs. And they brought in a report — 
no help to the farmers, didn’t reduce the input costs. How could 
they attack their friends, the chemical companies, when in fact 
Brian Mulroney is doing the opposite of Ottawa. 
 
So we had this committee of MLAs running around the 
province and they said, we will deal with the input costs. Well 
that was a sham. That cost the taxpayers over a quarter of a 
million dollars — $121,000 in advertising alone, and over 
$120,000 for the road show itself, and all to ask the farmers of 
this province: what did you get out of that road show that you 
financed around this province, the so-called input . . . looking 
into the input cost to the farmers? Not a single benefit to the 
farmers of this province, and hundreds of thousands of dollars 
blown in public relations. 
 
And today we got another report, a report of yet another road 
show, and this is on the Farm Finance for the Future, and I will 
guarantee you that the last year, that this government has spent 
close to a million dollars on public relations. They had a two- or 
three-day symposium here in Regina and brought in their 
so-called experts from across Canada to participate in dealing 
with the farm debt crisis, and for two days they got publicity. 
And then they decided that they would send . . . but more than 
that, they got Peat Marwick, the accounting firm, to do up a 
policy for them — equity financing — and I’ll be dealing with 
that. And that would have cost thousands of dollars. 
 
To further address this magnitude of this crisis they said: well, 
you were out there a couple of years ago, and you know we 
fooled the farmers then; we said we were addressing their input 
costs; we’ll send another road show on, put on another road 
show. And off they went to address, again, the crisis in 
agriculture, the crisis of which we know. And they went around 
this province, and I’ll tell you it cost hundreds of thousands of 
dollars for this public relations gimmick. They come back and 
they throw up their hands; indeed, the Finance minister, as I 
said, threw up his hands and he says, there is nothing we can do 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well let’s take a look at some of the aspects of the report and 
the magnitude of the problem which I was indicating to you, 
Mr. Speaker. We find that this problem hasn’t just suddenly 
fallen upon the farmers of Saskatchewan. Indeed, in 1980 the 
total amount of agricultural debt outstanding was $3 billion. By 
the end of 1986 — this is the election year — there was $5.8 
billion, almost double. And that was rising from 3 to 3.4 in ’81, 
in ’82 to 3.9, ’83 to 4.4, ’85 to 4.9 and ’86 to 5.8, and today it’s 
over $6 billion — $6 billion of debt on the backs of the farmers 
of this province. 
 
What were the programs that they brought in? All of this was 
indicated, the direction was known, that there was a 
  



 
April 19, 1988 

 

687 
 
 

group of farmers, and mostly young farmers, that had purchased 
land at high prices and at a considerable interest rate, and then 
the drop in the commodities. And that didn’t occur yesterday; it 
didn’t occur a year ago. This was known, or should have been 
known by the Premier, the Minister of Agriculture, for a 
number of years. And did they address them? Well no, not 
going into the last election. 
 
They knew that debt was there, but they decided getting elected 
is more important, Mr. Speaker, and so they launched a home 
improvement program which cost hundreds of thousands of 
dollars; indeed, hundreds of millions of dollars — that’s what it 
cost trying to buy urban votes, when indeed the problem was 
the debt crisis. The only thing wrong with their home 
improvement program is the ones that needed it couldn’t qualify 
— the poor. And they handed out grants to try to buy votes 
from the upper middle class and the wealthy as they put in hot 
baths. This is the sincerity of this government. 
 
(1445) 
 
And then you take a look . . . they were going into the election 
at ’86 and they put into place a production loan program of 
about $1.2 billion. Now they knew that at least that one-third of 
our farmers were in good shape. There’s no denying that, and in 
fact about 50 per cent of our farmers were in pretty reasonable 
shape at that time. 
 
But did this government analyse the crisis out there? Of course 
not. They said, what is important is to pull the wool over the 
farmers’ eyes, put out a universal program of production loans 
so absolutely everybody can qualify, whether they need it or 
not, and that’ll buy us an election, they said. Well it bought 
them an election, partly, although they needed another billion 
dollars from Brian Mulroney to bail them out, and they needed 
a deficit increase of $800 million on the operating of the 
government during the course of that year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has absolutely failed to address 
the basic question that is facing farmers today. And the sad part 
is, Mr. Speaker, is that the ones who are in trouble, in serious 
trouble . . . As the Farm Credit Corporation says, 11 per cent are 
insolvent, another 28 per cent in serious . . . having considerable 
cash flow difficulty. Well we take about 60,000, or a little over 
60,000 farmers, and if 40 per cent of them are in serious 
trouble, you can see what is looming ahead in the horizon in 
respect to the changing face of agriculture. 
 
And you know what this government’s solution to this here debt 
crisis? Well I’ll tell you. What they had indicated to the farmers 
. . . and they paid money for outside consultants to come up 
with a scheme. It wasn’t a scheme to look at the debt and see 
whether it could be restructured. It was not an open discussion 
with the federal government, because I don’t know if they were 
even invited there to this symposium. It was not a looking at the 
problem and saying, how are we going to solve it? It is not a 
commitment to reject that 40 per cent of our farmers must go. 
 
But I say that this is a basic philosophy of the party 

opposite. They want big farms; they want corporate farms. And 
what they brought in is their scheme, this equity financing 
scheme, which will in fact help to assist the taking of the farms 
from the farmers and turning them into tenants and 
share-croppers for a short period of time only. 
 
Because I’ll tell you, once they set up the equity financing 
scheme, I can tell any farmer that’s watching, once you set up 
the equity financing corporation and you sell shares . . . And 
they propose to do that on the open market with three classes of 
shares. That’s their original program — an A, B, C type of 
share. And they’re saying, oh the farmer, he can salvage 
something. He’s got a little equity. He can put some into shares, 
and some he’ll have little cash. And he can get this wonderful 
deal. 
 
Well I’ll ask you . . . And the farmers don’t believe them, of 
course, because they rejected the equity financing proposition. 
They even had the Credit Union Central running around the 
province trying to sell it. And every credit union area in the 
province rejected it. The wheat pool rejected it. The wheat pool 
has rejected it. Said this report, bringing in equity financing 
proposal is the worst possible solution that they could think of. 
The wheat pool is against it. The small credit unions throughout 
this province reject it. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. The hon. member is holding up his 
booklet inordinately long and can be construed as an exhibit, 
and I would ask him to watch that. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well thanks very much for the interference, but 
I’d like an interpretation on it. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order! Order. 
The interpretation to the hon. member is a matter of judgement. 
My judgement is that if a member holds up an exhibit in such a 
way that it can be construed as an exhibit, then he is out of 
order. I’m simply bringing that to your attention. Not that you 
can’t hold it in your hand, but you can’t hold it up so it’s an 
exhibit. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Exhibit is the word. I’m not holding it up as an 
exhibit. Within the report brought down by this road show, I 
will tell you that there were absolutely no benefits to the 
farmers of Saskatchewan. I’ll tell you that there was nothing in 
this report. And can I refer to the report, Mr. Speaker, or are the 
members opposite ashamed of that? 
 
You know, they say first of all that they’re going to bring n 
some recommendations. First he said, I’m pleased to say that 
our government has responded by extending The Farm Land 
Security Act to provide legislative protection for farmers facing 
foreclosure. That’s what they said. They brought in The Farm 
Land Security Act to protect the farmers. 
 
You know what happened at the same time? During this same 
period of time the federal government was removing the 
moratorium on foreclosure, moratorium on foreclosure. And do 
you know what, in 1986 there was over 900 foreclosures of 
farm land here in Saskatchewan. Farm foreclosures across the 
rest of Canada decreasing, but not in Saskatchewan under Tory 
policy. 
  



 
April 19, 1988 

 

688 
 
 

 
They stood by and they watched the federal government pull 
their legislation, pull the rug from under the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. That’s what they did, Mr. Speaker, allowed 
them to pull the legislation which would prevent a foreclosure. 
And they brag here, and other instances, that what they did was 
to extend it so that farm foreclosure would be at least delayed. 
 
Well I ask you, why wouldn’t they have communicated with 
their friend Brian Mulroney? Why didn’t they go and ask him to 
continue the moratorium on foreclosure on the farm credit debt? 
They never did it. Oh, but they’re going to help out in another 
way, and I want the farmers to know this one because this is 
really compelling; they’re going to go out and counsel them — 
counsel them. I’ll tell you we can take a look at the record of 
their counselling, and not many farmers are very impressed 
with respect to their counselling. 
 
Under the Farm Land Security Board cases handled, 2,251 
foreclosure notices filed on 1,806 farms — almost 800 cases not 
handled yet. Backlog. Only 106 recommendations to the court 
under the Farm Land Security Board, by the Farm Land 
Security Board, that the farmers should not be foreclosed — 
106. And this has cost the province millions of dollars, in fact, 
thousands of dollars for every single farm that they counsel — 
106 out of 1,061 cases completed; 107 farmers wanted nothing 
to do with the Saskatchewan Farm Security Board, and it’s little 
wonder; 289 recommendations favoured the lender, almost 3:1 
in favour of the banks over the farmers. That’s the Farm Land 
Security Board; that’s their so-called legislation that is 
protecting the farmers from this crisis. 
 
And I say, on the cost of the program last year it ended up that 
for servicing and counselling each farmer that the total amount 
per farmer was over $12,000 for the counselling. And this year 
. . . budgeted for this year is a considerable amount more, and 
that will bring it to about 23,000 per farmer if the same number 
of farmers were assisted. Now that’s real performance, and 
that’s really addressing the magnitude of the crisis that is facing 
the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we here deal with this as 
the most serious problem in Saskatchewan. And we have asked 
the Premier on occasions, we have asked the Acting Minister of 
Agriculture, and each time that we raise it on a very serious 
basis they run off into a list, a litany of all the things they have 
done, without addressing the very serious problem. 
 
And I say to the farmers and the people of Saskatchewan that 
we as a party are prepared to co-operate in a meaningful way in 
attempting to solve this major crisis. But it’s difficult to deal 
when we get deception of the magnitude that is coming from 
the other side, when they bring in and . . . take a road show that 
costs hundreds of thousands of dollars, and bring in 
recommendations which are of absolutely no use to the farmers 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
They say that they’re going to amalgamate all of the Acts 
together, and that’s going to help. Well it might be easier for 
those that are suing the farmers to find the right legislation to go 
after them, and it would be easier for the 

banks. But I’ll tell you, it won’t help the farmers unless you 
have legislation which protects the farmers or you have 
programs to protect the farmers. And I’ll tell you, they don’t. 
 
So the amalgamation of the debt legislation is really a 
facilitation for the financial institutions, their friends, so it’s 
easier for them to know what legislation they have to comply 
with. But this group across the way are really, really trying 
though, because they’ve come up yet with another major thrust 
to deal with the debt crisis. They’ve set up a hot line, a hot line 
for the farmers — 40 per cent of the farmers — families losing 
their livelihood. And I’ll tell you, every one of the MLAs across 
there from rural Saskatchewan will know examples of where 
people are losing their farm over debt crisis, and that this 
government sits on its hands and will not address it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Every one of you know that you’re from a rural 
riding. And at least I’ve had the courage of some to indicate to 
me that it is a crisis and it has to be addressed and that the 
government isn’t doing it. 
 
Obviously what — it is a major problem. There’s over $6 
billion of debt. We don’t have many choices. We have the 
choice of allowing the situation to deteriorate further and lose 
40 per cent of our farmers and do away with the family farm 
and the way of life which the Premier indicates is so superior 
where there’s no . . . there’s a structure of family and all of 
those aspects of good qualities of life. We can choose that, to 
allow it to go the direction that it’s going at the present time and 
lose 40 per cent of our farmers, or we can, in fact, do something 
about it. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, I believe that there is a way of doing it, 
and I think that the federal government should be encouraged to 
participate. I think the provincial government should 
participate, and I think financial institutions should participate. 
But look how meek their recommendations is when it comes to 
going to the federal government. It says the provincial 
government “should impress upon the federal government.” 
Well can you believe a report saying that, because you know 
what it assumes is that the federal government is oblivious to 
the magnitude of the problem. We’ve got to impress upon the 
federal government. The federal government is oblivious to the 
major problem here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to indicate, Mr. Speaker, that one of the solutions that 
they have recommended in their report, and the policy of the 
government, is in respect to equity financing. They have been 
rejected across the province, as I have said. 
 
(1500) 
 
They have been rejected by the wheat pool, who in their release 
indicated that this was the worst possible recommendation for 
the solution to the problem, and I agree with the wheat pool. 
The president of the wheat pool — and I quote from the 
Monday, April 18, the Saskatoon Star, where it says: 
  



 
April 19, 1988 

 

689 
 
 

Garf Stevenson, president of the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool, said there appears to be little in the report which will 
directly or quickly help farmers in financial difficulty. 
 
The pool believes equity financing offers the worst of all 
worlds, he said. It is almost impossible to think (he said) 
of a private-enterprise vehicle which would offer investors 
the return and control they want, while guaranteeing (the) 
farmers the control they need. 

 
How could it be better said? Can you feature, you’re going to 
turn over our farms to the investors in Bay Street in Toronto, 
and other capitals of the world, and the farmer’s going to have 
control? I don’t believe it; the farmers don’t believe it; the 
wheat pool don’t believe it; the credit union movement across 
this province didn’t believe it. The only ones that want to hoist 
the equity financing onto the backs of the farmers are the ones 
sitting across the way representing the government today. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker . . . but there is . . . they have looked 
seriously at this, and I think that it’s clearly indicated that what 
they want, and the federal government is a partner to them. I 
have an article here from The Globe and Mail, and this is 
August 29, 1987, and it says: “Bullish foreigners may get piece 
of Prairies.” They’re talking about the farm lands that are 
owned by families today — foreigners may get a piece of the 
Prairies.” You know how you get it? You set up an equity 
financing. You get desperate farmers out there that are going to 
be driven and foreclosed and taken everything from them, and 
they offer no other alternative but equity financing. And the 
farmers come on bended knees looking and hoping and 
searching for some form of assistance, because the international 
investors are going to own that land. 
 
And let’s see what some of the federal Tory people are saying 
in respect to equity financing. We’ve got Mr. Ralph Ashmead, 
research director of the federal Farm Credit Corporation — 
that’s supposed to be an institution helping farmers — who 
describes Saskatchewan restrictions on ownership, that is a 
foreign ownership. He said, that’s archaic; has spearheaded a 
fight for a new financing system. He is convinced that a large 
number of private investors are willing to become minority 
shareholders in the Prairie farms. A number of private investors, 
of quite significant magnitude, he says, have become very 
interested in agriculture. They see that it is at or near the bottom 
of the market. 
 
And he goes on to say, Mr. Ashmead has been approached by 
trust companies, other investors who have access to funds — 
Hong Kong, Japan, other countries — they see Canada farm 
land as a safe investment over the next 10 to 25 years. And they 
are talking big money, not little money, Mr. Speaker. They are 
talking big money — 50 million, or 100 million or more — 
that’s what they’re . . . 
 
And there’s somebody else that’s interested. Not farmers. They 
want to speculate. They want to get control. They want to turn 
out family farms into serfdom, that’s what they want, and that’s 
the group called the real estate 

association. 
 
Now wouldn’t that be beautiful? Take our farms from our 
families who know how to productively run them, and turn 
them over to the real estate associations; and turn our farmers, 
as they say, into the worst possible share-croppers or tenants, 
owned by outside investors. 
 
Well I say that is not the tradition of rural Saskatchewan and 
rural agriculture, Mr. Speaker. The people of Saskatchewan are 
close to the land. They love the land; they work it well; they 
bring up their families there, and I agree, it’s a tremendous way 
of life. And we on this side stand firmly in support of the 
farmers, in support of the families, in support of the family 
farm. And I’ll tell you, we’re going to continue to fight and to 
expose this government for its inaction. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I want to just review briefly a few 
comments that I have in respect to the equity financing that was 
put forward by this government under the Peat Marwick study. 
And it contains some pretty frightening details as to where this 
government asked the farmers to co-operate with, and to head 
for. 
 
This here study by Peat Marwick recommends that there by a 
Saskatchewan farm trust company, and that the initial 
capitalization be between 200 and $300 million. Government of 
Saskatchewan would loan and put in some operating grant, 
provincial Crown land in exchange for shares. FCC, Farm 
Credit Corporation, would throw in some of the land that they 
have foreclosed and take back some shares. Farmers would 
transfer some of their land to get rid of some of their debt, lose 
some of their land to the corporation, get a few shares back. 
 
But they go on to say that there should be some assistance to 
help these financiers come and take over the farm land. And 
what they say is that there should be the Saskatchewan stock 
saving plan — tax credits. Guess who it would apply to? Not to 
the farmer. It would apply to the non-farmer investors holding 
SFTC (Sask Farm Trust Corporation) shares; that’s who they 
recommended. 
 
The common share offering would include warrants, which 
would permit investors to purchase . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . I’m quoting from my own notes, if it’s any of your business. 
The common share offering would have a warrant which would 
permit investors to purchase government shares within three 
years at a guaranteed price so that the investors could also buy 
out the investment that the government put in. Dividends to 
off-firm investors would not be paid in the first couple of years 
because they would have these tax credits, but thereafter, I’ll 
tell you, that there would be dividends paid. 
 
The arrangement would be that farmers would sell their land to 
this trust company, and they would also become shareholders if 
they had enough equity to become shareholders. And the 
farmer’s shares would not be eligible for the Saskatchewan 
stock-saving plan. The very one that should be getting the 
benefits would be denied the benefits. And the outside 
investors, who come in to 
  



 
April 19, 1988 

 

690 
 
 

seize the land, would indeed be given tax breaks. 
 
Under this here equity finance situation, they say a favourable 
repurchase option should be part of the arrangement. But let’s 
face it, how is a farmer, who has been driven off his land, had to 
turn it over to outside investors — have you ever seen a private 
investment trust corporation allow a farmer to operate and 
manage and to buy back? Never. 
 
Lease rates — no one knows how long the lease rates would be, 
or at what price. But get this; they propose that there would be 
three classes of shares: Class A, issued to governments. After 
three years they would be available to be privatized. So they’d 
set that corporation up, the trust company. Class B, issued to 
participating farmers and lending institutions. But then they 
have a class C, issued to non-farmers, investors, and eligible for 
the 30 per cent tax credit under the Saskatchewan Stock 
Savings Plan. Well that’s quite a plan for the farmer. It really 
eliminates the debt; it really continues to establish the family 
farm. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this problem is of tremendous magnitude and it 
has to be dealt with the seriousness that it confronts the people 
of this province. Certainly we are opposed to the equity 
financing scheme and, as I say, the majority of the farmers 
across this province are. But we say that there is a major 
problem, but that problem, there is a solution to it. And it’s not 
going to be the solution that has been used up to date, and that 
is, the present system won’t work; it won’t continue to work. 
 
The federal government has been making considerable 
payments in the western grains stabilization program, but I can 
tell you, under that program there is one more year of pay-out, 
and after that there is virtually meaningless pay-out under that 
program unless it’s just a voluntary payment by the federal 
government, but that will not be the case. Because what they’re 
doing under the western grains stabilization program is 
indicating that what we need to do, because it’s virtually 
bankrupt, the program, is that we have to start charging the 
participating farmers more. 
 
Now isn’t that a solution? Farmers, 40 per cent are losing their 
land, and they say to participate in the western grains 
stabilization program you’re going to have to double or triple 
the fee to enter the western grains stabilization program. Well I 
say that won’t work; it won’t continue to work. 
 
And there is a basic unfairness in the western grains 
stabilization program. And I congratulate all the farmers that 
joined the western grains stabilization because it was made 
available and it indicated that for every dollar the farmer put in, 
the federal government was putting in $3. So it was a protective 
program and many of them joined, but there are 15 to 20 per 
cent of the farmers in Saskatchewan who are not participants in 
the western grains stabilization program. 
 
And I’ll tell you, the federal government — the western grains 
stabilization program has had to be subsidized by several 
millions of dollars by the federal government. And that’s fair 
enough. But those that are not in the program do not get 
anything. 

What I’m saying is the western grains stabilization program and 
the participation of those who are in it have not been able to 
carry the program because of the magnitude of the problem. 
And 15 per cent of those that are not in get absolutely nothing. 
And they’re concerned because the federal government is really 
collecting taxes outside — yes, they’re collecting taxes from 
society to subsidize the western grains stabilization program 
over and above the participation of the two levels, the farmers 
and the federal government. 
 
And so they’re saying, if you’re going to draw and subsidize the 
program, we’re not against you helping farmers; but there are 
15 to 20 per cent of us who are not in it — that’s our own fault 
— but the thing is, if you’re going to subsidize general taxation 
revenue, then you should in fact have an alternate program for 
those that are not in the program. 
 
But the second thing is that the deficiency payment — and I can 
tell you that it was welcomed across Saskatchewan by the 
farmers as considerable assistance, there’s no doubt, but the 
Premier didn’t get it though, that’s the problem. The difficulty 
with the — the difficulty that has been pointed out with the 
deficiency payment is that it’s poorly distributed — “Farmers’ 
subsidy poorly distributed” — over a billion dollars. “One 
billion subsidy distribution method questioned by study,” and 
we’ve done a study within our agricultural committee and you 
will find a disproportionate amount of the subsidy going to a 
very, very few farmers. That’s what happens. 
 
(1515) 
 
And what we need to do is to have it so that those who need the 
assistance for survival will in fact be addressed more than the 
deficiency payment. 
 
But the second flaw with the deficiency payment is, we can’t 
always have a Tory government at the brinks of defeat, either 
provincially or federally, and that’s the problem. And I don’t 
know how you can continue to farm, just hoping and wishing to 
get Something if there’s going to be an election. 
 
That’s what happened in Saskatchewan. The government was 
on their knees; they were defeated. And late in the morning one 
morning, on his knees he went crying to his friend, Brian, and 
begging for bail-out. Well the money is appreciated, but how 
can you run an agricultural program just catering to the whims 
of a political party and their crises at election time. That’s what 
has driven agriculture into a crisis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Because what they have done is that anything 
they have given to agriculture, they’ve done it on the basis of 
assisting, first the Tory Party, and then agriculture, and it’s only 
short-term; it’s not long-term procedure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — But I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that there  
  



 
April 19, 1988 

 

691 
 
 

can be a solution to this problem, and there are basically two 
things — I guess there’s three things that can be done. 
 
One, I think, is that there has to be a debt restructuring of the 
farmers who are in serious problems. That’s not a forgiveness 
of debt. Many of the young farmers have been caught with high 
interest rates. And may I say that this government, when they 
first came in, realizing where the economy is going — prices 
were getting less stable — they in fact precipitated Some of the 
problems with their farm purchase program. 
 
I know of young farmers who were encouraged, when the land 
prices were very, very high to seek this government 8 per cent 
loan, regardless of where the commodity prices were going, to 
stretch out and to expand. And I can find farmers who, because 
of that program, are in serious trouble today. 
 
So I’m saying that you have to be fair to all of the farmers out 
there. And there are those who, driven by the greed of the day, 
try to expand beyond their means, and as a consequence have 
massed up huge debts — huge debts. 
 
An Hon. Member: — 22 per cent interest . . . 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And Someone is chirping back — who’s never 
been on a farm — analyzing the problem. I homesteaded in this 
province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You homesteaded? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Or at least my forefathers. But seriously, Mr. 
Speaker, seriously in respect to this . . . and I ask that the 
members of government that we must join together in a 
constructive approach to dealing with this real problem. 
 
I don’t think we can afford not to deal with it. Otherwise, as I 
say, we change the map of agriculture as we’ve known it. And 
we’re going to wipe out, as sure as we’re standing and sitting 
here today, 40 per cent of our farmers if there isn’t Some 
solution brought forward and fast. 
 
And it rests with us, but it rests with the federal government, 
and I say it rests with the financial institutions also. They made 
piles of money, I’ll tell you, loaning out to farmers in the good 
times. And I think that they should also be a part of the solution 
because indeed they were a part of the problem, because there 
was no limitations to the handing out of the money. And if 
they’re a part of the problem, they have to become a part of the 
solution. 
 
And I’m recommending here two basic proposals. I’m saying 
that there has to be a major debt restructuring. As the official of 
the wheat pool said, if we don’t act we’re going to lose many 
young farmers; we’re going to lose a generation of young 
farmers, and he said it would take 10 to 15 years if we ever are 
able to recapture that again. And we had made good progress in 
getting younger farmers onto the land. 
 
So we have to have a restructuring of debt, and I’m saying here 
there may have to be some debt set aside — not forgiveness, but 
debt set aside. It has to be restructured, the debt, over a long 
period of years at a reasonable rate of  

interest. And I’ll tell you, that won’t break the federal budget, 
and it won’t break the budget of this province, if it hadn’t 
already been broke, which it is. That’s the problem. 
 
But we have to come to grips with the debt and we have to 
restructure it, and we have to do it, not tomorrow, not with 
equity financing, but actually taking the instrument that we 
have, the Farm Credit Corporation, and getting the federal 
government to act and to restructure the debt so that those 
families have a chance for survival. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Now I think that we should be looking as long 
as we have the international crisis upon us, with subsidization 
from the United States and subsidization in the European 
Common Market. I don’t think that we can stand by and not 
come to a realistic method of a fair return on commodities for 
our farmers. That’s what we have to look at. 
 
They have to realize that if they plant their wheat and it’s only 
2.67, that we, as a society, will give them a return on their 
production on their commodity; that they can make their plans 
and get a return. That’s not asking a great deal. All you have to 
do is to have a concern, and you want to have the will to keep 
the farmers on the land, but that’s not the agenda of the 
members opposite. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I say to the farmers of Saskatchewan, 
that’s what we are prepared to work towards. We’re opposed to 
equity financing which will destroy the family farm and turn it 
over to the bond dealers and the financial institutions and the 
real estates and the Hong Kong investors; we want to maintain a 
way of life here in Saskatchewan, and certainly we will work 
and will develop a policy to see that that happens. 
 
The only alternative, as I see, in solving the problem and getting 
Some action, is that the people of Canada take action 
themselves. And soon they will have an opportunity, Mr. 
Speaker. There will be a federal election coming, probably this 
fall, and I would ask the farmers not to be suckered into buying 
another promise of a deficiency payment, because that isn’t 
addressing the root of the problem, as we have seen with two 
deficiency payments to date. 
 
So to get rid of the problem, what we have to do, Mr. Speaker 
— and I will close, in moving this resolution — is we have to 
get rid . . . the farmers have to join together and really get rid of 
the real enemy, the Tory parties across this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Therefore I move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by 
the member from Humboldt: 
 

That this Assembly regrets the failure of the present 
Saskatchewan government to develop effective programs 
to deal with the farm debt crisis and for its equity financing 
proposal which does not address the heart of the problem 
of farm indebtedness. 

 
  



 
April 19, 1988 

 

692 
 
 

I so move.  
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to say a 
few words before I second the motion of my colleague from 
Quill Lakes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before the last budget I was waiting patiently for 
this government to do Something with regards to farm debt, and 
tens of thousands of farmers across Saskatchewan were also 
waiting because they know there is a crisis in agriculture. It’s a 
debt crisis. They have a problem that they cannot solve by their 
own means right now because of the low prices. They have a 
problem that has to be addressed by all those involved in 
creating that problem, and the government must take a lead in 
this. 
 
But what happened in the budget when people were so patiently 
waiting for Something to happen? Nothing happened. In fact 
nothing positive happened. But what happened was an $8 
million cut to the agricultural budget. That is why this motion is 
being put forward. This government has not addressed the farm 
crisis — has not and will not — because they do not have the 
desire to keep agriculture in Saskatchewan on a small, family 
farm basis; a structure that’s been built over this province for 
the last hundred years; a structure that works because we work 
together, and the dollars created in the agriculture economy 
flow through the system to the benefit of everyone. 
 
And this government wants to take that away because their 
vision of Saskatchewan is corporate farms — large, large, 
foreign-owned, corporate farms. And they will say, oh no, no, 
that’s not true. We want to help the family farm because we 
have our priorities. 
 
But this government has turned its back on Saskatchewan 
farmers. It’s denied them an opportunity to exist for many of 
them in this province. They’ve denied the opportunity for 
young families to locate on homesteads that have been there for 
a hundred years or more. It’s taken that opportunity away from 
them, all in the name of Tory progress. 
 
Well I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is not the answer to 
the problems in rural Saskatchewan. This province has $6 
billion worth of debt in agriculture — $6 billion worth of farm 
debt. I mean the number alone, when you divide it by the 
number of farmers, especially the number in trouble, and when 
you look at the number in trouble, it’s the youngest ones. The 
youngest third of the farmers are carrying three-quarters of the 
debt. The numbers are staggering when you look at them. And 
how does this government address the problem? It sits idly by, 
saying, well we have deficiency payments, the stabilization 
payments that the Premier of this province has gone and got — 
which is totally false. 
 
They have no debt restructuring; they have no program to get 
farmers from one generation to another on the land; no land 
transfer program, and $6 billion worth of debt. Surely that’s 
enough for the members opposite to sit down and take a look at 
it and say, well maybe there is something that we should be 
doing. But they won’t do that.  

Farm debt in Saskatchewan, $6 billion. And The Western 
Producer, February 18, it says: “Bankruptcies down — but not 
in Saskatchewan.” And I quote: 
 

Farm bankruptcies were down last year in every province 
except Saskatchewan . . . Two-thirds of (those) 
bankruptcies were grain farmers . . . (and the) Economists 
say bankruptcy statistics are just one small measure of the 
farmers leaving agriculture. There are no public records of 
foreclosures or of farmers that simply walk away. 

 
The bankruptcies are up, and that’s just one small measure of 
what’s happening out in rural Saskatchewan. It goes on to say 
that an agricultural economist, Mr. Schoney, says: 
 

Farms with supply-managed commodities are more 
prevalent in other provinces. 

 
That’s why the other provinces are not having such a problem. 
Farm supply management, it’s helping. And what is this 
government going out and doing with their trade deal? They’re 
knocking the legs out from under supply management. 
 
(1530) 
 
Six billion dollar debt; families having their right to farm taken 
away from them. Supply management, a situation where we can 
provide Some stability and has provided stability in 
Saskatchewan — and this government’s taken that away from 
them. So they certainly have failed to address the debt. 
 
In fact they’ve not only failed to address the debt, they’re 
accenting the debt by their programs and policies such as free 
trade. They’re going to take those farmers in supply 
management who have a good livelihood, who are those people 
who can service their debt and who have a program that they’ve 
built up through the years to make sure that their commodity is 
priced at a reasonable level so they can maintain themselves on 
their farms, and these cowboys are going to take that away from 
them. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that doesn’t bode well for this 
province, a government with that attitude. 
 
I have another clipping here from the Star-Phoenix: 
“Saskatchewan Agriculture Loans Worst on Royal’s Books.” 
And it goes on to say that seventeen and a half per cent of the 
bank loans in Saskatchewan are not being serviced. That is 
about twice the national average. Saskatchewan is leading the 
way. 
 
That’s because this government has no commitment to 
agriculture. They sit there and they talk out of one side of their 
mouth saying, yes, yes, yes, yes, we’re going to keep the family 
farm. And the statistics, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the statistics of 
bankruptcy’s down, but not in Saskatchewan. The statistics of 
Royal Bank’s Saskatchewan farm loans — worst in the Royal 
Bank’s books. Those figures don’t lie. 
 
The government over here is the ones who aren’t telling  
  



 
April 19, 1988 

 

693 
 
 

the truth, and they know it, and I know it, and the people of 
Saskatchewan know it. And that’s why we have to put motions 
like this in, so that we can tell the people of this province: 
despite the rhetoric, these people do not support agriculture in 
Saskatchewan. They support themselves and their buddies and 
the banks and large corporate entities who they’re asking to 
come in and farm this land. 
 
We also have the Farm Debt Review Board. And the Farm Debt 
Review Board is in place supposedly to help farmers, and the 
Farm Land Security Board. But when you look at the numbers, 
the numbers there are also startling. I mean, despite what these 
people say, the numbers are telling us the truth — 2,251 
foreclosures filed, notices of foreclosures filed on 1,806 
farmers. 
 
And when you work through all of them, Some farmers are 
even saying now . . . In fact 107 farmers said they just don’t 
want anything to do with them, because they know it’s not 
worth their time and effort to go into it. And out of all those, 
106 farmers had reports written in favour of them instead of the 
banks. But for every one report written in favour of the farmer, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, three were written in favour of the banks. 
 
And when I asked the Minister of Justice the other day about 
maybe we should do Something about this, maybe we should 
give the Farm Land Security Board Some teeth, a broader 
mandate, and what was his answer? Instead of saying, well, yes, 
maybe we could look into it, he says, well the constitution says 
we can’t do anything about it. 
 
I mean he’s trying to dodge the problem, trying to ignore that 
there’s a problem there. The Minister of Finance has given up. 
He’s saying that there’s not enough money in the treasury to 
help farmers. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have the facts and numbers, and I’m 
sure they do too, and now the question I ask is: why don’t they 
respond? Why are they always trying to dodge the issue? Why 
are they always offering up excuses? Why don’t they hit the 
problem head-on and try to solve it? 
 
And I think I know why. Because when you look at all the 
statistics, when you look at all the programs, and when you look 
at this government’s commitment, it’s quite clear that there is 
no commitment. 
 
Their commitment is to reduce the number of farmers. And 
what is that to say about a Premier of this province who in 1982 
and ’86 ran around saying, we’re going to fix it for you, boys. 
We’ll get it done, fellas. 
 
The bankruptcies go up; the debt goes up; the ability to service 
debt goes up. That’s what he says, and he does nothing to turn 
the problem around. He’s got a Farm Land Security Board and, 
as my colleague stated earlier, that spent an average of $12,115 
per farmer helped. 
 
Why don’t you just build a program that’s going to help 
everybody and have a long-term stability built into it? They’re 
dodging the problem again. They’re treating the symptoms of 
the problem instead of treating the disease, because they don’t 
have a commitment. 

And the back-benchers sitting over there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
who supposedly represent rural constituencies in this province, 
should be ashamed of themselves. How could they go out and 
tell farmers that they’re going to be working in their favour 
when they’re doing absolutely nothing. And doing absolutely 
nothing and turning around and telling the farmers: well, we 
have a plan; we’re going to implement this program and that 
program, and we have livestock programs and deficiency 
payments. 
 
Do you think the farmers out there are dumb? They look at their 
bottom line, and over the years it keeps coming down, keeps 
coming down to the negative figures. And that’s why we have 
the problem of people leaving this land and the government 
doing absolutely nothing about it. 
 
But they have one program, one program to help debt, to help 
relieve the debt. And Mr. Neil, who — Doug Neil, the president 
of the federal Farm Debt Review Board, says, farmers whose 
only alternative is to give up the farm, receive help through 
other government programs, such as the rural transition 
program.” That’s the solution, that’s one of the solutions for 
this government — the rural transition program. “This,” Neil 
said, “is a good program for helping farmers relocate to an 
urban setting and to get them into another trade.” 
 
Well, whoopee — isn’t that solving the problem. I mean, how 
narrow-minded of an approach do we have here from this 
government and this federal government. The rural transition 
program, as quoted by Doug Marte, “is an option that more and 
more farmers are looking at,” he says, “More and more farmers 
are looking at the program as a real alternative to foreclosures.” 
I mean, the government is actually trying to convince people 
that that’s the solution to their farm debt, is to get them off the 
land. What kind of a solution is that, when we’ve got in this 
province the structure built here? Families want to farm, to 
grow grain for a hungry world, but this government, they say, 
well we could farm this land with six or seven corporations. 
That’s what they want to do. 
 
The rural transition program is a $46 million program designed 
to help financially troubled farm families make the transition — 
$46 million dollars they’re spending to get people off the land. 
Why wouldn’t they spend that money trying to keep people on 
the land if they’re so concerned? They’re not concerned, that’s 
why. They pull the moratorium on farm land, on federal FCC 
(Farm Credit Corporation). They pull the moratorium, and then 
they have the farm transition program, because that’s the 
attitude. 
 
And yet this government says that we’re standing up for 
farmers, and Brian Mulroney says we’re standing up for 
farmers, and in fact . . . I have another little clipping that says, 
“PM vows to support farmers”. We’re not going to let them 
hang out there, he told the Star-Phoenix in an exclusive 
interview on Thursday. We’re not going to let them hang out 
there. But what about the numbers, Mr. Prime Minister? 
They’re hanging out there now; they’ve been hanging out there 
for the last five or six years. And many of them are gone. 
Maybe that’s what he means, we’re not going to let them hang 
out there — he’s going to  
  



 
April 19, 1988 

 

694 
 
 

get rid of them. And he also goes on to say: 
 

If you believe in the family farm and in the value of 
agriculture and our national life, then you’ve got to stand 
behind agricultural producers. 

 
Well how hypocritical. I mean he’s got a rural transition 
program in Ottawa that gets farmers off the land, and he’s 
saying, you’ve got to stand behind agricultural producers. Well 
I say he’s standing behind them all right — just far enough so 
that he can watch Somebody foreclose on them and boot them 
off the land. 
 
And also in this little clip, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Prime 
Minister goes on to talk about the Canadian Wheat Board 
announcement last week. It says: 
 

The adjustment in initial prices on Canadian Wheat Board 
grains announced this week will put another $175 million 
into the agricultural economy at a time when it is sorely 
needed, he said. 

 
This is the Prime Minister who said this — 175 million at a 
time when it’s sorely needed. Well just let me tell you 
Something, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about that. 
 
Last . . . beginning of last crop year when the Canadian Wheat 
Board sends the range of prices in to the government so the 
government can set the price, what did they do? What did this 
Prime Minister who is supporting and standing behind farmers 
do? He set the range at the . . . the value of the grain at the 
bottom of the range, right near the bottom. Instead of picking at 
the middle of the range where normally should be picked, he 
put it at the bottom of the range because he knew there was an 
election coming. And now this spring he’s going to try to gear 
up the troops. So he goes back in Ottawa and he says, well we’d 
better put Some more money out there; there’s an election 
coming up. 
 
So he adjusts the initial price of grain to the point where it 
should have been in the first place, and the members opposite 
know exactly this little routine. They know exactly this little 
routine. So he bumps up and adjusts the price, and the headlines 
say, farmers get $175 million. What kind of crass politics is this 
Prime Minister of this country playing, supported by the 
Premier of this province and his rural colleagues over there? 
What kind of support is that for farmers when we have $6 
billion worth of debt, and they’re toying with their lives on the 
initial price of grain, trying to win themselves another election. 
I’ll tell you that is hypocritical, that’s dishonest, and that 
shouldn’t be tolerated by an country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — But this is the method, this is the method used 
by these governments. They use every possible manoeuvre that 
they can muster to try to buy themselves another term in power. 
 
And here’s another little quote. This is Western Producer from 
February 18: 
 

FCC keeps getting land. Farm Credit Corporation  

land holdings increased 62 per cent during the last seven 
months of 1987. 

 
Sixty-two per cent, 337,000 acres on December 31 that it 
owned, and what did FCC do last year? It wrote off $126 
million. So this government, supporting the government in 
Ottawa, said it’s okay to write off $126 of taxpayers’ money; 
take the land from the farmers, the farmers who are paying 
thirteen and one-half, roughly, per cent interest, and have the 
land fall in the Farm Credit Corporation. 
 
So the scenario is like this: the farmer is paying high interest, so 
he can’t make his payments; Farm Credit Corporation says, 
well we’re going to foreclose on you, so they take the land 
back, and the taxpayers of this country have to shell out $126 
million. 
 
Wouldn’t it make more sense, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to give the 
farmer a low interest rate. The federal government can get 
money at 9 per cent; they can give it at Somewhat less than that, 
1 per cent, 2 per cent, plus administration charges — very small 
fee. The farmers would stay on the land and be able to 
eventually pay that back, if that debt was restructured, and save 
the taxpayers of this province $126 million. Now I mean that’s 
not so difficult to figure out, but that’s not the mandate of this 
government. Their mandate is to get people off the land, and 
that is a prime example of how they’re doing it. 
 
It’s so clear to me, so clear to me that they’re reducing the 
population of this province because they feel that they can 
control smaller numbers and still have the support, still get large 
corporate entities in here to farm the land. That’s the mandate of 
this government. 
 
The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, they offer a solution. It’s called 
the rural stability program. Their members have put together 
with their directors and executive a proposal whereby we can 
have a rural stability program to handle the land debt crisis and 
transfer the problem in this province. 
 
But has this government even considered it? Have they even 
gone out and talked to the wheat pool about their proposal? 
They have no ideas of their own. That’s what it appears to be. 
Maybe they should go against their mandate of reducing the 
population out here just for a little while and see if there’s 
anything they can do for the farmers. 
 
And that’s why we need a government that responds to people, 
responds to ideas, and responds to the solution that we need in 
here of restructuring the debt, of reorganizing the distribution of 
federal transfers of money to farmers to such a way where they 
have long-term stability. 
 
(1545) 
 
And I just reflect for a minute back to supply management. And 
I’ve looked at supply management commodities right from the 
time before that they were organized until now. And the whole 
pattern of those supply management commodities, the whole 
pattern of those farms has become one of a stable unit. But this  
  



 
April 19, 1988 

 

695 
 
 

government does not believe in that because it’s not their 
mandate. So they don’t take ideas like the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool’s, of a rural stability program. They ignore it, and I ask 
why. 
 
Last week we had members of the National Farmers Union 
walking in the streets saying, look, we have to have Something 
done. And they offered up Some solutions. Does the 
government even consider them? And if not, why not? 
 
The numbers tell the problem. The faces of farmers also tell the 
problem, and the government doesn’t respond to ideas — ideas 
like a moratorium on foreclosures until the banks can be . . . and 
the debt can be alleviated with Some other mechanism. But let’s 
put a stop to it right now, organizing the Farm Credit 
Corporation so that their mandate is one of prime lender instead 
of lender of last resort. I mean, that’s an obvious, simple 
solution. But that’s not the priority of this government. 
 
And yet the hypocrisy that comes out every time they stand up 
there in their benches and they say, we are supporting the 
family farm; we’re supporting rural Saskatchewan and 
agriculture because we believe in the family farm. What 
hypocrisy? All talk, rhetoric, garbage, is what it is. And the 
farmers of this province know that. 
 
Also the NFU (National Farmers Union) wants the deficiency 
payments geared to the cost of production. Not so difficult. Put 
a reasonable cap on it, geared to cost of production. No action. 
 
And one of the members says the current situation is one where 
a farmer has no power. He’s completely at the mercy of his 
creditors. And in 1986 — here’s another little statistic — 
farmers’ net income hit 5.5 billion nationally. Farmers’ net 
income — $5.5 billion nationally. But almost $4 billion — 3.9 
billion of that — went to pay off loans and interest on debt; 70 
per cent of the net income in this country went to pay off debt. 
 
And these guys don’t want to address the problem. What kind 
of a government would sit on its hands and allows this to 
happen? What kind of a government says out of one side of its 
mouth it’s supporting agriculture, and the actions — and I lay 
them out with the statistics, with the programs — say another 
thing that says, we’re going to get rid of these farmers in this 
province. 
 
I don’t understand it. At one time I thought that, why would any 
government whose support was in rural Saskatchewan want to 
get rid of the farmers? I mean, that’s their vote. It was their 
vote, maybe, but it’s not any more, I’ll guarantee you that, 
because the farmers of this province are telling me now that 
they no longer support this Tory government. They no longer 
support it because they’re hypocritical, because they’re 
deceitful, because they’re not telling us the truth in all 
instances. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They’re misleading the 
farmers, and the farmers are now seeing that. It’s okay to have 
the rhetoric, that hype about: we’re going to lead you home, 
boys. But when the stark reality shows and the farmers are 
forced off the land and they’re huddling their families in the 
living-room while their machinery is being  

repossessed, is not a very happy sight. And they are saying, 
where’s the government? 
 
And they know where the government is. The government is 
hiding Somewhere. Where are the members of the government 
in the seats in rural Saskatchewan? They are hiding 
Somewhere. They won’t even talk. They won’t even talk to 
their members. Now this is a government that shouldn’t be 
governing. This is a government that shouldn’t be governing. 
 
And I just want to go into, Mr. Deputy Speaker, into Something 
else. There is a very great problem right now in Saskatchewan. 
One of the reasons the problem is as grave as it is, is because 
it’s been an accumulation of debt over a few years and lack of 
response of the government. But one of the only reasons that 
we’ve had, in most of this province, Some income, is that we’ve 
had a crop. Some areas in this province haven’t been that lucky. 
But the majority, there has been a decent crop. 
 
But this year there’s a different story. This year right now, from 
the Yellowhead Highway roughly south, there is a tremendous 
drought. There’s dug-outs that are dry, the pastures are dry, and 
the farmers are wondering what’s going to happen. And there is 
an old saying, you know, we’ve never lost a crop in March yet, 
and that’s true. But I’ll tell you, what is this government’s 
response? And I’ll just have a little quote from the Star-Phoenix 
of April 9. It says: 
 

Though Some southern Saskatchewan communities are 
running out of water and dug-outs are bone dry, it’s too 
soon to be talking about drought-relief programs, says the 
Environment minister . . . 

 
I won’t mention his name because we all know his name. In an 
interview later, he said: 
 

The lack of water is a crucial issue right across the South, 
but it’s far too early to talk about drought relief. 

 
Well isn’t that Something — too early to talk about drought 
relief. What kind of a government does not prepare for what 
could come? Where is the program in place in case there is a 
drought? I mean, we all hope and pray that the rains come, 
there’s no doubt about that. But if they don’t come, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, what then? There will have to be another program in 
place. There will have to be Some type of an arrangement made 
so that we don’t lose even more farmers, so that the banks can 
be assured that maybe we can set this debt aside for a year 
because of the drought — Something, Some conditions — but 
we have to have a program in place. And what’s the 
Environment minister saying? It’s too early. What’s the Premier 
of this province, the Agriculture minister, saying? Nothing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hoping for rain. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Hoping for rain, that’s right, with nothing in 
place. And when it comes time for this debt . . . or for this 
drought if it does come, and I hope it doesn’t — but when we’re 
in the midst of it, and this fall if we don’t have  
  



 
April 19, 1988 

 

696 
 
 

a crop, then it’s going to take these cowboys another six months 
to figure out what to do. Just like the equity financing. I mean, 
how long can they drag this thing out? It’s incredible. 
 
They put in a farm purchase program that they said that there 
was a great need for. And there was need for an interest 
reduction, but what do they do? They cut it out — they cut it 
out so that they don’t have a program. And farmers now, who 
have been in it five years, don’t get the 8 per cent, interest 
reduced to 8 per cent, but they only get it reduced to 12 per 
cent. 
 
Now if things were getting better we can see . . . and I’m sure 
the program was planned so that over five years things, 
hopefully, would improve and that we would be able to pay 23 
per cent; but it didn’t happen. And where is this government? 
Are they saying, no, we’ll maintain that interest rate at 8 per 
cent? Not at all. Another solution that they could . . . simple 
solution that they could come through with, but they don’t 
budge on it because they don’t support agriculture and farmers 
in this province. 
 
I’d like to talk for a minute, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about The 
Farm Land Security Act. Now The Farm Land Security Act is 
still in force, and it was put in place to secure the home quarter, 
home quarter protection Act, as it was called, so that farmers 
could at least maintain their home quarter in times of 
foreclosure so they wouldn’t be booted right off the land. 
 
And as I said, The Farm Land Security Act is still in force. But 
the problem is that lenders routinely ask the farmers buying 
land to agree to an exemption from the Provincial Mediation 
Board, and if you agree to that exemption, the Act offers you no 
protection. And that’s common practice, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
for the farmers to have to agree to the exemption because the 
banks say, well, you know, we have to have that security, even 
that home quarter. And they will argue, well if you don’t . . . if 
you did do Something to that, it would dry up credit. 
 
Well, big deal. That’s the farmer’s biggest problem now, that 
he’s going to have his credit dried up. What he needs now is 
protection from the banks and from Farm Credit Corporation 
and from this government. And they won’t give them that 
protection. 
 
All the things that I’ve mentioned, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are all 
indications, right from the $6 billion debt, right through all the 
numbers of farmers in trouble, all an indication that this 
government does not care. And it’s beyond me to know why 
they wouldn’t care; because it’s hypocritical; it’s not fair to the 
people of this province that they put a government in power, the 
farmers of this province put a government in power, then they 
turn on them. That is totally unfair. 
 
Another reason that this motion has been placed in there, that 
they have not addressed . . . this government has not addressed 
the farm crisis, farm debt crisis, is the farm production loan. 
The farm production loan program bought this government 
another term in office. It was put out there with absolutely no 
forethought. 
 
They put this program out, said: farmers, here you go,  

boys, hassle-free cash, and they turned around and 
double-crossed them. Instead of becoming part of the solution, 
they are becoming . . . they have become a sixth of the debt 
problem in Saskatchewan. This government is one-sixth of the 
debt problem. 
 
And what are they doing about it? Well, they said, farmers 
asked to have the loan extended over 10 years. That’s fine; that 
was a good move. They assumed it would be at 6 per cent. They 
assumed it would be under the same security agreement terms 
of a promissory note. 
 
But that’s not what this government had in mind, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. What they had in mind was a grab, putting the vice on 
farmers, saying: look, fellows, you can have her over 10 years, 
but you’re going to pay more interest and you’re going to have 
to sign a security agreement. 
 
So they changed rules in the middle of the game. So they have 
not addressed the debt crisis. The farm production loan hurt the 
people of this province, just like the trade deal, the 
Mulroney-Reagan trade deal, is going to hurt them; just like 
equity financing isn’t going to help them. 
 
Changing the rules in mid-stream of the production loan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, was not fair to the farmers of this province. It 
was not fair to them because when they asked for the payment 
to be extended, what they meant was, give me more time to pay 
this loan. Give me more time to pay this loan at 6 per cent 
interest — give me more time to pay this loan at 6 per cent 
interest under a promissory note. And did they get that? No, 
they didn’t get that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because now the 
government has claim to all their assets. They can take it all 
away from them if the government so wishes. 
 
And the farm family . . . just imagine, the farm family this 
spring, going out there, and many of them are out there already; 
again they’re going into spring not knowing what’s going to 
happen this fall, not knowing if there’s going to be a deficiency 
payment. And the rumour is, well it’s an election, so we 
probably will get one. The only security they have is the 
stabilization payment this year, and after this year, unless it’s 
adjusted, it’ll be down to half or less the next year, and continue 
to go down. 
 
So they have not addressed the debt crisis. They still give 
farmers loans . . . or they still give people loans at 6 per cent to 
put their hot tubs in, with no security; that’s still in place. But 
the farmers get a different deal. Oh yes, they give Peter 
Pocklington $21 million — that’s no problem; that’s still in 
place. The rules haven’t changed on Pocklington’s deal, but two 
years into an agreement, the rules change for the farmers. 
 
Why would a government do that unless this mandate was to 
reduce the number of farmers in this province. The rules still 
stay the same for Weyerhaeuser, where they don’t have to pay 
unless they make a profit, but the rules stay the same and worse 
for farmers because they have to pay regardless of profit. 
 
I’ll tell you, our farmers could sleep at night if they had a deal 
like Weyerhaeuser’s. But this government’s priorities are all 
mixed up and not in line with what this province  
  



 
April 19, 1988 

 

697 
 
 

used to be and what this province could be, and that is, a firm 
financial base built on agriculture, combined with industry and 
service sector, the small business — that’s not their mandate. 
They’re taking this province to hell in a hand basket, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and they’re doing it very quickly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget devoted about as much time to 
tax increases as it did to agriculture. This budget cut $8 million 
from agriculture, $8 million that could have been used to 
support the farmers and help reorganize their debt. Twenty-five 
per cent of the budget was cut last year that could have been 
used to help farmers and reorganize their debt. And why wasn’t 
it? That’s the backbone of this province. When times were good 
and farmers were making a profit and paying income tax, they 
brought in about a third, in Some years, of the money that came 
into this country. So now it’s turn about fair play; it’s time for 
everybody else to gather together to help out the farmers. 
 
(1600) 
 
And that could happen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that could happen 
if the government of this province and the government of this 
country wanted it to happen. But I tell you, they don’t want it to 
happen, and that is a complete betrayal to the farming 
community. 
 
They haven’t addressed the farm crisis. They haven’t given any 
increase to rural revenue sharing so the farmers are going to 
have to pay more for their services there. Again, they’re adding 
to the farm debt crisis. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d just like to tell you now what they 
have done for agriculture. They’re going to commit themselves 
to try to end the pricing and subsidies, the subsidies around the 
world, the over-production problem; they’re going to work hard 
to end that. Big deal. What about the farmers that are losing 
their land today? 
 
That was one commitment from the budget speech. Fifteen 
million dollars for irrigation, at a time when irrigation farmers 
cannot afford to get into . . . when farmers cannot afford to get 
into irrigation, the government says, well boys, if you want 
more debt we’ll give you 15 million bucks to get into irrigation 
for agriculture. What kind of logic is that? There’s nothing 
wrong with promoting irrigation, but you have to get your 
priorities right. You have to set up those farmers who have a 
high debt now and who can’t manage it, because you can put 
$15 million into creating new irrigation projects for farmers, 
and then you could lose another $15 million when those farmers 
go bankrupt, and other farmers go bankrupt who are under 
irrigation. Where are the priorities? And they’re going to have 
an $8 million opportunity for a corporation to get into livestock 
production — $8 million. 
 
And what have they done to the other livestock, the family farm 
livestock people of this province? They’ve cut back their cash 
advance by 25 per cent. That wasn’t necessary; that wasn’t 
necessary; that wasn’t necessary at all. And that is why I say 
this government has no commitment to agriculture. I’ve laid all 
the factors . . . if you put one list of what their  

commitment, and the other list their lack of commitment and 
cut-backs. I’ll tell you, the cut-back and lack of commitment list 
is about 10 times as long as their commitment list. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they have counselling assistance, they have 
Farm Land Security Boards, they have production loan, they 
have cash advances, and all these programs that this 
government thought were helping farmers are not working; 
they’re not keeping the farmers on the land. And that is why, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this motion was put forward. 
 
But their solution . . . here’s one of their big solutions: equity 
financing. That’s going to be the big saviour for the farmers of 
this province. Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool says they prefer a revamped land 
bank to equity financing. They want a Crown-organized 
corporation to handle the land in this country, not foreign 
capital coming into this province to own Saskatchewan farm 
land. 
 
Equity financing, if it’s implemented, will probably have to do 
away with The Farm Land Security Act, and we’re going to 
have to do away with that so we can allow people to come into 
this province to invest. That throws this province wide open for 
investment to anybody. At a time when agricultural land is at its 
very, very lowest and maybe could be going slightly lower, but 
probably at its lowest point, that’s when they’re going to open 
up investment to this country for people outside of this province 
to own land. What kind of sweetheart deal is this anyway? 
Because they know that those boys will pump money into the 
pockets of the Tory coffers for election time. That’s the way 
they play the game. 
 
So the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool doesn’t agree with their 
equity financing, but they’re going to have a pilot project. A 
small pilot project on equity financing was one of the 
recommendations released in a report Friday. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, how long is this government going to drag out their 
solution to the farm debt crisis? 
 
First of all, implementing a program that, as I see it, won’t 
work, because it’s not going to help those people who are very, 
very poor or insolvent or who have a very high debt/equity 
ratio. It’s not going to help them. It’s going to help those people 
who possibly . . . who have Some assets to get even larger so 
they can buy up those farms, again in the tradition of the Tories, 
to reduce the number of farmers. It’s a master little plan. 
 
A pilot project — I wonder how long that’s going to take. I 
mean, they sat on this thing for a year now: oh yes, we’re going 
to have a program. And we’re going to have a pilot project for 
what, another year? How long does it take for a project like that 
to prove itself? — one, two, five years? 
 
An Hon. Member: — They’re just opening the door. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — That’s exactly right, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
they’re just opening the door to the financiers of the world to 
come into Saskatchewan and get bargain basement land. That’s 
what they’re doing. They’re going to open the door for to put 
Saskatchewan land on the stock market. They’re going to open 
the door to have the family farms of  
  



 
April 19, 1988 

 

698 
 
 

this province be share-croppers. That’s what they’re doing. And 
that’s exactly what equity financing will accomplish for this 
government. 
 
But it will accomplish Something else. It’ll bail out their banker 
friends who’ve been putting on so much pressure for them to 
say, look, we have to get our money out of this land; we’re not 
going to do it unless the government comes up with a program 
to bail out the banks. And that’s another reason that they’re 
doing this. 
 
What a sorrowful statement for any government to put before 
the people of this province: a plan that denies farmers the right 
to farm; a plan that bails out banking institutions who have 
made millions in dollars out of the farmers; and a plan to open 
up our land at fire sale prices to foreign investment. That’s what 
equity financing is. It is a smoke and mirror attempt to try to 
convince the farmers of this province that they’re doing 
Something. Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, they won’t believe 
them, because they are doing absolutely nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has not addressed the debt 
problem in this province. They have not addressed any 
solutions except farm equity financing, which won’t work, 
because it’s not aimed at the right people. It’s another 
government program instead of a farm-based program. 
 
That is why the farmers of this province are telling me in 
private, and Some in public, they’re saying, we will never vote 
Tory again. And I believe them, because they’re now seeing the 
light. They’re seeing the dust has cleared on the rhetoric that 
this Premier of this province has put forward. The dust has 
cleared and the colours are coming shining through of the 
deceit, the betrayal, the denial of existence for farmers in this 
province. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I certainly get . . . With that, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it gives me pleasure to second this motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, we have been sitting in this 
Assembly for one hour and 40 minutes hearing the member 
from the Quill Lakes and the member from Humboldt telling us 
how much we haven’t done for agriculture in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I was surprised at one of the comments of the member 
from Quill Lakes, where he said in 1980 or ’81 there was $3 
billion worth of farm debt. After seven to 10 years of the best 
times that agriculture has had in Saskatchewan, there’s still $3 
billion worth of debt. But in their mind that’s nothing, that’s 
just a starting point for the next three billion in their minds. 
 
How many of the members opposite know that we lost 10,000 
farmers from 1971 to 1981? A thousand of them a year, in those 
10 years. But you never bring up those facts in your comments. 
It’s always, the Tory government doesn’t support agriculture in 
Saskatchewan. We heard that statement over and over and over 
in the last hour and 40 minutes. And what . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, what a joke.  

Mr. Speaker, I have to say it is a little disappointing to be 
debating such a motion as we have been listening to today. And 
it is disappointing, Mr. Speaker, because in the first place, the 
motion contains no correspondence or true correspondence to 
the facts. 
 
But it is most disappointing too, Mr. Speaker, because here the 
opposition had an opportunity to produce a motion of 
substance, an opportunity to offer Some solutions. This motion 
that proposes no alternatives, a motion that could put a policy 
forward on agriculture, a motion that could have indicated 
Some genuine support for farm families in this province. 
Instead, what do we hear, Mr. Speaker? We have a motion from 
the NDP attacking a program of this government that has put 
over $1 billion directly into the family budget on farms across 
this province. 
 
And they say, no, it didn’t happen because of the Tory 
government happened — it just happened. What was our 
Premier doing for months and months and months, but going to 
bat for the farmers of this province. And you can laugh about 
farmers: I’m one, my brother is one, I was born and raised on a 
farm, and I know what the farmers are going through at this 
particular time. 
 
We have a motion that has not one suggestion, not one idea to 
offer to address the pressing financial challenges of many of our 
farm families. We have a motion devoid of thought. We have a 
motion, Mr. Speaker, that, taken for what it is, represents an 
insult to farm families across this province and a motion that is 
worse than a waste of this Assembly’s time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition could have put forward a motion 
that talked about the 2.8 billion-worth of agriculture 
programming that this government has put into place since 
1982. And by the way, that 2.8 billion only counts for the 
impact of programs up to February of 1987. 
 
They could have talked about programs that they think might be 
helpful, and we heard one or two little suggestions over there, 
but that is ideas that we have talked about for the last 10 to 12 
months trying to get them discussed in our caucus, in cabinet, in 
our tour around the province with the farming community, 
thousands of people being talked to, and it is a problem that is 
very, very difficult to come up with a good program. 
 
They could have talked, Mr. Speaker, about new initiatives that 
they would like to see. Instead all they do is criticize, condemn, 
and malinger, and we’ve heard that for an hour and 40 minutes, 
scoffing at the increase in the initial price of grain. And what is 
more important to the farm industry than having an increase in 
the price of their product that they produce. 
 
We’ve been faced with prices going down over the last three or 
four years, and the member from Humboldt laughed that it was 
Some great election promise to get the support of the farmers, 
and it’s not the fact that there is grain prices that are gradually 
starting to go up in the world market which we’re delighted to 
see, and everyone in this Assembly should be joyful to see that 
is starting to happen  
  



 
April 19, 1988 

 

699 
 
 

for our farm people. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, has chosen to make a 
commitment to support farm families in this province with all 
the resources it can reasonably muster and it has done so. And 
you know it is not even amusing, Mr. Speaker, to hear the 
member from Quill Lake stand in his place and say the 
government has done nothing for farm families, as well as the 
member from Humboldt. And I am really surprised to hear that 
coming from Someone who has a connection to the farm 
community. 
 
Let me put things in perspective, Mr. Speaker. The net debt of 
the province, Mr. Speaker, the net debt will be $2.8 billion in 
1989, and undoubtedly that is a great deal of money, a figure 
that must be viewed with concern. But put beside that debt just 
one item, the $1.2 billion put into farms in this province through 
the production loan program — 1.2 billion — and we account 
for almost half of the total net debt of the province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(1615) 
 
And they talk about the $3 billion debt that was there in 1980 
and ’81. But what did they do about it? Three billion evidently 
was okay in their mind to have that kind of debt load on our 
farmers’ backs eight years ago. The interest rates went up to 20, 
22 per cent, and what did you do? You did nothing with the 
farm debt, even if it was at $3 billion in 1980 — you did 
nothing. With interest rates climbing to 20 per cent you sat with 
your . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. They did 
nothing in 1980 when there should have been Something, and 
that is part of the problem now. It’s not starting at 3 billion — 
not starting at $3 billion worth of debt. And it has gone to 3 
billion since then, and we acknowledge that, but it was because 
of grain prices, because of drought, because of grasshoppers. 
The NDP, I’d like to see what they could do with grasshoppers 
all over southern Saskatchewan, and try to control things like 
that, or try to make it rain. You would have had the same kind 
of problems, and it’s not fair for you to blame it on the Tory 
government that it went another $3 billion in the last six years. 
 
And into that, Mr. Speaker, the expenditures of the government 
in the following programs: the livestock cash advance — and of 
course we have done nothing for agriculture — the livestock 
cash advance; grasshopper control; irrigation assistance; farm 
purchase program; ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) regular loan program; livestock moving 
program; livestock drought assistance program; the 
Saskatchewan program; livestock investment tax credit; 
livestock facilities tax credit; crop insurance; crop drought 
assistance; counselling and assistance for farmers; The Farm 
Land Security Act; and the farmers’ oil royalty refund — and 
the list goes on and on and on. 
 
And as I’ve said, for an hour and 40 minutes we’ve heard all 
afternoon that the Saskatchewan government had done nothing 
for agriculture. 
 

Let’s talk about The Farm Land Security Act. And we heard 
those figures being tossed about the — across the floor today, 
that nothing was done to help farmers. I’m going to read out of 
Hansard what my colleague, the Minister of Justice, presented 
to this House yesterday. 
 

There are in total in Saskatchewan of Some 63,000 
farmers. The number of farmers who have received 
notices, whose notices have been received by the Farm 
Land Security Board today — that’s the number of farmers 
who have had a notice come from a financial institution — 
has been 1,806. That is . . . of the total farmers that is about 
2.87 per cent of all farmers who have had notice served on 
them from a financial institution, have taken that notice to 
the Farm Land Security Board — less than 3 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker, or 1,806 farmers. 
 
Of those 1,806 farmers, 1,061 have had their case dealt 
with by the Farm Land Security Board — 1,061. That 
leaves 739 that are still pending before the board. All right, 
so their cases have not been dealt with by the board . . . are 
you following me? — 475 of those have been successfully 
mediated and have gone no further than that — 475 have 
been successfully mediated. 
 
That means that through the Farm Land Security Board, 
the farmer and the financial institution cut a deal — that 
are going on out there on a regular basis — arranged a 
deal, farmer has gone on, and the process continues. 
 
Of that group, that leaves 586 who have not been mediated 
and have gone to the next step which is to the court 
process. 
 
Of those, 289 farmers have had a negative report to the 
court by the Farm Land Security Board — 289. One 
hundred and six of them have had a favourable report, 107 
of them have requested that no representation be made, and 
84 of them have been neutral. 
 
If you are to look at that, at the beginning, of the 63,000 
farmers in Saskatchewan, those that have gone through the 
Farm Land Security Board, which every farmer has a right 
to, those that have received a negative report by the Farm 
Land Security Board has been .45 per cent. In other words, 
less than one-half of one per cent of the farmers of 
Saskatchewan . . . action has been taken by financial 
institutions, have gone through the Farm Land Security 
Board, less than one-half of one per cent of the farmers 
have in fact had a negative report to the court. That’s 289 
farmers, Mr. Speaker. And this is the current to the end of 
March 31 of 1988 . . . 

 
And we hear from across the way, that the Farm Security Board 
is not working, that the farmers are not being counselled and 
not getting any assistance. 
 
And the impact of these programs together, Mr.  
  



 
April 19, 1988 

 

700 
 
 

Speaker, and you have over $2.8 billion — $2.8 billion, or a 
figure very close to the net debt of the province. And in fact, 
Mr. Speaker, the total financial impact of our agricultural 
programs to February of 1987 was $2,840,146,697. In other 
words, Mr. Speaker, the agriculture programs of this 
government represents 99.03 per cent of the value of the entire 
net debt of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the math is simple enough for anyone to 
calculate so I would ask members opposite, in view of these 
facts, how can you in good conscience stand up and claim the 
government is doing nothing for farm families? How can you 
be taken seriously when what we are doing for farm families 
represents 99 per cent of the value of the province’s net debt? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in case the members opposite would like to 
misconstrue my words, let me be very clear. I am not asserting 
that farm families are responsible for the province’s debt; they 
are not. We are proud that we have been able to be of assistance 
to the point of $2.8 billion to the farm families of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I cite these figures not to cast a shadow of responsibility, 
but to show the extent and the nature of the commitment of this 
government to farm families. 
 
And it is worth noting that we had done . . . or if we had done as 
the NDP would have people believe, that we had done nothing 
for farm families, we would have a zero net debt, Mr. Speaker 
— zero. But farm families are important to this government — 
extremely important, Mr. Speaker — because we know that the 
cities, like my own city of Yorkton, our cities will not prosper 
without the massive contribution made to our economy by 
agriculture. 
 
So we have provided this extensive support, and the numbers 
are these pure and simple to prove it. And as I said earlier, Mr. 
Speaker, we are proud that we have been able to be of that kind 
of assistance to the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
You will note, Mr. Speaker, that those numbers do not include 
expenditures on the Department of Agriculture itself, nor do 
they include the huge expenditures for the rural natural gas 
distribution program or the private line telephone service 
program. 
 
If we added in those programs, the expenditures for Agriculture 
would significantly exceed the province’s net debt. And the 
members opposite are all upset that the actual Department of 
Agriculture is not getting the money they think it should get. 
And in discussing their complaints and criticisms about the 
production loan program, they like to sneak a comment that the 
government must not be committed to agriculture because it is 
reducing spending on the apparatus of the Department of 
Agriculture. 
 
But I invite them to go to the farm families around my city of 
Yorkton and ask them, would they prefer to have more civil 
servants employed in the department or would they rather that 
we implemented the programs we have, programs like the 
production loan program, putting the dollars directly into the 
family budget? You know what  

the answer will be, Mr. Speaker. The NDP like to say that if 
they had been in power, they would have done these things, and 
I have no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that they would not have. 
 
I can remember talking about the natural gas program to the 
farms and the small towns. You had an opportunity to do that, 
but you decided not to. They would not have a production loan 
program; they would not have lobbied for deficiency payments 
— they would not, out of all the hundreds of millions worth of 
programs that this government has implemented. They could 
have, but they refused not to, and the $3 billion debt that we 
were left within the farm side was already there. 
 
But we are not sure of what they would have done. We aren’t 
sure because they refuse to say anything about what they would 
do. They are very good at saying what they will not do. They 
are very good at saying what they do not like, but they refuse to 
put forward even one policy suggestion. I guess, Mr. Speaker, 
that if we want to know what these people would do, we have to 
look at their record, and that is all, in fairness, what we can do. 
 
Now let me just address the comments of the NDP members 
that this government is spending five million lesson agriculture 
than they did in 1981. What artistry they have, Mr. Speaker, 
when it comes to manipulating the facts. I have already pointed 
out that if we are sensibly discussing government spending on 
agriculture, we cannot look just at the actual departmental 
spending, we have to look at all the agricultural programs. 
 
So I ask: how much did the NDP spend on rural natural gas 
distribution, Mr. Speaker, in 1981? Not one dime, not one 
penny. And they can make light of that program if they like, but 
the simple fact of it is, Mr. Speaker, that that program directly 
results in an increase in farm income. Farm families have to pay 
less to heat their homes or run their grain dryers, and that means 
they have increased incomes. It is that simple, Mr. Speaker. 
 
How much did they spend on burying power lines? Mr. 
Speaker, again you know the answer: not one single dime. And 
that program opens up new acres to sow and increases the size 
of their crops. It reduces the time needed to work the fields and 
reduces the gas to run their equipment, and that increases their 
farm incomes. 
 
How much, Mr. Speaker, did the NDP spend on the direct 
subject of this motion, the production loan program? Again, not 
one nickel, at a time when they had $3 billion worth of debt in 
the farm sector. The NDP policies were based on two things: 
buy up the farm land, and discourage diversification, and chase 
the land prices up so that the sons and daughters of their parents 
were kicked out of the market-place. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I do not have to prove the first assertion, 
since everyone in the province is familiar with the tragedy 
known as the land bank. But it seems that there are Some 
commentators who do not need reminding about the second 
policy of the NDPs — the policy to oppose diversification. And 
without any malice or disrespect, I would direct such 
commentators who have suggested that all parties have been in 
favour of  
  



 
April 19, 1988 

 

701 
 
 

diversification, to look at the record. 
 
And here I would provide a specific reference from Jim 
Knisley, who is, in my estimation, a fine agriculture 
commentator. But I would refer him to the policy of the former 
NDP minister of Agriculture in 1980, Mr. Speaker. All of the 
experts were recommending agriculture diversification, and 
there was ample opportunity to act on those recommendations. 
And what did the NDP put forward for policy in the Financial 
Post of February 12, 1980? And I quote: 
 

If Saskatchewan farmers hope to cash in on a growing, 
profitable world grain market, the change-over to straight 
grain is necessary. The Saskatchewan economy is 
diversified enough to take the strain of a large crop failure. 

 
What utter nonsense. Now, Mr. Speaker, how could any 
Minister of Agriculture in his right mind state that 
Saskatchewan is diversified enough and diversified so much 
that a large crop failure would not be a problem? How could the 
NDP be recommending farmers to go backward, to change over 
to straight grain production and back away from 
diversification? This was the NDP policy, and until they 
provide Something new, we have to assume it remains the 
policy. 
 
(1630) 
 
Programs like the production loan program have been essential 
to keeping farm families on the land, Mr. Speaker. They have 
been a great help in difficult times, and we’re also helping them 
to diversify and not holding them back. 
 
The NDP, with motions like the one before us, wish only to 
hold back our farm families. They hope to escape the 
responsibility of providing any policy alternatives. The NDP is 
a party without alternatives, without policy, without hope. 
 
In agriculture, Mr. Speaker, we have the 4-H club. But when it 
comes to agriculture, the NDP is the 3-H club. They are, to use 
their own words, Mr. Speaker, hopeless, heartless, and helpless, 
the 3-H club. They hold out no hope for our farm families, only 
despair. Instead of posing solutions, they dwell on criticism, 
complaint, and bitterness. 
 
They have no heart, Mr. Speaker, for our farm families. They 
say the production loan program should never have been 
implemented. They call it a welfare program for rich farmers, 
and that is heartless. And they are helpless, Mr. Speaker, and 
they are helpless when they have nothing to offer. And we can 
only repeat the question over and over again: what are the NDP 
farm policies? They have no help to offer. 
 
And they are also helpless in themselves, Mr. Speaker, because 
farm families will not help them in the next election. They will 
remember exactly how much help the NDP offered them, and 
they will return it in kind. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, clearly the motion as it stands is 
unacceptable and unworthy. And I hereby, Mr. Speaker,  

would like to make an amendment to the motion: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all words after the 
word “Assembly,” and substitute the words: 
 
Communicate its support for the Premier in championing 
the cause of Saskatchewan farms, in fighting for deficiency 
payments to farmers and in giving farmers relief from high 
interest rates; and that this Assembly never forget the 
failure of the previous government to help farmers meet 
high interest rates, nor the boondoggle known as land bank 
and the damage it did to our farm sector. 

 
It’s my pleasure to move this motion, Mr. Speaker, seconded by 
my colleague from Morse. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Martin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to begin my 
remarks this afternoon on the issue of financing and the 
involvement of our Premier in dealing with financing in the 
agriculture sector. I want to point out a number of things, one of 
them being the record that we’ve got, the ongoing position of 
our government, and then I’d like to, if I have time, deal with 
Some of the things on international trade, Some things that the 
federal government has done in conjunction with us. And I 
believe that those things will point out where we have been 
walking along with the farmers of Saskatchewan in dealing with 
the financial debt problems that they have. 
 
I, first of all, want to point out, in a book that was put together 
by a committee of MLAs from the government side of the 
House, Some things that I believe are very pertinent and 
important. One of the things that we have to address, Mr. 
Speaker, is: what was the position of agriculture over the past 
. . . what has been the position of agriculture over the past seven 
years? 
 
For example, let’s take the income levels that farmers have 
generated in the province of Saskatchewan over the last eight 
years. Let’s take that revenue that is generated from livestock 
and grains and various kinds of sectors in agriculture, and then 
we will see what’s happened. For example: 1981, $3.9 billion, 
1981, total revenue, farmers; 1982, $4 billion; 1983, $3.9 
billion; 1984, $4.2 billion — 1984, Mr. Speaker, was the 
highest income ever recorded in Saskatchewan’s history, from 
grain, from livestock, the largest income that was recorded in 
Saskatchewan’s history from agriculture. That, Mr. Speaker, is 
significant. 
 
What we have had from 1984, Mr. Speaker, is a reduction in 
volume of grain produced in this province. The drought in the 
south-west almost ravaged the south-west in the production of 
grain; 1985 was no different, topped by grasshopper problems 
that we had all through those years, till 1987 we have a gross 
income of $3 billion — 1987, $3 billion in total revenue. That, 
Mr. Speaker, has gone from 3.9 billion in 1981 down to 3.1 
billion in 1987. 
 
Now I want you to go with me on the net, on one hand,  
  



 
April 19, 1988 

 

702 
 
 

and the net with the involvement of the people of Saskatchewan 
and the federal government. I want you to take a look at what 
the real income has been for producers in that same time. It has 
gone from 3.9 in 1981 to 4.2 in 1984, down to 3.1 in ’87. 
However, what is the total that agriculture has received, now 
including what they’ve earned and what governments have 
given them. What was the total value given to agriculture in 
1981, total, Mr. Speaker, federal and provincial? In 1981 it was 
$70 million; $70 million was the total in 1981. 
 
Now let’s go to 1987. What was the total in 1987 — $1.18 
billion, Mr. Speaker. What that does for total revenue 
generated, Mr. Speaker — ;and I want to point this out so that 
the members opposite will recognize it — in 1981, government 
and farmer, the total was $4 billion; 1984, I spoke about it 
before, total, government and farmer, 4.3, almost $4.4 billion; 
1987, total, $4.3 billion. Those, Mr. Speaker, represent the total 
dollar value. 
 
And what happened, Mr. Speaker, is that were the farmer was 
not able to generate the income, the federal and provincial 
governments have put into place programs that have been 
developed by this government, this Premier, and have provided 
that to rural Saskatchewan. And that, Mr. Speaker, is why the 
people of my constituency and all the way across this province 
voted for the Premier of this province, not because he did it 
once, but he did it over, and he did it over and over again. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, in 1987, what have we got in 1988? We 
have not only one deficiency payment, Mr. Speaker, we have 
two, and chances are we probably will be getting another one. 
In putting this into context in dealing with agriculture as it 
relates to the funding that we’ve provided, which the NDP 
constantly forget, is that these programs are going today. 
They’re ongoing. Our budget in this House represents precisely 
what I was talking about in delivery of 1988 programs. And that 
is continuing, and it will continue. 
 
I am going to point Some of them out because it is extremely 
important. Saskatchewan has about 90,000 people involved in 
agriculture — 63,000 roughly, farmers, and then we have those 
people who are interrelated with that farm family, constituting 
about 90,000 people. It is a very significant factor, Mr. Speaker, 
in dealing with how we have to assess this. 
 
If you take those figures that I read for you, those 90,000 
farmers, and split off that little over, just about $1.2 billion that 
we got in aid in 1987, that’s a fairly significant contribution that 
the federal government and the provincial government made to 
the province of Saskatchewan, and we will not allow the 
farmers in Saskatchewan to forget that. They ask over and over 
again: how much did the provincial government give? 
 
When I travel around in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, I hear 
this over and over again. As people are filling out their income 
tax I say, how much did your farm produce? Well, it produced 
this amount of money. How much of that was assisted by the 
government assistance providing a benefit for that producer to 
continue operating? Some say 60 per cent; Some say 40 per 
cent. Each one’s a little  

different but, Mr. Speaker, it is there. We are walking together 
with these people with cash. It’s not that we’re doing this in 
Some ambiguous kind of way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we’re discussing this very issue here today, the 
federal Canadian Grain Commission has announced that $130 
million will accrue to Saskatchewan because of an increase in 
initial price. We have western grain stabilization coming into 
play, which is also a part of developing a program. And it is, 
Mr. Speaker, delivered by the province of Saskatchewan and 
delivered by the involvement of our Premier with the federal 
government. 
 
And mark my words, I can recall, Mr. Speaker, being a 
producer through the ’60s and the ’70s, and dealing with the 
kind of administrative philosophy that was represented by the 
people opposite in Saskatchewan and in Ottawa. And I know 
for a fact, Mr. Speaker, that they did not deliver the way we 
deliver today. In fact, it was quite the opposite. And I want to 
make sure that the people of Saskatchewan clearly understand 
that because it is very, very important. 
 
What is the . . . Let’s talk about the commodities in grain and 
see what they have done over the last few years: 1980 to 1984 
the average price of a tonne of wheat was $184 a tonne; 1985 it 
went on to 143; 1986 it went down to 125; 1987 it was 98; and 
it’s lower than that today. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, combined with the delivery of the focus 
of the total revenue of the producers of Saskatchewan, 
combined with the amount of money that Saskatchewan and the 
federal government put into agriculture, provided for that 
delivery of that equivalent to almost equivalent to what they 
earned in 1984. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, has to be recognized by the people opposite 
and people who support that thought pattern. And I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that they’re totally wrong. They don’t understand 
agriculture, and they don’t even begin to perceive the real ideas 
that farmers have, that cattlemen have, and hog producers. They 
have no idea what the whole thing is about. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that Hon. Members across the 
way have discussed on many occasions the values or the pluses 
and the minuses of our programs, and they must have been . . . 
had Some convoluted idea of how to address the $25 an acre 
and change it from Something that was a positive in 1986, that 
was absolutely the best thing that we could have done for the 
producers at that time. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, was the beginning of when the federal 
government began to realize the value of what they had to pay 
to us in deficiency payments. That, Mr. Speaker, was extremely 
important because that set the tone for what they would be 
providing to us. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Premier here has mentioned this over and 
over again, and I will reiterate it. We earned those deficiency 
payments to the province of Saskatchewan without turning the 
key in our combine. Without any kind of effort, we earned that. 
We had the benefits accrue to western Canada, and that, Mr. 
Speaker,  
  



 
April 19, 1988 

 

703 
 
 

is really, really important. And I think that we owe to our 
Premier, who has travelled throughout this country bringing 
goodwill to the people of Canada so that they understood and 
that they did not . . . that it did not negatively affect the people 
in other places in regards to wanting to deliver to the people of 
Saskatchewan because they were producers of grain and the 
livestock industry. I think it’s extremely important. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we took the $25 an acre loan and extended it over 
10 years. Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I believe the only 
problem that we had with the delivery of that program in 
extending it to the 10 years was the misconception that was 
provided by the Leader of the Opposition, the member from 
Riversdale, when he spread these kinds of rumours across the 
province. And I believe that he was in error. I believe he did the 
wrong thing. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the producers who followed 
his lead and said they were not going to pay, in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, are penalized. And he caused that problem to develop 
on those producers when he delivered the message that was in 
error. And I believe that that’s wrong, Mr. Speaker. I don’t do 
that to the producers in my constituency, and I hope that he 
would not do that again. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, I want to just deal with a comparative . . . 
Mr. Speaker, I want to deal with a comparative assessment of a 
copy of an article I read in the Grainews magazine. It deals with 
the different kinds of budgets that we have in western Canada 
and it deals with, “Manitoba farm budget dwarfed by 
Saskatchewan and Alberta.” And I just want to compare the 
Manitoba with Saskatchewan. The Saskatchewan total budget, 
’85-86, ’86-87, $134 million compared to Manitoba’s $70 
million, and that, Mr. Speaker, is put together with the amount 
of volume of dollars that the federal government gave. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that demonstrates in a very clear way that the people 
of Saskatchewan were well served by this government. 
 
I want to go on to Some other programs that we’ve dealt with 
that show that we are aware of what the farm debt in 
Saskatchewan is all about. Let’s deal with the reduction of 
costs. As we reduce costs, Mr. Speaker, we give an opportunity 
for producers in Saskatchewan to have a better income, and that 
is extremely important. And we’ve had the member from 
Yorkton discuss these in a number of ways, and I want to 
reiterate Some of them and then I also want to add to that list. 
 
There’s the farmers’ oil royalty refund. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
have said that we wanted to deliver the most cost-effective way 
of delivering a program. We went out there and we said, okay, 
the producers, you get a number at your retailer or your 
wholesaler and you can have that opportunity to get a reduction 
in your fuel and the tax that normally is paid on it. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this was followed up. When our Premier sat at the 
premiers’ conference in, I believe it was Halifax or St. John’s, 
and he said to the Prime Minister, he said, Mr. Prime Minister, 
it is very difficult for the producers of Saskatchewan, who are 
in difficult times when they drive their tractor around the field, 
that when they see the increased taxes on farm fuels come into 
play, it is very, very difficult for them to  

realize that they should be taxed, because they are already in 
difficult situations. And that, Mr. Speaker, led the federal 
government to have a rebate on taxes to the people of 
Saskatchewan. But not only to the people of Saskatchewan — 
that helped the people in Manitoba; that helped the people in 
Alberta. 
 
And I know, Mr. Speaker, as sure as I stand here, that the 
Premier of the province of Saskatchewan has a very, very 
important message to deliver to the Prime Minister of Canada 
each time he talks. And I believe that is very, very valuable. 
And I want to just keep on with Some of the things that we’ve 
been dealing with. 
 
Farm purchase program. I heard the other day that members 
opposite were saying that we cut it off. But if you take and look 
in your blue book, you will find the farm purchase program 
mentioned there, because, Mr. Speaker, that was a five-year 
program, and all those people who applied last year will go on 
for four years. And that, Mr. Speaker, has a significant impact. 
 
I don’t recall the number in this year’s blue book, but last year’s 
was $19 million, and that, Mr. Speaker, is almost 25 per cent of 
what their whole agriculture budget was in 1981. And I believe, 
Mr. Speaker, that we are providing to those producers who 
really want to expand their production, an opportunity. 
 
Let’s take a look at one of the features that is unique to 
Saskatchewan. It’s called the livestock cash advance program. 
Here, Mr. Speaker, for the first time in Saskatchewan’s history 
have we had an opportunity as livestock producers — whether 
it’s pork, sheep, cattle, any of these — where we have had an 
opportunity to deal on an even basis with the grain producers in 
Saskatchewan. And that, Mr. Speaker, is very, very important 
for the livestock industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
It does, Mr. Speaker, a number of things. That program was 
introduced when we had a serious problem in drought in the 
south-west. That made people realize that we needed to put 
together a herd, whether it was hogs or whether it was livestock, 
that would deliver a program to maintain that herd. And that’s 
what it did, Mr. Speaker, and it did it very well. 
 
Now we have, through the past three years, dealt with this issue 
in different formats, and nowhere, Mr. Speaker, have we ever 
had people say that it was not a good thing to do. That is 
extremely important, and I believe, Mr. Speaker, that it’s 
definitely the way that we should have gone. It’s, in my 
opinion, a real important feature. 
 
Then we have Something that I believe is necessary too, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s the livestock tax credit. It is important for 
us, as livestock producers and hog producers, to be able to 
encourage the development of the industry. Mr. Speaker, the 
development of the industry occurs because of various kinds of 
reasons. The industry in livestock is directly related to the price 
of the feed; it’s directly related to the cost of money; it’s 
directly related to the benefits, the profits, that can accrue to 
that industry. 
 
And nowhere is the cow or the hog any more important  
  



 
April 19, 1988 

 

704 
 
 

than when people are planning their taxes. For years, Mr. 
Speaker, the cow has represented a deferral of taxes, the hog 
has represented a deferral of taxes, and now, Mr. Speaker, the 
opportunity to do that on that livestock that is fed to finish, it 
can be done right here. And I think that that’s really of benefit 
to the producers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Next, Mr. Speaker, you’d think that through the history of the 
NDP they would have picked up on Some of the things that 
were driving the livestock industry in other provinces. And I 
would have thought that through the years they would have 
been able to pick Something like that up. For example, Mr. 
Speaker, in Alberta they have had the feeder association 
guarantee program for at least 40 years — I think it’s up to 44. 
However, Mr. Speaker, not any time in the history of the 
livestock industry in this province or that province of Alberta, 
did they ever bring that program into Saskatchewan. 
 
And what we have in fact, by doing that and authorizing that 
through cabinet, we have begun to establish these associations 
that have a guarantee by the provincial government. And that, 
Mr. Speaker, is going to be the driving factor in developing the 
feeding industry in the province. I believe it. I know it’s real. 
We have over 40 of these today and I believe that that’s the way 
it’s going to go. As we expand the opportunity in our livestock 
industry, we are going to, Mr. Speaker, see this program 
develop more and more, and more and more producers are 
going to become involved in it. I believe it’s the right way to 
go. 
 
We can talk about a delivery of a program and I can recall 
discussing the issue of natural gas and in my part of the country 
when I talk about the drilling of oil wells and natural gas wells, 
it becomes a very important feature in my part of the country. 
As I listened to the ranchers talking in the sand hills and 
through the west side of my seat, I constantly heard the report 
that this well was capped and that well was capped and I would 
begin to ask the question, why? Mr. Speaker, did you know that 
most of those were gas wells that were capped. They were 
sealed off. They had discovered not oil but gas. They were 
capped off waiting for a day when an opportunity would come 
so that they could deliver to the people of Saskatchewan. And 
that’s what we did, Mr. Speaker. What we did is gave an 
opportunity for rural Saskatchewan and small town 
Saskatchewan — we often forget that, Mr. Speaker — that we 
delivered an opportunity to them to lower their costs. 
 
I was speaking with an individual who lives on a farm, just this 
winter, and he indicated to me, he lives down at Neville. He 
said to me, he said, I had a gas meter on my house during the 
time when it was colder — we had about two weeks of cold 
weather this winter. And he said, I had it on there for eight days 
and my fuel bill cost in natural gas was $17. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
if you would have taken that same house and the same period of 
time, the same energy requirement and put diesel fuel into 
there, it could have been four times as high. That, Mr. Speaker, 
is a direct saving to that producer, and we can do that on 
thousands and thousands of producers in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Plus, Mr. Speaker, that one item has delivered a 
job creation program all over this province. That’s, Mr. 
Speaker, why we do those things:  

they reduce the cost. 
 
Here is a very, very important feature, Mr. Speaker, in this 
issue: what does it take to run our halls, our community halls, 
our rinks, our town halls — all those various things where you 
and I go and get donations from? We go to the people to get 
donations to supply that. When these kinds of facilities, that are 
community-run facilities, have an opportunity to lower their 
cost, what does that do to the volume of dollars that they have 
to collect? Mr. Speaker, that reduces that in a very substantive 
kind of way. And that is a reduction, and it provides to the 
people of the community the right kind of development 
structure. It cuts the cost. It makes a better place to live in rural 
Saskatchewan, and that’s, Mr. Speaker, why people vote 
Conservative in this province in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And I will continue to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that they will 
continue to vote as long as we deliver those kinds of things. 
They are being delivered this year, next year, and last year, and 
in the years to come, because this government believes in those 
kinds of programs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, I have a whole lot more that I 
could say about this very issue, and I know that. I have issues 
here that deal with the things that the federal government has 
done on western grains stabilization; I have issues here dealing 
with free trade, and I could go on and on, Mr. Speaker, but I 
now move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. under protest and on 
division. 
 
 


