


















































May 16, 1988 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 16, 1988 
 
 

1363 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Highways and Transportation 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 16 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, you took 
exception to some numbers I used in the estimates before supper, 
specifically to the . . . I said that the maintenance budget for 
1981-82 was $60,548,761. If those numbers are in error, I 
apologize to you, sir, but I point out, I got them on page 233 of 
Public Accounts, March 31, 1982 — this Public Accounts, tabled 
by the member for Kindersley, the then minister of Finance. If 
they are in error, I suggest you talk to your seat mate, your 
colleague, and I point out page 233, total maintenance of 
highways and transportation facilities, $60,548,761. I was in 
error by 2 cents because there’s 2 cents written in here as well. 
So I just want you to recognize, when I’m using numbers, I’m 
using them from official places; I’m not just drawing them out of 
the hat. 
 
What these estimates are all about, Minister, more than just the 
numbers, how many dollars you’ve spent, highways are far more 
. . . It doesn’t matter to the people of Saskatchewan whether you 
spend 2 cents or $200 million on No. 11 Highway. What they see 
is a No. 11 Highway that is just about impassable in places, that 
trucks have to slow down for. 
 
The grading and surfacing — I want to compare the actual total 
number of kilometres that have been done where this year you 
are proposing for he road grading 234.53 kilometres. I point out 
to you that that is less than one-half the distance that was 
constructed in 1981-82, when 480 kilometres was constructed. 
At no time have you ever matched it; indeed, you’ve seldom 
come — in fact you’ve never come — within 100 kilometres of 
it. Most of the time you’re a third and more short of that 480 
kilometres. 
 
In terms of surfacing, in terms of laying down the blacktop, 
1981-82 there was 875 kilometres that was surfaced. At no time 
have you ever approached that. I heard you, at quarter to five, 
saying that this year you’re going to do more than 600 kilometres, 
and I did a double take because in your estimates — here it is; 
the surfacing 710.36 kilometres. It’s really interesting that you’re 
now hedging your bet and saying more than 600. Well, certainly 
710 kilometres is more than 600 kilometres, but I would have 
thought you’d have had a better grasp of the numbers than what 
you were portraying earlier. 
 
Minister, would you please identify the 1987-88 construction 
projects that are reannouncements this year, from last year’s list 
of capital construction projects? I’m interested in hearing your 
response because I’ve looked through your construction projects 
list and out of 30 projects regarding grading, I count eight of them 
that are nothing more than reannouncements — what you had  

announced you were going to do last year. So I’d appreciate your 
comments on how many of your projects are nothing more than 
smoke and mirrors and reannouncements of last year’s 
announcements. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The member 
opposite had some questions respecting whether or not the 
resurfacing was 600 kilometres or 710 kilometres, and for the 
member’s information I would like to offer an explanation. The 
figure of 600 kilometres of resurfacing that I used prior to 5 
o’clock is accurate, it’s very accurate, and that is resurfacing per 
se. 
 
If you take and add the paving on to that, the true paving on to 
that, you will add up to the 710 kilometres. So there’s a very 
logical explanation for it. I could go into great detail and . . . the 
difference between a resurfacing job and a full paving job on a 
brand-new grade that has been made. I’ll take No. 16 Highway 
near Saskatoon. A new grade was placed last year and we’re 
putting a full pavement structure on that. So once again for the 
member’s information there is indeed 600 kilometres of 
resurfacing. You add the paving on to that, and it will be a total 
of 710 kilometres of resurfacing and paving. 
 
Now the member opposite has also asked how many projects in 
the project array are reannouncements, if you like. I will tell you 
that it’s a standard type of an arrangement in Department of 
Highways and Transportation to have carry-over into the next 
year. And that is very, very simple, Mr. Chairman. 
 
People in the Department of Highways and Transportation or 
myself or this government cannot predict what the weather is 
going to be or what the schedule of the contractors is, and 
whether or not we can indeed say with definity that all of these 
projects are going to be finished. And in fact it is traditional, very 
traditional, that projects do get carried over into the following 
year. I could give you the exact figures of the carry-over, and 
they are not as large as they once were. The figures that are 
carried over . . . The figures that are carried over are far less than 
they were under the NDP administration. 
 
I will use as an example, in the NDP administration just prior to 
an election, Mr. Chairman . . . Just prior to an election, Mr. 
Chairman, in 1981 the NDP announced this great big project 
array, all of these hundreds of kilometres of road that’s going to 
be built and going to be resurfaced. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ll tell you what happened when this 
government came to power. We opened up the project array and 
we looked at it and we said, well, my goodness, you know, for 
that kind of money I don’t think they could have built all those 
projects. The facts of the matter are this, Mr. Chairman: in 1981 
under the budget presented by the NDP administration, 70 per 
cent, seven out of 10 that were announced by the NDP 
government, did not have moneys to be allocated to them. They 
could have built only 30 per cent of the projects that they 
announced in election year. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, I believe that the people of Saskatchewan 
have caught on to their ways, and that is  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1364 
 

why they were removed from power on April 26, 1982, and that 
is why, Mr. Chairman, on October 20, 1986, the people did not 
forget. And I predict, Mr. Speaker, in the next election, the people 
will not have forgotten that and other little tricks by the NDP 
party. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I will admit that indeed some of these 
projects on this array were carried over from last year. I will 
admit that there will be some that will be carried over into next 
year. It is a reasonable amount. I would tell you that carried over 
from 1987 into 1988, 270 kilometres were not completed. We 
have estimated and we’ve shown it right here on the project array 
— shown it in black and white for the people to see — that the 
estimated carry-over into next year will be somewhere in the 
vicinity of 150 kilometres. This is reasonable, Mr. Chairman; this 
is traditionally what has been done. This is far, far different, 
though — and I’ll stress once again — far different from what 
the NDP did in 1981. 
 
Once again, to remind you, Mr. Chairman, to remind the people 
of Saskatchewan, 70 per cent of the projects that were announced 
by the NDP administration in the year 1982 did not have moneys 
allocated to them. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Well it’s interesting that you would talk about 
carry-over and you talk about the people being wise — and you 
have your 1986 carry-over, 368 kilometres. That’s reasonable, 
you say. That’s real interesting. 
 
I’ll just remind you about the people and them getting wise to 
what’s going on. And I remind you that after the official count in 
Saskatoon Eastview, your party not only lost the election, but you 
lost your deposit, too — lost your deposit in a seat that you held 
prior to the by-election. 
 
It’s interesting that you should say that there was no money in 
1982 for a number of the Highways projects that had been 
announced — very, very interesting. How is it then that in 1975 
and 1978 — also election years, when the New Democrats were 
in power — how is that when the New Democrats were in power 
— how is it that the highways projects that they announced in 
those years, somehow we found the money for, and they got 
built? But ’82, suddenly the rules changed. You bet the rules 
changed; all of a sudden you people came in. 
 
(1915) 
 
I asked you in my previous question, Mr. Minister, about how 
many of your announcements are simply reannouncements, and 
I want to point out what you did with the No. 40 between Blaine 
Lake and Hafford, when in 1986-87 you announced resurfacing 
totalling 14.6 kilometres. The next year, 1987-88, you announced 
resurfacing on sections from Blaine Lake to Hafford — total of 
27.82 kilometres. Now this year in your estimates, you’re 
announcing a resurfacing from Blaine Lake to Hafford for a total 
of 6.13 kilometres. 
 
I just want to point out to you, Mr. Minister, that that’s enough 
pavement to pave from Hafford through Krydor to Blaine Lake 
and back to Hafford again — pardon me, back to Krydor. Don’t 
want you to think I can’t count. Or put another way, it’s enough 
pavement to redo No. 6 from  

Melfort to Naicam, or No. 9 from Whitewood to the No. 48 
junction, or No. 9 from North Portal to Alameda, plus No. 8 from 
Port of Carievale to Carievale, and that last particular highway is 
in atrocious condition. I’m surprised that you allowed it to get as 
bas as it is. 
 
So it’s interesting that we have one section of No. 40 Highway 
announced in three consecutive statements, construction 
projects, with . . . Yes, your name is attached to all three of them. 
And you’re just announcing and reannouncing and 
reannouncing. Is that project going to appear on next year’s 
construction projects as well? Are you going to reannounce that 
again, or are you going to do the job, get it done, and move on to 
some other highways that really need some work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — The member is not entirely accurate. For 
his information there was more than one section that was 
announced. It was not simply one contract that was announced 
again, again, and again. There was more than one section to it. I 
do understand that the first year, I believe it was, that the project 
was announced, the contractor was not able to make a start on 
that job for some very specific reasons. And I think the proof, 
Mr. Speaker, the proof, Mr. Chairman, is in the constituency 
itself and how do the people feel about the improvements that 
have been made to that highway. 
 
I know that the member from Redberry, as a matter of fact, who 
has had long discussions with me on that particular stretch of 
road, who has worked as a good MLA should in representing his 
people and bringing those concerns on Highway No. 40 to my 
attention and lobbying, lobbying on behalf of his constituents . . . 
And I’m led to understand, Mr. Chairman, that that improvement 
to Highway No. 40 is just an excellent job. The people in that 
area are very, very satisfied that a good job has been done on 
Highway No. 40. And I believe that the member from Redberry 
can go back home and visit with his constituents and hold his 
head very high that he has represented them well and he’s got a 
good highway for the people of his area. 
 
I deny very much your accusations of reannouncement. There 
was very good reasons for the way that was . . . that appeared in 
our project array. 
 
Mr. Trew: — It’s interesting. There’s always very good reasons, 
Mr. Minister. That stretch of highway totals a distance of 36 
kilometres; your announcements total 48 kilometres — very 
good reason. 
 
It is incredibly frustrating to see and listen to your non-answers 
when we’ve got thousands of kilometres of Saskatchewan 
highway that desperately need to be maintained, desperately need 
to be upgraded. We’ve got No. 11 that in places is just about 
impassable. I keep referring to No. 11 simply because it is a very, 
very well-used highway, and people that are paying any attention 
to the goings-on in here, most of them have ridden and driven 
and been shaken over No. 11 Highway. 
 
I want to turn to safety, which is a very serious matter. I know 
it’s a matter that you take seriously too, Mr. Minister. The 
statistics show that there has been an  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1365 
 

increase in fatalities in Saskatchewan, between 1985 and ’86 of 
14.5 per cent. Now in 1985 there was 214 traffic fatalities, and 
there was 245 in 1986. How many fatalities were there in 1987, 
and why was there . . . To what would you attribute the change? 
I’m assuming that 1987 will be different that the increase to 245 
that there was in 1986. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. From the 
figures that we have, and we do keep very, very accurate statistics 
on fatalities and accidents and safety in general, and indeed it is 
something that I, or I believe any minister of Highways in the 
past and, I think, forever into the future will take very seriously. 
The figures that I have vary from what you have in that the fatal 
accidents in 1986 were 207; in 1987 they were 193. That would 
show a 6.8 per cent decrease if in fact the member’s figures are 
accurate, and I do not know where he gets them, but if in fact his 
figure in ’86 is correct, the percentage decrease in fatalities 
would be significantly more than the 6.8 per cent decrease that 
we show here. 
 
Indeed I can tell the member that we have had a number of 
programs, programs that are still in existence that are safety 
related and have overall served to reduce the number of fatalities 
and the number of accidents, and the record over the period of 
this administration is a very good one. And I certainly will not be 
satisfied until we reduce and reduce and reduce further those 
accidents that we have. But when you add up the Lights On For 
Life campaign, the orange zone safety program for highway 
workers, when you add the seat-belt legislation that is currently 
in existence and one that we’re happy to see there, together with 
a large number of safety improvements on our highway system. 
I speak of reflective signing, I speak of many other improvements 
with respect to lighting of intersections and guards, extra guards 
along bridges, guard rails — and just thousands of dollars being 
spent on those safety related items that certainly are a real 
concern to me. 
 
So once again, to answer your question, the number of traffic 
accidents or traffic fatalities in 1987 has gone down some 6.8 per 
cent by our calculations. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Minister, I’m getting sick and tired to you telling 
me that my numbers are wrong — sick and tired of it. 
Saskatchewan Highways and Transportation annual report 
1985-86, you open up the bloody page, and what do you see but 
a picture of yours truly. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I would ask the member to apologize 
for the use of that type of language. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What? What kind of language? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The use of the one word you just used in your 
expression. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Which word is he supposed to pick out? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Well I don’t believe that’s the type of verbal 
language we use in this Assembly. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well make yourself more specific. 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Well if you like, I don’t believe the word 
“bloody” is the type of language that is conducive to this 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Do you seriously want an apology? Would you 
please point out in Beauchesne or Hansard . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I just ask the member to withdraw the word 
from the record. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I withdraw the word. 
 
I am sick and tired of my numbers being challenged. Inside of 
this Saskatchewan Highways and Transportation annual report, 
your picture. Not many pages later, we have the fatalities by road 
system 1985. You tell me it’s 207 but your annual report tells me 
214. 
 
A little earlier, you questioned me about a number, the amount 
of money that was spent on maintenance. I pull that out of Public 
Accounts, tabled by the member for Kindersley, the then minister 
of Finance. My numbers were accurate then. If this 214 fatalities 
in 1985 is wrong, then I think it is you who should be apologizing 
to this house and to the people of Saskatchewan for misleading 
us. 
 
I’m just very offended that you can’t either read your own reports 
or else they are so inaccurate. Which is it, Mr. Minister? Is your 
report inaccurate, or what’s the situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I would like to calm the member, Mr. 
Chairman, and I think if the member opposite would quote his 
statistics with the qualification of exactly what he is quoting, and 
I know now from what the member has said and from what my 
officials have advised me in leafing through the documents that 
the figure that you refer to is indeed accurate for not only the 
entire highway system but also includes accidents within cities 
and towns and villages and on rural municipal roads. And indeed 
I’ll concede that the figure of 245 is accurate on all roads and 
streets and back alleys and every road, if you like, in 
Saskatchewan. The figure that I assumed the member was 
referring to was the statistic on our true highway system, but if I 
was not clear about that, I hope that that would serve to clarify. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Minister, I wish you’d tell me where we are 
varying because your fatalities by road system, you list highways 
and then there’s a number; you list rural, and there’s again a 
number; you list urban, a number; and other, and there’s a 
number . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
I suggest to the member from Meadow Lake, he get a 
Saskatchewan Highways and Transportation annual report and 
read it. Otherwise either stand up and join in this conversation or 
don’t. 
 
I think the point has been made there, Mr. Minister. Personal 
injuries were also up in 1986 from 8,465 in 1985 to 8,829 in ’86. 
Since ’84, personal injuries have increased 11.9 per cent; in that 
year there was 7,904. 
 
A deteriorating road system in this province is now  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1366 
 

starting to take its toll. It represents a denial of your responsibility 
to provide for the travelling public of Saskatchewan a safe and 
reliable transportation system, a safe highway system. 
 
(1930) 
 
Minister, I want to turn to a different topic of Highways and that 
is specifically the sweetheart Weyerhaeuser deal whereby you 
have guaranteed that we’re going to build in perpetuity 32 
kilometres of highway, of roads, for Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, 
Washington, at taxpayers’ expense — roads that . . . Prior to that 
sweetheart give-away deal, Prince Albert Pulp and Paper 
Company built and maintained their own roads. When they were 
finished with them, they turned them over to the province, where 
they became part of the road system or were abandoned, 
whichever seemed to be the most appropriate. If it was a road that 
went literally to nowhere and wasn’t worth maintaining, it would 
be abandoned. 
 
Would you clarify the situation for this year regarding the roads 
and transportation agreement between Weyerhaeuser and the 
province of Saskatchewan? Because last year, Mr. Minister, if I 
recall it correctly — and I’m sure that you will correct me if 
there’s anything remotely in error — this government spent some 
$6 million in capital projects on northern forestry roads for 
Weyerhaeuser, a multinational corporation of Tacoma, 
Washington. That was part of the sweetheart deal. How much 
will be spent this year by your department under the capital 
projects expenditures for this corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well, Mr. Chairman, indeed part of the 
agreement with the Weyerhaeuser corporation was a roads 
agreement. Very standard when you have an industry such as 
Weyerhaeuser in any place in North America, I believe, that there 
is a roads agreement with corporations like that. Very similar in 
nature to a roads agreement that was negotiated and in place in 
1965, negotiated by a Liberal government, I understand, an 
agreement carried on by the NDP Party, and indeed, there is a 
road agreement under the Weyerhaeuser . . . with Weyerhaeuser. 
 
I should preface my remarks, Mr. Chairman, by saying how 
pleased I am, how pleased this administration is, and I believe, 
for the most part, how pleased the people of Saskatchewan are 
with the Weyerhaeuser arrangement that was negotiated by this 
administration. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, there were members of the NDP Party who 
stood in this legislature and said, there will not be a paper mill. 
Do you recall that, Mr. Chairman? I recall it vividly — that there 
will not be a paper mill. 
 
Well, today, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, as we speak there is a 
paper mill under construction. Today as we speak, Mr. Chairman, 
there are Saskatchewan men and women working on that job. 
Today as we speak, Mr. Chairman, there are men and women 
from Saskatchewan training, training to take those new positions 
at the brand new paper mill, the only paper mill of its kind in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chairman, there were people of the NDP Party,  

members of the NDP Party who said the Weyerhaeuser 
corporation will never pay us a dime. There were members of the 
NDP Party who said it was a sweetheart deal. Well I’ll tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, it was with a great deal of pride that 
I and my colleagues watched the Weyerhaeuser corporation 
make their first initial payment of some 30-point-some million 
dollars to this administration. 
 
And let us compare that, Mr. Chairman, with the members of the 
NDP Party running their PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company) 
mill and losing $91,000 a day — losing $91,000 a day and not 
creating one new job. 
 
Now the members of the opposition ask: well how many millions 
of dollars did you spend for the Weyerhaeuser corporation on 
roads? The facts are, Mr. Chairman, that within the roads and 
transportation agreement, indeed there were some specific 
commitments made by the administration. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, there were some of those items that were not 
just for the Weyerhaeuser corporation. I speak of a project that’s 
under construction this very day — the interchange at Prince 
Albert, the interchange of highways No. 55 and No. 3 — a 
needed interchange, Mr. Speaker, that will indeed benefit 
industry such as the Weyerhaeuser corporation, but an 
interchange that will benefit all of the people travelling in that 
area, will benefit many industries in the area of Prince Albert. 
That interchange is an expensive interchange to build at some 
$2.6 million. 
 
There is a commitment to construct logging roads, Mr. Chairman, 
that will be used by the Weyerhaeuser corporation, but will also 
be used by the small contractors — some of them, Mr. Chairman, 
that will be used by small contractors, some of them that will be 
used by tourists, and some by other industries. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the agreement is similar in nature, and, in fact, 
carries over commitments that were made with PAPCO under a 
Liberal administration; carries over commitments that were kept 
in part by the NDP administration. And if you add those figures 
of what we were spending in that area, it is some $8.45 million. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I stress again, I stress again that those 
expenditures are not just for the Weyerhaeuser corporation, they 
are indeed part of the agreement. Part of the agreement carries 
forward from a prior agreement under a Liberal administration 
and under an NDP administration. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Will the minister tell us which roads are involved 
in the value of work being performed and an approximate value 
of those roads? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I’ll give the . . . 
certainly be happy to, as a matter of fact, provide to the member 
opposite the details. 
 
Item no. 1 would be to construct 20 miles of main logging roads 
per year, an expenditure of $2.1 million; construct an interchange 
connecting highways 55 and No. 3, $2.6 millions; purchase of 
855 kilometres of main haul logging  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1367 
 

roads, $3.75 millions; for a total of 8.45 million. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Would you please give me the number purchase 
of 855 kilometres of road? I didn’t hear the number. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — 3.75 million. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Minister, I am absolutely astounded. We had . . . 
Prior to Weyerhaeuser coming into this province, we had a 
situation where Prince Albert pulp and paper company built its 
own road into its own timber, into the timber it was going to be 
using, at PAPCO expense, not at taxpayers’ expense. 
 
Those 855 kilometres of road have already been paid for by the 
taxpayers when we owned PAPCO, and now you’re turning 
around and giving Weyerhaeuser 3.75 more millions of dollars. 
It wasn’t good enough that you gave them $248 million, nothing 
down, nothing for 20 years, and nothing thereafter. It wasn’t 
good enough that there was $11 million in cash the day of the 
sale that your administration didn’t take into your own revenues. 
Instead Weyerhaeuser got that money the day they took over 
PAPCO. But now after we built 855 kilometres of road, we’re 
turning around and paying Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, 
Washington, an additional $3.75 million. 
 
Minister, $3.75 million could be better spent almost anywhere 
than in yet a further continuation of this insane, sweetheart deal 
to Weyerhaeuser. I’m most anxious to hear your response to that 
because it’s about the most ludicrous thing I have heard in all of 
the Highways estimates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I would provide the following 
information to the member, Mr. Chairman, and it is extremely 
interesting when you get into the details of this. The member 
opposite may know that under the 1965 master agreement 
negotiated by the Liberal administration that there were specific 
commitments made to construct 20 miles of main logging roads 
per year. In fact, Mr. Chairman, that commitment was not met by 
the NDP administration — was not met by the NDP 
administration in its fullest extent. There was a partial, partial . . . 
There was a commitment made and the NDP lived up to that 
commitment half-heartedly — half-heartedly. And to be fair, Mr. 
Chairman, to be fair, Mr. Chairman, this administration did not 
live up to that commitment to the fullest extent either. 
 
The bottom line, Mr. Chairman, is that there was a backlog in the 
commitments that had been made; the commitments that had 
been made were not fully lived up to; and a good portion, a good 
portion of this amount that was negotiated was to catch up, if you 
like, or to pay for a commitment that was behind schedule. 
 
I see in that, Mr. Chairman, nothing sinister, nothing evil, nothing 
terribly, terribly out of line. It was simply that there was a 
commitment made that was not lived up to to its fullest extent, 
and by negotiating this deal, those commitments have been lived 
up to. 
 
Mr. Trew: — So what you’re telling me, Mr. Minister, is that if 
I buy an automobile from one of your colleagues,  

and you had made a commitment to your colleague that you were 
going to paint that automobile; I buy that automobile for $5,000 
and I’m driving around thinking I got a whale of a good deal; and 
all of a sudden you’re going to catch up to me as I’m driving 
down Albert Street and say, whoa, I promised a paint job on that 
car — come on, let me do it. That’s what you’re telling us that is 
happening with Weyerhaeuser. 
 
Weyerhaeuser in 1965 when the Thatcher administration made a 
deal with Parsons and Whittemore of New York . . . I’m sure 
Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, Washington, was not anxiously 
following every such agreement. 
 
Weyerhaeuser got one of the sweetest deals any corporation 
could ever in their wildest flight of fantasy could ever expect — 
really sweet deal. And then that’s not sweet enough. You go in 
and throw in another $3.75 million paying them for roads that the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan had already paid for and built. 
 
How many other ingenious ways is your administration going to 
find to funnel yet further millions of dollars into the pockets of 
Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, Washington? 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well once again, Mr. Chairman, I feel 
that I have answered the member by stating that there was a 
commitment, and that commitment was not lived up to by the 
NDP administration, and that roughly half of these moneys were 
simply a catch-up, or basically something that lived up to the deal 
or the arrangement that had been made. 
 
Mr. Chairman, it’s, I think, fair business that when you make a 
deal, you live up to it. I will tell you, Mr. Chairman, that it was 
roughly a year and a half ago, or thereabouts, that the members 
of the NDP Party were privy to . . . had been given the 
Weyerhaeuser contractual arrangements in two big volumes. I 
remember them sitting here on everyone’s desk, two or three big 
volumes. It was a . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Three. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Three of them it was; you’re correct. It 
was a complex, negotiated, fair and reasonable deal between this 
administration and the Weyerhaeuser corporation. 
 
Now the question, the question that we asked, Mr. Chairman, is: 
why now, a year and a half or two years later, does the member 
opposite question the intricacies of the deal with Weyerhaeuser 
as they respect roads? 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would expect that the answer to that question is 
the following. I would expect that the member opposite, and 
indeed all members opposite, are hurting just a little bit today 
respecting their position, their former position, on the 
Weyerhaeuser arrangement, because, Mr. Chairman, the people 
of Saskatchewan know better today than they ever have that the 
deal struck with the Weyerhaeuser corporation was a good deal 
for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1368 
 

The people of Saskatchewan today know full well that a cheque 
was delivered, a cheque was delivered, presented to this 
administration just a few weeks ago for some $30.5 million. The 
people of Saskatchewan know and the people of Prince Albert 
know that there are Saskatchewan men and women today 
working at a new paper mill, building that paper mill with a great 
deal of pride and looking forward, looking forward to a new 
paper mill — the first of its kind in this province. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the members of the NDP Party take a look at this 
arrangement, and they’re trying to pick holes in it today because 
they know that the people of Saskatchewan view that deal as 
being a good one for all people in Saskatchewan. The members 
of the NDP Party have to pick apart these aspects of the 
arrangement that was made with the Weyerhaeuser corporation. 
They find it difficult to understand, and it’s no small wonder, Mr. 
Chairman, because we all know in this legislature that the NDP 
never once negotiated a complex deal like this one. 
 
We know, Mr. Chairman, that the members of the NDP Party had 
big experience in business — big experience in business. Let me 
tell you, Mr. Chairman, what that experience was limited to. That 
experience, Mr. Chairman, was limited to buying up — buying 
up industries throughout this province, nationalizing, socializing, 
building — not building, but buying industries across this 
province. I speak of the potash mines and the uranium mines and 
the Intercontinental Packers, and on and on and on. 
 
The only way that they could negotiate a deal, Mr. Chairman, 
was to walk in and say, we’ll buy it. Well, Mr. Chairman, this 
was a business arrangement, a complex arrangement negotiated 
over a long period of time. And in the final analysis it is a good 
deal for the people of Saskatchewan, and the dividends are being 
paid right today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — It was some kind of a business arrangement — we 
sure got the business. Minister, you said that the New Democrats 
are smarting. You’re absolutely right. After Eastview and 
Elphinstone we’re smarting and we want lots more of it. When 
are you going to resign your seat so we can get on with another 
election win? 
 
We have a spectacle of, we thought, $6 million spent on roads 
and highways, roads for Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, Washington. 
You spoke of me bringing this topic up here now, suddenly, a 
year later. I refer you to October ’87 Hansard when our critic for 
Highways, from The Battlefords, brought up and dealt with the 
Weyerhaeuser situation in these very, not this set of Highways 
estimates, but the previous one. So again you are misleading 
when you suggest that suddenly we’ve discovered Weyerhaeuser 
and that agreement. We have been talking about that agreement 
at every opportunity since you announced it — every 
opportunity. 
 
So it’s not that we’re suddenly discovering Weyerhaeuser. Doing 
some figuring on your $8.45 millions that you are spending this 
year on construction of 20 miles of road and a $2.6 million 
interchange on  

highway 55 and 3, as well as the purchase of 855 kilometres of 
road that we previously had paid for — and now we’re paying 
Weyerhaeuser for it again — that $8.45 million, Minister, 
amounts to a bigger waste than what your government is 
spending on empty office space. 
 
You are spending $34,000 a day on empty office space. You are 
spending more than $35,000 a day building overpasses that are 
only needed because of the Weyerhaeuser plant. We’re talking of 
spending in excess of $35,000, partly for that overpass, partly for 
the purchase of 855 kilometres of road that we’d previously paid 
for, and this is just your method of transferring an additional 
magic number of 3.75 millions of dollars into the Weyerhaeuser 
pockets. 
 
Minister, I asked you earlier and did not get a response. The 
question was: would you tell us which roads specifically are 
involved and the value of the work being performed? I have a 
total value of 2.1 plus the interchange — I’ll take the interchange 
as having been dealt with — but specifically which roads, or is it 
all one road that’s going to come to 2.1 millions of dollars? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to just clarify 
again: the agreement with the Weyerhaeuser corporation and, 
more specifically, the payment that we have made in part was 
simply living up to an arrangement prior to 1982 that the NDP 
chose, for whatever reason, not to live up to. On the purchase of 
these roads, within PAPCO, there was an account receivable or 
an account payable by the government to the mill respecting 
roads. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the member opposite uses the verbiage that the 
taxpayers have paid twice for these roads. That is not true, Mr. 
Chairman. That this portion of the agreement simply covers off, 
covers off something that an outstanding liability — if you will 
call it that — an outstanding liability that the mill had . . . or not 
a liability, an outstanding liability that the government had or a 
receivable by the mill and that was simply a payment. A good 
portion of the moneys was a payment on that behalf. 
 
The member opposite has asked: what roads, specifically, under 
this agreement this year will be constructed? I will give that to 
you: grading of 15 and a half kilometres of the Cowan Lake road, 
for roughly $1 million; and grading of 16 and a half kilometres 
of Bittern Lake road, for $980,000; as well, clearing was done on 
the Cowan Lake road and the Revo road, for $112,000, resulting 
in a total commitment of 2,092,000. 
 
I wish to stress the point, Mr. Chairman, that these roads of which 
is speak are multi-purpose roads. Indeed they are being used 
extensively on the pulp haul, but I believe firmly that if you were 
to ask the people in that area, you would find out that they are 
multi-purpose roads used by other contractors, used by tourists, 
for instance. There is an abundance of fishing in that general area. 
Many of these roads are indeed multi-purpose for the benefit of 
all people in Saskatchewan. 
 
I might also add, Mr. Chairman, that with this arrangement, toll 
roads, toll roads that were in existence under the NDP 
administration, do not exist as they did before. There are certainly 
some roads, some limited  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1369 
 

roads that are not for public access, but prior to this some of these 
roads were closed to industry only, and, in fact, I would deem 
them toll roads. 
 
Members of the opposition have asked in various times over the 
last couple of years about toll roads. Here was an example, that 
under their own hand there indeed was toll roads. And with this 
arrangement, some of these roads now have become 
multi-purpose, and those are the expenditures that the members 
asked. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Minister, you talk about an accounting, an account 
payable, to PAPCO, an accounting procedure where the people 
of Saskatchewan — through the government — owed to PAPCO, 
which was a Crown corporation owned by the people of 
Saskatchewan. So the people of Saskatchewan owed the people 
of Saskatchewan $3.75 million. 
 
What you have done is taken a transfer of $3.75 million and 
magically transformed it to the new owners, Weyerhaeuser of 
Tacoma, Washington. You have effectively picked the pockets 
of the people of Saskatchewan, bilked them of another $3.75 
million, and it’s disgraceful. 
 
It’s unbelievable that you can shell out that kind of money — 
anything for the multinationals, any amount, any number at all; 
so precious little for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
You’re spending $35,000 per day, per day, on roads and bridges 
for Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, Washington — money that 
previously was spent by PAPCO. PAPCO built roads into its own 
. . . where it needed for the forests, so it could harvest the timber 
and bring it into the mill. And now you have transferred that onto 
the backs of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
(2000) 
 
We are seeing this year, $8.45 million — 6 million last year. Who 
knows what it’s going to grow to next year? What other excuse 
you will come up with to give them 9 or 10 or $11 million? 
 
Two questions arise from this. You made a payment of $3.75 
million. Did you issue a cheque to Weyerhaeuser, or did you 
subtract it from the money that Weyerhaeuser owes the province? 
That’s one question. The other question is regarding the road 
specifically. Was Weyerhaeuser (Canada Ltd.) contracted to do 
the work, and who let the contracts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the 
member’s question, firstly, I don’t believe that the member will 
be satisfied until he has clearly, clearly stated, again and again, 
that it was just a sweetheart deal. But, Mr. Chairman, I believe 
that I’ve made a very good case to you, prior to this, that it was a 
good deal, and it was a good deal for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Once again I want to reiterate that a cheque delivered to this 
administration just the other day of 30.5 millions of dollars — I 
want to reiterate, Mr. Chairman, that the members of the NDP 
Party said there would never be a  

payment, that it was a straight giveaway. Well 30.5 millions of 
dollars paid to this administration the other day, that can go into 
roads and into health care and into education and into business 
and elsewhere, is not a sweetheart deal for Weyerhaeuser, it’s a 
good deal for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I will reiterate again that the members of the NDP 
Party do not understand that deals like this are complex, that have 
to be negotiated and there are difficult negotiations that undergo 
a complex arrangement like this. 
 
I’ll say again, Mr. Chairman, that it was the members of the NDP 
Party who could not, could not negotiate a complex arrangement 
like this. The only arrangements that they could negotiate, Mr. 
Chairman, was going out and snapping up and buying this or 
buying that, and whether it was Intercon or potash mines or 
uranium mines or buying of other industries in this province was 
the only types of deals they made. 
 
Mr. Chairman, that brings me to the specifics — the specifics of 
the arrangement that the NDP Party had when they bought the 
mill from Parsons and Whittemore out of New York city — New 
York city, Mr. Speaker. Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, that it is 
common knowledge, that it is common knowledge throughout 
this province, from every reasonable, thinking, business-minded 
person, that the NDP got took to the cleaners on the purchase of 
that mill, and it is beyond debate, Mr. Speaker, beyond debate. 
 
We get into the actual workings of the PAPCO corporation, and 
the loss of $91,000 a day was incurred by that corporation. And, 
Mr. Chairman, that is $91,000 a day less money that could be 
spent on roads — $91,000 a day less money that could be spent 
on health or education or social services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in summation, the arrangement with the 
Weyerhaeuser corporation for all the people of Saskatchewan 
was indeed a good one and still is today. 
 
I’d like to clarify, Mr. Chairman, some of the moneys that will 
be allocated over the next year in the purchase of the roads. And 
indeed this year it was $3.75 millions — once again a catch-up 
for a commitment that the NDP did not live up to. Next year that 
commitment is $1.875 millions and it ends next year for the 
purchase of roads. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the member opposite has asked, was that payment 
deducted from the purchase price? No. In fact it was a direct 
payment for that amount and it will be a direct payment next year. 
The member opposite has asked, well who is responsible for the 
work? The arrangement was made that the Weyerhaeuser 
corporation is responsible for the work. 
 
I am advised that some of the work has been tendered out, some 
of it has been invited bids, and some of it has been subbed out by 
the Weyerhaeuser corporation to an affiliated enterprise called 
Woodlands. 
 
Mr. Trew: — So you’re spending . . . Now you’re spending 
public money building roads where tenders  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1370 
 

may be invited, sometimes let. It’s unbelievable. 
 
You’ve just told me you have given, issued a direct cheque to 
Weyerhaeuser in the amount of 3.75 millions of dollars, money 
that PAPCO, which was a Crown corporation . . . PAPCO spent 
the money to build the roads; PAPCO was a Crown corporation 
owned by every one of us who claimed to be a Saskatchewan 
citizen. Every one of us owned that — every one of us. 
 
Minister, you’re asking if we ever got a dividend cheque. With 
what you’re doing here, how in the blazes is that a dividend 
cheque when you’re just falling over yourself to give money 
away, our money, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, the people of 
Saskatchewan’s money? And you’re just falling all over yourself 
to give it away. Next year, another $1.875 million. Your total 
commitment, buying roads that we already paid for and built, or 
the people of Saskatchewan already did, 5.625 millions of 
dollars. 
 
I’m totally at a loss, Minister. The next time you want to start a 
project here, be it a bacon plant or perhaps you want to sell off a 
coal mine — except you can’t any more because you don’t own 
any more of them; or if you want to sell another deal like Sask 
Minerals where you sold the company for less than its best two 
years of profits, a company that has returned over $50 million to 
Saskatchewan since 1946 when it was started . . . You sold it for 
15 or $16 million after it’s returned $50 million, has been 
profitable each and every year with the exception of one year. 
Sixteen years ago it had a very small loss — much, much smaller 
than half a million dollars. 
 
Next time you want to sell off any of these sweetheart deals, will 
you please come to me first? I can be a very, very wealthy person 
very, very quickly. 
 
Minister, does your agreement with Weyerhaeuser, does it 
preclude the department from determining and ensuring setting 
the standards and the level of maintenance of road systems? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — A very simple answer to the member 
opposite that, yes indeed, we do set the standards. And I would 
trust that’s the information that you are looking for. We do set 
the standards. 
 
In response to the member’s other dissertation on asking that next 
time we go to sell something that we seek the advice of that 
member or any other member of the opposition on how to go 
about selling, or at what price it should be sold for, I would say, 
Mr. Chairman, that that is not likely. 
 
And I want to point out, Mr. Chairman, very clearly the 
difference. And I hope that we can stand here like gentlemen 
tonight and agree, Mr. Chairman, that the member opposite and 
his philosophy and his cohorts, that those people, Mr. Chairman, 
are socialists — that those people, Mr. Chairman, believe that the 
government should own businesses and industry throughout 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The people on the opposite side of the House, Mr.  

Chairman, believe that government can do a better job of running 
businesses like PAPCO or Weyerhaeuser; or that the government 
can run businesses better in the meat-packing industry; or that 
government can run businesses better, such as in the auto-body 
shops that they had big plans to nationalize; or that governments 
can run businesses better, such as the life insurance business that 
they had plans to get into. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that by its nature is the socialist mentality. 
That, Mr. Chairman, is what the members opposite believe. 
 
I want to state clearly, Mr. Chairman, that I — and I believe all 
the members on this side of the House — do not believe those 
types of things. I believe, Mr. Chairman, that the vast number of 
people in the province of Saskatchewan believe in their heart of 
hearts that governments should stay, for the most part, out of 
business and let that system work. Let that system that has been 
responsible for the building of North America, let that system 
that has been responsible primarily for the high standard of living 
that we all enjoy — let that system work. 
 
And Mr. Chairman, I once again emphasize that there is a clear 
difference, a clear difference between that member of the NDP 
Party, his philosophy, and the members on this side of the House. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Trew: — You’re absolutely right. There is a world of 
difference between your party and mine. Two that I’d like to 
point out to you — two differences between Tories and socialists: 
one, we had roads and balanced budgets; second, socialist is not 
a four-letter word. 
 
Would you agree, Minister, that $8.45 millions representing 
roughly eight and one-quarter per cent of your capital budget — 
your total Department of Highways capital budget — over 8 per 
cent of it is money that is going to the benefit essentially of one 
corporation from Tacoma, Washington? Will you agree that 
removing that money from your department’s budget for one 
company is an awful lot of money to be spending for so few 
people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, I once again want to 
emphasize that although a case could be made that the majority 
of those moneys expended were for the benefit of the 
Weyerhaeuser corporation, although that argument could be 
advanced, Mr. Chairman, I feel strongly, I feel strongly that if 
you look at this objectively, you will find that items such as the 
interchange of highways No. 55 and 3 in Prince Albert is being 
constructed this year at a cost of $2.6 million, not solely for the 
benefit of the Weyerhaeuser corporation. I believe that if you 
were to ask the residents of Prince Albert, Saskatchewan and 
surrounding areas, that you would say indeed that interchange is 
much needed. It has been a bottle-neck for years, considered a 
safety danger, as a matter of fact, for some time. And indeed it 
would not be fair to state that the new interchange is only for the 
Weyerhaeuser corporation. 
 
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1371 
 

I would also say, Mr. Chairman, that the construction and the use 
of some of those haul roads are not single purpose, but they are 
used for other small contractors. They are used by tourists who 
come to this province and who do fishing, and hunting, and 
spending of their dollars in this province to the benefit of us all. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Chairman, these moneys that are being 
expended, that indeed will benefit the Weyerhaeuser corporation, 
in turn benefit the province of Saskatchewan — in turn benefit 
all people in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Chairman, when you get a 
cheque like we did the other day for $30.5 million, that is in part 
tied to the profits of that corporation, I think that it would be fair 
to say that a cheque like that is beneficial to all the people in 
Saskatchewan and will make a difference in this administration 
by having more money to spend on all the essential services that 
our government is involved in. 
 
I would also say, Mr. Chairman, that specifically talking about 
the small timber companies, the small timber companies that use 
these roads in most instances now, they do not have to pay that 
toll fee that was in existence before. And I believe that that is a 
benefit to those small timber companies, to those small 
contractors. And I believe that it is recognized by many of them 
as being positive. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Minister, moving to communications, subvote 7. 
 
In ’83-84, the budget figure for communications was $491,000. 
In 1984-85, the actual number that was spent — this is a year 
later — the actual number spent was $1,080,403. 
 
This year you’re forecasting $724,000. Would you indicate, 
Minister, which advertising firms your department has used 
during the last year and the amounts that were paid to each firm. 
I’m also interested in a breakdown of how that money was spent. 
How much was spent on media campaigns and what was their 
purpose, publications, and how much was spent on ceremonies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, I’ll give you the name of the 
advertising company that we have used this past year, and that is 
Dome Advertising — I believe a company that is used by many, 
many departments in this government. It certainly is not an 
exclusive company that is used. There are many other ad 
agencies that are used, but for our department, we use Dome. 
 
The total amount that we have used Dome for, ’87-88, is 
$197,426 — $197,426. Now the members opposite might like to 
know what that has been used for specifically. The members 
opposite are indicating to me, Mr. Chairman, that that is an 
inordinate amount. They’re saying that this is a high amount. 
Well $197,000 is quite a bit of money, but I want to clarify that 
by saying that $134,000 of that amount is used for the 
60-kilometre-an-hour highway workers’ orange zone. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I want to compare. I want to compare those 
kinds of moneys being spent on that specific program with items 
that the members of the NDP  

government, back in ’82 and prior to that, spent their money on. 
 
Here’s a program, Mr. Chairman, and I’ll bet you’ve seen it on 
television. Here’s a program that’s called the orange zone and 
they’ve got some excellent advertisements. And the orange zone 
is basically the construction zone in which highway workers are 
working. And the ad is an ad to advise the motoring public to 
slow down, be careful, and be observant when you’re in that 
orange zone — in that maintenance zone where highway workers 
are working. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, it is an ad campaign that has worked very, 
very well. I’m very proud of the driving public in Saskatchewan 
who have observed the orange zone advertising, and today for 
the most part are slowing down when they go through these 
construction zones. And the record of safety, or the record of 
accidents, is a very good one in those orange zones. And I say, 
Mr. Chairman, that the moneys that we have expended for that 
advertising campaign have been well spent when you consider 
that it is money being spent to protect the lives of our highway 
workers that are out on the job, outside on the front lines — on 
the front lines helping to maintain the large system that we have. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, you compare that with the advertisements 
that you used to see under the NDP administration. Well what 
were those advertisements, Mr. Speaker, where a lot of their 
money spent on self-serving — self-serving advertisements, 
touting the glory and the grandeur of the family of Crown 
corporations that we all owned anyway? You remember, Mr. 
Chairman, the grandiose advertising campaign put on by the 
NDP administration that was self-serving, political, and 
grandiose that for the most part, or for a good part, was a waste 
of tax dollars. 
 
Mr. Chairman, this amount of money that we have spent on 
communications and advertising for programs like the orange 
zone, the highway hot line, the highway map, the accident report, 
and various other ones, have been good programs and moneys 
well spent on behalf of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Well thank you for that somewhat lengthy answer, 
Minister. I can assure you that the orange zone ads are working 
very well. The orange zone in Elphinstone is doing very nicely. 
The orange zone in Saskatoon Eastview is doing very nicely also. 
 
People are not slowing down to go through your so-called orange 
zones. They’re, in fact, speeding up because often that’s the only 
stretch of highway that’s smooth enough you can get your vehicle 
up to 60 kilometres an hour at. 
 
Minister, I’m interested in knowing what portion of the 
communication budget was spent for you attending conferences 
and what were the locations of those conferences and what was 
the purpose of those conferences. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Okay. Mr. Chairman, I’ll be very brief 
here. And respecting conferences — and I would assume you 
would be referring to out-of-province  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1372 
 

conferences — well there was a conference on April 26 and April 
27 of last year in Edmonton. It’s the roads and transportation 
association meeting. I, in that year, was chairman of the board — 
a very good organization of which I was very proud and 
honoured to serve on. The total expense associated with my visit 
was $554.60. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Minister, in 1983-84 and then again in ’84-85, 
your department’s fleet was stable at 2,854 units. I’m talking 
equipment. In ’85-86, that dropped to 2,703 units for a decrease 
of 5.3 per cent. In ’86-87, your fleet expanded to 2,906 units. Can 
the minister provide some details on the department’s current 
fleet of equipment used to maintain the province’s highway 
system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I’m sorry, but my officials advise me that 
we do not have that figure with us this evening. I could not tell 
you exactly the number of pieces of equipment that we have in 
our organization at this time, but I would be pleased to have my 
officials look that up for you and provide that to you. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you. My research staff of one will indeed 
be heartened to know that our research was good enough to 
stump you on one question, albeit temporarily. 
 
In mid-April, Minister, there was yet another, yet another 
disposal of Highways equipment. There’s quite a list of 
equipment. And what I am interested in getting from you is 
information on the current capital costs of the equipment offered 
at these sales and the amount, the cash amount, that was realized 
in that sell-off, including not only the dollar figure, but how many 
pieces of equipment were sold off or auctioned off in this latest 
auction of the people of Saskatchewan’s equipment. 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — The information that I have in those items 
that were surplus to Highways and sold at . . . The book value on 
the equipment is 391,628. The sale price that was realized, 
409,959. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Minister, I was not interested in the book value, 
but rather the current value. I am looking for the current 
replacement value of that equipment, if you were to have to 
purchase it new today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I’ll just maybe clarify for the member 
opposite my previous figures that I gave to you. I’m advised that 
there were two separate packages that were disposed of. The 
equipment that was sold at Prince Albert realized 409,959; the 
equipment that was sold at Saskatoon totalled $402,519. 
 
Now the member opposite has asked: well what is the 
replacement value of that equipment? We do not have that, Mr. 
Chairman, nor would I commit to give that to the hon. member 
for the reason that we do not have that figure; and secondly, I do 
not feel that would be useful piece of my officials’ time to go out 
and price today what the replacement cost would be of that 
equipment. 
 
I can tell you, Mr. Chairman, that the moneys realized on the sale 
of that equipment were very similar and, in fact, higher, I believe, 
than the depreciated value of the  

equipment; and overall the prices realized, I feel, were very 
representative of the value of that equipment. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Well let me point out, Minister, that, for example, 
a chip spreader, there was one that was purchased in, I believe it 
said 1972, at a cost of less than $40,000. A unit like this today 
would run in the neighbourhood of 75 to 80,000 American 
dollars. With exchange, we’re talking 100,000 Canadian dollars 
being a realistic price for said unit. 
 
The only reason that there was for that chip spreader to be 
auctioned off was because of your decision that it is now surplus 
and you’re going to let somebody else do that particular work. 
 
You are giving away equipment that has been purchased by the 
people of Saskatchewan to do a job on highways. Now my 
quarrel is not with the highway contractors. Okay? My quarrel is 
with you giving away that particular equipment. I’m not standing 
here and advocating that we want to build every single kilometre 
of road with the Highways crews. I am advocating that the very 
minute portion of roads that get any work done by the department 
crews, that should continue and indeed it should, if anything, be 
enhanced somewhat. But you can’t do it when you start giving 
away equipment that was purchased for something under 40,000. 
It’s worth $100,000 today to replace, and who knows what you 
got for that particular piece of equipment. You’re really painting 
yourself into a corner where you are totally, totally going to be at 
other people’s mercy. So I’m interested in your comments. 
 
I wish before you would sell off Highways equipment that you 
would take a look at the value of the equipment, because I think 
you would come to the conclusion that much of the equipment 
that you’re auctioning off at fire sale prices and cheaper should 
be maintained; much of that equipment could be much better 
utilized by your own people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I will be brief, but 
I want to clarify something for the people of Saskatchewan. The 
member opposite has stated that we are giving away this 
equipment. The member opposite has asked for the replacement 
cost of the equipment. I know why, Mr. Chairman, because the 
member opposite will find out what the replacement cost is for 
that equipment and he will say, well you gave away $20 million 
of equipment for $1 million, like they did another time. 
 
The facts are these, Mr. Chairman: this equipment was offered at 
public tender; this equipment has realized in the neighbourhood 
of 8 or $900,000. Mr. Chairman, if you were to take this 
equipment list to somebody who is knowledgeable about the 
valuation on used equipment — take it to an equipment dealer, 
an equipment jockey, take it to an end user and you would find, 
Mr. Chairman, that the prices realized on a public tender system, 
available public tender to any person in Saskatchewan, that the 
prices received for this equipment were indeed very 
representative of true market value. 
 
The members opposite will say it was worth $20 million  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1373 
 

or whatever figure they may dream up. The fact of the matter is, 
Mr. Chairman, the public decided what this equipment was worth 
at a public tender and these moneys will go into a pot so this 
department will be able to buy new equipment, replace 
equipment that needs replacing, and we’ll be able to purchase 
new equipment. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Minister, the people of Saskatchewan don’t want 
the money to go into a pot. They want the money to go into the 
pot-holes. They want you to fix them so that those pot-holes are 
no longer there. 
 
Would you give us details on the rental rates for equipment that 
is used on an hourly basis for highways construction projects? 
And would you provide the rates for that equipment for the years 
’83-84, ’84-85, ’85-86, ’86-87, and then the year under review, 
’87-88. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, we’d be happy to supply that. I’d 
say we don’t have that with us this evening but we’ll certainly 
send that to you. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Minister. I want to turn to the gas tax 
for a while. In 1987, in his now infamous budget address, the 
Minister of Finance indicated that, after carefully considering the 
advice of the opposition and others, the government was in 
agreement that non-residents and interprovincial truckers should 
pay their fair share of highway construction and maintenance 
costs. Consequently, the government moved to apply a 
7-cent-a-litre fuel tax to apply to gasoline, diesel, and aviation 
fuels, as well as propane. 
 
Mr. Minister, your government is now projecting to collect $148 
million this year alone in provincial fuel taxes. That is 
substantially above anything ever collected by New Democrats 
by way of fuel tax. I remind you that a large part of why your 
government got elected in 1982 was the elimination of a fuel tax 
which in that year collected for the government $98.5 million. 
Well you’ve increased that more than 50 per cent to $148 million. 
 
People might have some sympathy for a gas tax if they saw that 
additional 148 million, or whatever the amount you ultimately 
chose to collect, going to highway and road maintenance and 
repairs. They don’t see that. It’s just not happening, Minister. 
 
Last year when your gas tax was first introduced, the Department 
of Highways was subjected to a decrease in what was spent. You 
saw that as a reduction in expenditures, somewhere in the order 
of $18 million. This year, Minister, your department has again 
seen a reduction in the total expenditure devoted to the 
maintenance and development of our roads and highways. 
 
Are we supposed to be appreciative of a government that plays a 
shell game with the people of Saskatchewan? Are we to be 
thankful that $10 million for a highway rehabilitation program 
will almost offset the amount that this year your department is 
going to transfer to the property management corporation? 
 
I ask you: is it appropriate, Mr. Minister, to congratulate yourself 
when all you’ve done is to divert capital and  

maintenance funds so desperately required just — well, needed 
just about anywhere in the province — and you’re diverting these 
funds to Weyerhaeuser, and you’re simply not spending the $148 
million in fuel tax on roads and highways? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well the member talks about the fuel tax 
and the portion of which is rebatable to the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. Frankly, the fuel tax is not a tax that goes directly 
into the Highways and Transportation budget, nor was it ever, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
The fuel tax traditionally has — I think since day one, whenever 
that was — gone into the general revenues of the government. 
I’m sure that the member and I could get into a long discussion 
on where the fuel tax should go and how it should be levied. 
 
I guess, Mr. Chairman, what I would like to see from the 
members of the NDP Party is a firm position and a firm stance 
by them on whether or not they, in their wisdom, would like to 
see the fuel tax such that it is not rebatable to the average citizen 
. . . and let your position be clearly known. 
 
The facts are that in Saskatchewan there is a fuel tax. The fact is 
that a good portion of . . . or for the average citizen, I should say, 
that they may apply for a rebate. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Minister, I can hardly congratulate you and your 
government for putting your position straight to the people of 
Saskatchewan. I quote: never as long as there’s a Conservative 
government shall there be a gas tax in Saskatchewan. You recall 
any of your colleagues saying that? You may recall the member 
for Estevan, commonly called the Premier, saying those very 
words. And now you’ve got $148 million gas tax. 
 
I don’t know how that squares with truth, with honesty, with 
integrity — it just is out in Never Never Land. You talk in terms 
that the opposition should be making our position clear; it’s 
hardly relevant at this stage. We’re doing Department of 
Highways estimates and we’re asking what you are doing on 
behalf of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
You’re collecting a $148 million gas tax. You can show virtually 
nothing in the Department of Highways this year that wasn’t 
there last year, or the year before, or the year before, or the year 
before that. So to what purpose is a road tax if it isn’t to go 
directly into the roads? 
 
(2045) 
 
Fix those roads up. Make them so that once again they’re 
passable. Make them so that once again we can be proud of our 
highway and transportation system here in Saskatchewan. Why 
don’t you capture at least a significant portion of that $148 
million for highways? What are you doing as minister 
responsible for highways and Transportation to see that some of 
that money, some of that additional, windfall money for the 
government goes into what the people think it’s going into? 
Every time we fill up with gasoline and we see 7 cents a litre, we 
think well at least some of it might find its way into the highway 
system, but it’s clearly not happening. What are  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1374 
 

you doing to change it so that that money does get into the system 
where it’s needed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well, Mr. Chairman, firstly, the statistic 
that you are quoting, $148 million, I’m not sure where you get 
that figure. If it is indeed accurate — I’m not sure that it is — but 
if it is indeed accurate, Mr. Chairman, that may well be an 
estimate of how many dollars in total is collected by the 
government in fuel tax. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, it must be recognized, and the fundamental 
commitment that has been made — that has been made — is that 
a portion of that, or that tax that is paid by citizens in 
Saskatchewan may, on application, be refunded to them. 
 
So the estimates that we are provided with, Mr. Chairman, are 
that, if it is $148 million, that there will be a refund to the driving 
public in Saskatchewan, and the next fuel tax revenue that is 
supplied to the government is something like $87 million. So the 
net revenue that the government receives is $87 million. 
 
The members opposite use the argument, well the fuel tax that is 
received by the government should be placed into Highways and 
Transportation, into the roads in the province. And that’s a fair 
enough, logical type of argument; that’s a fair enough, logical 
argument. The fuel tax that you receive, $87 million, the NDP 
says, put that into the highway and road system in the province 
of Saskatchewan. Well in fact, Mr. Speaker, if you took the $87 
million received by the government and compared that with the 
total budget for roads and highways and streets that are funded 
by this administration, you would find that that expenditure adds 
up to $253 million. Rural Development, Highways and 
Transportation, total budgets — $253.5 million. 
 
So in fact, Mr. Chairman, in fact the revenues received from the 
gas tax are $87 million, the money spent on the road system in 
Saskatchewan is $253 million, and I would disagree with the 
member opposite when he says, you can build road systems with 
just that gas tax revenue. It’s not true, Mr. Chairman, and I 
believe I have outlined the case to you, that we are spending far 
in excess of what we take in from the road tax. 
 
Mr. Trew: — So now my $148 million is incorrect. Pointed out 
what the member for Kindersley, numbers he put forward in 
Public Accounts in 1982, and my numbers were correct. I pointed 
out some of your numbers from your Department of Highways 
own annual report — you didn’t tell me that you made an error 
in your own departmental report. Well this time, if there’s an 
error in the $148 million, you better see your colleague, the 
current Minister of Finance. There may well be an error, but it’s 
in printing on page 10: fuel tax, $148 million — your estimates, 
1988-89 estimates — again numbers that are accurate. 
 
I am not for two seconds telling you that you can maintain a 
highway system on $148 million. We are spending in 
Saskatchewan $211 million this year — 148 is clearly 
inadequate. But last year you spent nearly $203 million on 
highways; the year before that you spent a little more than that. 
 

The point I am making is that since you reintroduced the gas tax, 
there has been no significant increase in spending on roads and 
highways. People who pay a gas tax . . . at least I always thought 
that a gas tax was something of a user-pay system. If you’ve 
introduced wear and tear on the highways and the roads, you pay 
for a little bit of it each time you fuel up. Clearly this is not 
happening under this scenario. The reintroduction of the gas tax 
was nothing more than a $148 million tax grab. 
 
You talk also in terms of the gas tax after the rebate netting 
80-some millions of dollars. Sorry to correct you, but the rebate 
that is projected this year is going to be 51.4 millions of dollars. 
Again, obviously it’s subject to perhaps a great deal of error 
recognizing where the numbers came from, the current Minister 
of Finance. He has been known to be as far as 300 per cent out. 
But until you table Public Accounts, these are the sorts of 
numbers we have to work with. Anyway, that nets not 80-some 
but $96.6 million of which you should be capturing some money. 
 
I want to deal briefly with the criteria used to priorize, to assess 
and then priorize the work that is to be done throughout our 
highway system. Do you have a map of Saskatchewan in your 
office hung up and you take darts and throw it at the highways, 
or does somebody do any assessment and an evaluation and 
suggest to you the order of priorities? Can you enlighten us a little 
bit as to how those choices are made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Indeed there is a system in place, Mr. 
Chairman, of priorizing the roads in Saskatchewan that require 
upgrading or resurfacing or reconstruction, whatever the case 
may be. And there are many factors that are taken into 
consideration. 
 
Something that we would look at, Mr. Chairman, would be, 
naturally, the volume of traffic on the road in question. We would 
look at the type of traffic on there — whether it is heavy traffic 
leading to some of the industries that are currently in use or are 
planned, that help diversify the economy. 
 
We would look at the soil types. In different areas of the province 
there are different soil types, and highways do last longer or 
shorter depending on soil types. We’d look at the climatic 
conditions. In some areas there are heavy rainfalls; in some areas 
there are not. And that is a consideration when it comes to how 
you construct a highway. We look at the tourism routes within 
Saskatchewan, which highways are being used more and more, 
how can we attract tourists to Saskatchewan. 
 
We look at the condition of the highway and have a very 
objective way of determining the condition or the riding quality. 
There are pieces of equipment that actually ride down the 
highway and measure very objectively, quantitatively, the riding 
quality on different highways in Saskatchewan. We look at the 
maintenance expenditures that we have expended on the 
particular highways in Saskatchewan. These are some of the 
factors that are taken into consideration. 
 
The member opposite has used the example of myself  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1375 
 

walking into my office and throwing darts at different areas of 
the province. I would suggest to the member opposite that that is 
indeed a slur, very much a slur on myself, and on the 
departmental officials who are very, very professional in their 
analysis, in their analysis of the needs and requirements of 
different highways in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Minister, when you take a little tour around the 
province of Saskatchewan, you can hardly blame anyone for 
questioning how the assessment is done. It defies all logic when 
you have shear failures on No. 11 Highway, when you have 
many, many pot-holes on many, many sections of highway here 
in this province at any given time. It just defies logic how some 
of your decisions are made. I don’t think you can fault anyone 
for suggesting that perhaps a dartboard was in use. 
 
The residents of Pilot Butte have been told that the recently paved 
highway east of Pilot Butte is a temporary highway and that that 
highway will revert to a rural road as soon as the new No. 46 is 
built, as proposed, a half a mile north of the existing temporary 
highway. Is that information correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I would tell the member that the item is 
under discussion at this time and that no final decisions have been 
made with respect to that road system in the vicinity of Pilot 
Butte. 
 
Mr. Trew: — That’s interesting because I’ve been talking to a 
number of the people that reside along that, what they think is a 
temporary highway. Those folks are going to be most interested 
in finding out what the real plans are, because they have 
purchased land, built there, wanting to get out of the city, out of 
heavy traffic. 
 
We have a heavy oil upgrader coming on site, meaning increased 
traffic along that very highway. There is a high number of 
accidents there. It is indeed becoming a very dangerous stretch 
of highway. The people along there really want to know what is 
the real plan, because they have repeatedly been told this is a 
temporary highway — temporary. 
 
Yet that’s not what I’m hearing you say. You’re saying, well gee 
now, maybe it’s under review. I’m interested in anything you can 
do to enlighten me and the good people that reside along this 
so-called temporary highway. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I am sorry I cannot 
give you with definity a decision on when that highway north of 
Pilot Butte may be built. No decisions are final. I do know that it 
is a sensitive issue. It is an issue of which I’m certainly 
concerned. 
 
(2100) 
 
I have visited with the member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden on 
the issue and we are trying our best to resolve it. And when we 
build highways, we like to keep as many people satisfied as we 
can. 
 
But I think, Mr. Chairman, the major point that I would like to 
bring up in addition to the specifics of the highway is the fact that 
improvements in that area have become  

necessary, I believe, or become more necessary because of the 
new upgrader, the new Co-op upgrader that is being built right 
here in the city of Regina. It is very, very representative of many 
of the diversification projects that we have going on throughout 
the province, of which we are extremely proud. And although we 
do recognize that those projects do place additional burdens on 
our highway system, but, Mr. Speaker, projects like that are 
adding to the diversification of the economy, and I believe that 
that is good for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I am aware, Mr. Minister, that the member for 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden has been involved in that. Indeed if you 
were to ask around in your department, you would find that there 
has been more than half a dozen plans on that very road, because 
every time a plan is contemplated, the minister starts interfering. 
And that is happening. 
 
I wish you would call a public meeting out there. Call a public 
meeting with the folks of Balgonie. Let the ones that are living 
along that present highway know that you are going to be 
meeting and just see just what they have to say. I think you will 
find that they are willing . . . if you can give assurances that in a 
year the highway will be moved a half mile north, I think you 
might get out of there with your life. But if you were to say, it’s 
going to be five or more years, I wouldn’t want to be in your 
shoes going to talk to those folks about that highway. 
 
Minister, in concluding . . . I just want to sum up. We’ve got a 
flashy rehabilitation program that is nothing more than smoke 
and mirrors — just nothing more. In fact, I would suggest to you, 
it’s an insult to the people of this province because you have 
reintroduced a rather lucrative gas tax, piled $148 million of 
taxes on the people of Saskatchewan, and the people expect to 
see some initiative taken, some increased Highways activity in 
terms of building and maintaining the road systems that we have. 
 
Instead, Mr. Minister, we are seeing the highway system that 
continues to deteriorate as we speak tonight. Our roads and 
highways are getting worse and worse, not better and better — 
worse and worse all the time — maintenance budgets frozen at 
the levels that they’ve had for a number of years now, and they’re 
woefully inadequate; capital spending that has been diverted into 
projects for Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, Washington. And then, 
additionally, you funnel $3.75 million, into the Weyerhaeuser 
treasury — not into highways, but into the Weyerhaeuser 
treasury — to pay for roads that the people of Saskatchewan have 
previously paid for. So you’re asking us to pay twice. The only 
difference is this time the $3.75 million can go to Tacoma, 
Washington where the parent Weyerhaeuser company is. 
 
Roads and highways in Saskatchewan, Minister, are a disgrace. 
They’re taking their toll on the people of Saskatchewan; they’re 
taking their toll on the vehicles of Saskatchewan. We desperately 
need some things to be happening in terms of highways. I very 
much urge you to get on with the twinning of No. 1 Highway. 
You may recall, in 1982, a promise to twin No. 1 from Manitoba 
to Alberta, and not a whole lot of action has happened in the 
ensuing seven years. There has been nominal work done. 
 
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1376 
 

There were also promises in 1982 of twinning the Yellowhead, 
again, province to province — Alberta to Manitoba. I can suggest 
to you, Minister, that at the present rate we are going, it’s going 
to be some time about 2040 before we will even notice any 
significant twinning of the Yellowhead. The rate is simply 
unacceptable. You’ve got a vehicle traffic count something in the 
order of 5,000 vehicles per day on the Yellowhead, and it’s 
woefully inadequate in a great many areas. 
 
So, Minister, just before I sit down, I would like to thank your 
officials for their attendance and you for coming forth with the 
answers that you have. I anticipate the written response to those 
queries that you had indicated earlier you would send answers 
across in writing. So thank you for going through these estimates 
this year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, too, for your questioning. I’d 
like to not prolong the debate, just to bring up a couple of points. 
 
Firstly, Mr. Chairman, the $10 million rehabilitation program is 
certainly not smoke and mirrors or anything of the sort. It is $10 
million of hard-earned money by the taxpayers of this province 
that is going directly into the highway system. More specifically, 
that $10 million will allow an additional 138 kilometres of paved 
highways to be resurfaced, and that is indeed significant. 
 
With respect to the maintenance area of the budget, the 
maintenance amount in this year’s budget is identical to that of 
last year’s. overall maintenance expenditures on our highway 
system, comparing the last four years with the last four years of 
the NDP administration, you’re looking at a 70 per cent increase. 
 
So indeed, Mr. Chairman, we are spending a significant amount 
of money on our highway system. I do not deny that more money 
is needed, more improvements are needed to our highway 
system. The member opposite has brought up some examples this 
evening that indeed are fair and reasonable. 
 
I thank the member for his questions and comments on Highway 
No. 11. I once again want to emphasize the tender contract that 
was let out very recently on Highway No. 11 for something in 
the neighbourhood of $1.7 million — a fair bit of money. 
 
The member opposite has chatted about four-laning of highways. 
Indeed four-laning is something that we are currently working 
on, and working towards more four-laning. However, I do want 
to point out that four-laning is an expensive, expensive exercise. 
And just for the public’s information, to put the additional lane 
on a highway, in round figures, would be about a half a million 
dollars. So for every mile, every mile of a full four-land highway, 
she’s a million dollars, Mr. Chairman. 
 
I think you and I know that today in Saskatchewan, money is not 
abundant in the government coffers. We’re trying our very best 
to manage that big road system that we have in Saskatchewan 
with the funds that are available, and I believe doing a very good 
job of that. 
 

And when I’m speaking of good jobs, I too would like to thank 
my officials in the Department of Highways and Transportation. 
These officials have served me very, very well, and more 
importantly, Mr. Chairman, served the people of Saskatchewan 
extremely well. I know from my experience with these men and 
women that these people have the interests of people of 
Saskatchewan very much in their mind, and I want to commend 
them on the work that they have done in the past year. And I say 
sincerely that I look very much forward to working with them 
again this year, and it’s just a pleasure to be Minister of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 19 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A note on this item. 
There’s an increase from $8,267,600 to $9,055,000; this is 
payments to the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation which is yet another branch of your government. 
You’re taking $9 million out of the Department of Highways 
budget now — that’s $9 million that should be spent on building 
and maintaining our highways and streets and roads system. 
 
But my question, Minister, is: what accounts for the increase, 
such a large increase, from 8 million two and a quarter — $8.25 
million to $9,055,000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — It may be important to know that in 
1987-88 the figure was based on an estimate, or estimated rental 
areas, and throughout last year the rental area inventories, or how 
much space we were actually renting, was finalized, and that did 
result in some adjustments to that original figure. 
 
In addition, there are a number of other projects coming on 
stream in ’88-89 which will increase rental costs to the 
department, and I speak of a few new shops, I believe, that are 
being constructed, or areas that . . . in the maintenance area where 
we keep some of our equipment or stockpile certain items. 
 
So those are the projects, and I could list them for you, but suffice 
it to say that the last year was an estimate, and there are some 
new projects respecting supply buildings and lab rooms and 
steam rooms and those types . . . weigh scales that are being 
constructed this year. 
 
Item 19 agreed to. 
 
Item 20 — Statutory. 
 
Item 21 agreed to. 
 
Item 22 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 16 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1988 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Highways and Transportation 
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1377 
 

Capital Expenditure — Vote 17 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Item 2 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you again, Mr. Chairman. A simple 
question: why is it that every year we see the urban surface 
transportation dollar value dropping? It is now nominally over 
half of what it was when your administration took office. Never 
mind inflation, in terms of dollars it’s less than half. 
 
Is this part of your final solution for the cities of Saskatoon and 
Regina and Moose Jaw and P.A. and The Battlefords, where 
they’ve elected New Democrats, or what is behind this constant, 
and now becoming very irritating, drop in urban surface 
transportation payments from your department to the urban areas 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — In fact, Mr. Chairman, if you were to look 
at this year’s budget closely, you would see that there has been 
an increase in urban assistance from 5.1 to $5.5 million. 
 
The member opposite brings up the fact that this amount, even 
this $5 million, is less by a significant amount than it once was. 
Indeed there were larger urban assistance budgets at one time. 
 
And there was also large projects in those areas that are now 
complete, and I speak of Circle Drive in Saskatoon, for instance, 
I think was something like over $30 million in Saskatoon. And 
that was a significant project for the municipal as well as the 
provincial government. And some of those major projects — 
Saskatchewan Drive here in Regina, for instance, is another big 
project — those are finished and indeed urban assistance grants 
have been cut in the last number of years. 
 
It is something that I have a big concern about, and I do know 
that the Minister of Urban Affairs, in fact, has discussed this with 
me at length, and it is something that we are very concerned 
about. 
 
On the horizon, there are a number of projects that both the city 
of Saskatoon and the city of Regina, for instance, let alone the 
many other cities — city of Melfort, the city of Estevan, the city 
of Melville, the city of Yorkton — all of these cities have placed 
requests before this government, and I am hopeful that at some 
time we can have increases in the urban assistance program. I am 
sure that the people in all of those cities have a great deal of 
confidence in this administration, that their needs, as well as the 
needs in rural Saskatchewan, will be well served by this 
administration. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Items 3 and 4 agreed to. 
 
Vote 17 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates (No. 2) 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Highways and Transportation 

Capital Expenditure — Vote 17 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 17 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I would like to thank the officials for all their 
help this afternoon in going through Highways and 
Transportation, and to the minister and also to the opposition 
critic for their help in reviewing Highways and Transportation. 
Thank you. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Education 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my right 
I have Lawrie McFarlane, who is the deputy minister for the 
department; behind him, Mike Benson, executive director, 
finance and administration; and beside Mr. Benson is Elizabeth 
Crosthwaite, who is assistant deputy minister of skill training. 
And in the event that we get into kindergarten to grade 12 tonight, 
as well, it may well be that Marine Perran, acting assistant deputy 
minister, curriculum and instruction, could join us. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, I had expected the minister to 
make an opening statement, but I want to, at the outset, thank the 
minister for sending me some information. I just had a chance to 
peruse this very quickly. I want to indicate to the minister, unless 
I am missing something here, there will be some additional 
information that I would want which is not included in here, but 
I’ll leave that for a moment. 
 
Mr. Minister, in examining the estimates of Education, I think 
it’s necessary to go back in time just a bit and to see where we 
were at in Saskatchewan in education, and where we are at today, 
and what has happened since you have taken over this particular 
portfolio. And without seeming to be too critical, Mr. Minister, I 
think that, I think the education process here in Saskatchewan 
certainly has deteriorated since you have come to that portfolio. 
I think that’s not being unfair. 
 
The relationships that exist today between the Department of 
Education, the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association have certainly 
deteriorated, and those do not come from my lips. I can 
substantiate that — press release after press release by those 
organizations, public statements made by those people. And I 
don’t think that many of those people — in fact some of them, I 
know, belong to your political persuasion, but felt that because 
of the interest of education, they were forced to make these 
statements. 
 
Mr. Minister over the years, as long as I can remember — and 
I’ve been involved in education since 1956, that’s 32  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1378 
 

years ago — all the Ministers of Education have always worked 
on the principle that the education process works best in 
Saskatchewan if we used a co-operative and a collaborative 
approach. 
 
In other words, if there are some major changes made in the 
philosophy of education or the objectives of education, the 
Ministers of Education that I can remember — and I remember 
many of them — always came before the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation and before the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association, called them in and said hey, look it, we 
need to look towards the future. We need to change things; we 
need to change our emphasis and need to change our objectives. 
 
And this approach was worked out collaboratively and 
co-operatively and even, Mr. Minister, your colleague, the 
former Minister of Education, if she were here, I would 
compliment her on that. The former Minister of Education, the 
member from Swift Current, because of her association, I 
believe, with the School Trustees Association, had a real 
appreciation of the process. Even though many of the people out 
in the fields may not have agreed with where she wanted to take 
education, agreed with her process, and that is that she would 
consult. She would consult with the STF (Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation), and she would consult with the SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) before she made 
any major changes. But since you have taken over, Mr. Minister, 
we have heard from you or from your department, through your 
spokesperson, unilateral decisions without any consultations 
whatsoever. 
 
And the STF and the SSTA have been very irked and frustrated 
with this process. I say to the minister opposite that that has got 
to stop. If the process of education is to proceed, and if we are, 
as you, yourself, said last year and have said on a number of 
occasions, we are to meet the challenges of the 21st century, then 
there has got to be that co-operative approach. 
 
And you simply can’t come down and say, this is the way it is; I 
know best. I can show you again, if you say that, well that’s only 
the NDP. 
 
I’ve got ample evidence here to show you it’s not just me. It’s 
not just me, it’s not just the NDP, but it’s people of the trustees 
association, educators, directors of education, people of the STF, 
who have been annoyed and frustrated with the process. 
 
So I say to the minister, unless that changes, you cannot be 
successful and will not be successful in your desire — and I think 
it is sincere — of meeting the challenges of the 21st century. It 
simply can’t be met unilaterally. 
 
When Directions was established in 1980 by the former 
government and brought forth its report in 1984, they had, I 
believe, 16 major steps that they said we have to undergo and 
carry out in order that we can meet those objectives and the 
challenges of the 21st century. And unless those are carried out 
co-operatively, you’re not going to meet those. Neither you nor 
your deputy can go out there and say to people, this is the way it 
is, because we know best. 
 

Now we think, or I think, as the minister may say, I think that 
people out there and parents are not satisfied with the evaluation 
of the school system. Therefore, we need standardized tests 
without having any consultations again with the SSTA or with 
the STF. And there is just no way, Mr. Minister, that that will 
work. It simply will not work in this province. That’s not the way 
that we have progressed. We have built one of the best 
educational systems anywhere in North America, but it’s been 
done through the co-operative approach. It has never been done 
unilaterally by the Department of Education, but has been 
worked out through a team effort. 
 
I would say to the member from Swift Current, I just 
complimented you while you were not here. If you heard me, I 
want to say to you, although those of us who were in the field at 
the time sometimes disagreed with where you wanted to take the 
department, and education, we certainly appreciated your 
co-operative approach and your consultation. We certainly 
appreciated that. 
 
I want to say to the present minister, and I want to ask him again: 
have we gone to the point now, have you made those changes to 
the department that you made unilaterally without any 
consultations? Have you made all those changes that you had to 
make, or in your mind you had to make unilaterally, that now we 
can go back again and you can patch up all the harm that you 
have done and get on with the work of developing a good 
educational system? Are you finished with your unilateral 
decisions? And are you going to start again with a co-operative 
approach? 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think 
education has always been . . . the feature of education has 
always been the co-operation amongst all the major parties, the 
Department of Education, LEADS (League of Educational 
Administrators, Directors and Superintendents), teachers’ 
federation, the school trustees, the home and school associations, 
and some of the other ancillary organizations. 
 
We, although I guess your perception obviously is not the case, 
but my desire and our practice has been to continue that 
consultative and co-operative mode with all the major players. 
And that’s been the practice in the past and, I suspect, will be the 
practice in the future. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, it’s not my 
perception. If you want me to, I’ll take the next hour or hour and 
a half and read to you from educators and trustees throughout the 
province — throughout the province — who have stated their 
perceptions of what they felt has been going on in this province 
while you have been the minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, at least I think you should be man enough to admit: 
all right, I made those decisions, I felt they had to be made and I 
made them, but I made them for the good of education. 
 
If you can’t do that, then at least admit that maybe you got going 
on the wrong foot, and that you didn’t realize, as one of the 
people in here has said, that’s the problem that  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1379 
 

you have when you leave education to those who don’t know 
anything about education. You don’t know anything about 
education and the process that’s going on. That doesn’t mean that 
you’re not educated; I’m simply saying that you don’t know 
anything about the process of education, and there is a difference. 
There is a difference. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you mind telling me, last year you fired or 
dismissed or retired or whatever word you want to use — and I 
don’t want to use too high a hyperbola to get things going — but 
can you tell me of all those people that were let go in the 
Department of Education, how many of those positions have you 
refilled or rehired or whatever the term may be? How many of 
those have you replaced? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I can’t give you what you asked 
for specifically, not that I wouldn’t if I could. And the reason I 
can’t is that with the reorganization of the department, for 
example, we might have had two positions of . . . relative to 
planning; now there is one. We had two finance and 
administration; now there is one. 
 
But what I can tell you is that all the management positions are 
filled. The department is staffed, and I have nothing but the 
utmost confidence in the officials who work for our government 
and in Saskatchewan education on behalf of all of the public of 
Saskatchewan. And I think it’s safe to say that they enjoy a good 
working relationship with their counterparts in public education. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, I know you can do better than that. 
Let me rephrase the question. When you did your reorganization, 
you had certain bodies available. You said, all right, we don’t 
want the people from kindergarten to Grade 12; we dismiss those. 
All right, we have now the secondary school bodies available; I 
will place them in those positions. 
 
Once you had placed all of those people, I want to know how 
many additional people you hired since that time. How many 
additional people did you hire since that time, once you had 
reorganized? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The new staff on the kindergarten to 
grade 12 side as best as my official scan recollect over this last 
year would be Dr. Fred Renihan, Brenda Beug. The new senior 
management individuals would be Dr. Fred Renihan, Brenda 
Beug, Sandra Klenz, Barry Mitchke, and then some regional 
directors, Ernie Chymystruk, Brian Keegan, and Alex Postnikoff. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, I want you, for tomorrow if you 
can, so we can expedite these matters a little bit quicker, I wonder 
if you could give me . . . if you can give me the names of the 
people and their salaries. 
 
I want you to note on the estimates on subvote 8, curriculum and 
evaluation, person-years for last year, 1987-88, we had 35.3. This 
year we have 51. I want to know who the people are that you 
have hired in that particular area, and I want to know why they 
had to be hired, because many of the people that you let go were 
in that particular area and were responsible for curriculum 
development for the new core curriculum. So if they weren’t 
needed before because of reorganization, why do we need them 
now? Why did you let go the vast  

amount of experience that you had in order to hire people that 
probably don’t have that same continuity and that same memory 
as these people had? If you can have those answers for me for 
tomorrow, I would appreciate that then, otherwise . . . or 
Wednesday, whenever we continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — . . . (inaudible) . . . I’ll do it tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Well I doubt if we’ll get to it tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Minister, the other thing I want to draw to your attention: did 
I ask for your ministerial staff; you gave me the ministerial staff 
and their salaries, but I had also asked you for the increase in their 
salaries, which is not here. I don’t have the increase; I don’t know 
what they made last year and what they’re making this year; I 
just have one figure. So if you can give me the increases, I would 
appreciate that. 
 
The other thing I do want to note, Mr. Minister, when I was the 
minister of Health and also a member of treasury board, I had 
two executive assistants — two executive assistants. You have 
listed here one, two, three, four, five, six ministerial assistant — 
six ministerial assistants, and yet we say that we don’t have any 
money for the ordinary expenditures for ordinary people out 
there. Six for the Minister of Education. When I was the minister 
of Health I had two. I wonder why the difference in having to 
have six, and two of those are on . . . an additional two that are 
on leave, I believe . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon me? . . . 
(inaudible) . . . Didn’t have any. Couldn’t afford it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I do want you to simply tell me why is it necessary, 
or maybe this is the common practice for all the ministers to have 
at least six ministerial assistants. Is that true, or do you have six? 
Do you mind answering that for me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, I think the . . . although you might 
like to try and suggest that somehow I have bloated office staff, 
the explanation is this. I would suggest that when you were 
minister, you probably did not include your secretaries as 
ministerial staff, and indeed the bottom four on that sheet I sent 
over to you are all secretarial staff. I think that puts quite a 
different colour on the numbers. After that, I think we have a 
pretty normal sort of complement. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — It may be normal for nowadays. I’ve been out a 
few years. When I was out in the real world at the retirement of 
the wishes of the people of Saskatoon South, we found out what 
the real world was like, and I’ll tell you, in the school that I was 
in, we had to cut back, we couldn’t increase. This is at least a 70 
per cent increase from what I had as a staff. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re not being truthful. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Well, okay, let me tell you . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — How many secretaries did you have? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Two, two, okay, and you have six — 50 per  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1380 
 

cent increase — 50 per cent, which I had to take a 20 per cent cut 
in my school. Mr. Minister, a 50 per cent increase in your staff 
but a decrease for many of the staff in the schools, as I will read 
to you from many of the letters that I have received from teachers 
who had to cut staff because your school grants were simply not 
sufficient. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you one further question. A few 
weeks ago, or maybe a week ago, one of your colleagues, and I 
don’t have the quote here, but one of your colleagues said that 
it’s about time maybe that school boards and school officials 
have a look at how they’re expending their moneys and that they 
better become more efficient. And I read this in the paper. I was 
wondering, Mr. Minister, whether you agree with your colleague 
that school boards out there are inefficient and have too many 
staff and that they should reduce their staff and be more efficient. 
Could you indicate to me which school boards your colleague 
had in mind, and why he thinks, and whether you agree with him, 
that school boards are, generally speaking, inefficient and could 
certainly cut staff and improve their programs with the moneys 
that they are receiving from your government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — My view is that, and I think the view 
of most boards would be, that they always would strive for 
maximum efficiency. I think that goes without saying. At the 
same time, based on some research that we’ve done which we 
have shared with the chief financial officer, the chairman of the 
board, and the director for all boards in the province, at a series 
of four regional meetings we shared with them some research that 
showed a fairly wide variation in some areas of expenditure. 
 
(2145) 
 
Now there may well be very good reasons for all of it, and we 
said that at these meetings. At the same time there may be some 
things that some boards are doing that are particularly efficacious 
and that other boards might want to know about or to pursue or 
to see why their numbers are different. If there’s a very good 
reason, fine. 
 
I’ll give you some examples of what I’m talking about. If you 
compare, for example, the administration costs across the 
province, based on audited statements from 1986, you’ll find the 
variation — and this is on a per pupil basis — the variation runs 
from $50.46 for the lowest to a high of $408.56. If you compare, 
for example, the instruction cost per pupil, you have a variation 
from $1,991 to 3,493. Other instructional costs vary from a low 
of 111 to a high of 849. Plant operation varies from 160 to 1,453. 
Now if one examines the variation between the averages, or the 
medians, or the norms, or whatever number you want to pick out, 
and compare, say, an individual school board against those 
numbers, it may well be that there’s very good reasons. For 
example, if you were spending $408.56 per pupil on 
administration, there may be very good reasons why you’re at 
408 and yet another board is at 50. 
 
At the same time, I think boards might find these useful and serve 
as a yardstick to measure their performance or, more importantly, 
as a diagnostic aid to see if there is something that one board is 
doing that they are not. And  

our whole approach here is to help them to be as efficient as they 
possibly can. And to that end we’ve generated some of this data 
for their use. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, I don’t disagree with that at all. All 
I’m asking you to do is, I think you’d better find a different 
colleague to be your spokesman for you because he irritated a lot 
of people out there when he accused school boards of being 
inefficient and told them to have a look at their budgets and at 
their programs and telling them, telling them that they have to be 
more efficient when at the same time your operating grants don’t 
keep up with inflation. 
 
Over the years, Mr. Minister, since 1982, the operating grants, 
the operating grants — and I want to distinguish that from the 
capital grants because I’ll get to the capital grants later — but 
your operating grants certainly have not kept up with inflation. 
In fact, they’re way under inflation, way under inflation. Inflation 
in Regina and Saskatoon have gone up about 29 per cent over 
that period of time, in six years. Divide that by six and you come 
out to about 4.9 or round it off to 5 per cent — 4.7, 4.8, 4.9 per 
cent was the inflation rate. Mr. Minister, I’ve got the inflation 
rates right here from Statistics Canada. I’ve got them right here. 
 
An Hon. Member: — So have I. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Well I mean they’ve got to be the same. So we 
can’t, we can’t argue on that. What I’m saying is that, okay, they 
were at 29 and 30 per cent for Regina and Saskatoon. Divide by 
six gives you about 5 per cent. Your operating grants at that . . . 
Mr. Minister, I want you to, if you don’t agree with me . . . I went 
to the estimates of 1982-83. The operating grants at that time 
were $299,228,620. 
 
This year, 1988-89, the operating grants are $336,831,400, or 
they’ve gone up by 12.57 per cent. Six years — divide that by 6 
and you come out with 2.1 per cent average increase. Some years 
they were up a little higher, other years they were minus. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: how do you justify, and how do 
you justify the comments of your colleague who says that school 
boards are inefficient when, on average, the inflation rate in this 
province, using them from Saskatoon and Regina, were almost 5 
per cent, and yet the operating grants were a little over 2 per cent 
on average? Now how can you and your colleagues make the 
accusations that our school boards are inefficient? 
 
I think school boards have done a pretty good job under those 
circumstances in trying to maintain the quality of education that 
they have. And certainly the quality has suffered, but through no 
fault of the local school boards. The fault has come from this 
government, not from local school boards. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want you to tell the people of Saskatchewan 
tonight how you can justify an average inflation rate of 5 per cent 
and operating grants increasing by 2.1 per cent, on average? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1381 
 

members of the Legislature, what we see here is really an 
incompetent and incomplete examination of the estimates. 
 
The member refers to the year ’82-83, and when it comes to CPI 
(Consumer Price Index) the index in 1981 is 100. The increase to 
’88-89 is 40.1 per cent. So I acknowledge there’s been inflation, 
but how can you, a man, a scholar yourself, if you like, how can 
you stand and talk about what’s being spent and operating, and 
yet ignore the education development fund, which wasn’t even 
there in ’82-83? And how can you ignore things like pensions 
and dental benefits that don’t show up in the operating subvote 
but yet contribute to inflation? 
 
Now any man, even of your intellectual stature, would know that 
if you’re going to compare oranges to oranges you have to 
include those. You can’t say I won’t include dental benefits and 
pension benefits in the formula, even though they contribute to 
the CPI — the inflation index. You can’t have it that way, my 
friend. 
 
I would suggest to you the only way you can have it is you pull 
out the effect of pension plans and dental plans, for example, on 
CPI. That’s the only way you can do it if you’ve got to compare 
apples to apples and oranges to oranges. Because I’ll show you 
what happens when you, in fact, compare apples to apples and 
oranges to oranges. 
 
The total grants have increased by 55.26 per cent, or if you look 
at it on a per pupil basis it’s 57.7 per cent, and that probably tells 
that enrolments are at best static or perhaps have declined some 
modest amount over the last few years. But by every measure, 
that is more than 40.1 per cent. Whichever measure you care to 
use, it’s more than inflation. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, it makes absolutely no difference 
to the school board in their operating their school system whether 
you give teachers a dental program. That’s separate from 
operating a school district. It makes absolutely no difference to 
the school board whether you say to teachers that they can retire 
at age 50 without any penalty, or 30 years and out without any 
penalty. 
 
Let me, before the minister gets irritated with that particular 
statement, I want to say as far as the teachers are concerned, we 
appreciate those things. I am now speaking on behalf of school 
boards and their operations. Mr. Minister, the only way that the 
school boards have been able to operate is because they have 
increased the property taxes substantially. Let me give you two 
examples. I’ll used Regina public and Saskatoon public. Regina 
public, in 1982 received 43 per cent, received 43 per cent of their 
funding from the provincial government. Today, Mr. Minister, 
that, I believe, is about 35 per cent, maybe 36 — 35 or 36 per 
cent — substantially gone down. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Saskatoon public school system in 1982, I 
believe, received 49 per cent of their fund from the provincial 
government; now they’re receiving 33.9 per cent of their funding 
from the provincial government. The rest is coming from 
property taxes. 
 

Mr. Minister, my point is simply this: we want to talk about 
operating grants, the cost of running a school system. You have 
shifted the responsibility from the provincial government to the 
local taxpayers. And this past year what you have done is, you’ve 
simply changed the computational mill rate by two mills and 
have jacked it up at the local level, particularly for the city 
schools, and then you have only increased their operating grant 
by 2.1 per cent, but inflation is close to 5 per cent. So what 
happens is the school boards have to raise taxes again. 
 
Mr. Minister, when it comes to operating grants, and let’s leave 
out . . . And let me say again, Mr. Minister, I appreciate the 
educational development fund. I can tell you tonight that when 
that announcement was made, and I was in the field of education, 
there was great joy in the schools because they felt that finally 
here was a pool of money that could be used to do some of the 
innovative projects that they had wanted to do for some time. 
And I thought that was quite ingenious on this government’s part 
to come up with that program, and you got a lot of kudos out 
there for it. 
 
But last year, again unilaterally, you withdrew it, half of it, and 
said, we’ll stretch it over 10 years. And I want to say to you, Mr. 
Minister, that I have again — and I have from almost every one 
of the back-benchers there — letters from teachers in your 
constituency who are complaining about, who are complaining 
about . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, oh no, the member from 
Wilkie says NDP members, and I will, if you want me to, I’ll read 
some of the names, because they have PC memberships. And 
they’re very annoyed with what has happened. 
 
But let’s put those things aside, Mr. Minister. I’ll give you credit 
for those things. I’ll give you credit for those things. Let’s now 
examine, let’s now examine what has happened with the 
operating grants and compare that to inflation. You simply have 
not kept up with inflation. And what you have done is you have 
shifted the responsibility of providing for education to the local 
boards. So I’m asking you again, Mr. Minister, do you think it is 
justified on the part of your colleague, the Minister of Urban 
Affairs, to criticize school boards for being inefficient and for 
raising the property taxes when your operating grants have 
simply not kept pace with inflation? Would you answer that for 
me, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the hon. member raises the 
example of one specific jurisdiction where the percentage of their 
budget that they received from the provincial government has 
decreased over the last few years. But as he well knows, with that 
equalization formula that his party used when they were 
government, for every jurisdiction that has a decrease, somebody 
else gets an increase, because it has to do with fairness and equity 
and ability to raise money, number of enrolments — those kinds 
of things. 
 
What we have — the argument that would be more substantive 
is, has . . . The question that would be more substantive and make 
more sense to debate is, has the government somehow off-loaded 
its responsibilities onto the local jurisdiction in a global sense? 
And to do that, the traditional index used by your ministers of 
Education when the NDP were in, and ours, is to compare the  
  



 
May 16, 1988 

 

1382 
 

percentage funding globally, locally, and provincially. And the 
province was spending, in 1982, 52.6 per cent of the expenditures 
on Education were coming from the province; the estimated for 
’88 is 51.3. You can see virtually the same kind of number — 
very little change. 
 
Another measure that’s pretty commonly accepted is, if 
somehow we had been off-loading our responsibility on the local 
boards, you would have seen the boards respond with massive 
mill rate increases. So the question is, have we seen massive mill 
rate increases? And the answer is no. We can look at 1987 — it 
was zero; 1986, plus .25 of a mill; 1985, zero; 1984, it was five 
and a half. 
 
So I would suggest to you, Mr. Chairman, and to the hon. 
member opposite, that by every measure the province is not 
off-loading its responsibilities onto the local jurisdictions. But 
yes, the equalization formulas that has been there to provide 
fairness and equity is still the formula that we use. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:01 p.m. 
 
 


