


















































June 21, 1988 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 21, 1988 
 

2317 
 

 
EVENING SITTING 

 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Finance 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 18 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to continue 
where we left off, Mr. Minister. This afternoon we discussed in 
some detail the debt created by your administration on the people 
of this province. We talked about the successive deficits that you 
have had for each and every year of your administration. We 
talked about the massive tax increases that you have levied against 
ordinary people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We were able to establish that the total debt of the province is 
estimated at $11.6 billion. We were able to establish, Mr. Minister, 
that Saskatchewan has the highest per capita debt in the nation — 
coming from the lowest to the highest per capita debt. We 
established, Mr. Minister, that in 77 years up to 1982 that the total 
debt of the province reached the sum total of $3.5 billion, and we 
established that in six years plus a few months that you have 
added $8 billion to the total debt of this province. 
 
We have seen that your seven straight deficits have accumulated a 
government deficit of $3.7 billion on the backs of the people of 
Saskatchewan, and in fact, Mr. Minister, in those three years while 
you were in the portfolio of Finance, you acknowledged this 
afternoon that you ran up a cumulative deficit of $2.13 billion. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Minister, that in all of the years from 1947 to 
1982, that there was only three deficits that this province 
encountered, and that was in 1961 and 1962, and the total 
cumulative deficit was somewhere in the neighbour of $5 million. 
 
And so I say to you, Mr. Minister, that in good times, in bad times, 
with different administrations, from 1947 up until 1982 when you 
assumed office, the one thing that the people of this province were 
assured of is that there was fiscal management and not fiscal 
incompetence, waste, and mismanagement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — We have seen the massive tax increases, as I’ve 
outlined this afternoon, laid on the backs of ordinary 
Saskatchewan people. We have seen that you have increased the 
flat tax up to 2 per cent, amounting to $500 on a net income of 
$25,000. We have seen that you have decreased, at the same time 
that you have increased the tax on ordinary Saskatchewan people, 
that you offered tax concessions in corporate income tax to your 
friends, the corporations. 
 
We see you indicating to this House that you are going to in fact 
charge more to the resource development corporations, and when 
we uncover the full scheme of what you’re doing, on the one hand 
you are indicating 

that you are going to increase the amount of taxes, corporate 
capital tax, but at the same time you have decided to decrease the 
royalty rates for resource companies. 
 
More taxes for ordinary citizens and less for the corporations. 
Resource royalty reductions, corporate income tax reductions, 
massive give-aways to the friends of big business that you cater to. 
And at the same time, you have left a legacy of debt on the backs 
of the people of Saskatchewan and you have also left a legacy 
which next generation will have to bear. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, no amount of excuses by you can 
forgive the mismanagement that you have placed upon the people 
of this province. And the incredible fact is that no longer can the 
people of Saskatchewan believe what the people . . . what the 
members opposite say. 
 
I have some quotes here in respect to deficits. And the member 
from Kindersley, the minister of Finance, November of 1982 — 
he says, “This is a minimized and manageable deficit.” It was the 
first of his four major deficits, each one increasing. 
 
In a speech of March 1982 the same minister said, “We anticipate 
a manageable increase in our combined deficit.” And in fact it 
increased by more than 100 million over the previous year’s 
deficit. And then to top it all, you, Mr. Minister, in 1986-87, 
running scared after four years in office — four years and the 
people of Saskatchewan were on the verge of throwing you out of 
office — you came forward with your 1986-87 election year 
deficit budget, and you had the gall to say to the people of 
Saskatchewan that that deficit was going to be $389 million. And 
you know, Mr. Minister, that you underestimated by some $800 
million, $800 million, and that deficit rose to over $1.2 billion. 
 
I just want to say to you, Mr. Minister, that in dealing with what 
you have done in respect to the fiscal management of this province 
is that you have placed the future generations at risk. You have 
tied the hands on government when the people of this province 
need the intervention and the help of government most. 
 
And I talk about the debt-ridden farmers across this province. 
Today we are in the thrust of losing up to . . . Eleven per cent of 
our farmers are insolvent; 28 per cent of our farmers have a 
serious debt cash flow; and the Minister of Finance, says, oh well, 
we can open the treasury, but that problem is much too big for this 
treasury. 
 
Well take a look at the record of the deficits and the amount of 
total debt and anyone knows that what you have don e is to tie 
your hands so that when people need help that you’re no longer 
able. We have had a drought situation raging here in 
Saskatchewan, one of the worst that we have seen since the 1930s, 
and this government sits on its hands and waits for Brian 
Mulroney to try to come out here to buy votes, rather than having 
a constructive program to deal with the problem. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we look at the mess that 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2318 
 

you have given to this province with a lot of concern. And I can 
say that the debt of Canada and the debt of United States, those 
two new found, free enterprise societies, are a concern, I’ll tell 
you, to many people watching the progress. Recently, Mr. 
Rockefeller III, the director or president of the Manhatten Bank, 
had this to say. He said, “The massive deficit that is accumulating 
in Canada, and the massive deficit that we have accumulated in 
the United States, has to be dealt with,” and he said, “It can only 
be dealt with by serious tax increases because the viability of the 
country is at risk if this debt goes on.” And who do you follow? 
You follow the blueprint written by Ronald Reagan, who has put 
that country, has taken United States of America from the greatest 
investor country of the world to the largest indebted country of the 
world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And with successive Tory governments across 
this country, Canada is right behind. Canada today is the second 
greatest debtor nation in the world, and the economy of this 
country is being sold off to outside investors. This country of 
Canada has the least home-owned operation of the industry of any 
industrial nation of the world. No other nation of the world has 
allowed its economy to be bought up to the extent that Canada has 
— even United States, because most of their corporations are U.S. 
based. And all I say, Mr. Minister, is that my children and the 
children of their children will have to pay the terrible 
consequences of the terrible political callousness of the 
government opposite — a government so callous that they would 
walk into an election and spend $800 million, overspend to get 
themselves elected and disregarding the future of this province; 
the government that would pour out $1.2 billion in the production 
loans to farmers with absolutely no consideration as to need. And 
now we have a group of farmers that are about to lose their 
livelihood, and the minister, the minister from Rosetown-Elrose, 
sits and chirkles. And I’ll tell you, you’ll chirkle but you won’t get 
elected again, my friend. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — One can take a look, Mr. Minister, at all of the 
indicators to see whether there is a method to your madness, 
whether there is a light in the tunnel, whether in fact Saskatchewan 
has any future, or whether we have to wait for the people of 
Saskatchewan to throw you out of office like they did the previous 
government of the Anderson government in the 1930s, to be lost 
again for another 30 years. 
 
I want to ask the minister in all seriousness . . . There are no doubt 
that those are the statistics which we established this afternoon. 
And you can’t stand here and indicate that it’s the social 
democrats’ fault, and you can’t stand here and indicate that it’s the 
previous Liberal administration, which you were a part of, because 
someone must have controlled you during those years. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Minister, that we view this as a very, very 
major problem for our future. And as I’ve said, Mr. Minister, and 
your own estimates indicate, that just to service the debt of this 
province — to service the debt —  

is $329 million, almost $1 million a day, just to service the interest 
on debt. Just imagine the hospitals and the schools and the 
highways and the programs that we could finance if there had 
been any economic decisions made, and any administration 
capable of running this province. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Minister, I want you to address the area of what is the future 
in respect to this very massive debt, to the very high taxation that 
you have imposed on ordinary people of this province. Every 
individual fee and licence has been increased. We did an analysis 
of it, and 234 individual increases. We see that power rates are 
increasing; we see telephone rates are increasing. We see in 
respect to telephones that not only are we paying for telephone 
service but we’re paying a federal tax now, and you’re even 
charging a tax on the federal tax. 
 
Mr. Minister, you said that you were projecting a 2 per cent 
economic growth in the province, and all I can say, Mr. Minister, 
is that unless the agriculture comes through, I doubt very much 
that you can achieve anywhere near that record. Right now what 
you have been surviving on . . . And your brag is going to be that, 
oh well just look at last year; we’ve cut the deficit; we’re on the 
right track. But the fact is, Mr. Minister, that you distorted the 
facts in the ’86-87 budget, and you overestimated, packed a little 
money away at that time to allow you to give another pretence that 
you manage this province. But the facts remain. I don’t think 
there’s any minister of Finance in the history of this country who 
has been able to demonstrate the incompetence of underestimating 
a budget by the tune of $800 million. 
 
So I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: what in particular do you see 
in the future in respect to the economic indicators which will in 
fact bring a possibility of some economic management to this 
province? And I only want to say in respect to the massive deficit, 
to read from one of your brethren in Ottawa in respect to what 
deficits achieve and debt, he says: 
 

When the government loses control of its finances (and this 
is Michael Wilson) . . . When the government loses control 
of its finances, everyone is affected. It leads to higher interest 
rates for mortgages and for business and consumer loans. It 
means declining economic confidence, less growth, and 
fewer jobs. It threatens our ability to provide the kinds of 
government programs and services Canadians need and 
want. 

 
He goes on to say, Mr. Minister: 
 

I believe this generation of Canadians want to leave our 
children and grandchildren a legacy of opportunities and 
optimism, not one of crushing debt and crushed hopes. 

 
And that’s the concern that we have here, Mr. Minister. And what 
I would like to ask you, recognizing some of the difficulties that 
you have encountered, but also some of the lost opportunities that 
you didn’t seize upon, I wonder whether or not you could indicate 
whether you have economic indicators which would point to a 
more fiscally 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2319 
 

responsible budgeting in the future; that the massive debt will be 
curtailed; that indeed some of the massive debt that has been 
accrued can, in fact, be wiped out of existence. 
 
I’d ask you, Mr. Minister, if you could indicate some of the 
economic indicators indicating to the extent that your economic 
philosophy is, in fact, working. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Chairman, and members of the 
Assembly, today, if the province of Saskatchewan had not 
invested in the commercial enterprises that the NDP had invested 
in, we could immediately have a debt reduced of about $2.5 billion 
— right off the top, $2,500 for every man, woman, and child if we 
hadn’t bought potash, uranium, pulp mills, Mr. Speaker. I believe 
that those people would have preferred to have it in cash. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hon. members don’t like to hear this, but the 
public wants to know, Mr. Chairman, that if the NDP had not have 
bought potash mines . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Oh, they’re 
saying it’s not my fault, all the new members are saying, not my 
fault. I told you this afternoon that the public had rejected the 
potash nationalization. If there had been no nationalization and 
acquisition of the potash industry by the now Leader of the 
Opposition and his cohorts, in 1986, this province would not have 
had a deficit. And if that same amount of money had have been 
put in the credit union, that everybody could have got the same 
interest rate as the average person in this province, there would 
have been no deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP want to include in their deficit the 
borrowings and the position of the potash corporation. No other 
jurisdiction in Canada owns a potash mine, Mr. Speaker. And 
every other single jurisdiction in Canada had the brains, the 
foresight, the intelligence, and the wisdom not to buy potash 
mines — but not, not the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have several hundred million dollars that the 
NDP used to buy pulp mills. No other province in Canada 
bothered to buy pulp mills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $2.3 billion of our deficit comes, comes, Mr. 
Chairman, from the NDP investing in business, investing in 
business, Mr. Speaker. Was it investment to build new industries 
or new jobs or create new opportunities? The answer is no. And 
they include Saskoil, Mr. Speaker, and what did Saskoil do when 
the NDP had it? They were given, given, Mr. Speaker, the natural 
gas fields of the power corporation — give to them — and then, 
Mr. Speaker, they went out and opened offices in Calgary. And 
that’s what happened under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. So they’re 
concerned about the deficit. It’s rather sudden, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the one hand they accuse me of not being able to 
count, and then the member just said, well the deficit was too high 
a year ago and the hon. member just salted away . that the deficit’s 
too high, that we really put money away. I wish . . . he can’t have 
it both ways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have read into the record on numerous occasions 
. . . And I think particularly the new members 

who say it wasn’t their idea about buying the potash and they 
weren’t part of this, let me tell you, you’re covered, you’re under 
that same umbrella. I have, Mr. Chairman, a report to Standard & 
Poor’s, a rating agency, by the NDP, and do you know what they 
said, Mr. Speaker? Do you know what they said the province 
would get from the Heritage Fund in 1989-90? You know what 
they said? Six point four billion dollars. Do you know how much 
we got? Do you know how much we got, Mr. Chairman? Four 
hundred and fifty million dollars — nearly $6 billion out on their 
projections, Mr. Speaker. The deficit, Mr. Speaker, would be gone 
three times over if we could even rely on their figures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that . . . I say that, Mr. Speaker, just to read into 
the record. I also read . . . and I could go on to that Standard & 
Poor’s presentation outline of the NDP because it’s interesting 
reading, Mr. Speaker, of inaccuracies. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked about taxes, and I’ll freely admit, 
and I’ve said it many, many times — no one likes taxes. No one 
likes taxes. Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Chairman, I read into the record 
this afternoon so that everyone would know that after all the 
provincial budgets are in across the country, here’s where 
Saskatchewan stands. For taxpayers earning $20,000 or less, when 
we put in the government charges likes sales taxes and exemptions 
and rebates, the province of Saskatchewan has the second lowest 
taxes and charges in the country. 
 
When we talk about income levels of $30,000, the province of 
Saskatchewan has the third lowest rates in taxes of any province in 
Canada. And when we talk with those earning $40,000, the rates 
in taxes from the province of Saskatchewan are the second lowest 
in Canada. And when we talk about those earning $50,000 a year, 
the rates in taxes in Saskatchewan are the second lowest in 
Canada. And when we talk about those earning $60,000 a year, the 
rates in taxes for the province of Saskatchewan are the third lowest 
in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we do make exemptions in 
Saskatchewan that no one else does. We exempt clothing, and we 
don’t have the tax on power bills that the NDP use to have. Mr. 
Speaker, we have reduced . . . We are the only province, Mr. 
Speaker, that doesn’t have the sales tax on basic goods. Mr. 
Speaker, we are the only province in Canada that rebates to the 
average taxpayer the fuel tax collected by the province. I say that, 
Mr. Speaker, because I raise again, and the hon. critic and I had 
this debate this afternoon . . . 
 
When we look back and see the choices made to nationalize 
potash industry that was already here — that’s the tragedy — it 
was here, it was operating. And we take 6 and $700 million from 
taxpayers to say, the government has to own it. And we take over 
$100 million of taxpayers’ money to buy a pulp mill that was 
already here and operating. 
 
Everybody knows the tragedy of the 1970s was the taking of 
taxpayers’ money to buy what was already here because of some 
false ideology and some belief that Saskatchewan had to be the 
test pattern for government ownership in North America. And just 
think, Mr. Speaker, 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2320 
 

in the 1970s, if we had have taken a billion dollars and put it into 
new businesses — new small businesses, new opportunities — 
this economy, Mr. Speaker, would have been diversified to handle 
drought, low grain prices, low oil prices, the natural commodity 
cycles that Saskatchewan has historically faced. 
 
I say that, Mr. Speaker, because again we had the debate this 
afternoon, and I suggest to the hon. members, you can’t stand 
there and say, I wasn’t elected in 1976 and ’78; it wasn’t me that 
nationalized the potash industry. The NDP can’t sit back there and 
say, because they’re new members, that it wasn’t me that took 
over a pulp mill and a whole bunch of other activities, because you 
can’t avoid that responsibility. 
 
And as I said this afternoon, Mr. Chairman, I believe . . . I believe, 
Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan have rejected that 
approach in the past and they will reject it again. And I believe, 
Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province fundamentally want 
to have a part of the economic development of this province, and 
we are giving them that opportunity. And I fundamentally believe, 
Mr. Chairman, that the people of this province want to make a 
contribution to the economic development and the economic 
activity, and we are giving them that opportunity. 
 
(1930) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve heard in this session is constant for 
this, that there hasn’t been a change. Not on of these members 
opposite has stood up and said, what we did in the 1970s was 
wrong; it didn’t work; it cost money. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It wasn’t wrong. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Oh now we have the hon. member from 
Saskatoon saying, it wasn’t wrong. He believes in government 
ownership of the potash industry, government ownership of the 
forest industry, government ownership of the mining industry, 
government ownership of farms. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that those 
were rejected, not once, but twice. And I really suggest to the hon. 
members that the province is changing, and the province 
fundamentally wants to see economic development in the hands of 
the people, not in the hands of government, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s what this government will deliver to them. And the hon. 
members opposite reject that fundamentally, reject it 
philosophically, reject that conceptually, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So having said that, Mr. Speaker, the public should be well aware 
when the NDP talk about their deficit and their deficit figures, that 
included n their figures are the costs and the debt of the potash 
corporation, and the cost and the debt of Saskatchewan mining 
corporation: — and Saskatchewan Minerals; and P.A. pulp mill. 
And I could go on and on and on and on of what’s included in that 
deficit. And all I urge the hon. members is that the world is 
changing, the country’s changing, and the economy of this 
province is changing. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Speaker, the hon. members are on the 
wrong side of public ownership, personal 

ownership. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been through this debate 
now for five or six years, and we’ve been through an election, and 
we’ll obviously have another one, but I predict, Mr. Chairman, 
that when the people of this province have the choice again 
between government ownership of the economy, they’re going to 
choose themselves in overwhelming numbers, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well a feeble, defenceless Minister of Finance 
gets up and he forgot the question. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Babbles on. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Babbled on. He forgot to mention that when he 
assumed office that the total debt accumulated in 77 years was 
only $3.5 million, and that since this great economic genius took 
over, that he’s added some $8 billion. He forgot that. 
 
I ask the minister whether he could indicate, under his great 
economic plan, what economic indicators that he could put 
forward indicating that we’re on that great horizon of new 
development and prosperity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve supplied to the hon. 
member what our projections for budgetary purposes are. They’re 
2 per cent growth. 
 
We do have estimates up to 3.4 per cent, and I gather that the 
conference board is raising its estimates as to provincial growth. 
And we are staying with our track because there’s an obvious 
uncertainty, as we discussed this afternoon, with the drought, 
which certainly has an effect on the provincial growth. But we 
simply will maintain our position of 2 per cent. There are 
estimates of different numbers, and I’ve given you a couple of 
them. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, I though perhaps the minister would set out a 
little bit more than that in respect to the indicators. I have some 
statistics here in respect to the economic performance in the 
province. 
 
I look at housing starts, new dwelling units. I look at the period 
from 1976, Mr. Minister, to 1981, and I find that an average for 
the six years under the New Democratic Party, on average there 
was 9.909 units built per year. I note that from 1982 until the 
present that the average during your administration was something 
like 5,845 housing units built. 
 
We keep talking about how the population is growing and how 
people are coming in, and still we are building less and less homes 
to accommodate them, apparently. But the truth of the matter is 
that the exodus is faster than the immigration. In the six years, as I 
said, we had an average of 9,909 new housing starts per year, and 
in the first six years of your administration, about 5,800. So this 
has been a 41 per cent drop in new housing starts during the 
comparative periods. 
 
And all I can say is that a lack of housing construction throughout 
the province has certainly, in respect to my area, to many of the 
outstanding tradesmen that I 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2321 
 

associate with and who are supporting the New Democratic Party 
because of lack of any meaningful jobs in the construction 
industry — the plumbers, the electricians, and the list goes on. So 
there has been a massive drop — in ’87 there was only 4,895. 
 
Now you may come back and say, well, you had this vision during 
the election of the home improvement program. And obviously 
you spent a considerable amount of money in respect to that. But 
nevertheless in respect to housing, new housing starts, they’re 
tremendously down. 
 
We look at the value of manufacturing shipments. And your 
government likes to talk about the diversification, but the record 
shows that between 1981 and 87, that the total value of 
Saskatchewan manufacturing shipments actually declined in real 
terms after taking inflation into account. From 1981 to ’87 there 
was a 9 per cent decrease in the real value of Saskatchewan 
manufacturing shipments after taking inflation into account. 
 
If we take a look at the total public and private investment — and 
the source is Statistics Canada — and also in respect to your 
budget addresses, in nominal dollars, or current dollars, making 
adjustment for inflation, there has been a 10 per cent increase in 
total investment spending in Saskatchewan from ’81 to ’87. But in 
real terms, taking inflation into account, there has been a 22 per 
cent decline over that period. In other words, the real value of total 
investment in Saskatchewan in ’87 was 22 per cent below the real 
value investment in 1981. 
 
And if you look at your budget speech, on page 42 at the bottom 
of the page, for the sector breakdown of investment from 1983 to 
’87, in nominal or current dollar terms you indicate that even in 
the current dollars from ’83 to ’87 there has been a decline from 
. . . in investment, in agriculture, in mining, and utilities. 
 
If we take a look at another indicator, the retail sales, Mr. Minister, 
from 1981 to 1987, Saskatchewan total retail sales volume was 
exactly in pace with inflation. In other words, over the period there 
was basically zero percentage growth increase in the real value of 
the total retail sales after taking inflation into account. In 1987, the 
total value of retail trade in Saskatchewan increased by only 4 per 
cent — second-worst in Canada. The national increase in 1987 
was 9.8 per cent. 
 
If we take a look at inflation, Mr. Minister, over the past year since 
June of ’87, Canada’s annual inflation rate has slowly and steadily 
declined from 4.8 to 4.1. But over that same period of time, 
Saskatchewan’s annual inflation rate increased, has gone up. In 
June of ’87, Canada’s rate was 4.7 and Saskatchewan’s, 4.5. But 
in every month since your budget, the Saskatchewan inflation rate 
has been significantly higher than the national rate. Those are 
some of the indicators. 
 
And then we take a look at jobs. We find over the period when we 
were in office, in the last six years of the New Democratic Party 
administration from 1976 to 1981, Mr. Minister, there was an 
average annual increase of 9,000 jobs per year, but in the Tory 
first six years, from ’82 to 

’87, there has been an average of only 5,300 new jobs per year. 
That’s the decline of 41 per cent. 
 
In 1981 in Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan had 110,000 jobs for 
young people age 15 to 24. By 1987, that had fallen to 95,000 — 
15,000 jobs fewer for young people; were gone. In 1981, 
Saskatchewan had 21,000 people reported unemployed; in ’87, in 
excess of 36,000 — 15,000 more unemployed. From ’82 to ’87, 
the national unemployment rate had fallen dramatically, but in 
Saskatchewan it had increased from ’82 to ’87 from 6.2 to 7.3. 
 
And we find, Mr. Minister, in respect to other indicators, in respect 
to bankruptcies, in 1987 in Canada there was 6 per cent more 
bankruptcies than in ’86. But in Saskatchewan the ’87 level of 
bankruptcy was 9 per cent higher than in ’86. The total number of 
businesses in consumer bankruptcies in Saskatchewan in 1987 
was 992. 
 
We can take other indicators as to the health of the economy that 
you have put in place here in Saskatchewan. Another indicator is 
new vehicle purchases. According to the national survey 
conducted by the research market and social research, in 1987 the 
national average was 113 new cars purchased per 1,000. 
Saskatchewan had the lowest rate in the nation for 1987 — about 
half the national average. The Saskatchewan figures was 64 new 
cars per 1,000 households. 
 
And I guess the final test of how the economy is working here in 
Saskatchewan is in respect to the Poverty Profile 1988, the 
National Council of Welfare. And I want to say, Mr. Minister, in 
respect in the latest year for which the figures are available, 1986, 
Saskatchewan had the second-worst poverty rate for families in 
Canada. The Saskatchewan rate was 16.4 per cent. The Canada 
rate was 12.3 per cent. For that same year, Saskatchewan had the 
second-worst child poverty rate in Canada, with 25.7 per cent of 
Saskatchewan children in poverty, or 64,600. Those are some of 
the indicators that we look at, Mr. Minister, in respect to the new, 
buoyant economic prosperity which you try to purport and try to 
project across this province. 
 
The number of businesses in Saskatchewan, the annual increase in 
the total number of businesses in Saskatchewan, we find that in 
1976 to 1981, the New Democratic Party’s six years, there was an 
annual average of 12 per cent increase in new businesses. And 
during the period from 1982 to 1987, Mr. Minister, the PC’s six 
years, the annual average rate of increase in new businesses was 
3.6 per cent. 
 
Those are some of the indicators that the people of this province 
have looked at. The people of this province feel the misery of your 
economic policy, and I think it’s indicated in some of the facts that 
I have set forward to you. 
 
I guess what I want to ask in closing on this, Mr. Minister, in a 
very serious vein is . . . You’re indicating an economic growth of a 
mere 2 per cent here in Saskatchewan, and what I’m asking is: — 
when are we going to see the benefits of this great, new, 
economic, Margaret Thatcher type 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2322 
 

styled economic policy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, Mr. Chairman, before I respond in some 
detail to the hon. member, I would like to put on record my views 
of the so-called poverty statistics that get thrown around rather 
glibly, because I think that they are a distorted statistic that 
unfairly reflects on the province. And those out of the province 
and those in the province that use it, I believe, are being unfair to 
the province. Because I’ll tell you how that works: — if net farm 
income is zero, a whole bunch of people in agriculture are deemed 
to be below the poverty line. And that’s . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . No, the hon. member knows this. And that’s 
precisely what they do. They do not — they take that net farm 
income for a year which puts virtually all of rural Saskatchewan 
below the poverty line, and that’s the statistic used by some, 
particularly — with all respect to the hon. members — outside the 
province. And I think they’re being unfair to the people of this 
province with the use of that statistic. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, let me indicate because we do have 
a different view of what’s happening. Mr. Speaker, I’m talking 
now about the investment intentions, and this is Statistics Canada. 
Their survey shows that Saskatchewan private and public sectors 
plan to spend 9.2 per cent more on new capital in 1988 for a total 
new investment his year of $4.7 billion. That’s compared to the 
1987 results which were above the national average. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we can take a look at the job activity in this 
province, and with an increase in employment year to year, April 
to April, Mr. Chairman, it’s interesting to note, it’s interesting to 
note that every sector in Saskatchewan increased employment, 
except agriculture, Mr. Speaker. There was a modest 1 per cent 
reduction in public administration, but every single, other sector 
. . . and that obviously reflects, Mr. Chairman, on the difficulties 
that our farmers face. But I think it indicates an inherent strength 
in the Saskatchewan economy, that it is becoming increasingly 
diversified, and that employment in the non-agricultural areas is 
growing and growing rather rapidly. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we could talk about housing starts, and certainly 
they were down, Mr. Speaker, but they do not illustrate the surge 
in Saskatchewan’s home remodelling activity. A recent Statistics 
Canada survey indicates the value of Saskatchewan new housing 
construction, including alterations, rose thirty-three and a third per 
cent last year, the strongest percentage use in Canada. Statistics 
Canada estimates that new capital and housing repair spending 
rose 28.5 per cent. 
 
And yes, Mr. Chairman, I’ll grant this to the hon. member, that 
there are serious difficulties in agriculture and that does have a 
dampening effect. But, Mr. Chairman, one should look in 
Saskatchewan at other sectors. And when we talk about 
construction, and I look at the construction activity in Saskatoon 
with the new City Hospital which is going to employ hundreds of 
workers; and I look at the nearly hundred million dollars for the 
agricultural building in Saskatoon, which again will hire hundreds 
of workers; and I look at the recently announced new pulp mill 
and facilities in Meadow Lake to employ hundreds of workers; 
and I look at the much maligned by the 

opposition Rafferty and Shand power projects to employ hundreds 
of Saskatchewan tradespeople. Mr. Speaker, the same 
tradespeople the hon. member says support the NDP, but show up 
at the pro-Rafferty rally, and union leaders speak in favour of the 
project, Mr. Speaker, because they believe in it and they want it. 
And, Mr. Speaker, if those are the same union people that are 
supporting the NDP as the hon. member says, they’re certainly 
giving out mixed signals, because they show up at a rally in 
Estevan by the thousands to urge development and building of that 
project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yes, there is difficulty in agriculture. Everybody in 
Saskatchewan realizes that. But, Mr. Speaker, there are also some 
great strengths in the provincial economy and we will see the 
results. And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, although we in 
government are using a 2 per cent growth, many other forecasters 
are predicting it much higher. But it’s wise and cautious, Mr. 
Chairman, to keep in mind the debilitating effects, not only on 
agriculture but the economy, of a drought. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to be cautious in our estimates, 
but there are many other statistics which show a great deal of 
strength in the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I listened with 
great interest to the preceding debate. And notwithstanding the 
minister’s comments about investment intentions about how our 
economy will improve, the harsh reality of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Chairman, is that there are line-ups at the food banks, there are 
line-ups at the employment offices, and frankly, Mr. Chairman, 
there are line-ups at the border of people leaving the province to 
seek opportunities elsewhere. 
 
That is the harsh reality of Saskatchewan. That’s not a reality that 
I’ve invented. People of Saskatchewan know that. They know that 
from their own experience. They know that in their families and in 
their extended families, there are people now who are unemployed 
where they weren’t unemployed before. There are people who are 
underemployed where they had full employment before. They 
know from their discussions with friends and relatives in other 
parts of Canada that, frankly, the Saskatchewan economy is flat 
and that there are opportunities in greater numbers elsewhere. 
 
People have seen tough times in Saskatchewan before, Mr. 
Chairman, and they will likely see tough times again. And they 
know that we’re experiencing tough times now, but I don’t think 
that any of the people in Saskatchewan can quite recall a 
government that seems to have lost sight of the simple principle 
that if you continue to spend more than you bring in, you will 
surely run up massive deficits. That is something that we have not 
seen very much of in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I want to turn, if I might, to the question of 
pensions. I want to ask the minister that . . . He will know that it’s 
been the practice of the government to provide for a partial cost of 
living increase for civil service superannuates. Last year you 
would not provide for such an increase. In fact, in a letter to 
superannuates, you said, and I quote you: 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2323 
 

The world economic situation has forced us to take a hard 
look at where we are going. There is not only a desire but a 
critical need for government to get by with less. This reality, 
unpleasant though it is, is affecting everyone. 

 
And you go on to say, and I quote: 
 

I must therefore advise you that it is our decision not to 
provide a pension adjustment to your membership for the 
current year. We believe this action is not only fiscally 
responsible but also consistent with our government’s 
direction in a number of other program areas. 

 
Well I wonder, in light of your government’s generosity to Peter 
Pocklington and to Fairfax industries and to many others, one 
might question, one might question your consistency of treatment 
in a number of other program areas. 
 
But I want to just put that aside, Mr. Minister, and refresh you, in 
fact, that on May 13, I believe it was, you announced that the 
government would, in fact, that it was your intention to provide a 
cost of living increase to civil service superannuates retroactive to 
April 1 of 1988. And I wonder if you can provide us today with 
the details of that announcement. Has that, in fact been done? If 
not, who and when is this to be accomplished? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The increase is approximately $2 million; it’s 
60 per cent of the combined Saskatoon, Regina CPI (consumer 
price index). It’s effective April 1, and the cheques are being 
adjusted and processed now. So any that have not received it from 
effective April 1, their next cheque will probably be the one that 
includes the retroactivity back to April 1. I might advise that I did 
meet with the association and they indicated they were pleased 
with that response. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I would agree with you, Mr. Minister, and 
I thank you for that information. It just wasn’t clear. You’d made 
an announcement and I just wanted to get clarification on that. 
 
I wonder if I might turn to another aspect of pensions. In March of 
this year the Premier suggested that billions of dollars in 
government pension funds might be used in an equity financing 
proposal to solve the farm debt crisis. And if I might refer to a 
Leader-Post story which ran on March 10, where it’s reported that 
the Premier also suggested a link between the roughly $4 billion of 
debt faced by Saskatchewan farmers and the more than $5 billion 
held by the government in pension funds. 
 
And I quote the Premier. He says: 
 

We’re sitting on billions of dollars of pension money that is 
here in Saskatchewan, (the Premier said, adding) . . . the 
province shouldn’t discard anything in time of need. We 
have money in pensions. I am just going to explore anything 
possible (he said). 

 
As the minister responsible for many pension funds and 

pending any changes, the minister responsible for investment 
decisions made by your department, can you outline today the 
guide-lines that you have issued with respect to investing pension 
funds in the Premier’s equity financing proposal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We indicated, with legislative changes, that 
right now there are about three or four different pieces of 
legislation which establish criteria, that for uniformity the criteria 
that will be utilized for pensions investments will be The Pension 
Benefits Act. And there the prudent investment manager, earnings 
history — all of these factors go in to play. 
 
There will be no change with the investment corporation in The 
Pension Benefits Act and the legislation restricting pension 
investments and pension fund management. The hon. member 
should keep in mind that the decisions with the changes will be 
made by the superannuation boards. And having said that, they 
will have the criteria of, roughly, the prudent investor, and the 
choices as to what they invest in will be theirs. 
 
(2000) 
 
I suggest to the hon. member, in the past that has included, under 
the criteria used in this province, it’s included investment in Bank 
of Montreal building in Regina, the Lloyds Bank building in 
Regina, I believe, Royal Bank and McCallum Hill . . . I believe it’s 
Lloyds Bank building now; I’m subject to correction. Royal Bank 
property on 11th and Hamilton, I believe. Those investments were 
made in about 1980, but those met the standards. The standards 
are not being changed except that, rather than have four different 
pieces of legislation all with roughly the same standards, we will 
just for uniformity use The Pension Benefits Act with no changes 
in criteria. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I do then ask you, Mr. Minister, does The 
Pension Benefits Act . . . does your interpretation of that suggest to 
you that the various pension funds — and again you have 
responsibilities in these areas — that you will be encouraging 
them or otherwise allowing them to invest in the equity financing 
proposal that the Premier has been trumpeting these last few 
months? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I will not be encouraging them to invest in 
anything. If they choose to invest in equity financing or downtown 
development or commercial property in Saskatchewan or 
something of that nature that they have in the past, that’s their 
choice. But whatever they invest in has to meet the investment 
criteria established by The Pension Benefits Act. 
 
I do not intend to encourage them, not do I intend to discourage 
them from exercising their investment management choices within 
the framework of The Pension Benefits Act. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Can I ask you then again: — does the 
equity financing proposal, as outlined by the Premier, meet, in 
your opinion, the investment criteria or the framework of The 
Pension Benefits Act? 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2324 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I couldn’t tell you, for the very simple 
fact that if there is equity financing, what return on investment 
does it give; what’s the security of the investment? Some equity 
financing proposals in other jurisdiction, it’s virtually the same as 
a real property mortgage, first charge instrument, so that could be 
very secure type of security. It could be a floating bond or a 
floating debenture, which may be a very secure instrument. I 
simply cannot tell you. I couldn’t tell you, if there is equity 
financing, what form of security would be issued. 
 
Once that is decided, if there is equity financing and what type of 
security is issued to the public, then it’s up to the superannuation 
boards to decide as to whether that’s an investment that would 
meet the prudent investment criteria and related criteria in The 
Pension Benefits Act. I just simply couldn’t answer that because I 
think one could design an equity financing where you would end 
up with the same security as a first mortgage of real property, 
depending how you design it. And that type of security certainly 
has been secure, has been an approved investment in the past. So I 
would just be speculating to the hon. member. 
 
But the decision is theirs, and they will not be encouraged or 
discouraged; they will be allowed to make the investment 
decisions based on the criterias that now exist. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, might I suggest to you 
that thousands of men and women in Saskatchewan, who have 
their moneys tied up in the various pension funds that the Premier 
talks about, are very concerned about the types of statements that 
the Premier has made about taking billions of dollars in pension 
funds from pension funds that rightfully belong, at least in part, to 
thousands of Saskatchewan people — to take those billions of 
dollars and to throw them into the farm debt crisis situation; that 
they are greatly concerned about that, and that they want more 
than assurances that whatever happens will happen and will need 
to meet the criteria of The Pension Benefits Act. 
 
You use the word that all of this is a great deal of speculation, and 
I guess that’s the nub of the problem, that there is a great deal of 
speculation about billions of dollars belonging to Saskatchewan 
people. And I think that it’s incumbent upon you to be clear about 
the guide-lines and conditions under which pension funds, pension 
money, and, indeed, taxpayers’ money — inasmuch as the 
government is a contributor to these pension funds — that these 
fund will be invested only subject to certain rigid criteria that you 
would expect before any such investments might be made, will be 
done on the basis of a certain return on investment, and will be 
done on the basis of a certain type of security. 
 
I don’t think that the kinds of concerns that I’m raising are made in 
isolation of the concerns that have been raised elsewhere by those 
who have charge of great pools of capital in this country, because 
frankly they too have great concerns about the wisdom of 
investing in farm land equity financing proposals. 
 
So therefore I ask you: would it be your intention, given 

the speculation that’s out there, given the unease, given the 
concern, to make some clear statements about the conditions and 
guide-lines under which any investment might be made by 
pension funds in the equity financing proposal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the only clear statement I could make to 
the hon. member is that the pension funds boards will not be made 
to make any investment that they do not approve of. I do advise 
the hon. member a couple of facts: — one, you referred to 
taxpayers’ money. I’d like to correct that, in that under the pension 
plans now, once the employer makes the employer’s contribution, 
that’s then the employee’s money. That’s not taxpayers’ money 
any more; that’s the moneys of the employee. They will not be 
required to make . . . They will not be required to make any 
investments that they don’t want to. That’s their choice. 
 
I secondly would advise the hon. member — and it was always 
thus — that the various superannuation boards do have the right to 
determine their investment strategy. They may decide on a certain 
percentage in equities, fixed income securities, mortgages, 
whatever. Each one of those superannuation boards has always 
had the right to determine its investment strategy. That does not 
change as well, and that will be communicated, I might advise the 
hon. member, to each of the employees and superannuates. 
 
So I can’t stand here and say that if a superannuation board wanted 
to invest in equity financing that they could not do it. I can stand 
here and tell you that the choice would be theirs, and they will not 
be made to make any investment that they do not want to. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, there is a lukewarm — I 
suppose that’s overstating it, probably more appropriate to say a 
very cool reception to the concept of equity financing in farm land 
by existing capital pools. 
 

The Canadian Bankers’ Association — and I refer you to an 
article in the Star-Phoenix, May 13, to indicate it there: 
 
It’s not likely investors will be interested in proposals to 
attract private capital into agriculture, the Canadian Bankers’ 
Association said. 
 
The proposals, usually called equity financing, don’t offer 
much prospect for profits and could be subject to 
government intervention, the association told the Commons 
agriculture committee . . . 
 
The association said equity financing is usually regarded as a 
way to help financially strapped farmers. (Agreed.) 
 
But investors will only be interested in investments with 
profitable farmers who are good managers and these people 
can already get loans from the banks. 

 
They concluded that: 
 

. . . equity financing “fails in most criteria 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2325 
 

necessary to attract investment capital on a voluntary basis.” 
 
Other opinion that’s been offered also suggests that there may be a 
feeling that there should be plenty of equity capital available in 
Saskatchewan bank accounts, but such a pool is unlikely to be 
spilled into equity financing or any other debt instruments without 
a realistic expectation of equity investment benefits. 
 
Equity holders normally have some say, in other words, the wish 
list seeking a pool of capital but with conditions that normally do 
not exist for attracting such capital, and recognizing that those — 
and including the Premier who are proposing equity financing — 
have developed a long list of conditions under which equity 
financing, at least from the farmers’ point of view, might be 
palatable. But with conditions that normally do not exist for 
attracting such capital, banks and other financial institutions would 
be unlikely participants, and the terms are unlikely to be appealing 
enough for those with savings. 
 
If the Premier is developing his proposal for equity financing on 
the assumption that pension funds will be invested in his scheme, 
wouldn’t it be sensible for your department at this point in time, 
again given the very many billions of dollars that the Premier is 
talking about, wouldn’t it be sensible for you to clarify for all 
concerned just what might be available from Saskatchewan 
pension funds, just where your department stands, before he goes 
too far with his proposals, so that we can all let him know just 
what the constraints might be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I’m not qualified to debate equity 
financing with the hon. member. But let me indicate that there are 
jurisdictions in the world where equity financing is well accepted 
by investors — Australia, for example; I believe in Europe. It 
depends on the form of the equity financing; it depends on the 
security; it depends on return investment. It’ll depend on how it’s 
decided. 
 
The only assurance that I can give the hon. member is the one that 
I gave earlier, is that the investment or the superannuation boards 
and the pension boards of the various funds will make their own 
decisions. They will not be obligated or forced to invest in 
anything they do not want to. 
 
And if equity financing — and I say if it does come — is not in a 
form that is acceptable to investors, of course people aren’t going 
to participate. If it’s in a form that’s acceptable to investors, that’s 
a choice that they’ll have to make. That’s the choice that they’re 
making in other jurisdictions. I’m told that roughly 40 per cent of 
Saskatchewan farm land is leased or non-owner operated. So 
equity financing from that point of view is not new. 
 
All I’m suggesting to the hon. member, if anyone looks upon the 
Saskatchewan pension funds as simply major pool of capital for 
investment, overriding all of the criteria established by The 
Pension Benefits Act and the individual pension boards, they’re 
wrong. They will continue to make that decision. 

They, for example, as happened several years ago, I believe about 
1980, if proposals came forward for commercial property 
investments in downtown Regina, they would go through the same 
exercise, and decide. I think the hon. member can agree with me 
and accept that perhaps 20 years ago in this province pension 
funds didn’t even look at the province, even on secure commercial 
property. 
 
(2015) 
 
So there has been an evolution in their thinking, but no one at any 
time has forced or insisted, nor will it happen because the Act 
protects their right to make that investment. The pension funds, to 
change their investment strategy or to invest in anything in 
particular, the choice will continue to be theirs. The choice of their 
investment strategy will continue to be theirs, and it should be that 
because under the fully funded plans we have to fundamentally 
keep in mind the point I made earlier that this is no longer the 
government’s money; it’s no longer, as the phrase used before, 
taxpayers’ money. Under these plans these are the employees’ 
moneys, and that has to be as fundamental to the thinking, the 
changes, and to the Act. And that is well protected under the 
changes. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well I hear what you’re saying, Mr. 
Minister. And I just want to get this clear, though. You’re saying 
that you would have a great deal of concern about anyone who 
would have designs for all of the pension funds in this province — 
that pool of capital — and override whatever wise provisions there 
might be in The Pension Benefits Act? Am I correct on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well you say that I’m correct. Can you 
then perhaps enlighten me, and I assume that this is something 
that’s more than the Premier is thinking when he links, suggests a 
link between the $4 billion in debt and the more than $5 billion 
held by the government in pension funds. And he says we’re 
sitting on billions of dollars in pension money that is here in 
Saskatchewan, shouldn’t discard anything in a time of need. We 
have money in pensions. 
 
Does the Premier not know about The Pension Benefits Act or the 
kinds of constraints there might be, and rightfully so, on pension 
investments? Was he just talking wistfully? Does the Premier not 
know what is going on? Was there no discussion to tell the 
Premier that look, Mr. Premier, there are some constraints here on 
this $5 billion, and although the $5 billion might be there, it’s not 
something that you can automatically revert into the farm debt 
crisis and invest in equity financing proposal. Was there no 
discussion? Did you not alert the Premier to these kinds of 
constraints and guide-lines? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Let me pose a question to the hon. member. 
Supposing there’s an equity financing corporation dealing with 
farm equity that guarantees to the investor an 11 per cent return on 
investment guaranteed by the province of Saskatchewan — and 
I’m just speculating. Supposing that there was that type of 
investment opportunity. I think a lot of people would 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2326 
 

probably invest in that type of operation. 
 
Should we exclude anyone from doing it? I can’t readily think, 
assuming we’re going to assume a Saskatchewan investment, 
investor, limited to Saskatchewan investors. But one can design 
equity financing. One could design a Saskatchewan commercial 
savings bond with a guaranteed investment rate of return to be 
used for commercial investment in the province. Should anyone be 
excluded from that? Fair question in my view. Should people be 
made to invest in it? No, they shouldn’t. But should they be 
automatically excluded? No, I don’t think so and I don’t think that 
would be wise. 
 
I think the choice has to be left up to the pension fund managers, 
the superannuation boards, and the pension boards. As long as the 
criteria are there and they have the right to determine their own 
investment strategy, I really think that the choice should be theirs. 
And I do believe, as I’ve indicated earlier, that — and woe betide 
anybody, whether it be forced to use it to buy potash mines or 
anything else — I don’t think that that would be acceptable to the 
people of the province. But I don’t think that it’s right to take 
away all investment opportunities, assuming it’s a legal and 
legitimate investment. 
 
And all I can keep assuring the hon. member is that with the 
changes the decisions are still those of the various superannuation 
boards, pension boards. The choice of their investment strategy is 
also theirs, remains theirs. So I can’t give much more indication 
than that. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I appreciate what you say, Mr. Minister. 
And like you, I suppose that if someone came along and could 
guarantee me an 11 per cent return on an investment, and as a 
pension fund manager, well I would say that I was very attracted. 
 
But I can tell you one thing, Mr. Minister. My experience, both in 
terms of investment management and my experience on pension 
boards, suggests to me that you never put all your eggs in one 
basket. My experience suggests that you spread those eggs around, 
because one sector of the economy or one sector of investment 
will sometimes out-perform another, but that you always guard 
yourself. 
 
But the Premier is talking, again, is trying to relate a $4 billion in 
debt faced by Saskatchewan farmers with the $5 billion held by 
the government in pension funds. And he seems to be under the 
impression, as I read it — and again as we go through the 
agricultural estimate — he seems to be under the impression that 
somehow all of this pension fund money will somehow become 
available. 
 
And I wonder, can you tell the House: is this the opinion . . . is this 
your opinion that all of that money might become available for 
equity financing? Is the Premier right in making that kind of 
association between $4 billion in debt faced by Saskatchewan 
farmers and the 4 to $5 billion that’s being held in pension funds? 
Is the Premier right in making that kind of association? Or should 
the Premier be told that he should perhaps be a little bit more 
modest in his outlook, modest in any realization of investments by 
pension funds or any other pools of capital for that matter? 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I must say with respect to the hon. 
member, I didn’t put that interpretation on it. I think certainly that 
there’s a statement as to the amount in, under investment 
management, and certainly the possibility of equity financing. 
 
I agree with the hon. member completely when he talks about the 
investment strategy of not putting all your eggs in one basket, 
varying your portfolio for whatever objectives the particular board 
chooses. And that investment strategy has always been held, and 
continues to be held, and will continue to be held in the province 
as the prerogative of the various investment boards. 
 
So I interpret the Premier’s statement as a statement that there is 
this amount under investment management. That’s the case, 
certainly, an awareness of equity financing. 
 
But I have discussed equity financing. I can envisage equity 
financing which may attract a lot of investors. I can envisage 
equity financing, if not properly done, of attracting no investors. 
But I can’t tell you, one, even if investment or equity financing is 
being further contemplated, or secondly, what form it would take 
if it is being pursued. But again I just simply suggest . . . I agree 
with the hon. member that the ability to diversify portfolios, to 
balance portfolios, is fundamental to the successful operation of 
any pension plan. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, I would just . . . I 
would interpret your remarks to say then that you do not share the 
Premier’s inimitable, wild-eyed optimism about pension funds 
being made, in whole, available for equity financing. That’s my 
interpretation and even if your explanation has been somewhat 
tortured here this evening I think that you’ve begun to set some 
minds at ease across Saskatchewan, because frankly 
Saskatchewan people have grave concerns about the Premier 
saying that we’re going to take all of their pension funds and put 
them into farm equity and tread where no other financial 
institution seems willing to tread. At this point I want to turn it 
over to my colleague from Saskatoon South who I understand also 
has some questions. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, just a 
few questions on the client-owned investment management 
corporation. Could you tell me who initiated the idea of moving 
away from the Department of Finance in setting up the 
client-owned investment management corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Let me explain to the hon. member what the 
difficulty or the problem is that we’re facing, that as we’ve moved 
to the fully funded plans the amount of moneys under investment 
management is escalating dramatically. Our estimates are that by 
1992, I believe, the amount could directly be over $9 billion. That 
adds a whole new dimension to the needs of the department and, I 
suggest, the employees as to how that’s managed. 
 
With that problem before us, then we retained a firm called J.P. 
Marshall — and I’m prepared to deal with that now or leave it till 
the legislation and give the credentials 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2327 
 

of that particular corporation — to review the situation. They did 
the in depth study and review, and there were several options, as 
articulated by the hon. member from Regina Victoria today, where 
he talked about a client-owned corporation, a Crown corporation, 
quasi-Crown, treasury board Crowns, whatever they’re called. I 
can assure the hon. member that the ultimate choice as to whether 
it was a client-owned corporation or a Crown corporation or 
treasury board Crown, was that of the pension funds. That was 
their choice, and that was the decision. Frankly I’m not indicating 
anything they don’t know. I favoured the Crown, myself, but their 
choice was the client-owned corporation and that’s the decision 
that we’re making. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — That’s all well and good, Mr. Minister. I didn’t ask 
that. All I asked: who initiated the discussions on the changing? 
That’s all I wanted to know. Who initiated that discussion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, as Minister of Finance, I certainly did in 
terms of being made aware and recognizing the extent of the funds 
under investment and investment management, and then we 
looked for solutions. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — So the teachers’ federation or the teachers’ group 
of Saskatchewan or the employees’ group of Saskatchewan didn’t 
come to you and say, Mr. Minister, we are concerned about the 
investment by the Department of Finance of our superannuation 
funds and we would like to look at a new vehicle? Am I correct in 
saying that they did not come to you and say that they were 
concerned, and they wanted you to look at a new vehicle for 
investment of superannuation funds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We initiated the study, the J.P. Marshall study 
that I’ve referred to. We then took that study to the various funds. 
So it’s certainly initiated by us in terms of the study. The study 
could have just as easily come back any other way and, secondly, 
any of the funds could have rejected the study, as well. But we did 
take the study to them. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, from what you’re saying, I guess 
you were concerned about the huge funds by 1990 or 1995 and 
you were concerned about those investments and you wanted to 
divest yourself of that responsibility and look for a new vehicle. 
I’m not critical of that. The reason I’m asking that question is, of 
course, that there are a lot of teachers out there who, when they 
heard the Premier talk about equity financing and talking about 7 
per cent, giving 7 per cent — and that is in Hansard — the 
teachers out there were very concerned. They’re saying, hey, look, 
over the years we’ve done very well. Meiklejohn and others have 
done very well in investing our money over the years and we have 
no particular desire to change the method of investment of our 
superannuation funds. 
 
In estimates, in Education estimates, Mr. Minister, I asked the 
Minister of Education the following question. Give me a couple of 
reasons as to why you felt the pension plans, the pension funds, 
had to be privatized or had to be changed. The Hon. Mr. Hepworth 
said the following: 

Mr. Chairman, relative to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Order. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Okay. The Minister of Education. I’m sorry. The 
Minister of Education said the following: 
 

. . . relative to the pensions, the reason that the negotiations 
or the discussions, if you like, have been instituted is not 
because of some wish particularly by the government but 
more by the teachers themselves. And I think what they see 
in this new structure would be less government and more of 
the profession, if you like, in charge. 

 
As I understand it, no matter which pension fund has been 
looked at, the view has been the same. They (meaning the 
pension fund people) see it as a chance to get it a little more 
arm’s length from government and have themselves more in 
control of their own destiny. And it’s not something that 
we’ve been trying to ram their throats . . . (I think he meant 
ram down their throats). They tend to want to go that way. 

 
Mr. Minister, when this was discussed in estimates and people saw 
it on TV, the teachers contacted me and said, that is not correct — 
it is absolutely not correct; we did not initiate this discussion. 
Many of the teachers are concerned out there, and they’re 
particularly concerned of two things, as I said, Mr. Minister: one is 
the Premier’s comments, and he has mentioned it on numerous 
occasions, that all these billions that are sitting there could be used 
for equity financing, and he has used a figure of 7 per cent. 
 
Now that has concerned the teachers. Now they will be reassured 
tonight of your speculation that if the government guaranteed 
something at 11 per cent, and maybe that would be a good 
investment. And I agree with you. If the government guaranteed it 
at 11 per cent, maybe it would be a good investment. But that has 
really scared the teachers. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Minister, the concern that the teachers had was the 
unfunded liability. Now I know that that is probably not a real 
scare and they shouldn’t worry about it because the government 
still has the ultimate responsibility to make sure that they’re fully 
funded. And I hope that that will be the case in the new legislation. 
 
So, first of all, Mr. Minister, would you make the correction here 
tonight and say that you do not agree with the Minister of 
Education — that these talks were initiated by the government, 
and they were initiated because of your concerns of the increasing 
amounts in the funds and that you felt that there were better ways 
of doing it. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, one further thing, would you tell me: did you 
— after your discussions with the people — did you give them 
another alternative? Did you say to them, look, if you don’t like 
the recommendations made by the study, you can still stay with 
the old plan? Did you give them that alternative? 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2328 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well what we gave to the teachers . . . And 
keep in mind that all of the funds received the same, that once we 
got the study, we then took it to each of the funds. 
 
That study had different alternatives in it, so . . . Okay. That was a 
matter of some discussion with the funds and the finance officials 
and Marshall — the three of them, you know, came to some 
conclusions over time. Understand, during the process, with 
respect to your interpretation of what the Minister of Education 
said, the process, once we gave them this, we made it abundantly 
clear to all funds, you don’t have to accept this, there’s . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — They could stay with the old one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Oh, yes. All had the choice as to whether they 
wanted a change in the investment management or not. They were 
all given that choice, and that was made clear to all of the funds 
throughout the whole thing. I frankly know that to go any other 
way would have been, one, politically unwise and unfairly 
threatening. So that choice was made throughout. 
 
How each fund then took the report, discussed it with their people, 
I can’t answer for that. I don’t have any indication what they did 
with it or what the extent of their discussions were with it. We 
dealt with the boards, who are the ones that have had the 
responsibility for investment. I, of course, as Minister of Finance, 
had the statutory trustee position, which is now being modified. 
 
But I’m just advised that the teachers, for example . . . And 
understand, these discussions went on for a long period of time. 
But I am advised that they at first favoured the Crown corporation 
concept, but then during the course of discussions then changed 
their mind and chose the client-owned structure, and that has now 
been accepted by all of the funds. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, I don’t want to prolong this because 
I know we are pressed for time. I simply want to make absolutely 
certain as to what the two ministers have said. One minister says it 
was initiated by the employees’ group. You clearly indicated 
tonight that that is not the case, that this study was initiated by the 
government, and you have also clearly indicated to me tonight that 
the groups had a choice of staying with the old plan, so that it 
would still be administered and invested by the Department of 
Finance. That choice was clearly there, but they chose the 
client-owned investment management corporation — all of them 
chose that route. Am I correct in that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes, and let me just, because this could get 
off . . . When they had the proposal, there were different views of 
the different funds, as to whether it should be Crown, should be 
client-owned, should be treasury board Crown. There were 
differences of opinion. These discussions have been going on for 
nearly a year and over that time the discussions with the Marshall 
group, and the finance officials, and the various funds, the 
consensus developed. But we made it abundantly clear, and in a 
couple of examples, reiterated to the funds: — look, this is your 
choice. And they chose it, and they came to the consensus over a 
period of a year to go with the 

client-owned structure. But it is their choice. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
just have one more question on the matter of pensions. Hard on the 
heels of the release of the Farm Finance for the Future committee 
report in this legislature, which dealt with the concept of equity 
financing, the Premier made the suggestion, hinted strongly at a 
pilot project in equity financing. And I want to ask you: has there 
been any discussion on your part, or that of your officials, or those 
in charge of the various pension funds, that you’re aware of, with a 
view to investing pension funds or other government funds in such 
a pilot project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, we haven’t been involved in any pilot 
project and we’re not sure that it got any further than discussions 
about a pilot project. You’ll have to check with Agriculture about 
that, but as far as Finance is concerned, that’s the advice that I 
have. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I’d like to . . . Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d 
like to turn to the Provincial Auditor, if that’s appropriate at this 
point and if you’re ready to proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We’re in the hands of the critic. Are you 
saying we’re finished Finance? Are we going to do it all at once? 
If that’s what the critic wants, that’s fine with me. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, no, we are not finished in respect to 
Finance. We were wondering whether it’s convenient for you to 
just dispose of the auditor. It will not take a great deal of time, and 
for the convenience of the arrangements that we’ve made. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The officials say it’s fine with the. We won’t 
have to change anybody around, so go ahead. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Province Auditor 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 28 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, I note a couple of things. 
One is the comments of the auditor to the Public Accounts 
Committee, that, given the present level of funding enjoyed by his 
office, one could reasonably expect that the auditor’s report next 
year will be forthcoming at about the same time as the auditor’s 
report this year, given the work-load that he enjoys. 
 
These comments were made by him prior to the end of May, when 
I believe his report came forward, and he said that his report could 
be expected around early June, roughly a year after his report was 
provided last year. Given the level of funding that he has, that’s 
how long it will take him to get his report ready for the legislature. 
 
I note that the amount of money provided to the Provincial 
Auditor this year has gone from 3.2 million to roughly $2.9 
million, a decrease. One would assume, from the auditor’s 
remarks and from the budgetary provisions, that we can 
reasonably expect the auditor’s report next year, again, late May, 
early June, perhaps the 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2329 
 

middle of June. That is something that is totally out of keeping 
with the past practices of this Assembly. And I don’t want to 
pre-empt the Public Accounts Committee which held discussions 
with you on that point. But I wonder from your point of view, 
from a policy point of view, if you could tell this Assembly 
whether it would be your intention to ensure that the auditor has 
the sufficient support and resources to enable him to complete his 
report in a timely way, let’s say at least by the end of March, next 
year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I don’t believe I’m betraying any confidences 
when I indicate that members of the committee from both sides 
did approach me with a view to some extraordinary funding for 
the Provincial Auditor to bring it back into currency. I can advise 
the hon. member that I’m advised that in this year’s budget 
request, for example, that the amount requested by the Provincial 
Auditor and the amount allocated, the difference is roughly 
$8,000. So it’s a very modest amount between the request and 
what is being voted on. So that the request from the auditor 
himself is very much in line with the budgetary item before us. 
 
Having said that, as I’ve indicated to those, I’m not adverse to that 
extraordinary payment. The caution that I have is that I, as 
Minister of Finance, I would be much more comfortable if I had a 
better idea of what the work-load actually is now that we’ve gone 
through that transition from a purely Provincial Auditor to the use 
of the Provincial Auditor and some of the private sector 
accounting firms in the province. That’s the caution that I have. 
 
I am aware that from time to time . . . And I believe back in 1978 
additional funds were put into the Provincial Auditor’s budget to 
allow him to catch up. In many cases, the Provincial Auditor 
falling behind is an evolutionary period, a little bit each year, and 
eventually a problem comes. 
 
So the only caution I throw at the hon. member is that I would be 
. . . I’m not adverse, conceptually, to the additional moneys. I 
would be much more comfortable if I knew that the work-load had 
in fact stabilized as a result of the use of the private sector audits. 
But that’s the caution that I leave with the committee. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I just throw this out as a suggestion then, 
Mr. Minister, that if you have concerns about the work-load and 
trying to get a handle on that, you might want to ask the 
committee to do that evaluation for you and to give you advice, 
appropriate advice, as to what the appropriate level of funding 
might be to any appropriate commitment of resources to assist the 
auditor to get up to steam. 
 
I want to turn to a couple of matters in the auditor’s report of this 
year that, although we’re able to obtain information from officials 
before the Public Accounts Committee as to the facts of the 
matter, there is some questions of policy and guide-lines that I 
want to ask you about. 
 
And one is the matter of non-compliance with statutory tabling 
requirements. And I quote the auditor. He says 

that: 
 

I note that there are numerous instances where financial 
statements have not been tabled in the Legislative Assembly 
as required by statute. 

 
And the instances are further described in various chapters of his 
report. 
 
That is a matter of some concern, where agencies are not able to 
provide financial statements to the Assembly as required by law to 
get those in on time. And although we, as members of the Public 
Accounts Committee, can receive information from officials as to 
the various reasons that these may not be on time, and assurances 
that they will be forthcoming shortly, the fact remains that these 
financial statements were not tabled on time. And I wonder if you 
might tell us if you see the need for a declaration by yourself to all 
the various departments and agencies — some policy direction 
that would attempt to focus their minds and their energies into 
ensuring that financial statements will in fact be tabled on time, as 
required by statute, in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I am advised by my officials that many were 
tabled at the last meeting of the committee, and that in some cases, 
the reports are awaiting the auditor, for example, some the public 
employees’ disability, that the records were completed and 
awaiting the auditor. Some have some technical difficulties. 
 
I am advised there is a further problem which we believe is now 
cleared up, and that was our own PEBA (Public Employees 
Benefits Agency) in the Department of Finance that last year a lot 
of its allocation of its resources dealt with the early retirement 
programs. And that took a great deal of the time of PEBA. That 
problem is over, and we’re assessing as to whether we need 
additional resources in PEBA. That problem is over, and we’re 
assessing as to whether we need additional resources in PEBA, or 
whether the problem is now solved from that point of view. So by 
and large it looks like many of them, or most of them if not, will 
be cleared up in this year. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, I appreciate your assurance, but I 
just simply want to point out that the matter of financial statements 
not being tabled on time in the Legislative Assembly seems to be a 
growing problem. I would certainly commend to you your 
diligence and your watchful eye to ensure that even though this 
year’s problems may now seem to be resolved, that this type of 
situation will not develop in future years, and that whatever it 
takes, whether it’s a strong word from your office, or whether it’s 
additional resources, will be provided to ensure that this does not 
happen again. 
 
I want to just turn to another aspect of his report, and that’s the 
matter of active co-operation. I’m sure that you are aware of the 
fact that the auditor states that: 
 

For the first time since my appointment, I must include in my 
annual report comments concerning a lack of co-operation in 
obtaining information that I consider necessary. 

 
And without going into a great deal of detail, he points to 
problems with respect to the Crown investments 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2330 
 

corporation, department of supply and services, which is now 
defunct, then the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation. 
 
And I wonder, as one member of the Executive Council, I suppose 
— and I’m not clear in your obligations in this matter — but at 
least as one who is nominally in charge at least when it comes to 
the funding for the auditor’s office, whether that statement evinces 
any concern for you, and evinces for you the need for some policy 
statement on your part to all departments, agencies, and 
corporations that wherever possible that they should co-operate 
with the auditor; and in the case of a dispute as to what 
co-operation should be provided, that there is some ready 
mechanism to settle that dispute so that these matters do not drag 
on and that whatever information the auditor is entitled to will, in 
fact, be forthcoming. 
 
Now we can get the details of these disputes from officials before 
public accounts, but I want to ask you whether from your point of 
view, from the point of view of the Executive Council and the 
Minister of Finance, whether you see a need for such a policy 
declaration on your part to all those agencies and departments to 
ensure that this matter of lack of co-operation does not arise again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I believe that that’s one area that I’m not 
quite frankly satisfied with the Provincial Auditor’s statements. I 
do think that there are from time to time disputes between 
accountants. For example, I’m advised when the auditor says that 
the department of supply and services . . . asked to see contracts to 
support rental payments made to SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation) and that he didn’t get the information 
— that there were no contracts, and so nothing was provided. So 
that they then started to give alternate documentation. I mean, 
that’s as bad as two lawyers fighting, I mean, when we’re at that 
level. 
 
Then when we deal with the SPMC allegation that the Provincial 
Auditor said that there was not enough information . . . He 
believes that the auditor for SPMC, a private accounting firm, 
should provide a report on the management control systems. The 
difficulty that they had, the private sector auditors, is that they 
were not appointed until later in the year, and we’ll be supplying 
that information. And that was communicated, I am advised, to the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
So then dealing with the Crown Management Board, I am advised 
that much of that is still working its way through the relationship 
between the Provincial Auditor and the private sector auditors. 
The question is: should he accept the audits done by them or does 
he automatically, if he wants to, just go in and redo what was 
already done? I gather that is starting to work out, but there were 
some strains in the relationship between the private sector auditors 
and the Provincial Auditor. I do believe those are being resolved. 
If not, then we would have to bring in legislation to specifically 
delineate the responsibilities if they can’t work it out, and that 
would be a matter for this Assembly ultimately to decide. 
 
The Provincial Auditor certainly made his statement. I do believe 
that there were justifications for the areas that he specifically 
referred to. 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, I’m not going to pursue the same 
area as my colleague has in the non-compliance with statues and 
the non-co-operation of various departments with the Provincial 
Auditor. Those are documented in the auditor’s report and if the 
member from Wascana wants to get into the debate, I would ask 
him to stand up and get into the debate. 
 
Mr. Minister, the auditor has documented on numerous occasions 
where there was non-compliance. I don’t want to get into that 
particular area right now. 
 
What I want to refer you to . . . I’m sure you’re well familiar with 
The Tabling of Documents Act. But just in case the minister has 
forgotten, it states very clearly, Mr. Minister, that it requires that 
documents required to be tabled must be prepared and forwarded 
to the minister or the Lieutenant Governor in Council within 90 
days after the end of the period to which the document relates. 
 
It goes on further to state that section 9 of The Tabling of 
Documents Act provides that if a document cannot be tabled 
because the session is adjourned, it must be tabled at the earliest 
possible day after the session is reconvened. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just want to draw to your attention, I have here six 
documents that certainly were not in compliance with The Tabling 
of Documents Act. One, Mr. Minister, is your own, and I think 
you probably gave some kind of an explanation saying that you 
had some problems with PEBA, and that’s the judges or the 
provincial court superannuation fund. I don’t know if that fell 
under that particular one. But if it did, let’s leave that one. 
 
But I have here five others that I don’t think fall in the same 
category. One of them is the Saskatchewan medical care insurance 
commission. Mr. Minister, this particular document was tabled on 
June 9, 1988, but the auditor has indicated that he was finished 
with it August 18, ’87, almost a year before it was tabled in this 
legislature. 
 
And very conveniently, Mr. Minister, this document was tabled 
just a few minutes before we started with the estimates — before 
we started with the estimates of ’87-88. And this is the document 
for ’86-87. Yet when the minister was asked why he had not 
tabled them, he said he had forgotten all about them and they were 
locked in his vault. But we are told — we are told, Mr. Minister — 
that all departments, if they do not table their documents, are given 
a notice or a reminder that their documents have not been tabled 
and that they should table them. 
 
Now I would think, Mr. Minister, that if I, as a minister, received 
such a notification or such a reminder, that I would check around 
to see if there was a document that I hadn’t tabled. Obviously, the 
Minister of Health didn’t. 
 
Also, Mr. Minister, another one here, Saskatchewan Health 
Research Board. Again this is the ’86-87 document. It was tabled 
just a few days ago on June 10, ’88. Yet the Provincial Auditor 
was finished with it on June 11, ’87 — one year ago. 
 
I remind the minister that we sat last year in this House from June 
17 to approximately November 5. I would 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2331 
 

assume, I would assume . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Well, the 
minister can laugh about this and make a joke out of it, but I think 
this is a serious matter. This is a serious matter because you are 
denying the right of this legislature to information which we have 
a right to know. The people have a right to that information and 
you people have denied it. 
 
Again, Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan Health prescription drug plan. 
Why was that not tabled last year when you dismantled the 
prescription drug plan? This one was tabled just a few days ago, in 
’88, yet it’s the document for ’86-87, and the Provincial Auditor 
indicates that he was finished with it on June 26, ’87. 
 
Surely, Mr. Minister, one would have to stretch one’s imagination 
not to think that this wasn’t intentionally done, that when the big 
debate was on last year in this House, the Minister of Health and 
the government simply didn’t want us to have access to this 
information when you were dismantling the prescription drug 
plan. I just don’t believe that the minister forgot. I just don’t 
believe it. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Minister, I have another one here, the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Foundation. This is the 1986-87, and it was tabled just a few days 
ago, June 10, 1988, and the auditor indicates that he was finished 
with it on August 14, ’87. Again, Mr. Minister, there was a lot of 
debate in this House, in this legislature, last year from June 17 to 
November 5 while we were sitting, on the cancer foundation, or 
on the cancer clinic. 
 
Mr. Minister, what I’m saying to you is this: that I am absolutely 
convinced that this is an intentional policy of the government not 
to table the documents when they are required, and I just don’t 
believe you when you say that . . . give all the kinds of excuses to 
my colleague as to why these couldn’t be done. 
 
I ask you very specifically, Mr. Minister: why do you believe that 
these documents that I’ve just referred to were not tabled when 
they were required to be tabled by The Tabling of Documents 
Act? Would you please answer that for me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the hon. member, I believe, knows full 
well that the tabling of the documents is the responsibility of the 
particular department along with its reports and documentation 
required for the legislature. And I’m sure that the hon. member 
asked that question of the Minister of Health during estimates and, 
if not, certainly the opportunity was there. I did try. You’ve 
indicated that you do not accept what I say with regard to the 
Department of Finance. That’s fair enough. I have given an 
explanation for the ones earlier that I was requested. You may 
reject the explanation. That’s fair debate. All I can do is give it to 
you. But the responsibility is that of each department on the 
tabling of documents. And I would hope that the hon. member in 
his vigilance will take it up with the appropriate departments at the 
appropriate opportunity. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman. Yes, Mr. Minister, we on 

this side did. I didn’t personally, but my colleague from Regina 
Lakeview certainly did. And what would you do when the 
minister tells you that it was locked in his vault and he had forgot, 
forgot to table them? Would you say that he is being untruthful? 
Would you say that he is being incompetent? Would you say that 
we should be suspicious of his motives? Would you . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Would you say that he’s slimy? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Yes, would you say that he is that? Mr. Minister, I 
just don’t believe the Minister of Health. I just don’t believe the 
Minister of Health. And as the Minister of Finance, who is 
responsible for the Provincial Auditor and, I believe, also The 
Tabling of Documents Act, do they . . . Maybe I should ask the 
minister: — does The Tabling of Documents Act not come under 
your jurisdiction, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I’m advised by my officials that it’s the 
responsibility of each department. I can’t tell you what response 
the Minister of Health gave. You don’t believe they were locked 
in his vault. What am I supposed to do? I don’t know. Well you 
can take some comfort to the fact that they’re not being left 
around, that they’re locked up safely in a vault. I mean, maybe you 
can take some comfort. 
 
You asked a question; you indicated to the Assembly and the 
public that answers were in fact given. The question has been 
previously asked by a colleague in the opposition. All I can tell 
you is that I’ve tried to give an explanation to you as it applies to 
the Department of Finance, and it’s more than appropriate for the 
hon. member to ask the Minister of Health at the opportunity, the 
various departments. I can’t answer more than that to say that 
that’s a responsibility of the departments, and there is a forum in 
which you can ask the respective departments. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, you still didn’t answer my question. 
Under whose jurisdiction does The Tabling of Documents Act 
come? Does it come under your jurisdiction or whose jurisdiction 
does it come under? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ll have to check whose it is. I’m advised it’s 
not ours. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Okay, Mr. Minister. All I would ask of you, if you 
have any influence in the Executive Council at all to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — He doesn’t. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Probably not that much, but would you make sure 
to tell the ministers that in this House, we must accept their word. 
We can’t question as to the truthfulness of what they state, but I 
find it very, very difficult, Mr. Minister, to believe the Minister of 
Health when he says that they were locked in his vault and he had 
forgotten about them when a reminder is sent. When they’re not 
tabled, a reminder is sent to all the ministers as to which 
documents have not been tabled. Surely the Minister of Health 
would . . . Then something would twig in his mind, I would think, 
and he’d say, hey I didn’t table certain documents. 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2332 
 

Mr. Minister, that’s simply not credible. I can’t say anything more 
against the Minister of Health because then I know Mr. Chairman 
would say I’ve been unparliamentary. But if . . . I just do not 
believe the Minister of Health, and you can drawn your own 
conclusions from that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I will pass on the impassioned pleas of the 
hon. member to the Minister of Health. I doubt if I could expand 
the plea to 15 minutes but I will pass on the hon. member’s 
concerns. At the appropriate time the hon. member certainly has 
the opportunity, I believe, to pass it on directly. I know the 
minister personally, and I know he’s a good listener, and he’ll take 
your concerns into consideration. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, my last question. In the Health 
department sometimes it’s referred to, when you’re absent-minded 
and you don’t really face reality, that you could be schizoid or the 
minister could be suffering from Alzheimer’s disease. Now you 
draw your own conclusion. Or he’s simply not telling the truth; 
take your conclusions from that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Those are not phrases that I think that most 
people in the Assembly would use as glibly as the hon. member, 
and I think we can take them as in the heat of battle and leave 
them at that. I don’t think they’re appropriate phrases to use. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, I want to make it very clear, that is 
not in the heat of battle; I’m simply facing reality. The Minister of 
Health did not table these documents, and for anyone to believe 
that they were locked in his vault and he didn’t know about it, 
when notification is sent to him, it is simply incredible. He did not 
want us to have those documents when we were debating this very 
issue, and therefore he did . . . that is the reason why he wouldn’t 
table them and that’s why they were a year late. 
 
And if the Minister of Health, who is now smiling in his seat, who 
says, well I got you on that one. Yes, he did, but I’ll tell you, the 
people will get him for that. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chairman, thank you. Mr. Minister, I’d like 
to turn for a minute to the program which your government put in 
with regards to the rebate on gas tax. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If the hon. member doesn’t mind we’d just 
like to be clear . . . Are we finished Provincial Auditor? Now 
we’re back into Finance? I’m not trying to constrain debate, but 
just . . . okay. Can we then vote on the Provincial Auditor so we 
can get back on the Finance? 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 28 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Finance 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 18 
 
Item 1 (continued) 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I was saying, your 
government implemented a program to rebate a gas tax which it 
said in previous elections that there would never be another gas 
tax under Tory administration. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, just to start off. I can find where the revenue 
side of the tax comes in, but I’ve never been accused of being a 
financial genius, and I was wondering — and I don’t suppose the 
minister from his past record has either — but I was wondering 
where the expenditure for the rebate program falls under, under 
the budget estimates ’88-89. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well you’ve maintained your position. It’s net 
budgeting on the item, so it’s the revenues less the expenditures. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — The revenues less the expenditures, as I agree, 
but could you identify specifically under what subvote that this 
would come under as far as expenditure is concerned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — It’s the program services, revenue division. 
You will note that the increase does not take into account the 
amount that I previously indicated for the summer student 
program. That shows up in the Public Service Commission — 
student summer employment program, subvote 6; that’s at page 
72. That’s where the summer students are paid from. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now, Mr. Minister, 
with regards to the program, I was wondering, my office received 
a package of rebate forms approximately four days before the 
deadline was to come up. I was wondering what your reasoning 
was to have the package of rebate forms sent out at such a late date 
to my office and other offices? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — They were well distributed in R.M. offices, 
post offices around the province. We decided late in the program, 
as a courtesy, that we would make sure that each MLA had 
adequate copies. So that’s the reason for the delay. But there had 
been the wide distribution beforehand, and it was a courtesy to just 
make sure that the MLAs had ample copies. I apologize if it 
wasn’t adequate time, but it was an afterthought to make sure that 
all the MLAs on both sides of the House had ample copies. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well thank you for the explanation, Mr. Minister. 
I just hope that in the future the consideration would be given . . . 
thought earlier in the program to allow everyone who comes in to 
offices to get these forms. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I was wondering, what were your predicted 
number of recipients with regards to the tax rebate program. 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Our estimate . . . well let me give you a 
broader explanation. According to StatsCanada there are 327,000 
households in Saskatchewan have at least one vehicle. Since 
Statistics Canada group single people 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2333 
 

living together as a household, we would expect more than one 
application from these households. A more accurate estimate of 
the number of potential applicants would be in the range of 
350,000 to 380,000, probably in the range of 350,000. 
 
Therefore we estimate that the 282,000 applications received as of 
June 17 represent 74 to 80 per cent — and understand that range 
of 74 to 80 is because we’re estimating between 350 and 380 — of 
the total potential number of applications are in. We should take 
from that, when we look at that percentage, that there are of course 
farmers who do not apply, they have another program. There may 
be people out there that, when they did their calculations, realized 
that the rebate was 10 or $15 and perhaps decided not to. So I 
believe that we’re probably closer to 90 per cent. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, a couple of more questions. What 
was the value, dollar value, of the potential 350 to 380,000 
recipients? And what was the actual value paid out, that will be 
paid out to the 282,000 people who actually applied? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well our estimates are $26.2 million. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — That’s $26.2 million that will actually be paid out 
under the program? 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s our estimate. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Okay, and what is the actual dollar figure that 
could have been paid out had everyone applied? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If there were 100 pre cent take-up, 100 per 
cent take-up and 100 per cent personal use take-up, it would be 
about $39 million. And obviously we don’t expect that. A large 
number of farmers would have very little personal use, for 
example. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — So if everyone applied 100 per cent take-up, it 
would be a $39 million expenditure. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And 100 per cent personal use. 
 
Mr. Upshall — And 100 per cent personal use. And you paid out 
26.2. Okay. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, under your calculations what would be the 
interest revenue from that $26.2 million from the time that the 
program started until the time that the actual dollars would be paid 
out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We’re doing a quick guesstimate of about 
$1.2 million. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — So that is revenue to the government from 
taxpayers who are using fuel that they could have had in their own 
pockets, but now it’s going into what department, the 
Consolidated Fund? Is that where the interest revenue would be 
going? 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s right. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — The Minister indicates that that is right. So, Mr. 
Minister, something else. What is the cost of 

administration, the total cost of administration for the fuel rebate 
program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We’re estimating around about 1.3 to 1.5, in 
there. The calculation won’t bread down because we’ve combined 
much of the administration now, to save costs, with the farmers’ 
oil royalty rebate. So both are being administered certainly during 
the course of the summer, the same people are putting out both 
program forms. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — I assume then that the administration breakdown 
would parallel the breakdown of expenditures under the farmers’ 
oil royalty rebate program and the fuel tax rebate — let’s say 1.2 
under the farm royalty and 3.3 under the fuel rebate program. Is 
that accurate to assume that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The estimate would be, and again we’re 
estimating because we are having the same people process both 
programs during the course of the summer. So we’re now 
estimating the allocation, and it’s roughly in that 1.3 to 1.5, plus 1 
million on the farmers’ oil royalty rebate. 
 
Now again, understand that we’re making an arbitrary allocation 
here, but that’s, I’m told, roughly the breakdown. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — So then the 1.3 to $1.5 million for administration 
which covers both programs . . .(inaudible interjection). . . plus 1 
for the farm royalty rebate, okay. Have you estimated the actual 
cost of processing each individual tax rebate to the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We would have to do that after the program 
when you look at resubmissions and things of that nature. We 
could certainly give you a better idea after the program has been 
fully paid out. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Yes, I would appreciate that information when it 
becomes available to the government if you would send it across. 
 
Mr. Minister, during this whole process of the tax rebate program, 
you had a number of programs, announcements, you had a number 
of brochures, you had the cost of printing the application forms. 
Did all the advertising for the fuel rebate program come out of 
your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m advised that it did. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, could you give me a 
breakdown of the costs of the forms, the cost of the explanatory 
pamphlets, the cost of the media advertising, the cost of letters that 
were put out after the applications were received by your 
department, and the cost of postage, and any other costs that might 
be incurred to give me a total breakdown of the cost of 
advertising? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We’ll have to pull that for you, but could I 
supply the opposition critic as for all the advertising expenditures, 
and if I give the critic, the package with the detailed breakdown 
that the hon. member asked for on the fuel rebate, is that 
acceptable? 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2334 
 

I’m not . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I was supposed to get it at noon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I can give you general, but I can’t give 
you that detail at this time. But I can try and get it as quickly as 
possible. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Yes, I appreciate having details as quickly as 
possible. I assume, then, that you can give me the total cost of 
advertising for the program. Would you do that please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — You wanted postage and all of the detailed 
items, yes? 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, you’re saying you don’t have the 
total that you can give me right now — the total cost of 
advertising? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — What we have now is the estimate which is 
150,000. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, just doing a quick 
calculation, not having the breakdown, it appears to me that there 
was $1.5 million in administration; $1.2 million in interest — 
that’s 2.7; a $10 million shortfall from those people who didn’t 
apply. And by 10 million, the actual figure was 13; I just reduced 
it by 3 million, given that you said it was 100 per cent 
consumption by individuals. So you’re looking at about 12, almost 
$13 million for the fuel rebate program — the cost to the 
government and the people of this province — lost revenue. And 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, that represents about 50 per cent of the 
actual pay-out that your government put forward to the people of 
this province. Do you think that that is extraordinarily high? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, understand . . . First of all, you are 
comparing apples and oranges, and it’s not a fair comparison. But, 
I mean, there are many options. You cannot have the fuel tax . . . 
We’ve gone through that debate. Many in the opposition were 
opposed to no fuel tax. There was the debate, and we have been 
through this many times, as to whether out-of-province people and 
others should pay it. 
 
When we designed a system whereby individuals would be 
forgiven the tax or have the tax rebated, we tried to design a 
system that was the least expensive. Least expensive way of doing 
it is using summer students, and that’s the system that we are 
using. 
 
Obviously, and I’ve said it before, and I would certainly appreciate 
the hon. member’s comments once the end of September and we 
have everybody paid out, what his views are. We’ve had some 
from the opposition that say the program should be scrapped 
completely. And I would appreciate the hon. member’s views that, 
having chose this, obviously there is a cost for administering this. I 
suggest to you it’s the least costly proposal in looking for a way to 
get the benefit back to the average consumer here in the province. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, the $10 million that you 
didn’t have to pay out represents a fairly substantial 

sum that the fuel consumers of this province are paying for a 
program that you put forward to buy yourself an election, or 
attempt to. 
 
And I’m saying to you that the method with which that you put 
this program forward and the results that we have seen from it tell 
me that the Tory government, who said that there would be no gas 
tax imposed under their regime, is not quite accurate. 
 
In fact if you look at all the promises from members on your side 
of the House, or many of them who are not there now, virtually 
every one of them has comments on elimination of fuel tax — 
provincial gas tax reduction 40 cents per gallon, and it goes on and 
on in every one. And now when we see the program after it’s set 
up, we see that the government has actually taken $10 million or 
thereabouts out of the pockets of these people who you had 
promised that they would pay no tax. 
 
(2130) 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, because of the way the program was set out 
there was a number of complications that came forward. As I 
understand it, there were about 2,500 to 3,000 applicants who did 
not . . . who had their application forms sent back because the 
postmark couldn’t be read on the envelope. In your estimation . . . 
Could you answer this: why did you send those letters back that 
you couldn’t read the postmark on? Obviously the people made an 
attempt to get them in there. Wouldn’t it have been simpler just to 
accept them if they were within a couple of days of your deadline 
and the postmark was on it, even if you couldn’t read it? Why did 
you hassle these people by sending the letters back and asking 
them to reconfirm that they had actually sent them in on time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The member is not correct. There were not the 
2,500, 2,800. There were about 1,300 returned. Secondly, we did 
wait, I believe, a week before any were sent. So any that came in 
in that week after the deadline were not sent back. 
 
Once a full week had passed, we felt that they probably were 
mailed late even though obliterated and that’s why they were sent 
back. So there was a grace period of a week given before any were 
sent back, and the number is approximately 1,300. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m not sure that we’re 
talking about the same thing. In the newspaper article, June 10 of 
the Star-Phoenix, it says about 1,500 people clearly missed the 
deadline, and that is in the ballpark with what you’re saying. But it 
also goes on to say, between 2,500 and 3,000 applications with 
unreadable postmarks arrived about the same time were also 
returned to their senders. 
 
Is that accurate, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That quote’s not right. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — So the actual fact, the total number of those 
people who sent in applications with unreadable postmarks, added 
to those people who had clearly missed 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2335 
 

the deadline, totalled about 1,300. Is that what you’re telling us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The ones that were returned were 
approximately 1,300. There was a period, a grace period of a week 
after the deadline. When they came in during that period they were 
accepted, so that the 1,300 were the deadline plus the grace period 
of about a week before they were sent back. So they came in a 
week past the deadline. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, will those people who missed the 
deadline for this year be able to reapply for this year’s, for 1987’s 
rebate when the rebate comes up again next year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — It’s not the intention, as I tried to advise the 
hon. member during the course of this . . . that the only way to 
control administrative costs is to have a deadline. Otherwise we 
would have to increase the number of permanent employees to 
manage it as they would come in year round. I suggest to the hon. 
member that we do have to have a deadline. I know that deadlines 
always cause some difficulty. We did advertise it. There were 
concerns in the opposition that we didn’t, that we wouldn’t 
advertise it. We did advertise it, and I think we have to look at it 
from the other side, that the vast majority of people submitted their 
application forms in on time, and we should respect the effort that 
they made to get their applications in on time. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — I understand that, Mr. Minister, but in other tax 
areas, for example with your income tax, if I happen to miss 
something this year, I can always apply it next year because it’s a 
fair way of doing things. 
 
I think what you’re trying to say here is that because you got 
yourself in to a bind with this fuel tax rebate . . . And I think 
everybody knows that it was the curse of the country when this 
thing was informed, if you walked around any filling stations. I 
will leave you to be the judge of that in later days. 
 
But you’re saying that because you want to keep down the 
administration costs, and I can really see that adding up the 
amount that has been taken out of the people’s pockets, that you 
might want to do that, but in the same terms it’s not really fair for 
those people who for some reason didn’t get it in on time, should 
be able to apply next year as they do with their income tax and 
apply that because it’s money that’s coming to them. And you said 
that the money is coming to you in the form of a rebate. Fine, you 
put the deadline on; however there will be another deadline next 
year as there is in the income tax system. And ask you why those 
people wouldn’t be eligible next year to apply for this year’s 
rebate if they missed the deadline. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well it’s certainly not an exact analogy in 
terms of the income tax. You are into averaging and all sorts of 
other activities that respond . . . that continue in the income tax 
system which do not apply here. 
 
Yes, we can sit and debate the need for a deadline. I do believe 
that when we get over 275,000 people coming in on time with 
their applications, their applications 

properly completed, that obviously the vast majority of people 
recognize the need to meet the deadline. I believe that many of 
them also saw the need that in order to try and keep the cost down 
that there had to be some regulations and guide-lines. 
 
The hon. member is right. And I agree with the point that he made, 
that the public will decide, the public will decide whether they 
want the rebate program, or as the NDP in opposition said, they’re 
going to cancel it. So they will have the opportunity to make that 
choice. And I agree with the hon. member with that statement. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, your government as I said 
before, in 1982 and after that, said that there would be an 
elimination of gas tax and there wouldn’t be one in place. And 
now I have been out in the country, and I’ve talked to many 
people, and in the cities, and the program that annoyed them most, 
second to all the incredible cuts and bad mismanagement and 
incompetence of health care, was the fuel tax rebate. Every time 
they went into the service station they were made because they 
had to keep these receipts because you were taking money out of 
their pockets. And as we see tonight, it adds up to $13 million out 
of the pockets of Saskatchewan taxpayers that you have taken out 
under your gas tax program. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I just have one question: seeing that it worked 
in ’82, I was wondering if you were going to see if it would work 
again in 1990 or ’91 and eliminate the fuel tax. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I don’t want to give the hon. member 
any inside information as to what the election strategy will be. I 
know that the hon. member . . . I’ve been into his riding and I 
know why he would like some advance knowledge as to what the 
strategy would be. And I appreciate and understand his concern. 
 
Having said that, there’ll be lots of issues. There’ll be the issue of 
your desire to take away the rebate; there’ll be the issue of whether 
the people should be participating in economic development or 
whether it should be the government. I can see all sorts of issues, 
and I look forward to the debate and I’m sure the hon. member 
does look forward to debating them in Humboldt. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, I would say that people of 
Saskatchewan, as I said earlier, were very disgruntled with your 
scheme to rebate fuel tax. I think that, along with the money that 
you’ve taken from their pockets and the fact that you won’t give 
them an extra chance in the next year to get their rebate. I think 
that’s one of the main reason why the fuel tax program was put in 
in the way it was. 
 
I think that you knew that there was going to be a substantial 
amount of money that would not come back into the program, 
because I think that your cupboards are so bare that you’re 
attempting to do anything to get money out of the pockets of the 
people, whether it be in the form of a fuel tax rebate that they 
won’t claim for or cutting programs and services. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think that, if you were using logic when you 
were putting this program in, you would have stuck 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2336 
 

to the traditional ways of using tax as an income source for the 
government. Instead you tried to fudge it in terms of a program 
whereby Saskatchewan people wouldn’t have to pay and it was 
just for out-of-province and other consumers. 
 
But as it turns out, we’re looking at $13 million, $13 million that 
your government has used out of the taxpayers’ pockets — those 
people who consume fuel in this province. And I think, Mr. 
Minister, that that tells me that you’re desperately in need of 
funds, and if you had any flexibility at all, you would, indeed, 
change the program. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, I wonder if you 
would be kind enough to give me the Liquor Board profit for 
1987-88, the actual Liquor Board profit. I see your officials are 
looking it up. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Preliminary estimate is 123.7 million. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Okay. Mr. Minister, what was the actual 
payment to the treasury? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Zero. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, what is your estimated Liquor 
Board profit for 1988-89? Your officials must have a figure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The estimate in the budget is 129 million. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What is the anticipated payment to the 
treasury? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — 150. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I want to suggest to you that 
you are, in a number of ways, building up an election fund. Mr. 
Minister, you are doing it in a number of ways, and I want to 
suggest two of them. 
 
I want to preface the remarks by saying that this government is 
becoming anti-democratic. As you remain in office, you become 
less and less comfortable with the democratic systems which hold 
you accountable. You, Mr. Minister, you seek to avoid 
accountability. I won’t, at this hour of the night, repeat all of the 
manifestations of that. 
 
Suffice it to say that the member from Saskatoon South 
mentioned, one, your failure to table annual reports, Mr. Minister, 
Bill 5 is yet another manifestation of your desire to avoid 
accountability. You no longer have to come back to the legislature 
to explain what you’re doing, when you’re doing it. The 
privatization Bill is yet another; you don’t want to come back to 
the Legislature to justify privatizations. Mr. Minister, the electoral 
boundaries is yet another; you jigger the boundaries. 
 
Yet another way you’re doing it, Mr. Minister, is by not giving the 
Assembly any information with respect to the financial affairs of 
the province. I see the minister shaking his head. I just wished 
you’d shake it hard enough to loosen whatever it is that has glued 
the pieces together. 

(2145) 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to refer first to the Liquor Board profits. Mr. 
Minister, I suggest to you that you are building up a rainy day fund 
in the Liquor Board profits. Mr. Minister, you consistently actually 
pay less to the treasury than you estimate. 
 
In 1986-87 you estimated $240 million profit; you actually took 
140 million. What you did, of course, was leave $127 million in 
retained earnings in the Liquor Board. In 1987-88 we learned that 
you took in $123 million, estimated 122.5 million to the payment 
to the treasury, but you paid nothing. Why? Because you’re 
keeping that there for an election year having . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . Well I will get to the liquor board stores you’re 
going to sell in a moment, Mr. Minister, having salted away the 
money . . . Well, I’ll wait while the minister yawns; I do not want 
to interrupt what must have been a most enjoyable yawn. When 
you’re finished, I’ll continue. 
 
Mr. Minister, you built up $120 million in 1986-87. You socked 
away another $122.5 million last year. Mr. Minister, you say this 
year you estimate $125 . . . 150 million. Mr. Minister, I know full 
well at the end of the year you’re not going to take any. Why? 
Because you’re salting away money — $150 million a crack — so 
you can shower the public with goodies come election time. 
 
Mr. Minister, if it weren’t just that it were crass, it would be bad 
enough, but, Mr. Minister, last year you did away with a drug 
plan. You did away with a dental plan. Mr. Minister, the 
educational system should be an embarrassment to you at all 
levels. Mr. Minister, but you continue to sock away money at 
$120 a million a crack so you can . . . $120 million a year so you 
can cynically, Mr. Minister, shower them with money in an 
election year. 
 
Far worse, Mr. Minister, is the Saskatchewan property 
development corporation. It’s popularly, I think, called Sask fraud 
because that is what the corporation is designed to do — to help 
you cook the books. 
 
Mr. Minister, when I got . . . I said earlier, Mr. Minister, and I’ll 
repeat it, that most ministers of Finance symbolize their efforts to 
bring order to the province’s finances with a new tie. You ought to 
have a chef’s hat for your efforts to cook the books. In some ways, 
Mr. Minister, you’ve been fairly successful. 
 
I refer you, Mr. Minister, to the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation — Sask fraud as it’s called. We spent 
some time, Mr. Minister, wondering how on earth expenditures 
could have arisen so astronomically in the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation. We noted that last year expenditures 
went up, operating expenditures went up by 11 per cent; capital 
expenditures ballooned. The total of the two together means an 
increase in money flowing to the Saskatchewan fraud corporation 
by 27 per cent. 
 
Mr. Minister, your operating funds have gone up by 11 per cent 
this year. If you go back two years to the beginning of Sask fraud, 
we find that the money flowing 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2337 
 

to Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation has gone up 
by 33 per cent during a period of time that your budgetary 
expenditures have gone up by 8 per cent. Are you leasing that 
many Renaissance hotels? 
 
At first I thought you might be until I actually began to wonder 
where you were hiding all the hotels. You can’t possibly be 
wasting — not even this government, as prolific as it is — could 
possibly waste that many tens of millions of dollars. Clearly what 
you’re doing, Mr. Minister, is you are building up money within 
Sask fraud, a very large chunk of money, and you want to shower 
it on the public in an election year and hope that you can do 
something about your abysmal showing in the polls. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t believe for a moment that the member for 
Souris-Cannington didn’t think of it. I credit the member from 
Souris-Cannington with being the author of it. 
 
Mr. Minister, you are clearly, cynically salting away money. Old 
people are going without drugs; children are not getting their teeth 
fixed; taxes are going up, and you are salting away money in the 
Liquor Board. You’re salting away money in Sask fraud, and, 
undoubtedly, in a number of other sources which we . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I’d ask the member to refer to 
the corporation by its proper name. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’d appreciate the basis for your ruling, Mr. 
Chairman. I’m not quarrelling with it. I’m wondering why you 
believe I cannot characterize, why you believe I cannot 
characterize an activity of government in the manner in which I 
honestly see and believe. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I’ve asked the member to refer to the 
corporation by its proper name and any challenge of that is a 
challenge of the Chair. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — In the interest of continuing with the 
estimates, I won’t be candid with the chairman about what I think 
of the ruling, but I’m going to honour it. I refrain from being 
candid with you at this point in time. 
 
Mr. Minister, I say to you that while you are short-changing 
children, while you’re short-changing old people, while you’re 
taxing people who cannot afford it, you’re failing to come to the 
assistance of farmers, you’re salting money away. It’s cynical. Mr. 
Minister, it’s callous and it borders on the cruel. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister: — will you acknowledge that this is 
what you are doing, and will you use the money which is raised in 
each year for the programs in that year so that we may restore 
governmental and social programs to the level at which they 
should be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I wasn’t embarrassed about the 
educational system until I heard the hon. member just give his 
diatribe. Mr. Speaker, for the hon. member to stand up and argue 
that the liquor board fund has not been used as a stabilization fund 
by previous administrations is wrong. It was done by the previous 
administration before the hon. member was dropped from cabinet. 
I’ll tell you it was common practice and 

done after. 
 
I suggest to the hon. member, I made it abundantly clear in the 
past, I made it abundantly clear in the economic statement, and I 
made it abundantly clear in last year’s budget that we were not 
taking that fund. I suffered the slings and arrows for not taking the 
fund last near; now I’m being accused of exaggerating the budget, 
now not using the money. I mean, will you make up your mind 
which way you’re going, please? On the one hand you say you’re 
spending too much money and then you’re putting too much aside. 
On the one hand you’re saying you’re being profligate, and then 
on the other hand you’re accusing me of putting money aside. 
 
I just suggest to the hon. member that the funds were not taken. 
I’ve been clear to that, clear to the public, and clear to this 
legislature. We debated that last year, and debated, I thought in a 
lot more articulate manner with the former Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Having said that, for you to stand up and criticize the existence of 
property management Crown corporations, which have been used 
in other jurisdictions, including Manitoba, I think it’s really, really 
a matter of sour grapes that the hon. member didn’t think of it 
when he had his chance. 
 
And I can understand that he can be upset with the changes to 
government services. After all, they were the guys who brought 
out to the public, the hon. member spending $25,000 to repair a 
grandfather clock, for Heaven’s sakes, for his office. 
 
So all I’m suggesting to the hon. member, you can make those 
arguments. The property management Crown concept is used in 
other jurisdictions, including NDP Manitoba, before the people 
saw the light. It’s not new. It’s used in other jurisdictions. 
Financing assets that are used over 20- and 25-year or 30-year life 
spans is fair financing. That can be debated and that debate’s been 
going on in the House now for three years. 
 
To argue, just say simply to the hon. member that to argue on the 
one hand that you’re spending too much money, and on the other 
hand, you’re putting too much money aside, is a rather 
inconsistent argument. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well all I can say is I didn’t think I’d ever see 
George Orwell’s superior, but I’ve just seen a doublespeak in a 
fashion which leaves George Orwell a poor master of the English 
language. Anyone that can take tens of millions of dollars each 
year, destroy social programs, overtax people, shower it on them 
during an election, and describe that as stabilization, has a real 
knack with dealing with the English language. 
 
Mr. Minister, having run that admission that your hoarding of 
funds in the Liquor Board is stabilization, would you — it would 
be humorous if it weren’t so tragic — would you, Mr. Minister, 
admit that that’s the explanation for the astronomical increases in 
Sask. fraud is that you are stabilizing it, to use your language, 
stabilizing it? Will you admit, Mr. Minister, that this Sask 
Property Management Corporation is also a stabilization fund? 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2338 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Not at all. As we indicated earlier, we are 
trying to move the costing of the leasing, for example, of 
government space to a cost-recovery basis. We are doing it 
gradually. 
 
Secondly, it’s not something that you can impose overnight 
because historically departments have been assigned buildings 
without any indication as to the commercial-lease cost. If 
departments had to make their property acquisitions or their rental 
acquisitions or the rental of their property on a commercial basis, 
they may choose completely different space than they have. So in 
the past, there has been no system. We are trying to gradually 
move it to a cost-recovery basis. It takes time to do that, and that’s 
what we’ve been trying to do, and that’s been one of the basis for 
the corporation. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, if there’s an explanation 
for the astronomical increases in Sask Property Management 
Corporation beyond — to use your euphemism — building a 
stabilization fund, I really wish you’d give it. 
 
You know, I started out this process by asking each of the 
ministers why the big increase in your cost to Sask Property 
Management Corporation. I gave up after a few ministers. I asked 
the Minister of Justice why the increase. He told me they 
renovated the court-house in Assiniboia. I did some subtraction — 
it was 6 million bucks. I said to the Minister of Justice, if you 
spent $6 million on the court-house in Assiniboia, I could see the 
dang thing from my front yard in Regina, it would be that big. 
There’s no way you could do it. And so on we went. I asked other 
ministers, why the increase. I got similarly ludicrous answers. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is crystal clear that you are using Sask fraud and 
the Sask Liquor Board corporation for stabilization funds. It would 
be humorous, Mr. Minister, if you weren’t destroying programs 
that children and old people need; if you weren’t taxing people 
who could ill afford to pay it; if you weren’t causing all that hurt 
and doing all that damage for the cynical of possible reasons to try 
to resurrect your own political fortunes. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I wish you’d save the children and the old 
folks and the taxpayers the pain and agony, because your political 
fortunes simply can’t be salvaged. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I don’t know if it’s worth a reply, but the hon. 
member, I’m sure, doesn’t recall that in the past one agency 
handled all the costs for each department and its patients. And 
there was no effort for managers to try and look for less costly 
space or for managers to try and look for less costly space or for 
managers to restrain the cost for leasehold improvements. Now 
they have some involvement in those costs because the costs are 
being allocated back to them. It strikes me as good management. 
 
(2200) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I want to ask a few questions 
on your dialogue on Saskatchewan income tax reform — the 
paper that you delivered in March of 1988. Before I start, I wonder 
whether you can outline for us the mandate of the committee and 
the members of the 

committee who presently serve on the committee, and also the 
original committee so we could have a differentiation of names 
and a comparison. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The committee consists of myself and 
officials: — Keith Laxdal, acting deputy minister; John Wright, 
executive director of taxation and economic policy division; and 
Kirk McGregor, associate director of taxation policy, taxation and 
economic policy division. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, does Keith Laxdal still serve 
on the committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Still is. 
 
Mr. Minister, in going through this paper, you’ve outlined, or the 
committee has outlined, four options to tax reforms in the province 
of Saskatchewan, and you’ll be well aware of the four, basically: 
— first of all the Saskatchewan progressive flat tax structural 
alternative; and secondly, the Saskatchewan marginal tax 
structural alternative; and third, the Saskatchewan pure flat tax 
structural alternative; and the final option, Saskatchewan 
independent tax system alternative that would be, in fact, if 
accepted, based I guess in part on the Quebec system where we 
collect our own tax independently of the Canada tax system. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, at this time, if you can outline for us 
briefly the pros and cons, and to give us some idea of where 
you’re headed on that basis in terms of tax reform in the province 
as seen by yourself. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I have deliberately — as I advised the 
Assembly at the time of the budget — I have deliberately avoided 
taking a position or being seen to take a position on it because I’d 
like some fair debate on it. 
 
I can advise the hon. member, with the committee, as it’s 
established, I’ll indicate how we see it evolving. We will have a 
distribution to groups that we’ve identified that would be 
interested in tax reform. We’re trying to track the federal 
government’s thrust in terms of how it communicated the papers 
and the technical papers out to interested organizations or groups. 
 
So we will be sending those out, not only to professional 
organizations . . . I believe that many organizations may be 
concerned, not so much as to the forum as, for example, whether 
we accept the tax credits, if that’s an acceptable way of 
reallocating income. We hope to get those out within the next 
couple of weeks. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, I wondered as well . . . I 
mean, really it’s hard to believe that you being on the committee 
and the minister, that you wouldn’t have an opinion and a 
direction that you’d be giving to the people in studying the options 
that are outlined here. 
 
It seems to me that going through these four, there’s a couple of 
them that don’t make a lot of sense, but I guess we won’t get into 
that tonight because you’re not willing to outline the position of 
the government as it relates to the four options. But that surprises 
me a little bit. Two 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2339 
 

explanations, I guess: — one, that you’re not being totally factual 
in saying that you’re not involved in giving instructions; or that the 
tax reform is nothing but a smoke-screen. And people will make 
their own assumption as to which it is. 
 
I think it’s clear, obviously, that Tory tax reform, whether it’s in 
the United States or in Great Britain or in Canada or in fact in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, means only one thing, and that’s 
shifting the tax responsibility away from the rich and putting it on 
the backs of the poor, in conjunction with major social cut-backs 
in terms of health and social services. 
 
And I guess it amazes me that you haven’t included in your tax 
reform discussion such things as the income tax as it would relate 
to increases in the provincial sales tax. At the last election and the 
election in 1982, you promised to eliminate the sales tax. After the 
1986 election, you increased the sales tax by 2 per cent. In the 
review that you’re doing, it’s not even mentioned as one of the 
possibilities of tax reform. 
 
I have here the list of the oil companies’ revenues and taxation in 
the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Chairman, I want to just quote 
some of the numbers. In 1981 the total value of the resource in 
Saskatchewan, the total amount of the value of the resource was 
$2.2 billion. And, Mr. Minister, in 1986 that had increased to 2.5, 
and yet the revenue to the province and to the people of the 
province had decreased, and decreased to a large extent. The 
amount of revenue and taxation that we were getting as the owners 
of the oil had actually gone down, even though the revenue had 
gone up considerably. 
 
Now it seems to me, Mr. Minister, that if you’re looking at tax 
reform in the province of Saskatchewan, it’s ridiculous to look at 
only the income tax side of it, and that in fact we should be 
looking at sales tax; we should be looking at liquor taxes; we 
should be looking in particular at the taxes resource companies 
pay. 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Minister, why you would take the position that 
oil companies should be excluded from the review when they’re 
one of the main sources of taxation in the province. We’re blessed 
with a large amount of oil and gas that belongs to the people of the 
province, and yet your friends are allowed to go free in terms of 
whether or not they pay more taxes. It’s not being reviewed in the 
same way as income tax is. Why have you chosen to go this route, 
very narrow on income tax, and not look at in a broad-based way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the hon. member is not accurate. It’s 
interesting, amongst other things, when the NDP refer to the 
revenues in oil back in 1981, they never mention the additional 
windfall that they got from the federal export tax on energy that 
they got because of the unwise policies of their friends, the 
Trudeau Liberals. And the additional that came, the additional 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . You guys kept them in office. You 
guys kept them in office. The NDP kept the former prime minister 
in office. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll take it a step further; it’s the NDP 
that also brought to the oil industry in Saskatchewan the national 
energy program. So they get their revenues on the federal export 
tax, not a provincial 

tax. 
 
With regard to the question of the corporate tax, changes in the 
corporate tax were made in this year’s budget which I think have 
been well debated. 
 
Let me move though to the question of sales tax and why sales tax 
cannot be considered in the overall position at this time, and we 
have debated this in previous debates. And as part of the overall 
federal tax reform, there is the ongoing studies now as to a 
national sales tax. And the relationship of national sales tax to 
provincial sales taxes is a matter of ongoing negotiations and 
discussions. The federal government did put out its position paper 
on the sales taxes to whether it be a valued added, the different 
options; some have been backed away from, and we’re now 
looking at the national sales tax. I don’t know where that’s going 
to come down because no final decisions have been made by the 
federal government. I think there’s a growing consensus, I 
understand, in Ottawa of all three parties to have major changes, at 
least, to the federal sales tax. Whether it results in a new national 
sales tax, I simply can’t tell you. Those negotiations are going on. 
 
If it is a national sales tax, then the question that Saskatchewan 
will have to address: do we then participate as part of the national 
sales tax? Again, we cannot decide that until we see what the 
federal proposals are. I have indicated publicly, as part of federal 
tax reform, that if it is workable and to the province’s advantage 
— or certainly not to the province’s detriment — if we can work 
in conjunction with the national sales tax to eliminate the 
duplication of activity for small business, we would be happy to 
do that. But until we have those proposals, I simply can’t put 
proposals out for public discussion. 
 
I can assure the hon. member that the question of the national sales 
tax and the position of sales taxes is very much part of the federal 
tax reform, and there’s been great public discussion on it now. I do 
believe that there is support from all — but I’m subject to 
correction — but I believe that there’s support from all three 
parties in Ottawa to at least major revisions in the federal sales tax. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well I guess the thing that will be confusing 
to a lot of people, if there were a lot of people watching this, Mr. 
Minister, is why you can go ahead and review one section of the 
tax system in this province if it is as you say, that you’re in the 
midst of negotiation with the federal government. What sense does 
it make it isolate one narrow area of taxation and pretend you’re 
studying it when obviously you’re not? 
 
And I say to you that this makes as much sense as the federal 
parties so-called tax reform that they announced back in ’85. And 
then we find out this year, as the headlines of many newspapers 
are carrying — here’s one, Tuesday, May 10, 1988, “5,220 
well-off Canadians paid no taxes in 1986.” This is after tax 
reform. 
 
And we know what happened in the United States, in places like 
California, where right-wing governments have so-called tax 
reform. Two things happen: the rich pay much less taxes; middle 
and lower income pay at 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2340 
 

least as much, but get many less services in terms of health care 
and social services. 
 
Here is another new item. “Tax-cutting British budget snips cord 
of consensus politics,” by Richard Gwyn. And in that article he 
says, and I want to quote: 
 

What Lawson has done is turn Britain’s haves into 
have-everythings and its have-nots into have-nothings. More 
than half of the nine billion tax cut will end up in the wallets 
and the purses of the top 5 per cent of British income earners. 

 
And he goes on later in the article to say: 
 

The profound effects of the budget, though, will be political. 
It legitimizes greed by giving to those who already have. It 
sanctifies meanness of spirit by giving nothing to those who 
now have nothing. 

 
And, Mr. Minister, I say to you that this is what your tax reform is. 
And I’m not going to debate it a long time tonight because I think 
the people of the province know what you’re up to. But all I’ll say 
is that two years from now, when we come back to this House and 
compare who is paying what, I would be willing to bet that under 
your tax reform the Richard Gwyn article will have relevance in 
Saskatchewan as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Is that the same Richard Gwyn who said that 
the NDP suffered a terrible defeat in Lac-St-Jean last night? 
Maybe he is partially accurate. 
 
I think in fairness, to the hon. member, in the areas under 
provincial control we have made some major changes in terms of 
the corporate side. In terms of the corporate side, we’ve made 
major changes with the new corporate capital surcharge reductions 
for small business, and adjustments so that the base in . . . Relative 
to Alberta, which is our major competition in the corporate side, 
it’s a level playing field, at the same time increasing revenues to 
the people of the province. 
 
(2215) 
 
On the personal income tax side we put out the proposals for fair 
discussion. If you feel that strongly . . . I hope that the hon. 
member in the opposition does put in position papers. 
 
Thirdly, I agree with the hon. member that the people will decide 
this. Fourthly, I do say on the national sales tax and the changes on 
sales tax that that’s a matter of some public debate now, and that’s 
not a change we could make in conjunction with the federal 
proposals that are out there for public discussion now. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, this 
morning I gave you a whole series of questions and, 
disappointingly, contrary to your commitment to provide it at 2 
o’clock, I have not yet received any of the answers, and it makes it 
pretty well impossible to follow up in any of the questions. And I 
suppose I took you at your word, Mr. Minister; I expected that you 
would have it here. I’m not going to bother going and delaying it 
any further. Apparently you had them in 

your possession and didn’t have the decency to send them over so 
that you wouldn’t be questioned in respect to them. That can be 
the only conclusion that I can come to. 
 
You gave a commitment today at 2 o’clock that you’d have them 
here, and your word is about as good as the figures in your budget 
— inaccurate. I want to indicate, Mr. Minister, that having 
received these, I’ll pursue them with the public because the public 
perception of this minister leaves much to be desired. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Minister, I am prepared to proceed with the 
conclusion of the estimates and the individual items. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 8 — Statutory. 
 
Items 9 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 13 — Statutory 
 
Items 14 and 15 agreed to. 
 
Item 16 — Statutory 
 
Items 17 to 23 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 24 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In respect to item 24, Mr. Minister, I think I 
understand the deletion, but in 1987-88 there was 13.5 
person-years; in the current year there are none. Is that as a result 
of the new arrangement in respect to pensions, I take it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And the establishment of the revolving fund. 
 
Item 24 agreed. 
 
Items 25 and 26 — Statutory 
 
Items 27 and 28 agreed to. 
 
Item 29 — Statutory 
 
Items 30 to 32 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Items 33 to 36 inclusive — Statutory 
 
Item 37 agreed to. 
 
Vote 18 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Finance — Servicing the Public Debt — Government Share 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 12 
 
Vote 12 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Debt Redemption, Sinking Fund and 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2341 
 

Interest Payments 
Finance 
Vote 175 

 
Vote 175 agreed to. 
 

Vote 176 
 
Vote 176 agreed to. 
 

Vote 177 
 
Vote 177 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates (No. 2) 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Finance 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 18 

 
Vote 18 agreed to. 
 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Finance 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 12 
 
Vote 12 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Koskie: — That’s not to be dealt with, the item on Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I mean, it doesn’t matter, but it’s out of 
order. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — No, no. That was not itemized, nor were we 
prepared, Mr. Chairman, in the items that were indicated to handle 
today. And we want to ask, certainly, many questions in respect to 
the potash corporation expenditure, and we’re not prepared to let 
that go. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister’s officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to take the opportunity 
before the committee to thank the officials from the Department of 
Finance for their help and assistance. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, I too, Mr. Chairman, would like to take the 
opportunity to thank the array of officials who, as my colleague 
indicated, had the difficult job of directing the Minister of Finance. 
I thank them all for their efforts. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Referral of Bill to Standing Committee on 
Non-Controversial Bills 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
move, seconded by the Minister of Finance: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 99, An Act 
respecting Consequential Amendments to 

Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of The Small 
Claims Act, be discharged, and the Bill be referred to the 
Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 62 — An Act respecting Securities in 
Saskatchewan 

 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Chairman, with me is Mr. Bill Wheatley, 
chairman of the securities commission; Miss Barbara Shourounis, 
registrar; and Dean Murrison, legal review officer. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, contrary to what 
has been our practice in many Bills, on this one I intend to make 
some general comments — and others might make general or 
specific comments — but I intend to make some general 
comments under the first . . . under clause no. 1, then the specific 
comments which I have I intend to make under the various 
clauses, so I say to the minister that the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — He’s actually read this Bill. 
 
(2230) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well I guess we’ll see, won’t we, as we got 
through the Bill, I say to the member from Morse. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to complain, and do so in the strongest 
possible terms, about the inability of the government to properly 
administer the area of securities. Mr. Minister, the consequences 
of your incompetence are perhaps more obvious here than they are 
in some other areas. They’ve really been spectacular. 
 
This area, Mr. Minister, was no place for your government’s 
patronage, and it was certainly no place for the petulance of the 
former minister, the member from Maple Creek. And I can only 
describe her treatment of the officials of the former chairman as 
being petulant. Mr. Minister, petulant — petulant is spelled 
T-o-r-y — that’s how I spell petulant. 
 
Mr. Premier, it has cost the Saskatchewan taxpayer enormous 
sums of money. I know that this is a difficult area. These Bills are 
esoteric in nature and difficult for the public to follow. Mr. 
Minister, your inability to administer this area, your firing of the 
former chairman, Ken Stevenson, for what I believe was an 
attempt to do his job, has cost the Saskatchewan taxpayer 
enormous sums of money. Your failures, your failure to regulate 
the securities business and the financial services business has been 
the results — to use the language of my 12-year-old — have been 
awesome. 
 
We have seen, Mr. Minister, we’ve seen Pioneer Trust; we’ve 
seen Principal Trust. The revelations about the latter go on day 
after day after day. It was a hot issue last summer. A year has 
come and gone, the temperature’s 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2342 
 

gone back up to the ’30s, and we still are dealing with the 
Principal Trust issue. And the Principal Trust issue is a number of 
things, a number of failings, but it’s also a failure of your 
government to regulate the securities industry. 
 
Mr. Minister, there are some improvements in this legislation, but 
if your government’s is not going to enforce it, then, Mr. Minister, 
we are wasting our time tonight; it isn’t going to do a bit of good. 
 
Principal Trust, Mr. Minister, went for two years, if I’m correct, 
did not file financial statements required under The Investment 
Contracts Act. Was anything done about it? No. As the member 
from Saskatoon indicated, that failure by your government to 
require the financial statements — which incidentally didn’t exist 
. . . There was a good reason why you weren’t getting quarterly 
statements and annual financial statements, because no firm of 
chartered accountants would give them an unqualified statement. 
That coincided, Mr. Minister, with large contributions to the 
Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, I say to you again that your performance in this area 
has been abysmal. We’ve seen the Pioneer Trust fiasco. We’ve 
seen the Principal Trust fiasco. This government has been unable 
to regulate the sale of securities, the sale of investments, the 
regulation of financial institutions. Your failure’s have been 
spectacular, Mr. Minister. It’s cost the taxpayers an enormous sum 
of money, and there really should have . . . I know that there are 
often . . . we often call for ministerial resignations when we don’t 
really expect them, but given the enormous size of the failures in 
this area, there really ought to have been some ministerial 
resignations. 
 
If this legislature functioned as a parliament should function, there 
would have been some ministerial resignations. Mr. Minister, your 
failures have been spectacular. The cost to the Saskatchewan 
public has been burdensome, indeed. People have lost money that 
they could ill afford to lose. 
 
You know, Mr. Minister, previous to this government taking 
office, it was assumed that if you invested your money in the like 
of Principal Trust or Associated or First Investors Corporation, 
you didn’t have to worry because “they” were looking after it. 
Who was “they”? “They” was you people. 
 
When our friends and our relatives were investing money and 
assuming that “they” were making sure it was safe, you don’t have 
to look any further than this Chamber for “they”. “They” are 
sitting right over there. And “they” weren’t doing their job. 
 
The very idea, Mr. Minister, of going for two years and allowing 
Principal Trust to continue to sell investments without filing the 
annual financial statements . . . There really ought to have been 
some resignations over this. But you people plough merrily along. 
You will stand up in a minute and, I’m sure, make some inane 
excuse. In the meantime, Saskatchewan people are out a lot of 
money because of your incompetence. 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I think the public are inured to the hon. 
member’s extreme statements. And let me simply advise him that 
with regard to the Principal Group, the Securities Commission had 
an involvement to the extent of dealing with the sale of mutual 
funds under the existing legislation. That, I’m advised, was the 
limit to their obligations and powers, and I am advised that the 
mutual funds activities under the Principal Group of companies, 
the mutual funds are fairly much in good shape, I’m advised. 
 
The other activities come about through other regulatory actions. 
Obviously the Code inquiry will have some influence on how 
governments view the actions of their relationship with the 
Principal Group of companies. 
 
So I think the member is being unfair when he tries to draw in the 
Securities Commission to a regulatory activity that did not have 
the statutory power to act upon. And I think we should recognize 
in the narrow activity that it had under the previous . . . the 
existing legislation — not the present Bill or the Bill before the 
Assembly — that they were limited to that component, being 
mutual funds, and I’m advised that mutual funds seem to be in 
reasonably good shape. 
 
So I’m only asking out of fairness that you may criticize the 
regulatory activities, much more broad than dealing with the 
Securities Commission. Securities Commission, within the 
framework that it has responsibility for, I would doubt that the 
hon. member can really find criticism. He can make the political 
statements, but I don’t believe he can find criticism. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, I note in section 166 that 
The Investment Contracts Act is repealed. And I note also that, 
Mr. Minister, in my reading of this legislation — and I’m sure the 
minister will correct me if I’m wrong — that hereafter these type 
of investments will now come under the Securities Commission. 
So I think this is relevant. 
 
Mr. Minister, what bothers us is that one year has gone by. We 
began last year at about this time asking the member from Maple 
Creek about this issue. It’s all on those . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . Right. On those rare occasions when she graced 
the House with her presence, she never admitted that there was 
anything wrong with going for two years without receiving the 
financial statements. She has never once said, yes, we should have 
had the financial statements for the 1985 year. She never said that, 
nor has this government ever admitted there’s anything wrong 
with going for two years without getting the financial statements, 
which were just not available. No firm of accountants would give 
them an unqualified statement. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, this is relevant to this, the Bill, and it’s relevant 
that you people have never admitted your role in the tragedy. 
Complicity might be a more accurate term. Mr. Minister, we’d just 
like to hear you say we made a mistake, and you’ve never done it. 
You and the member from Maple Creek have insisted that you are 
as clean as the driven snow on the whole issue, that you did 
everything you should, and that the whole problem belongs to the 
province of Alberta. 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2343 
 

Well it doesn’t, Mr. Minister. Your officials, the officials of this 
government had a responsibility, and your officials sitting with 
you, and I’m not drawing them into the debate, they’re not part of 
this debate — you, Mr. Minister, are now responsible, the Minister 
of Finance, who I think is the actual minister in charge of the 
Securities Commission . . . I’m told I’m wrong, it is the Minister 
of Finance . . . the Minister of Justice, I meant to say. 
 
The Minister of Justice, who is responsible for this, has the 
responsibility for ensuring that never happens again. But never 
again is any one who is selling securities and investments to the 
Saskatchewan public ever allowed to go for two years without 
filing the requisite financial statements. We’d just like to get that 
statement out of you. There’s probably not a whole lot we can do 
this evening in this Bill to prevent the tragedy which went before, 
but I and my colleagues would like to ensure it doesn’t happen 
again. And nothing that you have said has given us any assurance 
that it won’t happen again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I suppose the hon. member is talking about 
mistakes. And I was heartened tonight to hear from one of the 
members of the New Democratic Party opposition that they had 
nothing to do with the potash nationalization, and it wasn’t them; 
that they weren’t around then and that it was a mistake. That’s the 
first one, but then I heard a couple of other members that were in 
that former administration who are standing by their decision. So I 
. . . again, I think the hon. member certainly alluded to the fact that 
. . . no one wants to see investors lose through that, and as the 
Code inquiry unfolds, I think the situation with the company is 
going to lead to a rather, I suspect, lengthy and perhaps even 
damning report, if one can accept the newspaper reports as to that 
inquiry. 
 
I do believe that the hon. member, in fairness, has to remember 
that there were questions as to an inquiry here. I don’t think the 
public would have been well served with a, basically a year-long 
inquiry, and it’s going to go on quite a bit longer in Alberta. That 
was a request that we had last summer. The question ultimately 
will be decided, and I’ll grant this to the hon. member, and I think 
that the Code inquiry results will be an influence on several 
governments’ responses. Ultimately were any errors made? If 
there were errors, were people prejudiced as a result of the errors? 
— and those are the fundamental questions that have to be 
answered. I don’t think it’s fair to make those decisions without 
the Code inquiry. 
 
(2245) 
 
We’ve indicated on numerous occasions we don’t rule out the 
inquiry if that’s what it takes, but we’re better served and the 
people are better served to await the Code inquiry. That’s all I’m 
suggesting to the hon. member. 
 
Secondly, the hon. member does make reference to The 
Investment Contracts Act, and that is a change that that now 
comes under the Securities Commission by virtue of the Bill 
before the Assembly. And that will then require, similar now to 
other jurisdictions, that the investment contracts be treated like 
other securities, with the reporting procedures that are set out in 
the Act. So I think 

we would both agree that, even without the Principal inquiry, the 
action in principle is probably a good idea, and that is in fact being 
done in this legislation before the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, nobody’s asking for a Code 
inquiry in Saskatchewan. What we were asking you to do is do 
your job. Principal Trust, Associated Investors, and First Investors 
were not allowed to sell in the province of Ontario because they 
weren’t meeting the standards of the province of Ontario. Our 
standards are identical, and you let them sell, ad it cost the 
taxpayer tends of thousands of dollars. That is what we’re 
complaining about, Mr. Minister, is that you let them sell those 
securities when they weren’t meeting the standards of this 
province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — But keep in mind that they were selling in the 
province of Saskatchewan, I believe, since the 1950s and early 
’60s under those very provisions, so to leave the impression that it 
was recent is not accurate. They were selling here for a long 
period of time, and under the provisions of Saskatchewan 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. Minister, the 
difference in that regard is that the previous administration 
enforced the securities legislation, and that’s precisely the point 
here tonight, that you can introduce new securities legislation, and 
if you have no resolve to enforce it, it means nothing. So this is of 
the essence here tonight. 
 
And you would like to pretend, initially, that this legislation has 
nothing to do with Principal Trust, that the Securities Commission 
has had nothing to do with the Principal Group. Do you deny that 
in 1986 your Securities Commission did conduct an investigation 
into the Principal Group’s actions in Saskatoon? Do you deny 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Except that I’m advised that that dealt with 
mutual fund sales. And I’ve said at the outset that the Securities 
Commission, under the previous legislation, had responsibility in 
the mutual fund sales. So certainly that investigation went on, but 
dealt with exactly what I had said at the outset as to the area of 
responsibility for the Securities Commission. 
 
So all I’m asking the hon. member, that if you’re critical, I mean, 
don’t blame the Securities Commission for the legislative powers 
that they were acting under before. And I’ve said, on the mutual 
funds, that that’s where the limit of their regulatory authority was, 
and that on the mutual funds that I’m advised that they’re in good 
shape; the Principal Group of companies’ mutual funds are in 
good shape. 
 
So all I’m saying is that I’m not denying there was an 
investigation. It dealt with the sales of the mutual funds and not 
the investment contracts. The investment contracts will now be 
moved under the jurisdiction of the Securities Commission under 
the legislation before us, but that wasn’t their regulatory authority 
before. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Do you deny that there was fraud in the 
Saskatoon office of Principal Trust with respect to the sale 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2344 
 

of those mutual funds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m not trying to be picky. I’m trying to be 
precise. You indicated, was there fraud. That’s not the information 
that I have. There were forgeries alleged of sales personnel 
signing, obviously, others’ names to documents. That practice was 
investigated and action was taken. I’m not . . . as I say, I’m trying 
to be precise, given the criminal nature of the statements used; 
that’s all I’m trying to do here. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — In order to be precise, if there was forgery in the 
Saskatoon office of the Principal Group, can you confirm that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Not really. I confirm that there were 
allegations. I’ll have to check and see if there was a criminal 
resolution of the matter and whether the courts did in fact make 
that ruling. I don’t believe they did. 
 
My understanding was that the decision as to prosecutions went to 
the Department of Justice, and on their advice, no prosecution. So 
I’m not aware if there was a final determination. And again, I’m 
not . . . I’m sure that the Leader of the Opposition will understand 
the difficulty I have in responding to the questions. 
 
But there were the allegations of forgery. Employees were 
dismissed on investigation. My understanding was there was not a 
court determination of the criminal offence and that the decision 
not to prosecute was done with the Department of Justice as in the 
normal course. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well, Mr. Minister, this illustrates very clearly 
the kind of concern that we have on this side of the House with 
respect to your will or ability to implement your own legislation 
and to properly regulate in the field of securities and investments. 
What you’re really saying, in that it didn’t go to court and that it 
was handled by the Justice department, is that your securities 
people, in conjunction with the Department of Justice, winked and 
nodded when there was forgery found in the office of the Principal 
Group in Saskatoon in 1986. 
 
And I contend that, as my colleague has said earlier this evening, 
that when it came to enforcement of The Investment Contracts 
Act, section 25, by the former minister from Maple Creek with 
respect to the filing of quarterly financial statements, that minister 
and that department also winked and nodded. 
 
So we have a couple of instances here of very clear regulatory 
failure from your government and your government’s minister, 
who are either unwilling or unable to enforce their own legislation. 
 
I simply will leave it at that, that this legislation, this new 
securities legislation matters not a whit if there’s no resolve to 
enforce it and to regulate properly. And I dare say that the public 
of Saskatchewan ought not to bear the risk in making investments 
that their own government is not regulating. That’s damning, Mr. 
Minister. And I’ll just leave it at that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I would like to make it clear to the hon. 
member that when the Securities Commission investigated, the 
employees were dismissed. So to say that there was no 
enforcement is not quite fair. 
 
Your point that prosecution sometimes . . . that incidents don’t 
result in prosecutions, there can be any one of a number of reasons 
for it, including the ability of prosecutors to determine whether 
there is the evidence needed to prosecute the charge. That’s a 
judgement call that I think it fair to say the Leader of the 
Opposition and . . .(inaudible interjection). . . No, I think it fair to 
say that we’ve had a practice in this province that the ministers of 
justice and attorneys general do not interfere in those. Those are 
calls made by prosecutors. That’s been the practice. I’m not here 
to indicate that they did less than their job when they reviewed the 
evidence, but I do want to indicate that employees were dismissed 
upon the investigation of this matter. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I want 
to know whether or not this Bill is a uniform Bill in the sense that 
the same Bill is being submitted to various jurisdictions, and if it 
is, what is the authorship of the Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, it’s not what we would call uniform 
legislation. It is similar, and certainly there’s been a strong 
working relationship with the various jurisdictions. It is based on 
Ontario, very similar to Quebec, Alberta, British Columbia, and 
Manitoba, but it’s not what we would call uniform legislation, 
which is traditionally legislation very much precisely along the 
lines. It’s not uniform in that context. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, I direct this to the chairman. 
This is a very long Bill, and if we really want to know the meaning 
of eternity, we can try going through this section by section. I have 
a suggestion to make which I think could be done by unanimous 
consent. I’m sure there’s 5,000 reasons why it can’t be done and 
6,000 rules covering them, but I have the following suggestion. If I 
am the only person who has questions on individual sections, and I 
don’t know that that’s true, but if I am, we could simply proceed 
to the sections where I have questions and not ask approval of 
each individual section in between, and that would speed us 
through in a fraction of the time it would take. If the Government 
House Leader prefers to go through it page by page, we can do 
that as well. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — There is amendments to clause 81 and clause 
96. We could approve it to clause 80. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Let’s just go through it page by page. 
 
Page 1 agreed to. 
 
Pages 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Page 13 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you have increased the number 
of commission members from four to six. I’m wondering why 
you’ve done that? 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2345 
 

(2300) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — It will allow the commission to obviously 
broaden the experience of people to be appointed, but secondly, it 
allows them now to establish panels for hearings. 
 
Page 13 agreed to. 
 
Pages 14 and 15 agreed to. 
 
Page 16 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, section 9, and the notice 
provided for the hearings — I didn’t see an equivalent for this in 
the old section, actually. I don’t particularly object to it. I’m just 
wondering in what circumstances that would be of use? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m advised that these provisions were in 
regulations before. 
 
Page 16 agreed to. 
 
Pages 17 to 20 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Page 21 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, as far as I’m concerned, we 
can approve of part 3 as a whole. I have no questions on part 3. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Is part 3 agreed? Carried. 
 
Page 28 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Did we not approve part 3? Then we’re on 
page 28. 
 
If I understand this correctly, we used to require financial 
statements. Now we’re allowing audits. It doesn’t seem to be a 
great burden to require them to send financial statements. All it 
costs is a 37-cent stamp and they mail it in. 
 
I don’t believe, Mr. Minister, that providing for audits provides 
nearly the same protection. Now I’ll stop there, and perhaps the 
minister will tell me that I’m wrong, that we used to . . . But it 
seems to me we used to require financial statements, and now we 
simply allow audits. And I’m wondering why the change. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, financial statements are still required by 
section 24. 
 
I think Hansard may be having some difficulty. I think if we do 
parts, if we can indicate to Hansard that we have gone from page 
such-and-such to the next page, so that they can follow along. Is 
that . . . Thank you. 
 
Page 28 agreed to. 
 
Page 29 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I always get suspicious when I see the word, 
“self-regulation”. This, I think, is new. At least the 

title is new. I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if in the era of 
everything from Pioneer to Principal to Osler, if we really need a 
degree of self-regulation in the securities industry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well this would refer to the investment 
dealers association, the stock exchange, for example, as approved 
by order in council as set out in clause 8. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I question whether or not 
there’s any room for self-regulation in an industry involving such 
enormous sums of money. It is one thing to allow some businesses 
to regulate themselves — that may make some sense, it’s been 
used in the professions for a long time — but with respect to 
securities, there is enormous sums of money involved, and the 
presence of enormous sums of money doesn’t always bring out the 
best in people. 
 
And I’m really wondering if there’s any place for self-regulation 
in this whole area at all. There are very few areas that have 
distinguished themselves over the last three or four years with 
respect to self-regulation, and the problems here have just been 
endless. 
 
Mr. Minister, our jurisdictions have a reputation for being 
pussy-cats when it comes to regulating some of these things. We 
allow some things that the U.S. jurisdiction would not allow, and 
here I see we are moving further in the area of self-regulation. 
 
I say, Mr. Minister, I don’t think there’s any place for 
self-regulation in an area which involves the exchange of as much 
money as this does, and the opportunity for the enormous profits 
and the enormous short cuts — if I can be very kind to them — 
the enormous short cuts that are sometimes taken here. I say, Mr. 
Minister, I think there’s no place for self-regulation in the 
securities industry at all. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m not debating the merits of self-regulating 
or demerits of self-regulating; I do indicate to the hon. member the 
difficulties. And I think other jurisdictions have wrestled with the 
difficulties of regulating, for example, a stock exchange. And they 
trade not just beyond or within the borders of a particular 
jurisdiction, in many cases they trade internationally. 
 
I’m not debating the point with the hon. member. I’m just raising 
the difficulty, for example, of trying to regulate a stock exchange 
or a commodity exchange. One may say that they don’t have a 
place; I think that realistically they are here and others have 
wrestled with the difficulties. And keep in mind that we are not 
giving up our jurisdiction, that we still have the approval 
requirement of the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 
 
So I think it’s a realistic recognition of the stock market that there 
are some rather imperfect regulations out there now, regulatory 
agencies now. Other jurisdictions have looked at it and haven’t 
come up with solutions yet. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, I have no questions on part . . . 
That takes us then to part VI; I have no questions on that. And if 
that’s agreed that takes us from page 33 to page 38. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Just to clarify that takes us from page 29, 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2346 
 

part V through to page 38. 
 
Page 38 agreed to. 
 
Page 39 agreed to. 
 
Page 40 
 
Mr. Shillington: — There is, Mr. Minister, a new exemption here, 
I believe, unless again I’m mistaken. And I guess I haven’t been 
so far, so I’m not doing badly. 
 
Section 39(1)(e) appears to provide a new exemption. I wonder 
what exactly the . . . Perhaps I’m wrong. If I am, I’m sure the 
minister will correct me, but if it does provide a new exemption, I 
would be interested in knowing the reason for exempting this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That was an exemption, though, that was 
previously there at $97,000, and that goes back some considerable 
time. It’s just been increased to 150,000. 
 
Page 40 agreed to. 
 
Pages 41 to 51 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Page 52 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. I’ve been asked by 
Hansard to specify the clause and this is a very long section. It 
appears to be section 39 which began on page . . . Section 39, 
beginning on page 39, is still trolling along nicely on page 52. 
 
It appears, Mr. Minister, that we are . . . I refer you to clause (l). 
We are omitting “a security issued and sold by a prospector for the 
purpose of financing a prospecting expedition.” I’m wondering 
why this is being omitted. In the old Act, I think this was called a 
grub stake. I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, why this is being 
omitted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, it’s the same provision that’s in the old 
legislation. The hon. member’s right — prospector’s grub stake. 
It’s carried over from the previous Bill. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, there’s section (p) then, 
provides for yet more securities which will be exempted by 
regulation. What precisely does the department, does the 
commission rather, anticipate exempting under section (p)? Again 
it’s section 39, beginning on page 39 — this gets very awkward 
with something this long — subsection 2, sub-subsection (p). 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The advice I have on clause 2, subclause (p) is 
that it is merely a provision for the commission, that there are so 
many new types of securities coming down, that rather than bring 
it back for legislative change all the time, that they have the power 
by regulation, if a new security comes along, to define it and 
exempt it or reject it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — All I can say, Mr. Minister, is I hope you’ll 
show a good deal more deference to the average investor and a 
great deal less deference to those who are selling them than you 
have in the past when you make these exemptions. There’s 
altogether too little protection 

given in this whole area to the investing public, and far too much 
deference paid to those who sell them and those who issue them. 
 
Page 52 agreed. 
 
Page 53 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What are the futures? As I read this, this 
includes a farmer who sells a futures contract on his crop. And I 
see the officials vigorously shaking their heads. Perhaps through 
the minister they’ll enlighten me as to why the language . . . 
 

No person shall trade with . . . commodity future contracts in 
Saskatchewan unless:. . . 

 
It seems to me, Mr. Minister, that language is broad enough to 
include a farmer who sells his crop by virtue of a future contract. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If we go back to the definition section, you 
will find that it’s commodity futures traded on exchanges, so it 
doesn’t include the farmers. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That may be so; that may be so. 
 
Page 53 agreed to. 
 
Pages 54 and 55 agreed to. 
 
Page 56 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Now this I assume, Mr. Minister, is the 
section which governs the information which must be given to an 
investor who buys 100 shares in the Royal Bank of Canada 
because he thinks the price is going up or because he thinks the 
dividend is attractive. 
 
(2315) 
 
Subsection 42(1)(d) requires the dealer to provide “the name of the 
person or company from, to or through whom or which the 
security was bought and sold.” How would you come by that 
information? You can provide the exchange, but I’m not sure 
where you’re gong to get the name of the person or company that 
the security was bought from. 
 
(2315) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, if I can just make a noted 
comment, I don’t think this information’s been provided for half a 
century. If I buy securities, if the Chairman decides to invest his 
many millions in the shares of the ABC moose pasture and buys 
them through the Toronto Stock Exchange, the shares may come 
from anywhere in the world, and I’m not sure how one would get 
the information required in subsection (d). 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Except that this is the same as the section 74 
in the old Act, and it really . . . all it does, and it’s a standard 
practice — if someone buys shares from a dealer, they will get a 
statement after as to the amount. It’s like your bill, and that’s the 
information that’s forwarded, required to be forwarded in the past. 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2347 
 

Mr. Shillington: — I know it’s the same as the existing section, 
but that doesn’t mollify me one bit. There’s no way of providing 
this information. 
 
Mr. Minister, if the chairman sells 100 shares . . . say if he buys 
100 shares in the Royal Bank, the seller may live in Tuktoyaktuk, 
they may live in Des Moines, Iowa, they may live in Paris, they 
may be sold through any one of a million brokers. What actually 
happens, the actual process is the chairman takes his bulging 
wallet down to the brokerage in Saskatoon, opens it up, the moths 
fly out, he pulls it out, and then he’s going to buy his shares. The 
broker calls the Toronto Stock Exchange or the Montreal Stock 
Exchange. They, in turn, have an electronic system by which they 
know what shares are available, but there’s no way in the world of 
ever knowing the name of the person in Tuktoyaktuk, Des 
Moines, Iowa, Paris, or London who sold you the share. This just 
won’t work. You may blissfully ignore it if you like, but it won’t 
work. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — In the vast majority of cases, he’s acting as 
broker, not as agent. I think your questions come from (d), which 
says, where he’s acting as agent, he then is required — he’s 
obviously acting on behalf of someone — he then is required to 
declare; otherwise I’m advised that it’s that statement that one gets 
. . . If one buys shares, you’ll get a statement of the purchase price, 
the commission, and the number of shares. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I’m not going to keep us here 
all night, but this guess is no better than your last one. 
 
The chairman goes down to get the shares in the Royal Bank of 
Canada, the broker is acting as his agent. On rare occasions, the 
broker will own 100 shares in the Royal Bank of Canada which 
he’s prepared to sell to the chairman. The broker must then 
indicate on the confirmation sheet that the broker is selling as 
principal. And that’s the only circumstance under which the 
broker doesn’t sell as a agent, when he’s selling his own shares or 
the shares of his own firm. Otherwise, if he’s buying them through 
an exchange in Montreal or New York or Toronto, he’s selling as 
an agent. 
 
Mr. Minister, you last explanation was no better than the one went 
before it. I’d ask you to try again . . .(inaudible interjection). . . I 
don’t think he has any idea what he’s talking about. 
 
In one fashion or another, more through my work as a lawyer than 
an individual, I’ve been buying these things for 20 years. And I’ll 
tell you, Mr. Minister, this information is not available and cannot 
be provided in any case. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well we think that . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . No, we’re not wrong. In many cases what may be 
happening, if someone for example buys shares through Wood 
Gundy, and they may have acquired it from, say, another 
brokerage house, it will probably have a code on it, and there’s a 
provision in here that they may use codes. And they advise that 
that’s how the transaction would be indicated to the buyer. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, it’s too late at night to 

continue this argument. I tell you you’re wrong about this. It 
doesn’t appear on any of them. I can show you half a dozen 
confirmation slips from half a dozen brokerage firms; the 
information isn’t there. Nobody wants it, nobody needs it, and 
nobody, quite frankly, needs this subsection (d). 
 
You don’t provide the name of the person you bought it — 
through whom — that is not known. And it would be an enormous 
job to actually find out who in Des Moines, Iowa, sold 100 shares, 
in our mythical case, to the chairman. 
 
I’m not going to keep it up, Mr. Minister, but this section is 
nonsense. It just is not done, cannot be done in today’s electronic 
system. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I hope the hon. member will give me all those 
slips that he has just offered, confirmation slips offered to give. 
 
Page 56 agreed to. 
 
Pages 57 and 58 agreed to. 
 
Page 59 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The old section 78 provided a right of 
rescission. That doesn’t seem to have been carried forward into the 
new legislation. I see the officials shaking their heads, so perhaps 
it has been. I’ll wait for the minister to confirm it has been, in fact. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The rescission rights are set out in section 79, 
I’m advised. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Another comment I have about section 46 is, 
is there’s a typo in it. I don’t intend to take a long time, but there 
are, by my count, 146 words in that sentence — and I’ve a 
complaint about that — and I don’t see a verb. I think there’s a 
mistake in the printing of this particular section. It just does not 
make sense, Mr. Minister. 
 
So I don’t expect your officials to . . . I know the position of the 
minister opposite is that he can do no wrong and has done no 
wrong, but I think this section does not make sense as it stands. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If you want to write out a House amendment, 
I’d be more than pleased to entertain it and consider it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister . . . Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, 
two years hence, when I have your job, we won’t need House 
amendments, we’ll be coming here with Bills properly drafted. 
I’m not the minister of Finance, and I’m not drafting amendments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ve always been prepared to accept 
reasonable House amendments, and I just wanted to indicate that 
to the hon. member. And I was not in any way trying to pry what 
commitments the hon. member had made with the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Page 59 agreed to. 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2348 
 

Pages 60 to 63 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Page 64 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, part X — I’m probably going 
to take longer to explain this than it would have taken to go 
through it the other way — part X is unchanged except for the 
increase in the minimum, actually, to 150,000, and I think we 
could approve part X beginning at section 57 on page 64 and 
ending at section 58 on page 66. 
 
Page 64 agreed to. 
 
Page 65 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I do want to mention to the hon. member in 
section 46 that he couldn’t find the verb; that we have found the 
verb and it’s in the second line. 
 
Page 66 agreed to. 
 
Page 67 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, section 59, why would we not 
give this to people who are investing in it, the price paid to the 
underwriters? With respect to sale of some securities, the 
underwriters charge enormous amounts, and I’m wondering why 
we would omit that? Why would we omit information which 
seems to me to be necessary to figure out what the underwriters 
charged? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — It has to be in the final prospectus; it may not 
be set in the preliminary prospectus. That’s why it can be omitted. 
 
Page 67 agreed to. 
 
Page 68 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. I think, Mr. Chairman, we can 
approve the balance of this part which will take us to, and we can 
approve all of part 12 which will take us to section 79. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Page 79. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The minister’s correct. It’s page 79, section 
80. 
 
Pages 68 to 79 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 81 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Clause 81 of the printed Bill. House 
amendment to Clause 81 of the printed Bill. Will the members 
take the amendment as read? 
 
Clause 81 as amended agreed to. 
 
Page 80 agreed to. 
 
Pages 81 and 82 agreed to. 
 
Page 83 

Mr. Shillington: — As far as I’m concerned, Mr. Minister . . . or, 
Mr. Chairman, rather, we can approve everything up to the end of 
part 13 which ends at section 83 on page 96. 
 
Page 83 agreed to. 
 
Pages 84 to 99 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Page 100 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, again, I know the hour is 
getting late. I think we could go to the end of part — my roman 
numerals are not good — part XIV, which takes us to section 97. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — House amendment to clause 96. Will the 
members take the amendment as read? 
 
Clause 96 as amended agreed to. 
 
Page 105 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I just asked the Securities 
Commission to look at this, and I’ll be very brief. This is one of 
the very serious problems with the sale of securities; it involves 
take-over bids. I think there’s a crying need to have legislation 
which requires all classes of shareholders to be treated equally. 
Mr. Minister, it seems to me that the current practice of buying 
voting shares without buying non-voting shares could create some 
serious inequities. I just raise the point, and I would ask the 
commission to look at it. 
 
(2330) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m advised that the securities commissioners 
are in fact looking at that problem. 
 
Page 105 agreed to. 
 
Pages 106 to 124 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Page 125 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, again the same comment. 
Insider trading has been a major problem. This seems to me to be 
largely the old legislation which hasn’t done the job before, and 
I’m not sure it will again. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the things that was in section 121 of the old 
section provided that those who didn’t have the knowledge, and 
were therefore treated unfairly, could sue, and that seems to have 
been left out. If it’s in somewhere else, I’d appreciate knowing 
that, but that seems to me to be a very useful remedy to leave the 
shareholders. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I am advised, as we go through the insider 
trading itself dealing other parts, the fines are now up to $1 
million, and there are now penalties for passing on information as 
well, not just using. So there has been an expansion of the 
penalties, an increase in the size of the penalties, but an expansion 
of the offences. 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2349 
 

Mr. Shillington: — That doesn’t exactly answer my question. 
Why leave out the civil remedy which was given to those who 
didn’t have the knowledge? It appears to me to have been left out. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — It’s in part XIX. 
 
Page 125 agreed to. 
 
Pages 126 to 135 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Page 136 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, those are all of the questions I 
had on the legislation actually. Unless members want to 
mechanically go through these pages one by one, it seems to me 
we could simply approve the balance of it without going through 
the pages. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Is the Bill approved to Clause 167 — coming 
into force? Carried. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Could I take the opportunity, Mr. Chairman, 
and members of the Assembly, to thank the officials from the 
Securities Commission for their help and assistance. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, I’d like to join with the Minister, 
particularly at such an ungodly hour of the night, to have them 
there. I do appreciate it. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 62 — An Act respecting Securities in 
Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 
now be read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — By leave now, I move this Bill be now 
read a third time. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 11:36 p.m. 


