


















































May 9, 1988 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 May 9, 1988 
 

1185 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Human Resources, Labour and Employment 

Ordinary Expenditure  Vote 20 
 

Mr. Chairman:  Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my left, 
your right, is the deputy minister of Human Resources, Labour 
and Employment, Gerry Meier; and on my right is the assistant 
deputy minister, Judy Moore. And we have other officials with 
us in the Assembly and I may be able to consult with them if 
necessary, but I’ll only introduce these two for the time being. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I join 
with the minister in welcoming the officials to the assembly for 
the review of the department’s track record and plans and 
expenditures in this most important of government departments. 
 
I note that it has changed slightly since we last reviewed this 
department last year, and that the Indian and Native Affairs 
Secretariat is now listed as a separate department. However, I 
look forward over the hours and days to come, as we undertake 
a meaningful review of this government’s plans and dealings 
with issues related to labour, to the women’s directorate, the 
senior’s directorate, and also to youth and youth employment. 
Those are all areas, Mr. Chairman, which obviously all of us in 
this Assembly would consider to be extremely important, 
particularly in the climate and the environment that faces 
Saskatchewan people today. 
 
As past practice did dictate, Mr. Chairman, I look forward to a 
free and frank exchange. I anticipate that in response to clear 
questions, there will be clear answers, and that by co-operating, 
we will be able to serve the public interest with that kind of 
decorum in the Legislative Assembly Chambers, Mr. Chairman. 
So it is with that kind of spirit and expectation that we’d like to 
begin the deliberations related to the Department of Human 
Resources, Labour and Employment. 
 
I’d like to begin, Mr. Chairman, with some routine questions. I 
suspect that the minister will have anticipated these as they are 
all routine and are asked each year and are part of the 
accountability of the Government of Saskatchewan to the 
people of Saskatchewan. and let me begin, first of all, Mr. 
Chairman, with the minister’s office. I would ask, Mr. Minister, 
if you would please advise me of the names, the positions or 
titles, and the salaries of each of your ministerial assistants at 
two separate dates  the dates I ask as at December 31, 1987, 
and then at the end of the fiscal year as at March 31, 1988. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  As far as I know, the answers to your 
two questions are the same. I have a list here that I could send 
over for you. 

Mr. Hagel:  Just to read into the record then, Mr. Chairman, 
I think it is appropriate to do this because there will be some 
who will be interested in the record from year to year. I ask for 
your confirmation here, Mr. Minister, a John Schmeiser, 
ministerial assistant 2, monthly salary of $2,637, and your 
indication that that was the salary both at December 31, ’87 and 
at March 31, ’88; Debbie McNabb, ministerial assistant 3, 
$3,397 per month at both dates; and Brenda Syhlonyk, 
ministerial assistant D, $2,334 as of both of those dates. 
 
Mr. Minister, the salary for Brenda Syhlonyk, Syhlonyk  and 
please advise me if I am pronouncing that incorrectly  last 
year was listed at $2,244 per month, this year is $2,334; and 
Mr. Schmeiser was last year listed at $2,524 per month, this 
year at $2,637. Could you please advise me of the rationale for 
the change in those salaries? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Well we’re dealing first with Mr. 
Schmeiser. He started off at our office with no experience in 
that field and received a small promotion to a ministerial 
assistant 2. With respect to Brenda Syhlonyk, she has had many 
raises over the years. She started out in the office of the minister 
of labour under one of your colleagues and then served under, 
or served with my predecessor and also with myself, and from 
time to time she received increases. She was very young when 
she started and she is still quite young and has improved 
considerably over the years and is entitled to performance 
increases the same as other young people as they get older and 
more experienced. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  I simply note, Mr. Minister, that . . . and I will 
assume that it was an error that occurred innocently when you 
said that for the dates of December 31, ’87 and March 31, ’88, 
that all people were at the same salary rate. I note that, as a 
matter of fact, with Miss Syhlonyk, that’s not the case and that 
she received an increment increase, you say, of 4 per cent 
effective January 1, ’88. Just nothing that slight error in the 
explanation, we’ll proceed, Mr. Minister. 
 
I would just want to clarify with you as well, then, your 
rationale for the increase of the salary of Mr. Schmeiser was 
because of a reclassification. Was that the rational for that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, I suppose technically I 
might have been a day out. The figures you have before you are 
for January 1 and you were referring to December 31, and I 
think that is close enough to have some meeting of the minds 
here. As far as I’m concerned, they’re all still in the same 
positions. On March 31, 1988 they were all still in the same 
positions. 
 
I advised you that Mr. Schmeiser, as indicated, was promoted to 
an MA2 (ministerial assistant 2)  different responsibilities 
and duties. And you have the explanation before you in black 
and yellow. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Well, Mr. Minister, I simply make the point. 
And we’re really dealing with a relatively minor item here, that 
when a straightforward question is asked, as I said before, it is 
my commitment to you, sir, that in 
  



 
May 9, 1988 

1186 
 

reviewing the expenditures of your department, that I will do 
my best to ask straightforward questions and would assume that 
straightforward answers would be forthcoming. And perhaps if 
we can avoid getting one’s nose out of joint and proceeding 
with the questions, we can do that in the best interests of the 
public. And so I simply request of you, sir, that you do your 
best to provide straightforward answers to straightforward 
questions. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to give you four questions in total. And 
you may prefer to provide these in writing rather than reading 
them into the record; that’s quite satisfactory to me. 
 
The four questions . . . to save time, I’ll just read them together, 
Mr. Minister. First of all, does any of these three individuals 
have a government car or car allowance? Secondly, in terms of 
out-of-province travel in the past year, in the fiscal year ’87-88, 
could you please tell me what out-of-province travel you 
undertook and was undertaken by your staff. And I would ask 
that in each of those cases that you identify the date of the 
travel, the destination, the number of persons on the trips, the 
purpose, and the total cost. That’s standard question. I would 
anticipate you have the information handy. 
 
Thirdly, Mr. Minister, and please tell me if I’m going too 
quickly for you here, would you please advise me of the total 
in-province ministerial air travel that you undertook as minister 
responsible for this department in 1987-88 with the same 
details: in other words, date, destination, number of person, 
purpose, and total cost. 
 
And finally, number four, Mr. Minister, I would ask that you 
would provide information as to the cost that the department 
incurred in 1987-88 for (a) polling; for (b) advertising; and (c) 
for aircraft charter or lease. And again, I would ask in each case 
that you would identify the date of the expenditure, the purpose, 
the firm involved, and the total cost. 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  I’ve got some of the information . . . 
You asked about 10 questions all a once; we’ll try to get you the 
answers as fast as possible. 
 
The first question: do any of my ministerial assistants or 
secretaries  and the one you referred to, Brenda Syhlonyk, 
was a chief secretary; they’re all lumped together, you know  
do any of them have a government car. The answer is no. 
 
With respect to travel, I think you were interested in my travel, 
is that not correct? 
 
An Hon. Member:  And your staff. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  And the staff, all right. We’ll see what 
they can find for those three that we mentioned. 
 
With respect to my travel, out-of-province travel: Ottawa, 
March 25 to 27, ’87, first ministers’ conference on aboriginal 
constitutional affairs, $524.30; Halifax, Nova Scotia, June 8 to 
12, ’87, federal-provincial ministers’ conference for the status 
of women, $2,068.73  I recall 

that I took in two meetings at that time and they were at two 
different locations, so there was a little extra flying; Ottawa, 
October 4 and 5, ’87, status of women meeting, $945.80; St. 
John’s, Newfoundland, November 2 to 5, ’87, labour-market 
ministers’ meeting, $1,600.60; for a total of $5,198.83 for 
out-of-province travel. 
 
With respect to in-province travel, the following trips: Melville, 
Prince Alberta, return to Melville; Prince Albert to Melville; 
Regina, Saskatoon, Regina; Regina to Saskatoon, return to 
Regina; Regina to Saskatoon; Regina to Saskatoon and return to 
Regina; Regina to Saskatoon and return to Regina; Regina to 
Nipawin; Melville, Saskatoon and return to Melville. For a total 
. . . just a second, that’s administrative services. There’s also 
women’s secretariat from Melville to Prince Albert and return 
to Melville; and a seniors’ directorate from Regina to Nipawin, 
for a total of $6402.62. 
 
Looking at out-of-province travel here . . . we’ll try to sort it out 
for the three people in question. For Mr. Schell, his total is 
$4,245  trips to Halifax, Nova Scotia, Ottawa, and St. John’s. 
He was with me on those particular trips as my adviser and 
assistant. With respect to Mr. Schmeiser, I only show one trip 
here to an occupational health and safety conference in 
Winnipeg, for $527.03. And Ms. Syhlonyk did not travel out of 
province. 
 
If you have any other questions, we’ll gather up some more 
information. I’ll give you more information as we go. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Mr. Minister, I am encouraged by your 
willingness to provide information and pleased to see that. Are 
you intending to send that information across in writing or 
simply let it set at what you’ve read into the record? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  When I sent you the information, you 
read it into the record, so I read it into the record for you. It will 
appear in Hansard, and it’s not my intention to do both. So I’ll 
either send you the information and you can have I, or else I 
will read it for you and it will be in Hansard. 
 
With respect to advertising, the total for my department for last 
year was $20,513.08, and administrative services was $893.86. 
Labour relations branch, for the senior labour relations officer 
newspaper advertisement, $3,757.50. It seems it takes quite a 
lot of money to find the appropriate people with the expertise. 
In employment opportunities branch, advertising for the 
opportunities ’87 newspaper advertisements, $10,995.50. 
Communication branch spent $647 advertising, 198.64 for the 
minister’s tour notices, and newspaper advertisements of 
449.02. And the seniors’ heritage program, $3,598.04. The 
women’s directorate spent $620.52 on newspaper 
advertisement. The total I’ve given you is 20,513.08. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Mr. Minister, I would appreciate if you would 
send all of that across to save time. It’s not necessary that this 
be read into the record, but I do note that what you fail to 
mention is the dates for your in-province travel. And also I 
assume that when you 
  



 
May 9, 1988 

1187 
 

didn’t say someone was accompanying you, other than the 
minister or the assistants that you mentioned, that you were as a 
matter of fact travelling alone, and it was only yourself who 
was travelling at company expense . . . or at government 
expense, I’m sorry. 
 
Mr. Minister, you made some reference as well to having made 
some extra stops when you were talking about your 
interprovincial travel, and if you’d like to clarify what you 
meant by those, and I would ask again that you would advise 
me as to whether there were polling expenditures undertaken by 
your department. If you did say that, I’m sorry; I missed it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Well we don’t have any polling 
expenditures here, and there’s none that we know of, but we’ll 
go back and check to be sure. As far as I know, as I stand here 
now, there was no polling expenditures in this department. 
 
With respect to the extra stops: yes, I had two meetings, more 
or less, going on at the same time and they interchanged. So 
because I am a minister with many duties, I was able to cover 
two meetings on one trip to Halifax, but I had to go to Cape 
Breton to cover the women’s meeting while the social services 
ministers were meeting on labour matters and social services in 
other places. 
 
So I went to Halifax, flew to Sydney, rented a vehicle, and 
drove back to make connections in Halifax for the balance of 
the meeting. So I went to a meeting in Halifax; I went to Cape 
Breton for a meeting, came back, and caught the tail end of the 
meeting in Halifax. So that is the bouncing around on that trip 
by air and by land, and not by sea on that trip. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Well, Mr. Minister, I appreciate your 
clarification in those matters. You still neglected to mention the 
dates of those trips, and the easiest way . . . If you’ll just 
commit to me to send that information across, we’ll have it in 
total and we can proceed. 
 
Are you saying you’d prefer to read it into the record? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Well I already read the dates of the trips 
into the record. That one was specifically June 8 to 12, 1987. 
And when I read it into the record, I gave you the date and the 
amounts of the costs of those, and so since I read it in the 
record, there’s no need to send it over. You’ll have it tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Well then if you’d send over, Mr. Minister, the 
dates for your travel within the province which you didn’t 
mention. 
 
This is turning into a bit more of a tooth-pulling exercise that I 
anticipated, Mr. Minister, and perhaps if we can charge along in 
the interest of the protection of the public purse. 
 
Mr. Minister, I note that it is the intention of your department to 
pay some $1,477,500 to the property management corporation 
in this fiscal year ’88-89. And again I have a number or 
questions related to the department, what the bang for the buck 
that the 

department is getting from the property management 
corporation. If I may provide you with those questions, and 
again a written response is really quite sufficient, Mr. Minister. 
 
Regarding then property management corporation, I would ask 
that you would provide an itemized list of facilities provided to 
your department by the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation  facilities such as offices, compounds, parking 
lots, etc. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Minister, I would ask that you would identify the 
number of square feet, or in the case of parking lots, the number 
of stalls in each of those facilities that you cover in the first 
question. 
 
Thirdly, I ask that in those instances where the facility is not 
leased, would you indicate the amount which the department is 
paying the property management corporation for its use, this 
year, and how much was paid in fiscal year ’87-88. 
 
Fourthly, I would ask, in the case of all the facilities that I’ve 
described, would you please indicate the use that’s presently 
being put to those facilities. 
 
And finally, Mr. Minister, I would ask that you would provide 
an itemized list of the services being provided by the property 
management corporation, and the amount being charged to the 
department for those services, in this fiscal year, as well as how 
much was paid for those services in fiscal year ’87-88. And as 
an example, I use things such as mail service, government 
automobiles, furnishings, and so on. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you would please make a commitment to 
provide that information  as I say, to do it in writing is really 
quite sufficient  then we can proceed to other items that your 
department deals with. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  In answer to your question, the 
information . . . I have added on to it the additional information 
that is beyond what it would show on the paper. So I’m going to 
give this to you orally again because you want it in the record. 
 
And Saskatchewan Place, the third, fourth, and fifth floor, and 
sixth floor, the square metres, respectively, are 197.95; 
1,345.41; 129.70; and 1,241.24. That’s used for the head office 
of the department here in Regina. The Toronto Dominion Bank 
Building, the sixth and third floor, used for the women’s 
secretariat, Opportunities ’88 and the affirmative action 
program, respectively 367.2 metres and 521.79 metres; the 
Palliser square in Regina for seniors, 569.5 metres. That’s the 
headquarters of the seniors’ branch. London Life Building, 
Regina, 107.7 metres  and we’ve moved out of that space so 
we no longer are in there. The Circle Eight Building in 
Saskatoon for occupational health and safety, and labour 
standards, 320.4 square metres. And then the following 
buildings: the W.G. Davies Building in Moose Jaw, 18.1 square 
metres; Kramer Place, North Battleford, 14.10 square metres; 
McIntosh Mall, 12th floor, Prince Albert, 66 metres; E.I. Wood 
Building, Swift Current  and you may recognize some of 
these buildings  18.1 metres; the Kuziak building  who I 
know personally and recall him 
  



 
May 9, 1988 

1188 
 

being a member in that area  14.1 metres; and the Downtown 
Plaza in Estevan, 13.1 square metres; for a total of 4,944.39 
square metres, less the vacated space at the London Life 
Building of 107.7 square metres at a total charge to us of 
$1,477,500 for total services including leased space services 
provided by property management corporation. The last ones 
that I listed, the smaller ones, were the regional offices of the 
department. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Mr. Minister, will you provide the additional 
information that I requested that you did not respond to now. 
Will you provide that in writing for me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Sorry. What was the other information 
that you wanted? 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Well, Mr. Minister, I had requested that in the 
case of parking lots, the number of stalls; and also in terms of 
services provided by the property management corporation, the 
amounts being charged in the fiscal year ’87-88 as well as 
’88-89  and I had requested those two things. Again, if you’ll 
provide those in writing, that will be satisfactory. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ve given the 
information on the total costs and where the buildings are 
located, what they are used for. And I don’t count parking 
spots, and I don’t pay rent individually on parking spots. There 
has to be some limit on the amount of information we keep 
track of at our department, and I’ve given the member a clear 
picture of how much space we have, where it is, and the total 
cost of the property management corporation rental charts, and 
that’s as far as I can go. you know, we can’t spend thousands of 
dollars keeping track of all the fine little details for the member 
opposite, so that’s as far as we’ll go on that. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Well, Mr. Minister, I don’t know that it’s your 
place to determine what’s the fine little details for the member 
opposite that you ever have not a responsibility to provide. 
There are people in this province who are of the opinion that 
this government is mismanaging a good part of the office rental 
space in this province, to the tune of some $34,000 a day. And 
you just finished, on record her, putting forth the case that it 
would seem, at first glance, indicated responsible use of your 
travel in the interest of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
All I’m asking you to do here is to simply account in the same 
way that any responsible corporation would account for its 
expenditures. That’s all I’ve asked you to do. And I would 
simply ask, Mr. Minister . . . I’ve not, I’ve not intended to make 
a big issue out of this. If you’re hesitating to provide 
information this evening, I have said several times that I am 
quite satisfied with having this in writing so that we of the 
opposition can ensure that your department is spending money 
expeditiously in the interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
These items I’ve asked for are not niggly little items that are not 
discernible, and I simply ask for that information, and again I 
will accept it in writing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Well, Mr. Chairman, now the 

member opposite wants me to go out and count parking spaces. 
 
I have listed the buildings that there are. The public knows 
where they are; the addresses are given. If the public or the 
member opposite wants to count the parking spaces, he can go 
count them himself. I’m not going to go out and count parking 
spaces. I don’t park in these spaces. The employees and the 
public parks in these spaces. I’m not going to count them. I just 
simply refuse to count parking spaces, Mr. Chairman. 
 
With respect to the $34,000 per day on wasted space, the 
information that I have, sitting in cabinet, without giving you 
the detail of cabinet secrets  although you wouldn’t believe 
anything if you heard it  is that your figure is a calculation, 
that is, a guess that is based on prime retail space that is based 
on false information, and therefore, you are out sevenfold. 
You’ve exaggerated it by seven. And I ask, why stop at 34,000? 
Why don’t you just raise that to 240,000 or any kind of figure 
you want to. Just go ahead. You go ahead and put out any 
information you want, because it’s all you’re doing, is guessing. 
 
I’m telling you that the overall government figure, from what I 
can gather in cabinet and my colleagues, is one-seventh of that, 
but you’ve gone and put out that figure, and I’m not going to go 
out and bring you figures to prove to you that you’re 
exaggerating, because you will exaggerate anyway. And the 
very bottom line is: I’m not going to count parking spaces in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Well, Mr. Minister, counting parking spaces 
may be a more productive exercise than some of the things 
you’ve done, quite frankly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel:  And if you want to suggest that this government 
is wasting $240,000 a day on empty office space, I guess that’s 
your prerogative. 
 
Now I’m not asking you here, as the minister responsible for 
the property management corporation, to account for the 
functioning of that corporation. If you want to get into that, we 
can get into that, but that’s not what I’m assuming we’re here 
for tonight. 
 
We’re here tonight to deal with the Department of Human 
Resources, Labour and Employment. You are minister 
responsible for that department. Your department has a 
contractual relationship with the property management 
corporation for provision of facilities and services  an 
increase of some 14 per cent over last year. 
 
I have simply asked you tonight, as minister responsible for the 
expenditures of the Department of Human Resources, Labour 
and Employment, to advise the people of Saskatchewan how 
those expenditures are being charged to your department. That’s 
simply all I’ve asked you. Now if you want to make a major 
issue out of this, I guess we can make a major issue out of this, 
and we can debate your $240,000 a day of wasted office space, 
if that’s what you want to do. 
  



 
May 9, 1988 

1189 
 

I’m simply asking you to do the simple exercise of providing an 
accountability for the costs incurred by your department, paid to 
the property management corporation. Quite frankly, I’m fed up 
with the failure of minister after minister on that side of the 
Assembly side-stepping all of the questions that have to do with 
payment charged to your department by simply saying, well 
that’s the property management corporation’s prerogative; and, 
put those questions to the minister responsible for property 
management corporation  who in turn then will refuse to 
provide the information for each department. 
 
I am simply asking you for information, factual information, 
which your department has a responsibility to be held 
accountable for, related to expenditures that were incurred by 
your department and paid to the property management 
corporation. I’m not asking you to go out and count parking 
stalls, although if you want to dot it, go ahead and do it. That 
won’t upset me in the least. But that’s not what I’m asking here 
tonight, and I would assume, sir, that you will treat questions 
seriously and you will respond to them seriously, and in that 
way we can get on with a decent review of your department. 
 
I simply repeat my question, sir. Will you provide the 
information to the questions that I asked, that you haven’t 
provided here tonight. I repeat again that I would consider it 
quite acceptable to receive that response from you in writing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  The minister responsible for the 
property management corporation will answer for the property 
management corporation. I’ve told you how many square 
metres we lease from them and how much we pay to them, and 
that is all that I’m going to tell you because that’s all that is 
relevant here. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Well, Mr. Minister, isn’t this interesting, that 
you determine that the only thing that is relevant related to the 
expenditures that your department incurs, some $1.5 million 
paid on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan through your 
department to the property management corporation, that your 
only obligation is to be accountable to the people of 
Saskatchewan to say: here are the buildings; here’s how they’re 
used; this is how big they are; and altogether we pay 
$1,477,500. 
 
I suggest to you, sir, that your responsibility is greater than that. 
And I simply repeat my question again. Will you provide the 
information that you have not done yet. Will you provide the 
information as to the services provided to your department by 
the property management corporation such as meal service, 
government automobiles, furnishings, and so on. There will be 
the categories that are standard. Will you simply give me those 
figures. Again, I will accept those in writing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 
tries to find something negative or sinister in anything and 
everything that he looks at. And it’s typical of the NDP to do 
that. 
 
What we have here, just so that nobody is confused: the 
property management corporation is not a publicly traded stock 
corporation, but is a corporation that is 

owned by the Government of Saskatchewan. And if they were 
to make any profits that in the views of the members opposite 
would be outrageous, those outrageous profits would be turned 
over to the Department of Finance. so what you’re dealing with 
here is not a question of whether my rent is fair, but how you 
calculate it. I have submitted what the rent is and how much 
space we receive. The space is primarily open to the public, 
except for the private offices, that you can go in and see what 
we are getting for that money. There’s nothing sinister about it. 
We are paying a government Crown corporation rent, and they 
are in turn purchasing services. And so don’t let anyone suggest 
that this is some corporation of our friends. This is a 
corporation that belongs to the Government of Saskatchewan. 
So what you have here, Mr. Chairman, is again an attempt to 
exaggerate facts into some sort of evil fiction. And that’s not 
the case. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Well, Mr. Minister, I’m finding this exchange 
extremely insightful. This year, as compared to last year, your 
department is paying the property management corporation 
some 185,000 additional dollars  some 14 per cent 
approximately  presumably for exactly the same services that 
you received last year. You’ve refused to identify whether 
there’s any difference; you’ve refused to identify what you are 
paying for specific purposes. And all the time you’re expecting 
the people of Saskatchewan to accept the increases in their sales 
tax despite your promises to eliminate it; to accept the increases 
in the flat tax despite your promises to reduce income tax, and 
on and on without being willing to be accountable to the people 
of Saskatchewan. I’m not asking the impossible. I’m asking 
simple, straightforward question, that you simply identify what 
you spent last year on services and what you spent this year on 
service to the property management corporation. That’s not a 
complicated exercise. 
 
Mr. Minister, I will look forward to your response in writing to 
provide me with this additional information. And, Mr. 
Chairman, I will take my seat and allow the member from 
Regina Lakeview to address some issues of political importance 
and social importance to the minister in charge. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, it’s not complicated. 
What happens is that I get money from the Department of 
Finance, who gets it from the taxpayer, and then my department 
pays the rent to the property management corporation, and it 
pays its expenses. And if it has any money left over, it gives it 
back to the Department of Finance. So the money goes around 
in a circle. And what does it matter to me if they raised the rent? 
It’s going back to the same landlord; it’s going back to the same 
place. I get the money from Finance; it goes back to Finance. 
They’ve raised the rent since last year. Maybe it was too low 
last year. Maybe it’s a little too high this year. But the money is 
all . . . wherever, whether it’s high or low, the money is all 
going back to the same place, the Department of Finance. It’s 
all going back to the Department of Finance. The Department of 
Finance is the people. I get it from the people, I pay it back to 
the people, and that’s where the money goes. So there’s nothing 
mysterious about it. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
  



 
May 9, 1988 

1190 
 

as the minister responsible for the status of women, you’ve been 
entrusted with a tremendous responsibility. You are expected to 
advance policies and programs that will improve the status of 
women in Saskatchewan. To understand the importance of your 
position, one only needs to look at the statistics on the status of 
women. The overwhelming conclusion of the information on 
women is that the experience of women is the experience of 
poverty. The recent report of the National Council of Welfare 
stated that one out of six children being raised by their mothers 
alone lives in poverty. And this is not surprising, Mr. Minister, 
considering that women’s average income in Saskatchewan is 
only 57 per cent of that of men and that 70 per cent of minimum 
wage earners are women and the minimum wage has increased 
by only 25 cents since 1982. 
 
The percentage of women in the labour force has been 
increasing every year, as you know, Mr. Minister. The 
percentage of Saskatchewan women aged 25 to 34 years, for 
example, has increased from 45.5 per cent in 1975 to 71.8 per 
cent in 1986. And the reason why women are entering the 
labour force, Mr. Minister, is because women must work out of 
economic necessity. Women must work in order to contribute to 
the family income or to provide, in many cases, the sole source 
of income for their family. Women want to provide well for 
their families, but they have difficulty in doing so when they 
earn low wages. 
 
As you know, many women are ghettoized into low-paying jobs 
that are low paying primarily because it is considered women’s 
work. Pay equity  equal pay for work of equal value  
attempts to redress the historical undervaluation of women’s 
work. And I suggest that this government should follow the lead 
of Manitoba and Ontario and implement pay equity in the 
public sector. 
 
Working women, Mr. Minister, also desperately need high 
quality, accessible, affordable day car, but I understand that 
your government has frozen subsidies to day care, which 
greatly limits the money available for high-quality day care. 
 
Mr. Minister, I understand that there are negotiations with the 
federal government with respect to day care, and I would like 
you to tell us tonight what your government’s policy is with 
respect to improving the day-care situation in Saskatchewan. 
And would you please advise us as to the status of negotiations 
with the federal government on the matter of day care. 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, the negotiations with the 
federal government are going quite well. They have a 
commitment to double the number of day-care spaces in Canada 
in the next seven years. In addition, they have seen fit to give 
parents a choice in day care, and they are increasing the per 
child income tax deduction from $2,000 to $4,000 per child  
a maximum of 8,000 per family. I recall that maximum being 
. . . that’s right on, isn’t it? It’s 8,000 maximum. 
 
And these negotiations are going well. There will be more 
spaces. I’m in the process now of announcing  I think 

the press release has gone out  that there’ll be new spaces. I 
think the exact sum is 40 . . . possibly 30. I’ll try to be accurate, 
but 30 or 40 new spaces announced in Saskatoon Lakeview, in 
the new Lutheran housing project, which contains low-income 
families, senior citizens  a cross-section of society. The new 
project will also have single parents living there, and the day 
care will be operated by the housing authority. 
 
In the near future you will hear additional announcements of 
many more rural day-care spaces. And so . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  When? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  And the member opposite asks when. I 
said in the future, and that I mean in the near future. And I will 
make an announcement. The members need not be concerned. I 
will make an announcement of the locations and the number of 
spaces. And I will give the members opposite ample 
opportunity to be negative on the topic, because the negative 
democratic party insists on their right to be negative and they 
will get their opportunity. 
 
But we are continuing to increase day care availability, and I 
have indicated earlier it’s my intention to introduce a day care 
Act into this Assembly this spring  something that we do not 
now have. So, Mr. Chairman, we are making progress in that 
regard. See, the difference between our party and the members 
opposite is that we think positive; you might say we’re the 
positive conservatives rather than the negative democrats. And 
we believe in action, they believe in rhetoric. 
 
So when they shouted long and loud about day care, they had 
many fewer spaces than we now have. When they had the 
opportunity to do something, they talked. And now they’re in 
opposition and they continue to talk. We are taking action; and 
you’ll see a lot of action in this area. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Chairman, the positive conservatives did 
quite negatively in Saskatoon Eastview and Regina 
Elphinstone, I might say. 
 
I should just mention at this point that tonight some colleagues 
and I went out and had Chinese food for supper, and in my 
fortune cookie, this is the fortune that I got, Mr. Chairman, 
“Hope for the best, but prepare for the worst.” and I must say 
that I thought that was rather appropriate for this evening. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you please tell us what your government’s 
policy is with respect to pay equity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Well the law in Saskatchewan is quite 
clear. We go beyond equal pay for the same work; we go to 
equal pay for similar work. What the member opposite is 
suggesting, that a government set everybody’s pay cheque in 
Saskatchewan by government decree. And we’re not prepared 
to do it at this time. The members opposite refer to Manitoba 
and Ontario, and I do not see any improvements for women 
there that exceed the improvement in Saskatchewan. 
 
So, I mean, what she’s talking about is a red herring in 
  



 
May 9, 1988 

1191 
 

other government bureaucracy, and what we are enforcing in 
Saskatchewan is equal pay for similar work, regardless if it’s 
men or women  equal pay for similar work. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman, I have at length 
in this Assembly outlined for the minister the problems with 
equal pay for similar work. Basically, they are that it’s very 
easy for an employer to make the work somewhat dissimilar 
and avoid paying equal pay by alleging it’s not similar work. 
 
Also, the equal pay for similar work provisions are not 
mandatory, are not proactive. The obligation is not on the 
employer to implement those provision. Instead, the employee 
has to bring a claim or an action against the employer before 
it’s enforceable, and in that sense, it’s quite inadequate. 
 
And the minister says that we wish to impose . . . write the pay 
cheque or whatever for every person in this province. Well 
that’s absolutely ridiculous, and he knows it. And it’s not doing 
fair to the principle of equal pay for equal work, which he also 
knows. 
 
Women’s organizations across this country, including many of 
the women’s organizations in Saskatchewan, are asking for 
equal pay for work of equal value. And by making that 
comment, he is suggesting that these women’s organizations, 
including these national women’s organization, are being 
ridiculous. And I think that ‘s exactly what he intended to say, 
Mr. Chairman. Obviously, his government does not intend to 
implement equal pay, and once again it will drag its feet on 
social policy across this country, as opposed to being a leader 
and in the forefront. 
 
In addition to the poverty, Mr. Chairman, that so many women 
face, women have had to bear the brunt of government 
cut-backs in so many areas in Saskatchewan  75 per cent of 
the jobs eliminated in the public service were held by women. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, your government gave over 200 women 
dental therapists the pink slip when you dismantled the 
school-based children’s dental plan. Some of these women were 
dental therapists because they were heading families themselves 
and were the sole wage earners for the family. And others were 
supplementing the family income, like the farm woman in the 
Shaunavon area who, I understand, has now launched a lawsuit 
against this government. The insensitivity of these cuts and the 
insensitive cuts to the social assistant levels, and in particular 
the elimination of transportation expenses, had made it even 
more difficult, Mr. Minister, for these women and for their 
families to break the cycle of poverty. And what we see here is 
a very anti-woman, anti-family approach and policy by your 
government by firing so many women through government 
cut-backs and by cutting back on social assistance to women. 
 
Your government last year also cut funding to the 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission, which lessened the 
ability of women to seek protection for sexual discrimination 
and harassment in the work place, 

inasmuch as the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission 
doesn’t have enough funds at its disposal to deal with all these 
problems. We find this policy very anti-women. 
 
Funding to the Regina Transition House has been cut this year 
by another $10,000  back to pre-1983 levels, I understand, 
Mr. Minister. In Saskatoon during the ’87-88 fiscal year, 204 
women came to Interval House seeking shelter for themselves 
and their children; yet during that same period, Mr. Minister, I 
am advised that 432 families could not seek refuge in that 
shelter. Many of them may have been put up in hotels or 
motels, but as I made the point earlier  or last year rather  
these locations are not particularly safe for women. The shelter 
is far more advisable and far safer than a motel or a hotel. 
 
So we have a situation in Saskatchewan where more than twice 
as many families are being turned away from the Interval House 
than are actually being given shelter there. And, Mr. Minister, 
women in Saskatchewan find this unacceptable. These women 
and children are fleeing desperate, violent, life-threatening 
situation, and statistics show, Mr. Minister, that an average 
woman is beaten 28 times before asking for help  28 times is 
the average before she asks for help. So when she finally seeks 
help, Mr. Minister, she will go to the transition home and 
probably not find shelter there because of underfunding by your 
government. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I would like to ask you for a breakdown. I 
understand that there is going to be more money available for 
situations of violence. And I would like a breakdown form you, 
Mr. Minister, of the  and you don’t have to give this go me 
tonight; you can give it to me by letter  of the transition 
homes across Saskatchewan and exactly what funding each of 
those transition homes is receiving in 1988. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Thank you, I’ve heard that speech 
before. I think you gave it last year, and that’s the only speech 
you ever give, really. It’s your consistent speech. And we will 
provide you with that information. 
 
But I think because you are so negative, you should hear 
something positive for a change. And I want to explain to you a 
few things. In 1981 the Women in government in our 
employment were 47 per cent of work-force, and 7.7 per cent of 
them were in management. And I think you were responsible  
a matter of fact, I’ll hold you responsible  for what the 
government did in 1981. You were very much a part of the 
government at that time in the position you had. 
 
Now in March of 1988, women in government are 48.6 per cent 
 that’s gone up 1.6 per cent. But compare women in 
management who have gone from 7.7 per cent to 23 per cent as 
women in management right now, and you compare our record. 
 
Now we’ve heard your speech before; we’ve heard your 
rhetoric. We know what you’re going to say. You don’t have to 
give us that story; we know what you’re going to say. It was 
recorded last year and the year before that, and so we already 
know you are very predictable. 
  



 
May 9, 1988 

1192 
 

But I want you to listen to some of the answers, I want you to 
know that there are now 27,000 more women employed in 
Saskatchewan than there were in 1982. I want you to know that 
the unemployment rate for women is 7.8 per cent; it’s the third 
lowest in Canada. We are tied with Manitoba, so they’re 
actually second lowest  Manitoba is 6.9 and we’re 7.8. And 
it’s fluctuating; we’re gaining on them right now. 
 
So we have a high participation rate in the work-force. We have 
government a high percentage, and it should be higher; we’re 
working in that direction. I’m not saying we’re perfect, but I’m 
saying that if we are not perfect at 23 per cent women in 
management in government now, where was your government 
at 7.7 per cent? is that something that you’re proud of? I don’t 
think so, but you don’t want to talk about the realities. You 
want to give your same standard speech. You want to make the 
same exaggerations. You want to talk about the Regina 
Transition House being reduced $10,000. I’ve given that 
explanation on television and to the media. 
 
Clearly, you don’t seem to understand that they are receiving 
the same per month as they were last year. You don’t seem to 
understand that when there was a chance last year, they were 
paid an additional sum last year for three months to give them 
notice of the change. You can’t seem to add and subtract, but 
that’s not surprising; that’s not surprising judging by the things 
that you’ve said in this Assembly. 
 
So what we here is, for example, in Regina since we’ve become 
government, a 67 per cent increase in the funding for women 
and family shelters in the city of Regina  a 67 per cent 
increase since we’ve become government. And you say it’s not 
enough. And yes, we will try to do more, but you won’t say 
how much is enough. And you think that the problem can be 
solved simply by pouring more money on the problem. Please 
don’t blame the government for the state of our society. 
 
When I try to influence the morals of this province, I am 
criticized. When I try to influence members opposite on the 
morals of this province, I am criticized. 
 
Don’t blame the government for the number of people that are 
mistreating their wives or children. We detest that idea. We try 
to stop it. We try to do something about it. Don’t blame the 
government for men who desert their families. We are certainly 
not in favour of that, and I give you a commitment that I will do 
everything possible. And we are doing more to have fathers be 
more responsible for their children and their wives. 
 
But somehow you think that this is a government program. We 
are doing what we can to influence the morals of this province, 
to do away with these problems. What you want to do is pour 
money onto the solution, but not look at the real cause. And the 
real cause is that we in this province have each other. We have 
to help our neighbours, our friends; we have each other get 
through life. We have to help each other solve problems so you 
don’t get into those situations. We cannot close a blind eye to 
the problems of our neighbours, and then when there is a 
beating or violence, then say, oh the government’s at fault. We 
all in this province together 

and we all have to do our part to improve our society. And yes, 
we will put more money, and we are putting more money into 
family shelters this year. We are always putting more money 
into counselling. 
 
(2000) 
 
But don’t hold the government responsible for everything that 
happens in this province. We do not . . . It’s not the policy of 
this government to dictate to the lives of the people and follow 
them around like a big government telling them exactly how to 
live. And when they get into trouble, we try to help them. When 
they get into trouble, we try to help them, but we’re not going to 
have a society here where the government is going to make 
absolutely every rule and enforce it. People have to live their 
own lives; we will help as much as possible. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Minister, will you provide us with the 
information with respect to transition homes, a breakdown of 
what each transition home is receiving across Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, she wasn’t listening 
again. I said we would send over the information as soon as it’s 
together. that’s the first thing I said when I got up last time. I 
say it for the second time: yes, we will provide you with the 
sums that each one is receiving. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now let me just say, 
the amount of women may have increased in the public service, 
but as I pointed out to you earlier, it’s also increased 
substantially in the work-force across Saskatchewan. And the 
fact that there may be more women working in the public 
service, is that the reason, Mr. Minister, that you were able to 
fire so many women in the public service? Because you had 
more women there  is that why you fired more women? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, we didn’t fire any 
women. We have workers. The member opposite should know 
this. We have workers. We don’t look at their gender; we have 
workers. Now she wants us to start deciding weather they are 
men or whether they are women. And that should matter, she 
suggesting. It’s does not. We have workers, persons. We have 
person-years. The member opposite likes to refer to people as 
persons. We have persons, If we have to lay off persons, we lay 
off person. But we do not look whether they are men or whether 
they are women. 
 
But again she wasn’t listening, Mr. Chairman. I was not talking 
about having more women in the public service. Yes, we do 
have 1.6 per cent more as a percentage. what I was talking 
about was 23 per cent in management as opposed to 7.7 per cent 
in management, and the member opposite either chose not to 
hear that, did not listen carefully, or simply is trying to ignore 
that fact, that more than threefold is our record of women in 
management. She’s talking about women not having the same 
income as men. They have to then do the same jobs as men and 
that’s what we’re trying to do in management, is to get women 
into management, into the better-paying jobs. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we are doing a lot to try to give women full 
equality in economics. Women have total legal equality 
  



 
May 9, 1988 

1193 
 

in this province. We are trying to assist women to become 
economically equal and for that purpose we have sponsored 
seminars in business. Of the new businesses being started, more 
than 50 per cent are being started by women. We will continue 
this type of policy. We try to influence young women to take 
education that will give them economic equality. We encourage 
them to go into the professions that pay the same as men. 
Teaching pays the same. Law pays the same, make or female. 
 
Now, not everyone in law makes the same amount of money. 
You’re judged by what society thinks you’re worth when they 
pay their fee, but men and women are paid the same  there’s 
no bar there. And it goes on and on that way in the professions. 
 
In business, nobody is guaranteed a certain wage. And we can 
see that it’s difficult to make a living in business. Women can 
make what they can make in accordance with how they run 
their business. Sometimes it’s even a matter of luck. But it’s the 
same for men as it is for women. 
 
In farming, there are not very many women in farming, but 
there are no special rules against women who farm. 
 
An Hon. Member:  There are lots of women in farming. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  The member opposite said there are lots 
of women in farming. Yes there are, but as a percentage . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes. As a percentage they are not a 
large factor. And I can tell that the member opposite is from 
Saskatoon, downtown Saskatoon. She would know exactly how 
many women are farming in the rural parts of Saskatchewan. 
But there are no special rules for men or women in farming. So 
when you go through all of the things there are no special rules 
but you have to encourage women to get an education that will 
give them economic equality. And income is directly related to 
education, and if you do statistics based on education of men 
and education of women outside of the blue-collar jobs, you 
will find that there is a very narrow gap. 
 
Now when you get to the blue-collar jobs, you will find that the 
factor is not education, but depending on what your union has 
negotiated for you. And men have considerably higher incomes 
in the blue-collar level because of the negotiations that have 
taken place and the jobs they fulfil. 
 
So we have to encourage . . . And this is happening. CNR 
(Canadian National Railways) in Melville recently hired six 
women to train as brake person. They will be paid exactly the 
same as men, and they will be paid, once they are fully trained 
and employed, in the range of 40,000 a year plus. They are 
doing the same jobs as men. Those are the kind of things that 
women have to do. People are paid on the basis of the position 
they fill, and if women fill those position, they will be paid the 
same. We encourage them to get an education to be able to fill 
those positions. 
 
Now members opposite quote statistics and statistics. I can find 
you statistics for almost anything. What I’m saying is the 
people of Saskatchewan know the situation; they know the 
reality of the world; they know that this 

government is trying everything possible to give women 
economic equality. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Minister, you said that the law pays men 
and women equally. That statement in itself tells everyone on 
this side of the House and many people outside of the House 
just how little you know about pay equity and equal pay for 
work of equal value. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard:  The fact of the matter is, is that many of the 
jobs held by women are traditionally low-paying jobs because 
their work has been undervalued. That’s the very principle upon 
which pay equity is based. And I know I’ve repeated that to you 
before; either you don’t understand it for some strange reason 
or you choose not to understand it, and I think it’s probably the 
latter, Mr. Minister. 
 
You talk about women in management. Well let me tell you that 
although we like to see women advance in management, there’s 
also a very serious problem with women in lower-paying jobs 
that has to be addressed, and that’s why we talk about pay 
equity. The fact of the matter is that women in lower-paying 
jobs are having difficulty making ends meet. And as I indicated 
to you before, by far the majority of people earning minimum 
wage are women  by far the majority. And many of those are 
single-parent mother, Mr. Minister. And you have to be 
concerned about that. For you to pass it off with your 
moralistic, self-righteous, chastising type comments does a 
disservice to the women of this province and to all the members 
in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Minister, with respect to another . . . You 
know, you talked about the affirmative action aspect. Let me 
just tell you that I have some statistics here, and I’m going to 
ask you if they’re correct  and that is that actually the number 
of women in non-traditional, non-management positions 
dropped to 7.3 per cent from 16.2 per cent in a 17-month period 
ending on August 31, 1987. 
 
The statistics look particularly at the temporary, part-time, entry 
level and non-union positions within the public service  a 
group that apparently covers 34 per cent of all civil servants. If 
you are unable to verify that tonight, I would ask you to send 
me the particular numbers on that so I can determine whether or 
not these figures are indeed correct. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, just when I say that the 
member opposite will find a statistic for anything, she comes up 
with another statistic. 
 
Your raw statistics could be accurate. I’m not saying they’re 
not, and I’m not saying they are. What I am saying is: it 
depends how you define non-traditional positions. 
 
Even if your statistics are anywhere near accurate, even take 
into account the definition of non-traditional positions, these are 
unionized positions we’re dealing with, and there are union 
contract rules for who fills out 
  



 
May 9, 1988 

1194 
 

positions. So we cannot, under the union rules, bump out men 
and put women in those positions. And I think you would be the 
first one to complain if we didn’t follow the negotiated contract. 
 
So we have to live within the union rules as they are negotiated. 
We are trying to get those rules changed and we will see how 
we do with the negotiations. And you might want to talk to your 
friends and get them to co-operate a bit more so that we can 
change those rules and have more women in those positions. 
 
But men are not saying, thank you very much, here’s my keys; I 
won’t drive this truck any more because you are trying to hire a 
woman for my job. Men don’t exactly want to lose their job for 
the sake of your statistics, see, because men are also people and 
they would like to have some job security. 
 
So these are the kind of union situations that we have to 
negotiate and improve through attrition. And so the men in the 
traditional jobs that the women want, these non-traditional jobs, 
are not laying down their shovels or turning in their keys, or 
saying, here you can have this crane, and those kind of things. 
 
It’ll take a little time to straighten out the union rules; it’ll take a 
little time through attrition to get more women in . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I just explained to you that at CN, which is 
federal . . . And I know you don’t like the federal government 
either, but the federal government through CN is hiring six 
women out of 12 people; 50 per cent of the new hirings for 
brake persons were women in Melville in the last two months. 
And what the men in Melville are not, though, saying: okay, 
you can have this train, I quit this job because I don’t want this 
job any more; you have to be able to hire more women so I’m 
quitting. 
 
So you don’t expect us to kick men out of their jobs driving 
trains or driving trucks so that women can do those jobs. When 
the jobs comes open, we will try to get women get an equal 
opportunity for those jobs. 
 
You suggest as to what’s an good example in this legislature. I 
suggest to you, hon. critic, that you are not speaking for all 
women in Saskatchewan when you stand up and give us some 
of your radical ideas. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Minister, nobody here has talked about 
kicking men out of their jobs, and that’s not what we’re 
suggesting and you know it. That’s a red herring on your part, 
and it’s another way that you want to undermine these policies 
that have been developed by women in Saskatchewan and 
women’s organizations. It’s just another way of you attacking 
women in this province. Nobody on this side of the House, 
nobody on this side of the House has suggested kicking men out 
of jobs. 
 
We feel that your government is not doing as much as it should 
to improve the lot of women in the province. And me as 
opposition critic for women, you as the minister responsible for 
women, have an obligation to direct our attention and our minds 
to those issues surrounding women. Not to try and pit women 
against men, which is what you tried to do with your last 
comments  in much 

the same way that this government has tried at every single step 
of the way to divide people and to pit farmer against workers; to 
make comments about United Church people to try to get others 
to hate the United Church people; to make comments against 
people because of their sexual orientation or because of a 
number of other things; to try to get people to hate other 
members of society. 
 
Well let me tell you, Mr. Minister, that that strategy is not going 
to work. Your strategy of dividing and disseminating hate 
throughout Saskatchewan is not going to work. You’re not 
going to divide men and women; you’re not going to divide 
farmers and worker; you’re not going to divide people on the 
basis of religion; you’re not going to divide people on the basis 
of race; because the people of Saskatchewan have another 
vision of Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard:  And New Democrats have another vision of 
Saskatchewan. We believe in a united Saskatchewan  people 
united, working together to solve problems. Obviously not your 
vision, Mr. Minister, because you are one of the worst 
individuals for disseminating hate and disseminating attitudes 
of division amongst people. Well, it’s totally unacceptable, Mr. 
Minister  totally unacceptable. 
 
(2015) 
 
I want to move into the women’s secretariat in particular, 
because your government’s reorganization of the women’s 
secretariat took place over a period of years, which we have 
discussed at some length before. And it’s created a certain 
amount of confusion on your part, I believe. 
 
There were originally 18 positions in 1982, and I believe now 
there are only nine positions in the women’s secretariat, 
something like one-half of what there were before. And I also 
find it very ironic, Mr. Minister, that after all this juggling 
around, the women’s directorate is now a part of the 
department, when the main reason, the original main reason 
your government created the women’s secretariat was so that it 
would be an independent body co-ordinating efforts between 
departments. And now we see it as lost in the maze of things in 
your department. 
 
Now I understand there are nine positions listed for the 
women’s directorate in the government telephone directory. 
However, only six positions are actually listed, and they are: 
director, senior policy analyst, project officer, research officer, 
officer manager, and support person. But you actually have nine 
persons in the estimates book, I believe. So could you please 
advise, what are the three remaining positions and whether or 
not those positions are currently vacant. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s very 
interesting that the member opposite talks about divisions 
among people and accuses our government of trying to divide 
people. 
  



 
May 9, 1988 

1195 
 

I refer the member opposite back to the very philosophy of her 
party based on the teachings of Marx, which advocates class 
struggle  continuous revolution and class struggle. Now I 
think maybe they’ve given up continuous revolution in Canada, 
but they certainly are a party that is based on class struggle, and 
then they of course have no conscience to come here and accuse 
me of trying to divide people. I don’t try to divide people. 
 
The reason I quit the NDP was because they represented about 
four or five narrow, special interest groups, and I wanted to be 
part of a party that would govern for and represent all parts of 
society. I gave up on class struggle when I quit that party. The 
negative democrats  they don’t like to be called NDP any 
more; they want to be called the ND, the negative democrats  
have to be against somebody all the time, against everything. 
Did they ever tell you what they were for? And when you 
consider what they are for, ask yourself, what would life be like 
in Saskatchewan if they introduced what they are for? 
 
I mean, it goes non and on beyond belief. They are like this 
with special interest groups like the National Farmers Union 
which yesterday was advocating that we buy nuclear 
submarines from the Soviet Union. Well why bother buying 
them? Why don’t we just hire them to patrol our waters so that 
they can tell us when they are spying on us? That would be a 
simple solution. That is the negative democratic party, a party 
of simple solutions. But when you’re government, you have to 
govern. You have to do what’s practical and reasonable. 
 
And so here is a person who comes from a party based on class 
struggle and has the audacity to accuse us of trying to divide 
people. We do not say we represent this group and that group 
and that group and that group. We represent all of 
Saskatchewan. And sometimes you have to balance the interests 
of various parties in this province. And I don’t mean political 
parties; I mean various groups’ interests have to be balanced. 
But at least this government claims to represent everyone in 
Saskatchewan and try to govern for the common good. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, then after she’s got this class struggle 
concept all mixed up, suggesting that we are in favour of class 
struggle when Marx was the one who invented it, then she said, 
there are three vacant positions in the department in the 
women’s secretariat. That’s not a revelation, Mr. Chairman. I 
know there are three vacant positions, and you will see an 
advertisement to fill those positions. Now not all of them are 
necessarily advertised in the paper, as I indicated earlier to the 
member from Moose Jaw North. It costs up to $3,700, 
sometimes even $5,000, to advertise for these top positions. But 
all three of those are being filled. And when they are filled, then 
there will be a full complement of staff. But there’s no 
revelation that there are three vacancies. Yes, there are, and yes, 
we are filling them. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Chairman, let’s hear the truth about this 
matter. That member says that they represent all of 
Saskatchewan. Do you want to know who they represent? They 
represent big business; they represent big resource companies; 
they represent multinational banks. That’s what that party 
represents, Mr. Minister, and their budget 

clearly shows that that’s who they represent. Those are the 
Tories’ friends, Mr. Minister, not the people of Saskatchewan. 
And that message came through loud and clear in the two 
by-elections. 
 
The People of Saskatchewan do not believe that they represent 
their interests. It’s a very small minority of people that the PC 
party represents  a very small minority of people in this 
province, and a number of people from out of the province in 
the form of big business and big resource companies and banks. 
That’s their following, Mr. Chairman. 
 
With respect to the women’s directorate, Mr. Chairman, I 
understand that you’re searching for a new director at this point 
in time and that Janet McGregor is leaving or has left the 
position. And I would like to know what the terms of her 
separation are; and I would also like to know whether in fact 
you are looking for a new director or executive director of the 
women’s secretariat. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, Janet McGregor 
obtained a position in British Columbia and gave us notice and 
left effective April 28, 1988. As the member indicated, we are 
advertising to fill the position and the ad is in the Regina paper 
and I believe the Saskatoon paper and maybe all across western 
Canada. I could check it; I have a copy of the ad in my pocket 
here. Yes, we are advertising for a replacement. 
 
Ms. Simard:  That makes two directors in two years, I 
believe, Mr. Minister. Two directors you’ve lost in two years. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, how much power this women’s 
directorate has to develop and recommend policies and 
programs to improve the status of women in this province. 
While your government has been juggling positions back and 
forth between departments, you’ve lost a clear focus on the 
issues and problems facing women today. 
 
You’ve gone down from 18 positions to nine, I understand, and 
three are vacant. And you’ve lost two directors in the course of 
two years. I understand also, Mr. Minister, that today you only 
have one researcher in the women’s directorate  just one 
researcher, Mr. Minister. And I would like to know how the 
women’s directorate can formulate policy and programs with 
only one researcher. It would appear to me that in the past there 
have been several research positions in that division, and now 
there’s only one, and that policy and program recommendations 
cannot be made without adequate staff and resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, there’s a classic 
difference here again between the thinking of the NDP and the 
thinking of this government. The NDP’s thinking is that you 
make changes by research. Our thinking is that you make 
changes by implementing policy, so we put more emphasis on 
implementing policy than we do on the research. 
 
But in addition to the research officer she refers to, the 
department as a whole has a research branch, and we are filling 
an additional position right now. So there will be 
  



 
May 9, 1988 

1196 
 

more research capability, but I wouldn’t put total emphasis on 
research. We’re more into solving the problem, and that’s what 
we are trying to do, rather than a lot of academic thought on 
topics that is filed on the shelf. 
 
And so what we are doing, Mr. Chairman, is trying to 
implement improvements for women. We are trying to assist in 
the organization of business seminars. We are trying to 
encourage young women in career choices, and we are putting 
the emphasis on the implementation. And we all know that it 
will take some time to make these changes and to bring about 
total economic equality. 
 
I believe the members opposite . . . Even the members opposite 
agree that it cannot be done instantly. After all, they had 11 
years as government to try to do this, and we have made more 
progress than they have since they had their opportunity. 
 
So we emphasize implementation and as much research as 
necessary. But we don’t emphasize a women’s research 
directorate. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Chairman, the minister said that he’s into 
solving the problem. Well I would like to say that I believe he’s 
part of the problem. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the 1986-87 annual report it mentioned that 
workshops and presentations were provided to a variety of 
groups throughout Saskatchewan. Could you provide us  if 
not tonight, in correspondence  with specific information on 
the groups that participated in these workshops and their 
presentations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Yes, we will. We’ll send it over to you 
as soon as it’s gathered up. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Minister, the same annual report 
mentioned that career counselling was provided by the 
women’s secretariat. I understand, however, that this career 
counselling no longer exists, or perhaps no longer exists. So I 
would like to know from you whether there presently is anyone 
on staff within the women’s directorate who is responsible for 
career counselling or conducting educational workshops and 
presentations of that nature. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, I though we were doing 
more of this, and I agree we should be doing more. I had 
indicated to the branch that I wanted to see more career 
counselling and more activity in the schools, and there was 
some internal resistance. but I think we’re overcoming the 
internal resistance there to going out on the road and spreading 
the word. And you will see more performance in that regard 
with respect to career counselling in the schools. 
 
Ms. Simard:  I think it’s important to note, Mr. Chairman, 
that at the end of February, the mayor’s task force on women’s 
issues tabled its final report to the Regina City council. And this 
report, which had the input of many women’s groups, made 122 
recommendations on topics such as family violence, non-profit 
day care, public housing, health care, affirmative action, 
pornography, and public transportation. And the task force 
recognized a wide range of issues which affect 

women and suggested many courses of action to assist women. 
Many of the recommendations from the task force instruct city 
council to lobby the provincial government to take action on 
many of these very important issues. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to know whether you are going to 
give the directorate the mandate to take a close look at the 
mayor’s task force and bring forward recommendations and 
ways in which the government can approach many of these 
problems and suggestions and bring them into effect. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, my department is 
looking at that report and I also want the Saskatchewan 
Women’s Advisory Council to have a look at that. We will 
listen to the recommendations and see what can be done to 
implement things. 
 
It’s always useful for city councils to offer their opinions, but 
we have to govern from a point of view of what’s good for the 
entire province. So we will examine that, and we will take the 
good things out of that and implement them. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Minister, we talked a bit about affirmative 
action earlier in the evening. Now I understand that the 
government has been to the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission to obtain approval for an affirmative action 
program and several conditions were attached to that program. 
Would you please tell us what those conditions are and what, if 
anything, you’ve done to meet the conditions. 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, the information is 
mostly public information already. I’ll read them out one to six: 
 

That the names of people appointed to the joint 
Saskatchewan Government Employees Union/Government 
of Saskatchewan affirmative action committee be 
submitted to the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission by January 31, 1988. This condition has been 
complied with. 

 
(2) That a progress report on the development of the 
comprehensive plan be submitted by April 30, 1988 to the 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission. (I believe 
that’s been done.) 

 
(3) That a comprehensive affirmative action plan 
developed by the joint affirmative action committee be 
submitted to the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission by June 30, 1988. (And they will attempt to 
do that.) 

 
(4) That in accordance with Regulation 42 of The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code a report be submitted 
to the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission by April 
30, 1988 on the actions taken during the preceding year to 
implement the interim plan, on progress made, on 
difficulties encountered and on changes to the plan that 
may be considered. 

  



 
May 9, 1988 

1197 
 

 
The following is done. As I indicated, the names of the persons 
appointed to the joint SGEU-Saskatchewan government 
committee has been submitted. The progress report has been 
sent in. The comprehensive plans will be submitted by June 30, 
’88 unless a request is made and approved by the Human Rights 
Commission for an extension 
 
The other elements of the plan are: 
 

That a report be submitted to the Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Commission by June 30, 1988 on funding that is 
provided for affirmative action including the amount 
allocated for technical aids, support services, education 
and training, accessibility, etc. (I might say that by funding 
we mean money out of the treasury.) 

 
(6) That a report on the accessibility review of government 
owned/rented buildings be submitted to the Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Commission by June 30, 1988. 

 
The report on the equity, employment equity costs, will be 
submitted by June 30. The report on accessibility will be 
submitted by June 30. We’re in the process of negotiating with 
SGEU and CUPE (Canadian Union of Public Employees), and 
I’m sure the member opposite will encourage the leaders of 
those unions who are friends of hers to co-operate and we’ll be 
able to get that negotiated through. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Minister, would you please advise whether 
or not you’re allocating more staff to the employment equity 
branch to administer the affirmative action program, and if so, 
how many staff members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, we’re doing this 
government-wide. Each department has a committee to 
implement the plan and a budget to do that within their 
department. My department co-ordinates and oversees the 
overall government plan, so I don’t need a large bureaucracy 
when each department, which is actually going to implement 
the plan, is taking part in the overall plan. 
 
So we find it is going rather smoothly, Mr. Chairman, and that 
we’re getting good co-operation from the departments. And 
after the negotiations with SGEU and CUPE, we expect we can 
proceed with the implementation of the plan. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Minister, would you please advise what 
government funding is allotted for the implementation of the 
affirmative action program in your department and across 
government, if you have the latter statistic. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, that budget is being 
prepared. And I will accept the member opposite’s suggestion 
on what sum should be spent and I’ll also accept her suggestion 
on how that money should be raised, but we are preparing the 
plan. 
 
Ms. Simard:  I take it that you don’t have an idea as to 

exactly how much you’re going to be spending at this time, Mr. 
Minister. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, we will spend what’s 
necessary to implement the plan. We will not waste any money 
and we will not be stingy. We will spend exactly the right 
amount. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Chairman, the Saskatchewan Women’s 
Advisory Council is a group of private citizens, appointed by 
the minister responsible for the status of women, to advise the 
government on policy and programs related to the status of 
women. Last year in estimates, Mr. Minister, you admitted that 
you’d allowed the atrophy of the advisory council, that the term 
appointments of the members of the council has been left to 
expire on December 31, 1986. 
 
In 1987 you attempted to breathe a little bit of life into the 
council by appointing four women to it, but it was not until 
January 27 of this year that you appointed the additional 12 
women to give the advisory council its full compliment of 16 
members. The council had been inactive, I understand, for a full 
year because of your oversight to appoint members to the 
council. 
 
I would like to know, Mr. Minister, how the women were 
appointed to the Saskatchewan Women’s Advisory Council. 
The women’s directorate newsletter in February of 1988 states 
that: 
 

Council members come from varying fields of expertise 
and geographical regions reflecting the wide range of 
views and diversity of Saskatchewan. 

 
However, last year in estimates you presented us with a list of 
only 18 women’s organizations which were contacted to put 
forward names for the council. And I am sure you would agree 
that there are many more women’s organizations which could 
have been contracted, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now I would like to know what consultation you had with 
women’s organizations and how you chose various women to 
fill these positions. So I would like you to list what women’s 
organizations responded to you and the process that you used in 
choosing the representatives to the council. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  The members appointed, Mr. Chairman, 
were appointed by minister’s order, and it was almost a similar 
process to forming a cabinet. We chose them on the basis of 
area, ability, and background. 
 
I can tell you, Mr. Chairman, that the following are the 
members, and that they have taken to their task with vigour and 
are doing an excellent job and have already given me some 
excellent advice, and I expect to see even further excellent 
advice given to myself from this council. They are as follows: 
Pam Allen of Regina, realtor; Pam Barber of Regina, 
home-maker; Irma Corcoran, Kincaid, farmer/rancher; Frances 
Cresswell, Tisdale, home-maker/farmer; Y. Don Elliot, 
Christopher Lake, small business person; Anne Hyrniuk, La 
Ronge, home-maker; Mickey Krock, Saskatoon, retired; Leah 
  



 
May 9, 1988 

1198 
 

MacDonald, Regina, school teacher; Mary Muir, chairperson, 
Kindersley, director of the Danny Fisher Centre for Drug and 
Alcohol Abuse; Lynda Newson, Saskatoon, teacher, 
small-business person; Donna Rodway, Saskatoon, radio 
announcer; Marilyn Stradecki, Balcarres, home-maker/farmer; 
Paulette Vanderlinde, Regina, school principal; Jacqueline 
Wahlmeier, Estevan, secretary; Alice Wuttunee, North 
Battleford, home-maker; Donna Zimmer, Cudworth, a manager, 
part owner of Zimmer Motors. 
 
I’ve tried to include in that list a broad cross-section of 
Saskatchewan women, including a treaty Indian. I’ve tried to 
locate a Metis woman as well, so that we have a broad 
cross-section. And I think you will agree that we have realtors, 
home-makers, farmers, ranchers, small-business people, 
teachers radio announcers  a broad cross-section of society  
and that’s why they are giving me the excellent advice and 
guidance that I seek from this council. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Minister, with respect to one appointment 
that had been announced, and I notice it’s included in the 
woman’s directorate newsletter of February, a Janet Bradshaw 
from White Fox, I understand she did not accept her 
appointment to the council because she was too busy to attend 
council meetings. The reason why I was concerned about the 
process, Mr. Minister, is that Mrs. Bradshaw stated she had no 
idea who had put her name forward and that she wasn’t 
involved in any women’s organizations. So once again, Mr. 
Minister, I will ask you: what organizations presented names to 
you, and what organizations were contacted? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, with respect to the 
women that decided to terminate hr position on the council, it 
was my understanding that she changed her mind. Certainly no 
one was appointed that was not interested in being there. 
 
With respect to the groups that I contacted with respect to her 
suggestions, the provincial council of women of Saskatchewan, 
the Saskatoon Women’s Network, the Regina Women’s 
Network, the Saskatchewan Federation of Women, the 
Saskatchewan Women’s Institute, Saskatchewan Business and 
Professional Women’s Club, Saskatchewan Women’s 
Agricultural Network, the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association, Saskatchewan Nursing Assistants’ Association, 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce, Saskatchewan Action Committee on the Status of 
Women, Saskatchewan Provincial Catholic Women’s League, 
the United Church Women’s Saskatchewan Conference, 
Immigrant Women of Saskatchewan, the Aboriginal Women’s 
Council of Saskatchewan, the Canadian Federation of 
University Women, the Canadian Consumers Association, and 
the Law Society of Saskatchewan; and I asked for their 
suggestions. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Minister, would you please advise what 
priorities . . . I’m not sure that you’re aware of these, and if not, 
would you please determine what priorities the council has 
established for the upcoming year, and what kind of projects it 
will be undertaking. 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Well, Mr. Chairman, right now day care 
is their prime consideration. And I need their guidance with 
respect to accessibility and rural day care and all of the other 
issues in that area. They are also considering education and 
women’s directions and the education choices they make. And 
they are also considering the problems of achieving economic 
equality for women. 
 
So those are some of the things that they were considering right 
now; and primarily now they are looking at day care and giving 
us advise on that area. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Minister, how much of the budget did the 
advisory council spend in ’87-88? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, $10,714.37. 
 
Ms. Simard:  And how much, Mr. Minister, has been 
allocated for ’88-89? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  75,000. 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairperson. I 
have a question to the minister. Mr. Minister, can you advise us 
how many day-care spaces your department created last year, 
and how many of those day-care spaces were actually . . . came 
on stream? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, last year we had 
budgeted for additional spaces, but we remained with the small 
number of spaces as the prior year because of the negotiations 
with the federal government. We didn’t know what to expect 
from the federal government. We didn’t know what to expect 
from the federal government. Now that we know what the 
federal initiative is, you will see us doing some catch-up work 
in the coming year with respect to the allocation of spaces. 
 
And I have advised you that I have already allocated  maybe 
you weren’t in the Assembly at the time  I’ve already 
allocated just this week a new day-care centre in the Lakeview 
area of Saskatoon and the Lutheran . . . I don’t have the official 
title but it’s the Lutheran housing project for people of all ages 
including single-income families and single families. and those 
new spaces are going in at Saskatoon right now. 
 
In addition, you will hear in the very near future an 
announcement of many new rural day-care spaces. And you 
will also see a priority of announcing spaces in the city of 
Saskatoon, which you represent, because Saskatoon is 
underrepresented in proportion to Regina, where Regina has 
approximately 1,800 spaces and Saskatoon has approximately 
1,300 spaces. 
 
And this was something that our government inherited from the 
days when you were government. And I’m going to try to 
correct that inequity, but we’ll also try to provide new spaces in 
Regina as time goes on. So we will work on accessibility and 
availability and affordability, all at once. 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Minister, you did not answer the 
question. I wanted to know how many new spaces you 
announced last year. I believe you had made some 
  



 
May 9, 1988 

1199 
 

announcements in terms of new spaces, additional spaces, in 
this province. I would like to know the number of spaces you 
announce, and the number of spaces you are creating this year. 
And I am talking about subsidized spaces. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I answered that 
question. 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  Well, Mr. Minister, you did not answer the 
question. Was it 200 spaces that you announced last year? is it 
200 spaces that you’re announcing again this year? Can you tell 
me how many spaces you announced last year. I’m not talking 
about how many you created, I’m talking about how many 
spaces were announced by your government for the year 
1987-88, and how many spaces will be created this year for the 
year 1988-89? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, I answered that question. 
It’ll be in Hansard tomorrow. I said that I did not open any new 
spaces last year. I did not announce any new spaces last year. I 
said the reason is that we were dealing with the federal 
government on their new program, that we will have a catch-up 
year this year to introduce spaces because we now know what 
the federal program is. 
 
So now, Mr. Chairman, I have answered the question twice and 
pointed out twice that I’ve already answered the question. I 
would hope that the member opposite could read it in Hansard 
tomorrow. 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Minister, are you telling me that you did 
not announce last year  and I’m talking about in the year 
1987-88  the creation of any new spaces? Is that what you’re 
saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, when I announce that 
there is a day-care space, as we have in Saskatoon at the 
Lutheran housing project, then they get a licence for the space. I 
did not announce the licensing of those spaces last year. 
 
I’ve explained in question period earlier that we were holding 
back to see what the federal government would be doing. I’ve 
explained to the member opposite that we budgeted for an extra 
200 spaces last year, that those spaces are still there in the 
budget. They haven’t disappeared. I’ve allocated some of them 
already. In a very short period of time, I will have all of those 
spaces allocated and then I will start on spaces that are 
additional in this year’s budget. 
 
So what’s the score now? Three times answered, two times 
referred to Hansard to check the answer. 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  Well, Mr. Minister, just answer the 
questions. You don’t need to get catty. I’m not into having any 
kind of confrontation with you. I’m just asking you to simply 
answer the questions. 
 
So what we now have determined is that last year there was 
money allocated for the creation of 200 new spaces. And those 
200 new spaces were not created, Mr. Minister, even though 
you announced the allocation of funds for those spaces. And 
this year you’ve reannounced 

your old announcement form last year. 
 
Now, as you say, there is a problem in Saskatoon in comparison 
to Regina with the number of spaces that are licensed by your 
department and subsidies that are available. I’ve written to you 
on several occasions about a situation that’s developed in my 
constituency. I would like to know, Mr. Minister, whether you 
are aware of that situation. The situation pertains to the lack of 
day-care spaces around Buena Vista School. We have been in 
touch with the day-care division; we’ve been in touch with 
yourself and your office about the need for subsidized spaces. 
And I’m talking about subsidized spaces for a family day-care 
home. I’m wondering whether you can tell us tonight whether 
or not the constituency that I represent can expect or anticipate 
any additional licensed spaces for the single parents and 
working parents that are living in my area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Well, Mr. Chairman, yes, the member 
opposite has approached me about this perceived problem, and I 
don’t doubt that there is some demand there. And I’m going to 
try my best to help with that. But I want to advise the member 
opposite that there has to be some degree of fairness to this 
system of allocation of spaces. 
 
So, therefore, in my office  the media have seen this; they’ve 
taken a picture of it  there is a map which has got every 
family day-care home and every day-care centre in 
Saskatchewan with a pin on the map. And I find that in the 
member opposite’s constituency  which she could probably 
help me as to the name of her constituency. I’ve a mental block 
on some of those areas. Since I lost my friends in those seats, 
it’s hard to remember who owns them. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Nutana. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Nutana, thank you. In Nutana the 
number of pins there is quite more dense. There are a lot more 
pins in Nutana than in other parts of the province. And I look at 
the situation where in the constituency of Redberry there are no 
day-care spaces whatsoever; in the constituency of Turtleford 
there are non whatsoever; in other constituencies there are only 
one family day-care home. I have to now look at the rural 
day-car situation where women have to work because of rural 
economic situation, which I am sure the members opposite will 
blame on our government, you know, and they forget about the 
22 per cent interest rates when they were government. But they 
will blame the lack of money in the rural area on our 
government. 
 
But they will not be able to blame the lack of day care on our 
government, because I will be announcing many more spaces in 
rural Saskatchewan. And yes, I will consider the situation in 
Nutana, and we will try and do what we can, but you have to be 
fair and look at the province as a whole. 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. We all recall 
the lay-off or the firing of the 411 dental workers, most of 
whom were women, many of whom lived in rural 
Saskatchewan, and many of those women have not received any 
kind of alternate employment since your 
  



 
May 9, 1988 

1200 
 

government privatized the dental plan. So we know all too well 
what’s happening in rural Saskatchewan, particularly with your 
latest economic fad, privatization. and we know what that 
privatization fad has meant to women living in rural 
Saskatchewan, particularly women who worked for the dental 
plan. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you said you had a number of pins in my 
constituency designating or denoting the number of licensed 
family day-care facilities. And I’d be interested in knowing if 
you can tell me how many pins are on your map in your office. 
 
Just to clarify for the member, I’m talking about Saskatoon 
Nutana. He was the person who referred to having little pins on 
the map showing how many licensed family day-care homes 
there are. I’d be interested in knowing how many there are in 
Nutana. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  I’ll send you the information on Nutana. 
I don’t have the exact number of spaces in your seat at the tip of 
my tongue, but I have a pretty clear picture in my mind of the 
city of Saskatoon, and your area, because I specifically looked 
at that situation because of the problems you’ve been referring 
to, where you suggest that your need is greater than other 
people’s needs. And I have to balance this. This is the 
responsibility of government, is balancing the needs of people 
and keeping some degree of fairness. 
 
So I’ll ask my officials to make a note and I will send you the 
exact figures for your constituency and we’ll try to get you that 
information. And I’ll do what I can to assist with some further 
spaces in your constituency. 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Minister, thank you very much. I don’t 
know if you recall the conversation I had with you and you . . . 
If I recall the conversation correctly, you advised me that there 
weren’t that many family day-care homes in my constituency, 
and I’m aware of that. 
 
You were somewhat concerned about all of the family day-care 
homes in the most eastern part of Saskatoon, and I would 
simply like to point out to you that around the Buena Vista 
School there are a number of working parents and single 
parents, and there is no licensed family day-care home in that 
area for children of working parents. 
 
I think it would be appropriate . . . And I know that the Buena 
Vista Home and School Association has written you about this 
matter, and I have contacted your office about this matter. I 
would encourage you to use your good office to ensure that the 
families around the Buena Vista School have access to licensed, 
subsidized spaces, because it certainly will enhance their 
opportunities to provide for their family, to work in the 
community to provide for their families. And many of them 
cannot afford unlicensed day-care spaces; they require the 
subsidy, Mr. Minister. 
 
I also want to say to the minister that I am pleased that your 
department is finally looking at the whole issue of rural day 
care. I wouldn’t want you to misunderstand me in any way; I 
think that our province needs to do a great deal in rural 
Saskatchewan in order that families living in 

rural Saskatchewan have access to day care, but I would also 
like to encourage you to consider the fact that there are many, 
many working parents in urban Saskatchewan that require day 
care as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Well I recall the discussion you and I 
have had. Since you and I have had that discussion, the only 
opportunity I’ve had to put new spaces are the ones into the 
Lutheran housing project in Lakeview where there was an area 
that didn’t really have much for services and a lot of young 
families with children. And when I go to family day-care 
homes, which I’m doing now, I’ll give that consideration and 
try to take care of your part of the city. 
 
I want you to know that when it comes to subsidized spaces as 
they now exist, that approximately 80 per cent are utilized by 
single parents, primarily women. So I feel that the money is 
going where it’s needed the most and we’ll try to keep that in 
mind as we allocate the new spaces. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just on the topic of 
day care and the need for single-parent women particularly to 
have good child care, I want to raise with the minister my 
concern again about the fact that single-parent women are 
defined as employable when their babies are four months old 
and cut back on their social assistance payments and required to 
go out to find work. There are no licensed day-care spaces for 
four-month-old babies  not nearly enough. The city of 
Saskatoon has many women in this situation. 
 
I want to know why you, when you are so self-righteous about 
the way in which you want to support families and be moral, 
can justify defining a woman whose baby is four months old as 
employable and forcing her to go back into the work place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, actually that was a 
Social Service question, and I don’t have the officials here to 
give you the exact statistics in that area, but I concede you have 
a point there that four months, probably if . . . If you’re 
suggesting that that woman would be better off at home looking 
after the child than being forced out into the labour force, I 
would consider your suggestion very seriously, and I will. 
 
And yes, I agree with you that if we’re going to discourage 
abortion, we have to spend money to take care of children. And 
I will do a lot and everything possible in that regard, that if this 
government discourages abortion, we will put money into the 
care of children, and especially young children of that age. 
 
And when we get to Social Services, if you’ll ask that question 
again, I’ll have my officials here and I might have some more 
answers for you, but I’ll take that seriously. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, I’d like to move to a new or a different element of the 
responsibility of the Department of Human Resources, Labour 
and Employment, and to spend some time in heart-to-heart 
discussion this evening, Mr. Minister, related to the Workers’ 
Compensation Board 
  



 
May 9, 1988 

1201 
 

which is under the legislative responsibility of this department 
in yourself, Mr. Minister. 
 
If I can begin by putting the Workers’ Compensation Board into 
a context of reality in Saskatchewan society today, Mr. 
Minister. Members of the Assembly will be aware that since 
about 1911 there has been workers’ compensation within the 
province of Saskatchewan, and legislatively, the first board was 
established in 1930. 
 
There have been revisions to the Act, to The Workers’ 
Compensation Act, over the years, and I think that it’s 
important before we begin this discussion and this 
heart-to-heart exchange of concerns related to the Workers’ 
Compensation Board, Mr. Minister, that we note that workers’ 
compensation was introduced to provide security to, at one and 
the same time, both employees and employers. It will be, in a 
sense, different from many issues in the labour field in which it 
is perceived that what is to the advantage of the employer will 
be to the disadvantage of the employee, and vice versa. 
 
(2100) 
 
Workers’ compensation, Mr. Minister, as we all know, was 
introduced to do away with a hardship for both employees and 
employers, and that by introducing The Workers’ 
Compensation Act employees then gave up the right to see 
retribution in the courts when injured on the job. 
 
We also know as well, of course, that part of the basic 
principles of that Act was to accept that workers’ injuries would 
be compensated without fault. So in essence we have a no-fault 
insurance program that is completely funded by employers. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I said, there have been a number of revisions to 
that Act, and one of the most significant changes came about in 
the Act that was passed in 1979 and implemented on January 1 
of 1980. And included in that, Mr. Minister, as we all know, 
began the practice of deeming. And I want to spread some 
attention on that particular topic. 
 
Prior to 1979, as we all know, there was a different form of 
compensation for injuries that were suffered by workers on the 
job. Prior to that time there was what was commonly referred to 
as the meat chart, where injuries were compensated for, not on 
the basis of effect on income, but were compensated for on the 
basis of a specific injury being defined as compensation for a 
certain percentage of wage loss. 
 
So, for example, the loss of a finger  and I’m just pulling 
numbers out of the air; I don’t know specifically what they were 
 may have resulted in a compensation coverage of 5 per cent 
of income. And as we can all realize now as we look back, it 
was an unfair system. Certainly for a piano player to lose a 
finger was much more serious than, Mr. Minister, you or I as 
members of the legislative Assembly to lose our finger and 
carry out our duties. 
 
And what was brought in in 1979 was a new form of 

compensation which was intended to address the real issue, the 
original philosophy of workers’ compensation, and that being 
the loss of employment potential income. 
 
Since 1979, and the practice beginning in January of 1980, a 
number of jurisdictions across the country  fact, Mr. Minister, 
if I’m not mistaken every jurisdiction across the country  has 
taken a look at the Saskatchewan practice and has either 
adopted that new form of compensation settlement or is in the 
process right now of seriously looking at it. 
 
As we consider the application of the Workers’ Compensation 
Act, there’s probably no single issue of concern to both 
employees and employers than the practice of deeming. And I 
want to say, Mr. Minister, in the context of the intent of the Act 
that I rise on my feet this evening, and I assume you do the 
same, recognizing that a good, solid, fair workers’ 
compensation Act which is administered in a good, solid, fair 
manner is in the best interests o both employees and employers. 
Part of the frustration that many employees have been 
experiencing, who have been the victims of deeming, or as 
some have somewhat facetiously referred to as “damning”  or 
as some maybe not so facetiously have referred to it as damning 
 part of the problem with that is that there is a growing 
movement within Saskatchewan today for people who are of the 
opinion that it may be appropriate to do away with the Workers’ 
Compensation Board and go back to that archaic practice of 
seeking retribution in the court. 
 
Now that would be a sad day indeed if we should ever reach 
that point. Clearly, seeking retribution in the court would be 
extremely difficult for employees who are injured on the job 
and would have to assume costs of seeking retribution in the 
court. And clearly for any employer. In Saskatchewan terms the 
vast majority of employers are small business, family business. 
And for any single employer, family business employer to be 
dealt the blow in court of being found to be responsible for an 
injury which cost an employee that potential for earnings for the 
rest of their life would be absolutely devastating. The impact of 
that could be absolutely devastating to an employer in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So clearly it is in the interest of both employers and employees 
that we have a good solid system, not only in legislation but in 
practice, as a matter of fact  one in which people have 
confidence, in which they feel that justice has been served, and 
has provided the security that employees seek as well as the 
security that employers seek. 
 
Now in that context, Mr. Minister, you will be aware, of course, 
that a review as stipulated by the Act was undertaken and that 
in 1986  in September of 1986  the report of The Workers’ 
Compensation Act review committee was presented. 
 
Quite significantly, the very first recommendation of that report 
was dealing with the practice of deeming. And the report 
recommended that there should be only four circumstances in 
which deeming is considered legitimate. 
  



 
May 9, 1988 

1202 
 

Now to put the report in its context, Mr. Minister, you will 
know as well as I that the committee which undertook the report 
was made up of equal representation of employers and 
employees. It was a committee of nine chaired by Judge Muir, 
who I believe has chaired the last four reviews. The 
recommendations that were put forth were put forth 
unanimously. In other words those employer representatives 
and the employee representative who undertook the review of 
The Workers’ Compensation Act were unanimous; the were 
totally in agreement with the recommendations that were put 
forth. They saw it as recommendations in the best interest, at 
one and the same time, of employers and employees. 
 
And what did they recommend about deeming, Mr. Minister? 
They recommended that there should only be four 
circumstances in which it’s legitimate. And deeming as we all 
know is the practice whereby and injured employee or an 
injured worker is judged to be capable of some earnings. The 
amount of compensation received from the board is therefore 
reduced by the amount that that injured worker is deemed to be 
capable of having earnings. 
 
And the review committee appointed by the minister of the time 
 that wasn’t yourself, but appointed by the minister of the 
time  said then therefore there should only be four 
circumstances in which this practice of deeming should be used. 
And what were they? They said they were these four: one, in 
situations in which a worker has refused an actual job offer 
within his/her physical limitations. In other words, a worker is 
capable of employment, has been offered a job, refused it, 
therefore should be deemed capable of that income, and the 
Workers’ Compensation Board is not responsible for that 
portion of the benefits from the injury. The second 
circumstance is one in which the worker has completed an 
appropriate rehabilitative training program, and they go on to 
define  and we’ll get into that later  what they consider an 
appropriate rehabilitative training program. The third situation 
is one in which a worker has refused to take appropriate 
rehabilitation training, just refused to undertake that. And then 
the fourth situation, one being where the worker has voluntarily 
retired from the work force. 
 
So in other words, Mr. Minister, the committee was 
recommending that deeming should be used only in those 
circumstances  turn down a job, has participated in 
rehabilitative training, has refused rehabilitative training, and/or 
has retired from the labour force. 
 
Now I recognize as well, Mr. Minister, that you do consider this 
to be a serious problem facing workers, injured workers today, 
and in order to do that, I need only go back to Hansard of last 
year, Mr. Minister, and you said, and I quote: 
 

And I do agree with the member opposite that this 
“deeming” has become a problem, not a problem created 
by our government, and possibly not intended by his 
government in 1979. And as much as I can influence the 
board without changing the legislation (I underline without 
changing the 

legislation), I am now directing the board . . . to find a 
solution to the deeming. I don’t know if it can be exactly 
as recommended by the board that studied the Act, but I 
do admit that deeming is a problem, and in some cases is 
unfair, and is probably the major problem before the board 
right now. And I would be hopeful that the board can work 
out a solution to this before the end of this calendar year. 

 
Those are your words, Mr. Minister. You go on a paragraph 
later to say: 
 

I do agree that deeming has to be looked at, and it will be 
looked at, and I have given you a commitment that by the 
end of this calendar year we hope to have the board with a 
new policy on deeming. 

 
On page 2181, of the same estimates, Mr. Minister, and these 
are your words again: 
 

Mr. Deputy Chairman, when you change a provision like 
deeming that was implemented many years ago, there has 
to be a calculation as to the cost that would be involved in 
who will pay for it. Now we just about have that 
calculation completed, and once that calculation is 
completed, we anticipate making changes. 

 
I didn’t say we’d wait until the end of the year. I said we 
would do it before the end of the year, and that would be 
the latest that it would be done. Possibly the policies can 
be changed very soon, but we’re waiting for the detailed 
calculation so we know exactly who will gain and who 
will benefit. 

 
So there we have it, Mr. Minister. We have a situation where 
the review committee appointed by your government made a 
unanimous recommendation, the unanimous recommendation 
was very simply: to follow the Act. That’s all they were 
recommending, that the Act be followed  nothing more, 
nothing less. 
 
And we also have, Mr. Minister, your recognition that deeming 
is the number one problem facing the Workers’ Compensation 
Board today, and the commitment that by December 31, 1987, 
at the latest, that the problem of deeming would be addressed 
and a new practice and policy would be in place. 
 
So in light of all that, Mr. Minister, I ask you simply this: what 
changes were made by the board relative to deeming, and at 
what date were they implemented? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. We 
recognized that deeming was a problem. The report says that 
deeming should be used sparingly, and the board is using it 
sparingly now. We are preparing legislation to implement those 
parts of the report that require legislation. I hope to introduce it 
before we adjourn this spring, and I hope to have it passed, as a 
matter of a fact. I’m sure you’ll co-operate in that regard. 
 
The majority of the recommendations of the report will be 
  



 
May 9, 1988 

1203 
 

implemented, and I think you will probably see a record number 
implemented this session, as compared to other reports, but that 
will have to be counted later. 
 
The board has taken my advice and done so in its deeming more 
sparingly and is following the guide-lines set in the report as 
much as possible. And in the future, you will see deeming used 
less and less and more sparingly. But the report recognizes that 
in some instances you’ll still have to deem the amount that a 
worker can earn and then pay the difference. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Mr. Minister, would you please advise me then 
on . . . because you did make the commitment that it would be 
done by the end of the year. I hear your words saying that there 
will be less and less over a period of time. 
 
Will you be more specific, please, as to how deeming has been 
changed in the application of deeming of injured workers? 
Specifically, how has that been changed by practice of the 
board, and what dates did that begin and when you predict that 
it will be used less and less over a period of time? I simply ask: 
if there is room for improvement, why isn’t that happening 
now, and what does it take to do that, in your opinion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, we’ve been following 
some of the recommendations on deeming made in the report 
with the intent to implement these recommendations. There will 
be a new policy statement issued shortly indicating exactly how 
the board intends to about the process of deeming, using it more 
sparingly. 
 
We have already made those changes that we can make without 
legislation. We will be bringing in legislation this spring. The 
member opposite will see the legislation when it’s introduced. 
So we have started, as I indicated last August, in making 
improvements; we will continue. The legislation will be the last 
improvement in this session once legislation is introduced and 
passed. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Well, Mr. Minister, I look forward to the 
legislative changes that you propose, and you have my 
commitment, that if, in my view, those changes are in the best 
interest of a fair compensation system  both for employers 
and employees  that it will receive my support. 
 
But again, I ask the same question that I asked, Mr. Minister, 
and that is: specifically what changes were made and when did 
those begin? I’m recognizing that you made the commitment in 
estimates last year in August to implement them by December 
31 of 1987. I’m hearing you say you did that, and I’m simply 
asking you how you did . . . not necessarily yourself, but how 
the board did that? What policy changes or what procedures 
were changed, and effective what date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Well, Mr. Chairman, as the member 
know, I don’t have control over the wage of a Workers’ 
Compensation Board. I can only make suggestions, and the only 
control I have over the board is the appointment of the 
members. But they have behaved 

responsibly. Since we last were in this Assembly, I suggested 
that they be more reasonable and particularly take into account 
the wage rates in rural Saskatchewan as compared to urban 
Saskatchewan and what it’s possible to make out there in the 
real world and not what they might hypothesize could be 
earned. And they have applied those rules more reasonably 
because it’s a problem area. 
 
But it’s still a judgement call, even when we follow the report 
exactly there will still be some judgement calls and there will 
still be, on occasion, some people who think that they should 
have more money than the board determines. But that’s the 
board’s system, and you have already agreed that we should not 
have this before the courts. 
 
So the board will make these decision, and they have acted 
responsibly in the past and they have been more sensitive since 
you and I last had this discussion. They’ve taken the 
suggestions to heart, have tried to be more reasonable, a little 
more understanding, and they are tying their best to do what’s 
fair. but boards are like judges and politicians  they can’t 
please everyone all the time so they’re trying their best. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Well, Mr. Minister, I don’t take issue with the 
words that you’re using when you tell me that the board has 
become more sensitive and has attempted to be more reasonable 
and understanding. I think that’s commendable and I would 
hope that’s the case. 
 
I hear you saying that there was . . . has been some attempt to 
give a more realistic assessment as to what employment 
potential is in rural Saskatchewan. And I’m asking again the 
same question, Mr. Minister . . . I don’t want to be facetious 
here as we deal with these estimates, but as someone once said, 
and I think maybe it’s not entirely untrue, that if every injured 
worker who was deemed capable of being a security guard 
became a security guard, we would have one of the most secure 
nations in, certainly in the western world, if not in all of the 
world. 
 
And I simply ask again the same question, Mr. Minister, other 
than attempting to be more reasonable about earning potential 
in rural Saskatchewan, have there been any other changes to 
make the practice of deeming more fair and reasonable, to use 
your words? And I would ask as well, Mr. Minister, you may 
wish to respond at the same time to a second question, and 
that’s: what is it  in your view  what is not possible to do 
with the current legislation in order to make deeming more fair 
and reasonable? What are the limitations that the board is faced 
with under the current legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, I’m advised by the 
chairman of the Workers’ Compensation Board that the 
legislation is not necessarily holding up the process in this area, 
and that to finalize the changes they have to do some 
administrative things. I said earlier, there will be a policy 
statement coming out as to how they’re going to do it. It will 
contain, generally, a reorganization of the unit that does the 
deeming. It will be an increase in staff in that unit. Every person 
who, in the position of having their case assessed with respect 
to the possibility of deeming, 
  



 
May 9, 1988 

1204 
 

will be dealt with individually by an individual counsellor there, 
will have their case reviewed in a personal interview. There will 
be no bureaucratic deeming as has happened in the past; it will 
be an individual situation. 
 
We still won’t be able to please everyone, but I believe with 
that reorganization you will see some considerable 
improvements. We are tying to correct it as fast as possible. 
You have to realize, though, that by all accounts we have the 
best workers’ compensation system in Canada. It is the 
best-funded . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
A member opposite says, ha. I say that that is a credit not only 
to this government but to her colleagues who went before her, 
and to the Liberals who went before them, who all did a good 
job in setting up a system that we have maintained as a 
government. And she is slighting and slandering those members 
of the CCR (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) who 
carried on this system, and those members of the Liberals who 
started the system, and we as Progressive Conservatives are 
continuing the system. And I wish the member would not speak 
from her seat because the critic here understands that we have 
the best system in Canada. We have probably the best in all of 
North America. We have delegations coming from New 
Zealand coming to study our system. They do have a labour 
government in New Zealand that they are trying to improve 
their system, to get it up to our standards. 
 
So we have the best system, but it’s not flawless. And we’ll try 
to make these changes to solve the major problem in the 
deeming area where it’s very much a judgement call. 
 
But we cannot, we cannot solve every problem. One of the 
problems is that if you’re injured at a certain wage level and 
you have gone through retraining and everything else and you 
can’t find a job at that same wage level, then someone has to 
make a decision on what wage level you should be able to find 
a job at, and pay you the difference. 
 
And we’ve asked them to be more realistic as to what you can 
possibly find a job at now when the rural economy is in 
difficulty due to the agricultural situation, and when that lack of 
money in rural Saskatchewan is starting to reflect on the 
economy of urban Saskatchewan. we’re all in this together in 
this province, so we’ve asked the board to consider not only 
what the person can do but what is available out there, and 
that’s what we’re tying to solve. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Mr. Minister, I hope you didn’t misinterpret my 
comments regarding tying to improve the practise to reflect 
reality out in rural Saskatchewan. I concur with that, and that 
simply makes sense. 
 
I also share with you the view that historically The Workers’ 
Compensation Act in practice by and large in Saskatchewan 
over the last large number of years has been a model 
compensation program. And for that reason it’s not surprising 
to you or me or anyone else in the Assembly that the 
Saskatchewan model is been studied by other jurisdictions. 

That’s also by the way, Mr. Minister, why I think as we are 
standing and discussion the Workers’ Compensation Board and 
its function that, probably contrary to other times, I don’t think 
the tone of this exchange is adversarial. We all have a common 
objective here to have a fair compensation system. And I repeat, 
in the interest of both employees and employers, both have a 
vested interest in that. 
 
I just want to, because it’s not clear to me yet  and I do 
appreciate your clarifying your original statement that it was 
requiring some legislative change in order to clean up the 
practice of deeming that’s a problem now, because that, quite 
frankly, is my interpretation, that legislative change is not 
necessary to deal with that problem. So I appreciate your 
clarifying that. 
 
I would like to go back to the statement that you made in review 
of estimates last year again because it’s simply not clear to me 
what you are meaning when you said: 
 

Mr. Deputy Chairman, when you change the provision like 
deeming that was implemented many years ago, there has 
to be a calculation as to the cost that will be involved and 
who will pay for it. 

 
I assume, Mr. Minister, there you’re referring to the fact that, in 
your opinion at that point in time, that some kind of number 
crunching was going to have to take place in terms of fees 
assessed to employers across the province to make the 
compensation Act feasible with an improved, more fair, and 
more reasonable, and more just practice of deeming for 
employees. 
 
And you went on to say then, Mr. Minister, and I quote: 
 

Now we just about have that calculation completed, and 
once that calculation is completed, we anticipate making 
changes. 

 
I didn’t say we’d wait until the end of the year. I said we 
would do it before the end of the year, and that would be 
the latest that it would be done. 

 
Could you please explain for me, Mr. Minister, because it’s not 
clear to me at all from what you’ve said, what happened 
between August 31, 1987 and December 31, 1987 that 
prevented the board from crunching those numbers and from 
making the complete number of changes that are necessary to 
get the practice of deeming consistent with the spirit of the 
legislation and consistent with the recommendations put forth 
by the review committee. 
 
You may very well . . . Maybe there’s something I’m not 
understanding that happened between the months of September 
and December. But I do know you made a very clear 
commitment last year, and I hear you saying today that you’ve 
made some moves, but we’re not where we want to be yet. And 
I’m simply asking, Mr. Minister: what happened to prevent the 
board from being where they should be by the end of 1987? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, at the time that you 
  



 
May 9, 1988 

1205 
 

quote me we had the report of the review panel, and their 
calculation on the actuarial costs of some of the 
recommendations was a little bit fuzzy, and they did not have 
access to actuaries the way the board does. So they did some 
guesswork and a little calculating and we found that their 
recommendations were sound, but their cost calculations and 
their review of the investments of the board were not entirely 
accurate, and they had to . . . in fact, they retracted their 
calculation of the board’s investment practices. 
 
And so since then we’ve completed the calculation, we find that 
within the scope of the current employer costs that the costs of 
being more reasonable on the deeming are not excessive; that 
employers should be able to bear those costs. We have started 
to implement those changes. I’ve indicted to you that to 
complete the implementation, first of all, we had the 
calculation, which took a little time; then we started 
implementing the changes; now we are finalizing it with a 
reorganization of the whole division and the addition of extra 
staff. 
 
So the process is being completed, and I would say, yes, it’s 
taken three or four months longer to finalize it than I had 
anticipated, but we’ve gotten there. I think people will be 
satisfied with the changes. We’ve done the best and we’ve 
given it serious consideration, looked at all the possibilities. 
We’ve got to where we think we should be, where you believe 
we should be, where the committee of review things we should 
be, and we’ve done it responsibly and so . . . Yes, I do admit it’s 
taken a little bit longer, but we have done it. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  And also for my information, Mr. Minister, will 
you  I’m not sure what you said there  is it your view then 
that as of this date, May 9,1988, that the board is dealing with 
the practice of deeming as recommended by the review 
committee? 
 
If that’s not the case, Mr. Minister, if that’s not your opinion 
today, May 9, 1988, then by what date do you anticipate, or 
more to . . . let me be firmer than that: by what date do you 
commit that the board will be dealing with the practice of 
deeming as recommended by the review committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, we anticipate that the 
complete reorganization and additional staff can be in place in 
two to three weeks, possibly four weeks, but approximately that 
time frame. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  So is it correct therefore then, Mr. Minister, to 
assume that to pick a figure by the end of May, by the end of 
this month, that the board will be dealing with the practice of 
deeming as much as it intends in order to respond to the 
recommendation, the first recommendation of the review 
committee. Am I correct in drawing that conclusion, Mr. 
Minister, that that will be the case by the end of this month? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, we believe that’s a 
realistic target for the implementation of the reorganization and 
the completion of the deeming changes I’ve said we’ve started 
for the last few months. That’s a realistic target. We think w can 
reach it. 

Mr. Hagel:  Thank you very much for that commitment, Mr. 
Minister, and you can rest assured that as you carry out your 
responsibilities as the minister of the Crown responsible for The 
Workers’ Compensation Act, I will also carry out my 
responsibilities as critic for The Workers’ Compensation Act, 
and will forward to you any concerns that I may have in that 
regard, and would expect that within the spirit of our exchange 
here today that those would be given clear consideration. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to move then to the second 
recommendation of the committee, and that has to do with the 
practice of rehabilitation programs for injured worked. As we 
both have already discussed, two of the recommendations for 
dealing with deeming had to do with either having completed 
participation in a rehabilitation program or an injured worker 
refusing to participate in an appropriate rehabilitation program. 
 
In the recommendation dealing with the rehabilitation 
programs, it would be my view that the committee is simply 
saying this, that it’s in the best interest of both employees and 
employers when a worker is injured that that worker should 
participate whenever appropriate and whenever possible in a 
rehabilitation program so as to become fully employable in a 
new career, and hopefully, at some point in time, up to and 
beyond the level of income at the time of injury. 
 
The committee is recommending also then, Mr. Minister, in 
terms of the board dealing responsibly with the long-tem best 
interests  the long-tem interest being that it is in everybody’s 
best interest to have the worker rehabilitated, therefore no 
longer drawing benefits and becoming a fully active participant 
in the work-force; that’s in the worker’s best interests, it’s in the 
best interests of cost to the compensation board, and also in the 
best interests, therefore, of employers  the committee was 
recommending that when a worker is receiving rehabilitation 
which involves a course of less than one year, that it would 
never be considered acceptable to deem a person until that 
person is able to  and they use quotation marks  “find a 
job.” 
 
Secondly, thy recommend that if the training program is 12 or 
24 months, that the worker be allowed six months before 
deeming was applied, and if the case of training program longer 
than 24 months, that deeming would be put into practice after a 
three-month period of time after graduation. 
 
Mr. Minister, is it your opinion that that is wise 
recommendation, and do you concur with that 
recommendation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, I can’t agree totally with 
the recommendation. It is our position that we will get a worker 
to a position where he or she is job-ready. That means they’re 
capable of obtaining employment, but we cannot have a 
workers’ compensation system that guarantees a job. And we 
don’t’ have that anywhere in the world, such a system that you 
are guaranteed a job. 
 
So we can get people job-ready, but we will not go so far 
  



 
May 9, 1988 

1206 
 

as to guarantee that they will have a job or we will pay them for 
not having a job. And for those workers who re not injured, 
there is no job guarantee. We try to have as much job security 
in this country as possible, but there is no job guarantee for 
anyone. And we can’t have a job guarantee for a rehabilitated 
injured worker, but as much as possible we will have them 
completely job-ready. And with the things that are going to 
happen in the future in this province  with freer trade, with 
economic diversification, with a recovery in agriculture that is 
starting now  we feel that being job-ready will mean that 
people will be able to get jobs. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Mr. Minister, it’s my opinion as I read the 
recommendations of the review committee that they are 
speaking something a little more strongly here than some kind 
of faith that free trade and piratization and whatever else will 
provide the necessary job opportunities. I read this 
recommendation and it seems to me that the committee is 
talking about “finding a job” in the same context as its first 
recommendation having to do with defining whether deeming 
would be applied or not. 
 
Mr. Minister, I find your response a bit interesting  a bit 
confusing, quite frankly, because it seems to me you’re saying 
something a little different in this case, having to do with a 
rehabilitated worker, than with your endorsation of the 
recommendations regarding deeming. Can you clarify the 
difference, in your opinion, between these two situation, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, we are spending a record 
amount this year on rehabilitation of workers who have been 
injured, and we’re putting $12 million into the Wascana 
rehabilitation hospital in Regina, the construction of which will 
cost in excess of $54 million. 
 
So we believe that our actions in assisting injured workers are 
quite reasonable and that our investments have carried the 
board. Even when the stock market dropped, I believe that we 
still had capital gains of $7 million when other people took 
losses. So the Board has been very responsible in their 
investments, and I commend them for that, that they actually 
were still able to make a capital gain in a falling stock market. 
 
All of this has led to reasonable cost, maximum benefits, and an 
excellent rehabilitation program. And if you look just outside of 
this building, you see the bricks and mortar of the new hospital. 
So I think the member opposite and I are agreed that we have an 
excellent program in Saskatchewan. And he can’t seem to find 
fault with the program, so I think we should just get on with the 
job of taking care of injured workers. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Well now there’s a fine idea, Mr. Minister. Let 
me then ask again for your clarification because it’s getting 
more confusing here as you speak. Are you concurring with the 
second recommendation of the review committee or are you 
not? I guess to be more specific I’m asking: when a worker has 
participated in a rehabilitation program of  let’s use the terms 
that the review committee used, a program of 12 months or less, 
12 or 24 months, more than 24 months  at what point do you 
determine, Mr. Minister, that it is appropriate to introduce the 
practice of deeming with that injured 

worker? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Minister, as I indicated earlier, we 
believe very much that we should spend the money at workers’ 
comp to rehabilitate the worker to be ready for a job. And if that 
job does not pay as much as the job that the worker was injured 
at, workers’ compensation will pay the difference. 
 
For example, if you’re earning $12 an hour, and then if you’re 
injured and you’re rehabilitated, you’re retrained or 
re-educated, but the job that you are re-educated for only pays 
$10 an hour, if you take that job we will pay you $2 an hour 
from the Workers’ Compensation Board possibly until your 
retirement  and that happens. 
 
So what we do is we compensate to the level that you are at, but 
we do not guarantee a job. That’s where the deeming comes in, 
is where a worker says, I can’t find a job at all, no job of any 
sort. Then the board at some stage says, well we have to sit and 
decide that you can do a job that may pay $6 an hour and 
therefore we will pay you $6 an hour difference, but you have 
to go out and earn that other $6 an hour. 
 
It is a very complicated process; it’s difficult. The member 
opposite agrees that you have to deem in some situations. 
 
So what we are doing is spending a record amount on 
rehabilitation. As a result, there are people having a much 
higher level of education and training after their injury than 
they did before their injury; we find that most of them are still 
able to find jobs. Most people are satisfied with the workers’ 
compensation system. There are few people that have 
difficulties, and we try to deal with them as best possible. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Mr. Minister, specifically what is the record 
amount being spent in rehabilitation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  In 1987, academic educational 
upgrading, number of workers, 240, expenditure, $1,799,358; 
technical education upgrading, injured workers, 289 in 1987, 
expenditure, $1,651,658; on the job assessments of injured 
workers, 179, expenditure for on the job training, $556,871; 
training on the job . . . job assessment is the first one, the next 
one is not an assessment but the actual training only, no 
assessment, 76 workers, $182,860; and that’s the 1987 
expenditures. 
 
It’s in the report, by the way that was tabled today, page 16. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  And the anticipated budget for 1988-89, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, we don’t set a budget. 
We spend what’s necessary. Injuries are down somewhat. We 
hope that 1988 would cost less. But even with injuries down we 
will be spending more per worker, so we anticipate it will be 
somewhat higher for 1988. But we are pleased to say that the 
injuries have been down in the last year. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  If I can come back again to the second 
recommendation, Mr. Minister, because when you 
  



 
May 9, 1988 

1207 
 

responded three questions ago you didn’t respond to my 
question. You were talking about deeming, and just on 
reflection, I don’t think you said a great deal that I can disagree 
with, but that wasn’t my question. My question was, relative to 
a rehabilitate worker as defined by the review committee with 
their second recommendation, do you concur with their 
recommendations that deeming shall be applied to an injured 
worker in a rehabilitation program of less than 12 months, not 
until that person is able to “ find a job”, or in deeming practice, 
“have a clear opportunity for a job”  training program of 12 
to 24 months, six months until deeming; over 24 months, three 
months till deeming. Is it your view that that is a reasonable 
recommendation that the committee is putting forth? I ask 
specifically about these time periods for a rehabilitated workers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I take the view 
that in some cases that is reasonable, and in other cases it may 
not be, depending on the situation, depending on what you had 
been retrained for. If you are being retrained as a nurse, and I 
understand there’s a shortage of nurses, then you shouldn’t have 
to be paid for six months to look for a position. But if you were 
retrained for something else and there’s not a great demand, 
maybe you have to be paid for six months to look for the 
position. 
 
And so some people find jobs in two weeks and we pay them 
for two weeks of job search, and some people take six months 
and we’ll pay six months or even longer, depending on the 
circumstances. We don’t accept that there should be a standard 
formula that everybody gets paid to search for a job for an exact 
period of time, depending on their education time that they were 
in rehabilitation. Each individual’s circumstances have to be 
examined and, depending on the circumstances, that’s the 
length of time that the board pays. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Mr. Minister, can we move then to the next 
series of recommendations, recommendations 3 through 6, if 
you have the committee’s report handy and in front of you. 
These are recommendations, Mr. Minister, that you will 
recognize have to do with the spousal benefits for injured 
workers. And can I ask you, first of all, you plans related to the 
third recommendation, which is a recommendation for a 
legislative Act, related to the five-year limit placed on spousal 
benefits for a worker who suffered a fatal injury, and the 
dealing with the hardship clause. I think that’s the particularly 
problematic part of this particular section of the Act, Mr. 
Minister, is the interpretation of hardship that is used when 
calculating benefits for a spouse of a fatally injured worker. 
 
Mr. Minister, is it your intention to deal with this through a 
legislative Act, or otherwise through the board, because I note 
that recommendation number 4 is that the board should 
immediately review its current interpretation of 83(4), section 
83(4) of the Act, with a view to implementing the principles 
included in that recommendation. So my question to you, Mr. 
Minister, is: has the board, since the  well, at any time  
moved to act on this, and is it your intention to introduce 
legislative change to address the recommendation of the 
committee? 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Well, Mr. Chairman, our interpretation 
is that we have to have a legislative change to enact that . . . or 
to implement that recommendation, and we will be so moving 
in the legislation that will be coming forth. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Am I to assume  and I accept, Mr. Minister, 
you may not want to pre-announce the legislation  but am I to 
assume, Mr. Minister that in your view that legislative changes 
you will be making will be completely consistent with the 
recommendations made unanimously by the review committee? 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 
opposite will have an opportunity to see the legislation in the 
not too distant future, and I give him an assurance that the 
problem will be addressed. The details of the legislation will 
come before this Assembly in a few weeks. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate at least 
that assurance, and there will be a number of people who are 
significantly affected by the hardship clause related to spousal 
benefits, and I look forward with anticipation to that. 
 
Mr. Minister, recommendation number 5  and with the time 
that we have available left to us tonight, I think what I’d like to 
do is just walk through some of the recommendations and get 
your views and plans related to them. Recommendation number 
5 suggests the benefits paid to a surviving spouse for a period 
exceeding 24 consecutive months  that an amount equal to 10 
per cent of the payments be set aside for an annuity for that 
spouse at age 65. has there been any action, Mr. Minister? If 
not, are we to anticipate something again during this legislative 
session? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, we’ll deal with that 
when the legislation comes forward. We anticipate making the 
improvements suggested. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Mr. Minister, we can drop down to 
recommendation number 9, which again suggests legislative 
action to section 99(1) of The Workers’ Compensation Act, 
related to the ability of survivors who receive Canada Pension 
Plan benefits. Mr. Minister, is it your intention again to deal 
with that recommendation through legislation in this session? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, we’ll be making some 
changes there. The details will be announced at a later date 
when the legislation is introduced. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  I’m sorry, Mr. Minister, there was noise here. I 
didn’t hear your answer. If I could ask you to repeat it please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, we are making some 
changes in that provision. The details will be announced and 
revealed in the legislation when it’s introduced in the House. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Regarding the recommendation 13, 
  



 
May 9, 1988 

1208 
 

section 74(3) of the Workers’ Compensation Act, again to 
provide where there is an annuity of $5,000 or less at age 65, 
that a lump sum be paid to the worker. 
 
While I’m on my feet, why don’t I just ask two or three because 
the answer may be the same here. If you want to deal with them 
separately, fine. Section 93 . . . recommendation that that be 
repealed  and that’s to deal with the ceiling; recommendation 
that Section 86 of the Act be amended to enable the board to 
make additional allowances to a foster parent. Those again are 
all recommendations to change the legislation, Mr. Minister. 
Are we to expect some changes in legislation in those three 
areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, I’m not going to give the 
member opposite the legislation today, when the final draft is 
being prepared in Justice and drafting right now. What we have 
here is that the member opposite and the members of the 
Assembly have the Workers’ Compensation Board 1987 annual 
report which I tabled earlier this afternoon. And if the member 
opposite will look at pages 23 and following, committee of 
review recommendations, the ones that do not require 
legislation are addressed in that report, and an overview is given 
as to what has been done. 
 
The other ones require legislation, and I will be introducing 
legislation later in this session to deal with the other 
recommendations, and then we can proceed with the debate at 
that time. It’s not that I’m trying to hide anything but there’s no 
need for us to go through the Act twice, and when I introduce it 
I think then we could debate it. 
 
So if the member opposite could just show some patience until 
we get to the Act, I think we can deal with it then. That’s about 
all I can give you now, that most of these things will be 
addressed in the legislation and you will see the details then. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Well, Mr. Minister, I appreciate the explanation, 
although it’s not a surprise. I have seen that and, as you pointed 
out, those recommendations that don’t deal with legislation, 
there is some comment there. I’ll review that carefully. That’s 
why I’m asking you about the ones that are recommendations 
dealing with legislative change because they’re obviously not 
referred to in the report. I would not want to run the risk. Mr. 
Minister, of when you come with your legislative changes, that 
you have failed to respond to some of the recommendations 
made by the review committee, and we will have . . . I would 
assume that by the time that you bring in your legislative 
changes we will have competed the review of this department, 
and there will not be the opportunity then to question you on 
your intentions with relation to this. 
 
Maybe we can summarize all of these, Mr. Minister. There are 
. . . In my view, recommendations 13, 14, 15, 24, 62, 67, 68, 69, 
70, and 71 are recommendations that call for legislative action 
by you, the minister responsible. Let me ask you then, Mr. 
Minister, are there any of these . . . We’ll put it the other way; 
maybe we can proceed a little more quickly. Are there any of 
these recommendations to deal with legislative action that 
you’re not planning to 

deal with your introduction of legislative change in the next few 
weeks in this session of the Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, there may be a few. I 
can’t say whether there’ll be one or two or four our six, but not 
very many that we won’t address in the legislation. This 
government has set a record for implementation of 
recommendations of the committee of review, and we will keep 
up that tradition when the Act is introduced. We can’t have the 
committee write the entire legislation, but where practical  
and the great majority of them are practical  we will 
implement them. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Well, Mr. Minister, part of the record of your 
dealing with the recommendations has not been with the speed, 
quite frankly. The report was presented some two years ago, 
and if you’re . . . You’ve obviously said nothing to me in your 
response just now. You said the ones that are reasonable, and it 
might not be all, it might be some. Let’s just limp through this 
then, I guess, if we have to. Recommendations 13, 14, and 15, 
are you planning to deal with those through legislative change? 
Let’s all go back to that original question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, we’re considering them. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Mr. Minister, you know, we don’t have to play 
silly games here. I would assume that in the interest of both 
your and my commitment to be of service to the people of  
Saskatchewan that we can deal with serious questions with 
serious answers. I give you my commitment that I will ask 
serious questions, and as long as we can avoid playing silly 
games  are you intending then, Mr. Minister, to bring about 
changes related to section 74(3) of the Act, section 93 of the 
Act, and section 86 of the Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  well, Mr. Chairman, I’m not going to 
answer anymore questions; I’m not going to go through the 
entire Bill today. What I’m saying to the member opposite is: if 
he doesn’t ask silly questions, I wont’s give him silly answers. 
 
And so he should stop asking about the Bill till we get into the 
debate on the Bill, because I’m not going to give him any more 
of what’s in the Bill and what isn’t in the Bill. I said the 
majority of the recommendations will be dealt with, and it’s not 
a question of silly answers; I’m simply not going to tell him 
anymore about what the actual wording of the Bill is because 
we’re not discussing the Bill here. We’re discussing workers’ 
compensation, which isn’t even part of the department under 
review, but traditionally we answer questions on workers’ 
compensation. So we’re answering question, but if you want to 
see that legislation, wait until it’s been drafted and printed, and 
then I’ll show it to you. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Mr. Minister, is it your view that domestic 
worker should be included under coverage of workers’ 
compensation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, I’ll give you an answer 
on domestics. I am contemplating including domestics under 
labour standards, but we are not contemplating including 
domestics under workers’ 
  



 
May 9, 1988 

1209 
 

compensation. It was tries in Manitoba; no one applied. It 
hasn’t gone over very well. It’s a difficult area with respect to 
domestics and farmers and so, therefore, we will not be making 
that mandatory in the legislation. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Mr. Chairman, it would appear that some of the 
members opposite are either being bored by this conversation or 
insulted or something. The Minister of Health is deeply 
offended by the fact that we should be taking a close look at the 
plans of this government related to The Workers’ 
Compensation Act. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the hubbub being raised by members on your 
side, I heard you make some reference to farm workers, and I 
wasn’t clear as to what you said. Is it your intention to include 
and improve the coverage for farm workers covered by 
workers’ compensation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Mr. Chairman, I indicated . . . I am 
considering, Mr. Chairman, domestic workers with respect to 
labour standards, but we are not considering domestic workers 
with respect to mandatory workers’ compensation. We have had 
a problem in that area. Manitoba tried it and they have not had 
very many people applying . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m 
advised none, but maybe there were one or two, very minimal 
number of people interested. It has just been an ignored part of 
their law. 
 
Farmers and domestics are difficult are to regulate, and we 
don’t intend to go into that area at this time, but I will examine 
that situation on the labour standards side of it. And then in a 
few years, if there is a possibility that it can be properly 
regulated without abuse, then we will look at it under workers’ 
compensation. But at this stage we have to look at some other 
things first. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:57 p.m. 


