


















































March 29, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 March 29, 1988 
 

179 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hagel: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it's 
my pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to the members 
of the Assembly, 17 grade 5 students from St. Margaret School in 
Moose Jaw. Mr. Speaker, St. Margaret's School is a French 
immersion school in Moose Jaw, and I understand that the tour 
that these students just completed was conducted in French. They 
are accompanied today by their instructor, Mr. Vic Lavallée, and 
following question period I will be joining them for pictures and a 
visit and drinks which will be in room 255 of the Legislative 
Assembly Building. 
 
I introduce them on behalf of my colleague, the member from 
Moose Jaw South; the school is located in his riding although 
several of the students will live in my riding as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are seated in the east gallery, and I would ask 
you and all members of the Assembly to show a warm welcome to 
these students from St. Margaret School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly, some 60 students seated in your gallery, sir. 
These are grade 8 students from the Weyburn Junior High School. 
We had a similar group here yesterday with us, Mr. Speaker. They 
are accompanied by teachers Dean Leach and Jim Nedelcov. I 
know they have had a tour already of the Legislative Building. 
This is, as I mentioned yesterday, a tradition of Weyburn Junior 
High to bring their students here. I will be meeting with them after 
question period, and I would ask all members of the Legislative 
Assembly to join with me in welcoming these young people to our 
Chambers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Alleged Budget Leak 
 
Mr. Romanow: Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Finance. According to recent news reports, most notably on the 
CBC, there appears to have been a major leak from the 
Department of Finance respecting Thursday's budget to be 
delivered in this Chamber which, as you know, Mr. Speaker, if so, 
represents a very major breach of parliamentary tradition and 
privileges. 
 
My question to the minister is this: Will you advise the House 
whether or not portions of your budget, as reported on the CBC, 
were leaked to the media, and if those portions as reported are 
accurate or false. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Well as I indicated to the media yesterday that 
there's some speculation on the CBC, and speculation is all it is. 
 
Mr. Romanow: Mr. Speaker, a new question. The Minister of 
Finance would have us believe and the public believe that this is a 
matter of speculation, yet the CBC news report was not 
speculative, Mr. Speaker, it was directly specific saying in part, 
quote: "The CBC has learned some of the details of the budget," 
referring to the budget, and then indeed identifying three or four 
major matters pertaining to tax increases which, as you know, sir, 
is indeed a very grave matter because it would give public 
advantage to some and not to others with respect to the 
announcement of prospective budget increases. 
 
So my question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: the House needs a 
clear answer from you to the question which I have asked — 
whether or not there was a leak. I'll put it to you another way. Has 
the CBC learned the details of portions of the budget or has it not? 
A simple yes or no would suffice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Well I've been in this House 17 years and I've 
never figured out what the CBC has learned, so I can't answer the 
Hon. Leader of the Opposition's question as to what they've 
learned. 
 
I've indicated that the news report was speculation, and I can't tell 
you more than that. You'll have to do a comparison when the 
budget's announced to see whether you think there was a leak or 
not. I don't think there was any leak and certainly the speculation 
about the budget . . . Even the hon. member, the Finance minister, 
was speculating about the budget the other day, and if it's improper 
for him to speculate the budget, I am surprised. That's not the way 
the system works. 
 
I think that I can indicate to the hon. member, Hansard back in 
1982 where his seat mate was then Finance minister and did in 
fact have a leak, and there were many discussion with your 
predecessor that day as to the public consultation and the public 
involvement in the budgetary development, so I would urge the 
hon. member to calm down a bit, that it's speculation, and that's all 
it is. 
 
Mr. Romanow: Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister of 
Finance. And with the greatest of respect to the Minister of 
Finance and the treasury benches opposite, I think this is a matter 
which deserves a serious consideration by them. Because I repeat 
again, Mr. Speaker, and I have a copy of the CBC news report, 
and I must simply beg the indulgence of the House to cite this one 
sentence of the report. It says, quote: 
 
Although Lane won't reveal the contents of the budget until 
Thursday, CBC News has learned some of the details. The deficit 
will be the second or third lowest since the Conservatives came to 
office . . . 
 
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

180 
 
 

And so forth. I'm mindful of your rules that the question should 
not be long, or the preamble long. And on it goes in specific 
details. Note, Mr. Speaker, the words are specific, that CBC "has 
learned." 
 
My question to the Minister of Finance is this: one of the things 
the CBC has learned, it says, is that the flat tax which you have 
imposed, this unfair flat tax, will go from 1.5 per cent to 2 per 
cent. Will the minister specifically deny that statement? And if 
not, will he then admit that there's been a serious breach of 
parliamentary tradition and practice? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Mr. Speaker, speculation about the flat tax has 
been going on for some time. I have indicated that the government 
would be considering changes to the flat tax. I've said that publicly 
for some several months. The opposition critic for Finance has 
indicated that he believes the flat tax is going up. You're saying the 
flat tax is going up. If there's a change to the flat tax, it should be 
of absolutely no surprise to anybody; I've said that for several 
months. 
 
I really think, Mr. Speaker, the bigger problem that the opposition 
leader faces right now is that if there was a leak, he should be 
talking to his Finance minister, who wasn't aware of the leak in the 
first place. 
 
Mr. Koskie: A question to the Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, I 
want to ask you: as a result of the CBC leak of their report, I want 
to ask you whether, in fact, that you have conducted an 
investigation into your department, outside of your department, to 
determine whether or not . . . And I ask you, Mr. Speaker, in your 
investigation can you indicate the nature of that investigation if 
indeed you did carry out an investigation; and I ask you, did you 
investigate yourself and your immediate staff? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Fully aware of the Peter Principle, I apologize to 
the House for calling the opposition Finance critic the minister. I 
recognize one may reach certain levels, but having said that, no, 
there was no investigation. Secondly, I don't believe an 
investigation is necessary. Thirdly, there has been much budget 
speculation. I think the hon. member for helping assist me in that 
speculation. But finally, let me assure the hon. member that even if 
there was an investigation, which I don't believe is necessary, the 
investigation would not be broad enough to include . . . to find out 
why the opposition critic didn't get a copy of the so-called leak. 
 
Mr. Koskie: Mr. Speaker, a new question. I want to ask you, Mr. 
Minister: when the budget comes down, and if in fact it turns out 
that the CBC story is based on more than mere speculation, and 
that it does indeed contain factual numbers, and particularly in 
respect to the tax on tobacco, I want to ask you: in light of that — 
as you will appreciate and as you raised in this House back in 
1982 — it would follow that some people could in fact gain some 
advantage by a pre-announcement of the tobacco tax, if indeed it 
comes to pass? 
 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, do you 
not consider that that in fact would constitute a serious breach of 
confidentiality of the budget? And under those circumstances, if it 
comes to pass, I ask you whether you are in fact prepared to do the 
honourable thing, and to submit your resignation as Minister of 
Finance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Well, Mr. Speaker, if anyone is surprised that 
tobacco taxes go up in budgets, it's only the NDP that would be 
surprised, and that's very recent, because I believe tobacco taxes 
have gone up virtually every year. Let me just refer the hon. 
member to Hansard of March 16, 1982 where the then leader of 
the opposition, then premier of this province, the former leader of 
the opposition, when he talked about . . . that their government had 
increased the tobacco taxes in every single budget, so that is not 
surprising speculation. 
 
And I'm quoting Hansard from the then premier of this province, 
so if tobacco taxes go out . . . and go up and the average person 
here buys an extra couple of cartons, I'm not going to begrudge 
them that. 
 
You may recall last year that I indicated well in advance of the 
budget that there was a likelihood of the sales tax going up. I made 
that clear so that the average person could take some advantage of 
that. So I think that your point is not particularly well taken, and if 
you're at all surprised, or if anybody's surprised if tobacco taxes go 
up, they shouldn't be. 
 
Mr. Koskie: Well, Mr. Minister, you stood in this House and you 
didn't show any surprise when the circumstances were on the 
Minister of Finance and the then Blakeney government, a similar 
situation in respect to tobacco tax. And I'll tell you what they did 
in that time, under those circumstances because the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: Order, order, order. I believe the hon. member is 
getting into a fairly lengthy preamble, and I'd ask him to get to his 
question. 
 
Mr. Koskie: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'll get directly 
to the supplement. In those circumstances as you have been 
familiar with when there was a release of the imposition of a 
tobacco tax, the then minister, what he did was to then announce 
immediately that the tobacco tax would become effective. And I'm 
asking you: have you considered that, in the light of your lack of 
denial and in light of the fact that there could be people who could 
benefit from the pre-announcement of the tobacco tax? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: I would expect, Mr. Speaker, that as we approach 
budget, that having had tobacco tax increases for 15 years, in 
every single budget for 15 years, that the smokers in this province 
don't go out pre-budget to buy some cigarettes, I would be very, 
very much surprised, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I suggest to the hon. member, if you want me to impose a tax 
in advance of the budget so that the average  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

181 
 
 

person pays more taxes, that's a change in policy of the New 
Democratic Party, and I'm glad it's on record. 
 

Possible Flat Tax Increase 
 
Mr. Goodale: Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Minister of Finance 
could indicate whether the Leader-Post is correct today when that 
newspaper suggests that there will in fact be a flat tax increase 
included in your budget on Thursday, and in one specific detail 
that newspaper suggests that the tax will take effect only on July 1. 
Can the minister confirm that that detail as reported by the 
Leader-Post today is correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Well again it's pure speculation, and I think that 
the hon. member will find out on Thursday as to when the tax goes 
into effect. And I simply indicate to the hon. members opposite 
that, just so you don't get all caught up and wound up, that the 
budget was printed before the stories ran, so there's no changes in 
the budget to reflect any changes, as has been done, I believe, in 
past federal governments. 
 
Mr. Goodale: Mr. Speaker, would the minister not agree that the 
suggestion in a media publication, not only that a tax may be 
changed but in fact the specific date when it might come into 
effect, would the minister not agree that that is more than just idle 
speculation, and which should indicate to him that somebody 
somewhere has had specific access to some of his budget 
documents, and that is a subject that should be of concern to him 
in terms of the security of his own system. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Well I don't have the concerns of the hon. 
member. I certainly made it clear that I have discussed thrust and 
indications of where the budget was going for the last couple of 
years, last three years. I have been, I believe, as open as I possibly 
could in indicating to the people of this province what the thrust of 
the budgets were, and I will continue to do that. 
 
That certainly one can interpret that as the Minister of Finance 
leaking his own budget, but I'm not sure that's the case. I can go 
back to the past history in this province where others have stood 
up and said that involving the public as much as you can in a 
budget is a desirable practice. I happen to believe that it is. All I 
can indicate on the specific question to the hon. member is that the 
dates that he referred to, he can judge those in the budget on 
Thursday. 
 
Mr. Romanow: I have a new question, and I have to direct it to 
the Deputy Premier, in the face of the obviously unsatisfactory 
answers from the Minister of Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: Mr. Speaker, nobody on this side of the House 
denies the right of the Minister of Finance to talk about the general 
thrusts of taxation and fiscal policy. That is clearly within his 
domain, if I may say so, but that's not the issue here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the issue is the announcement of specific details on 
tax increases which, under parliamentary  

tradition, have got to be kept strictly confidential to the budget day 
for obvious reasons. And this minister has displayed a total 
lackadaisical, indifferent attitude to that very serious problem in 
question period today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: My question to the Deputy Premier is this — in 
the absence of the Premier, since the Minister of Finance 
obviously does not want to treat this with any degree of gravity, 
obviously does not want to treat it as a matter of parliamentary 
tradition — my question to you, sir, is: will you do what is right 
and conduct an investigation of the Minister of finance's office, 
including the Minister of Finance, to find out whether or not the 
CBC was leaked this information, and if so, what steps were taken 
to prevent it in the future? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: Mr. Speaker, I think that it's impossible to 
tell whether or not it is pure speculation until such times as the 
budget is tabled, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member for Quill Lakes, the opposition Finance critic, 
yesterday didn't find this to be such an urgent and compelling 
thing. He sat there on his hands all during question period 
yesterday, Mr. Speaker. And I'm told that this speculation was 
going on in the media as early as yesterday morning. So this, quite 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, is a tempest in a teapot. 
 

Ward system in Municipal Elections 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the Minister 
of Urban Affairs, the minister in charge of the proposed municipal 
gerrymander Bill. 
 
Mr. Minister, your statements about your intentions to arbitrarily 
do away with the ward system in municipal elections has caused 
widespread concern. Last night the city councils of Prince Albert 
and Regina passed resolutions saying to you in no uncertain terms 
that you're dead wrong, and that it is the right of municipal electors 
to decide whether they wish to have a ward system in their 
municipality or not. 
 
In light of that, Mr. Minister, will you make it clear to this House 
and to the people in Regina, Saskatoon and P.A. and other cities, 
that you will not proceed with this arbitrary notion of yours that 
you should do away with the ward system in spite of the wishes of 
the majority? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: Mr. Speaker, I don't believe that our government 
has made a fair commitment or an announcement to that regard. 
But in any event, regarding the plebiscites — regarding the 
plebiscites, plebiscites are costly and expensive procedures. 
Plebiscites are matters which have been established — as a matter 
of fact can, I think, be open to some serious criticism, some 
serious criticism of the judgement in terms of the expenditure by 
city fathers, in terms of all of the other priorities for money 
spending that they have. A plebiscite will in fact be an expensive 
and costly opinion poll which will hurt the  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

182 
 
 

ratepayers. And it goes on and on. I didn't say that, but in May of 
1973 the Leader of the Opposition did. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister. 
Mr. Minister, here we have a case of you, sir, and your 
government dictatorially imposing its will on the people who live 
in the cities, who appreciate a ward system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: Plebiscites have already been held in Prince 
Albert and Regina and in Saskatoon, and the electors in those 
municipalities said they want a ward system in Regina — 70 per 
cent of them said that they wanted the ward system. 
 
Now in view of these undeniable facts, Mr. Minister, can you tell 
the House who it is you're representing when you talk about your 
intention to arbitrarily do away with the ward system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: Mr. Speaker, this debate has been going on since 
1959. Regina in 1959 voted no. Regina in 1970 voted no. In 1973 
the NDP government imposed it. Saskatoon voted no, and you still 
imposed it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: Mr. Minister, can I ask you a supplementary, 
and it is this: have you consulted with Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association on your proposal, and have they said 
that you should proceed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: Mr. Speaker, we consult with SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) an awful lot. 
This seems to be an issue, however, that affects four cities. The 
major consultative process of this issue is with the taxpayers. 
 
As Minister of Urban Affairs, Mr. Speaker, believe that it is my 
responsibility to be concerned with the high, rising property taxes 
that exist in all of our urban centres throughout Saskatchewan and 
to control those escalating taxes as best we can. 
 
Clearly the ward system is a very inefficient way of operating a 
municipal government, and day after day — they hoot and holler. 
They put it in. We saw what happened. But none the less, the 
sophisticated taxpayer today and the intelligent voter today has no 
problem distinguishing amongst the aldermen that choose to run at 
a particular municipal location. 
 
The only people that are really hollering about this, Mr. Speaker, 
really, are the aldermen, and I suppose it might be better to ask 
them, what do they fear? Do they fear representing their cities at 
large, their cities as a whole? And in any event, the next question 
that it brings forward — and this is controlled in the Act, and it's 
strange that the  

media has never asked me this. 
 
We haven't made any announcement on the ward system yet, but 
if we're talking efficiencies, the Act also control one other 
important thing: how many aldermen should these municipalities 
have? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister. 
Mr. Minister, 70 per cent of the voters in the city of Regina in a 
plebiscite said they want the ward system. That is pretty definitive 
and pretty certain. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: You have said before, and you said again 
today, and you're saying that the ward system is responsible for 
increased spending by municipalities and the increased debt load 
of municipalities. Can you explain to this House on what you base 
that accusation, Mr. Minister, and can you also tell us if you are 
saying that the system of provincial constituencies are at fault for 
the massive $3.4 billion deficit that your government has rung up? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: Mr. Speaker, what my learned friend is bringing 
up really amazes me. We in this Assembly are elected on a totally 
different process. We have a government; we have an opposition. 
So that as a result, we come in here and we're responsible to the 
entire tax paying public of the province. 
 
At the municipal level, when you have ward aldermen that come 
in and represent a very narrow viewpoint and make trade-offs — 
this for that, and all the rest of it — you know, it really begs the 
question. And I suppose that I could refer to an article in your 
reference library, the Leader-Post, where a municipal expert, a 
professor from the University of Saskatoon, spoke out against the 
ward system, and why. 
 
Now here's a municipal expert; I've never met the man, but 
obviously agrees with exactly what we're talking about. And as we 
go around and talk to the people and hear their complaints and 
hear their concerns, and why can I only elect one alderman, why 
can't I elect the entire government of that municipality, and the 
like, it really overwhelms me that the benches opposite can't, when 
they fought like the devil in 1973 to impose it against plebiscites 
and all the rest of it, why they can't use the same argument now 
when we're in a discussion of bringing some reasonable form of 
government back to municipalities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: A new question to the minister, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I'm appalled . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: I'm appalled by the minister who would stand 
in this House and condemn men and women elected by voters in 
municipalities throughout all of Saskatchewan, as he's done today. 
Mr. Minister, the  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

183 
 
 

financial pressure on municipalities and on the taxpayers in those 
municipalities has been brought about because of your 
government's deliberate shift of the tax load from the province to 
the property taxpayer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: Why don't you admit, Mr. Minister that your 
purpose in suggesting that you will do away with the ward system 
is strictly political, partisan politics, in which you feel that without 
a ward system the people who will get elected to municipal 
councils will be people who are representative of only your point 
of view. Mr. Minister, why don't you admit that and become 
honest for a change? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: Mr. Speaker, these people are living so far in the 
past it's unbelievable. If our government chooses to do something 
with the ward system, we'll get into some very interesting debate 
because the Leader of the Opposition, again in 1973, assured us 
there was no political politics involved in that system. So we can 
talk about them, but they're living in the past. 
 
The new Leader of the Opposition waited — he's admitted that 
he's waited 17 years to get crowned the Leader of the Opposition. 
But it's kind of like the captain of the Titanic — he switched 
around his deck-chairs over there, and now we've got a new critic 
of Urban Affairs who just said that the ward system exists in all 
municipalities. There's only four that they . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: Three. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: No, not three. Four. There's only four that it 
exists in. And in those four, one chose not to go with it. 
 
Now you refer to plebiscites, and I could refer to plebiscites as 
well, and in 1976 Saskatoon turned it down. And did the 
government of the day do anything? No. So that I think that in our 
wisdom, if the government firmly believes that a more efficient 
way of operating is electing at large, then I suppose that's the way 
we'll have to go. 
 
In the meantime, the aldermen that represent the existing wards — 
and I never did criticize them; I just simply indicated that they 
come in with narrow points of view — but a good alderman, 
elected at large, and those ward aldermen could very well be 
elected at large, I believe that the taxpayer, who I am concerned 
with, has the right to elect the entire city council. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: Order, please. Order, please. I believe question 
period is over. I'd like some quiet, please. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Neudorf and the amendment 
thereto moved by Ms. Simard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: Mr. Speaker, I know that many members 
opposite have waited in eager anticipation of this moment, and so, 
not wanting to let them down, I want to talk firstly, Mr. Speaker, 
about the annual report of SaskPower that was tabled just a few 
moments ago. 
 
In that annual report, Mr. Speaker, it shows that the corporation 
made a profit of $36 million in 1987, Mr. Speaker. Both the gas 
and the electrical utility were profitable — gas with a $16 million 
profit and the electric utility with a $20 million profit, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Although the corporation has made a significant turn-around 
financially, this year's profit of $36 million is only a dent in the 
debt of 2.6 billion. It comes after a $10 million loss in 1986 and a 
net loss of 22 million over the last five years. Unless the 
corporation can resolve this debt problem, Mr. Speaker, it will 
have to begin to achieve profits of at least 100 to $150 million a 
year to reduce the debt and finally bring costs to a level, Mr. 
Speaker, so that the rate changes can be held to inflation or less, or 
possibly even be reduced. 
 
At the beginning of 1987, Mr. Speaker, the management of 
SaskPower, the board of directors, and the government decided 
that the situation had to change immediately or the long-term 
consequences would be unbearable. SaskPower had to control 
spending, including interest charges paid on the debt. They had to 
make significant charges paid on the debt. They had to make 
significant profits, Mr. Speaker, to substantially reduce the debt 
that had been accumulated. Making a profit was the only way to 
get some money to start paying it back, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I expect SaskPower, Mr. Speaker, I expect SaskPower to continue 
seeking alternatives to work its way toward a positive financial 
position. This will mean diligence, prudent management, and 
creative thinking. Judging by the turn-around, Mr. Speaker, which 
has already started, I believe the current SaskPower leadership will 
achieve this financial health while keeping rates down and serving 
their customers in the excellent fashion that has been SaskPower's 
tradition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to also point out that his has been done, 
this beginning of a turn-around has been done at a time when the 
number of employees at SaskPower has been reduced 
significantly. So we have fewer employees delivering the service, 
and I think to the customer's satisfaction in a very effective way, 
Mr. Speaker. And I think that the employees of SaskPower 
deserve a great deal of credit for the work that they've done in that 
respect over the last year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: Before I leave the annual report, just so the 
members of the opposition have the fact before them, I want to 
point out a couple of comparisons, Mr. Speaker. Rate increases, 
and this is the system  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

184 
 
 

average, Mr. Speaker, on the electrical side of the utility on the 
seven years immediately previous to April 26 of 1982, on the 
electrical side in those seven years there was a 99.9 per cent rate 
increase in those seven years, Mr. Speaker. That's an average rate 
increase of those seven years, Mr. Speaker, of 14.3 per cent — 
14.3 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now let's take a comparable period — since April 26 of 1982. 
Well we've only got six and a half years, and during that 
six-and-half-year period we have had a total rate increase, Mr. 
Speaker, of 42.9 per cent, or an average of 6.6 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker, in that period. 
 
Now that's a fair and reasonable comparison, Mr. Speaker. 
Members opposite, during their last seven years in office — and 
the people of Saskatchewan in light of these facts will never see 
them back again — had rate increases on the electrical side more 
than twice of a comparable period of this government, Mr. 
Speaker. On the gas side of the utility, in the same seven years 
prior to '82 gas rate increased 188.5 per cent, an average of 26.9 
per cent, Mr. Speaker. Compare that to the years since April of 
1982, Mr. Speaker. The total increase on the gas utility since April 
of 1982 is 5.3 per cent, Mr. Speaker, or an average of .8 per cent. 
Mr. Speaker, the rate increases in the gas utility for the last seven 
years that they were in power as compared to the first six and 
one-half or seven that we've been here, Mr. Speaker, their rate 
increases, I think a quick calculation will show you, about 35-fold 
more than ours. I hope members opposite are paying attention, Mr. 
Speaker, because those happen to be the facts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure for me to have the opportunity to 
speak to the throne speech and the motion of my friend, the 
member from Rosthern. In his remarks moving the motion, Mr. 
Speaker, my colleague noted that this throne speech is one that 
embodies the principles of responsibility and commitment. I 
would like to address those principles in my remarks today, 
particularly as they relate to the duties that I've been asked to carry 
out in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, and in this government; and 
indeed, Mr. Speaker, to relate to the duties of some other members 
of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not assume, even though the evidence so 
strongly points to it, I will not assume that the member for Regina 
Rosemont is intentionally uneducated about his responsibilities as 
a critic. Nor will I assume that the lack of factual information in 
his statements and claims is rally his own fault. I've decided 
instead, Mr. Speaker, to believe that the problem must be that he 
has not had time to acquaint himself with all of the facts relative to 
the responsibility that he has. After all, Mr. Speaker, I can 
understand that when one is busily designing a quote: massive 
intervention, massive government intervention into the economy, 
end quote, that one must not have much time left for such trifles as 
facts about the Rafferty-Alameda and Shand projects, even of such 
an apparently unimportant thing as SaskPower. 
 
Or perhaps, Mr. Speaker, the member from Rosemont has simply 
been unable to follow the explanations of the professionals in this 
subject. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I'd  

like to give some help to the member and take some time to go 
over the details of the Rafferty-Alameda and Shand projects and 
explain to him in the simplest terms possible what the facts are. 
 
The first thing the member has said about the project, Mr. 
Speaker, is that it is a political boondoggle because it was built — 
it was built in the constituencies of Estevan and 
Souris-Cannington, or that's where it's proposed to be built — and 
those constituencies happen to be represented by Conservative 
MLAs. But, Mr. Speaker, I don't think — I don't believe the 
member would really expect us to build such a project in Regina 
Rosemont. The river is in Estevan and Souris-Cannington. 
 
It seems logical then that — and I know that there may be a storm 
drainage gutter that runs through the riding of the hon. member, 
but, Mr. Speaker, it simply could not support the needs of a major 
project like Rafferty, and the hon. member ought to know that. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, the suggestion that the project should be built in 
any NDP-held riding is absurd, and that suggestion in itself is a 
political boondoggle, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One further thing, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that a study conducted 
by the previous administration in 1981, the NDP administration, 
provides an interesting revelation. 
 
The study, called the Estevan redevelopment study, looked at a 
number of options for increasing the electricity supply in the 
province. This study identified Shand, Mr. Speaker, and concluded 
that it was the best option for the next stage of power generation in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even the former NDP minister of the Environment, 
one Neil Byers, recognized the need, and he stated in 1974: 
 
The Souris Basin has been the subject of more theoretical 
development than any other river basin in our province. 
Development has been advanced by every political party. This 
interest in development comes naturally to people of the Souris. 
The big barrier has been water. The immediate problem is to 
ensure a regular supply of water in the face of wide variations of 
flow during the year and from year to year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so even an NDP minister recognized the need and 
the validity for these developments. But the member for Rosemont 
has said that there will not be enough water to cool the Shand 
power plant. And again, Mr. Speaker, I understand how busy he is 
with his NDP rule books and planning meetings and so on, but it 
doesn't seem unfair, Mr. Speaker, to ask that member to acquaint 
himself with the facts, or at least to say nothing. 
 
(1445) 
 
The facts are, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation has conducted a hydrology analysis, and for the 
benefit of that member, hydrology, Mr. Speaker, is the study of 
water, the flows of water. The results of that analysis make it quite 
clear that there will be sufficient water to cool two units at Shand, 
Mr. Speaker, and irrigate  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

185 
 
 

12,000 acres of land, provide water for recreational use, municipal 
consumption and, Mr. Speaker, an added bonus of flood control. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I did not do that analysis. SaskPower did not 
do that analysis. The professionals at Sask Water did that analysis, 
Mr. Speaker. And I find it a little annoying that the member from 
Rosemont would care so little for his credibility that he would 
impugn the efforts and the reputations of very highly qualified 
professionals at Sask Water. The member for Rosemont has said 
that even if all this is true, Saskatchewan should have bought the 
power that will be generated by Shand from the Manitoba 
electrical utility instead. 
 
I don't know if he will be of that opinion, Mr. Speaker, after April 
26 of this year. I doubt it. But, Mr. Speaker, I suppose it all fits in 
with his values of putting the NDP ahead of the truth, ahead of the 
professional advice, and ahead of the people of Saskatchewan, 
because the simple fact is, Mr. Speaker, that for every dollar we 
will invest in Shand, we would have had to spend $1.50 to get the 
equivalent amount of energy from Manitoba Hydro. The member 
for Rosemont is advising us to spend 50 per cent more to buy from 
his friends in Manitoba. I ask you, Mr. Speaker, where is the 
political boondoggle? 
 
The member has said we should at least have studied the thing 
more, that there has not been enough examination. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, there was the Estevan study I just mentioned from 1979 
to 1981, and in fact, the fact is that this project is the culmination 
of 80 years of effort and study, with the first proposal for the 
Alameda in 1907. And in 1932, Mr. Speaker, the Rafferty was 
proposed. 
 
There was the 1940 IJC (International Joint Commission) study; 
there was the 1959 IJC study; there was the Red Rainy Basin 
study; the Nelson basin study; the Souris Basin study; the 
Burlington study; the Lake Darling study; the Souris Basin 
Development Authority study; and the Souris River study; our 
environmental impact hearings, and on and on, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this particular river, the Souris River, is one of the most 
studied rivers in the world. 
 
At a time, Mr. Speaker . . . there comes a time when you either act 
and proceed with the development and building, or you give up. 
But the member for Rosemont wants us to study it some more — 
study it some more and in fact, study it until the area is represented 
by NDP MLAs. And, Mr. Speaker, I think if we were to wait for 
that, we'd be waiting a very long time. 
 
The member from Rosemont has said that Environment Canada 
has taken the position that the project is not viable. Mr. Speaker, I 
don't want to speak too harshly here, but that simply is not true. So 
one of two things: either the member is deliberately misleading the 
people of Saskatchewan, or, I continue to assume, he has simply 
not informed himself. 
 
Environment Canada will examine the project carefully, and 
because I have confidence in the professionalism and knowledge 
of our people at SaskPower, Sask Water, and Environment, I am 
completely confident that Environment Canada's approval will be 
forthcoming, Mr.  

Speaker. 
 
I believe that the Assembly can agree with me that we have strong 
reason for that confidence, given the kinds of comments coming 
out of Environment Canada to date. Let me quote a Mr. Pat Finlay 
of the electric power section of Environment Canada, Mr. 
Speaker, who said: 
 
The Shand plant's zero discharge concept means that no water will 
be discharged into the Souris River. The Shand station will be the 
first power plant in Canada with a zero discharge water system. 
This is a very progressive step in environmental protection, and 
SaskPower is to be commended for this initiative. 
 
He went on to say, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
 
The proposed design will surpass water management practices 
recommended by Environment Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is one of the people who has spent his life 
protecting the environment, not from political handbooks and 
NDP rule books, but with hard scientific information. 
 
And remember, he is not my official. He is not with SaskPower. 
This gentleman is not even in any remote branch of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. He is an employee of Environment 
Canada, and he says, contrary to the prognostications of the 
member for Rosemont, that our design exceeds standards, that we 
are to be commended for the sensitivity to the environment that we 
have demonstrated. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the old story about the lion being the 
king of beasts. Well the member for Rosemont should take a 
lesson from mother nature, Mr. Speaker. The lion is king of beasts 
because its roaring is matched by its credibility, its ability to 
deliver. The roaring, Mr. Speaker, of the member from Rosemont 
is like the mewing, or more like the mewing demands of a 
newborn ferret than that of a lion. There is no credibility to the 
noises he is making; they are just noises without substance. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, that member has suggested that one of 
the ways — now listen to this carefully — one of the ways to 
avoid the need for Shand would be to invest several hundred 
million dollars to insulate seniors' houses. 
 
Now I'm all in favour of programs what would help seniors 
insulate their houses. But, Mr. Speaker, one of two things is the 
case here. Either we would be saving natural gas, with which the 
majority of houses are heated, in which case this measure would 
not mean a thing as it relates to the Shand project, or we would 
cause all of those people to switch to electric heating, in which 
case the demand for electricity would be greatly increased and 
Shand would be more necessary than ever. 
 
So either way you take the argument, Mr. Speaker, he is wrong, 
simply mewing again and knows not whereof he speaks, or is he 
trying to generate even more support for Shand? And I quite 
frankly think that's highly unlikely. 
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

186 
 
 

Mr. Speaker, my friend from Rosthern speaks of responsibility 
and commitment. I know that he is speaking of a responsible 
attitude to our people — not an attitude that allows any amount of 
misinformation so long as it serves some narrow political end; not 
an attitude, Mr. Speaker, that defines commitment, not in terms of 
the protection, economic development, and respect for the people, 
but only in terms of the maximum return for the NDP. 
 
Let me ask: where is the commitment, Mr. Speaker, where is the 
responsibility to the people of Saskatchewan, and particularly the 
people of southern Saskatchewan, in the attempt to deny those 
people water that is desperately needed? Where is the 
commitment, Mr. Speaker; where is the responsibility in telling 
people that they must continue to haul water in dry years, mile 
after mile, that they will have to continue to ration water, that their 
economic future must continue to be subjected to the extreme 
swings of the weather and the climate? 
 
Where is the commitment, Mr. Speaker, and where is the 
responsibility that says those people must continue to accept the 
opposite as well — the floods that occur in years of excess water? 
That is not commitment and that is not responsibility. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, I suggest that never before has this House been witness 
to the height of irresponsibility demonstrated by our Richard the 
ferret-hearted, across the way. 
 
The member for Rosemont has said he has a plan for southern 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we will call it the Rosemont plan. He 
plans to call for the construction of small off-stream 
impoundments, the expansion of the Weyburn and the Midale 
dams, the expansion of the wetlands in the basin, and the 
establishment of a heritage park. Yes, Mr. Speaker, the member 
has come up with a number of sound and original ideas. 
Unfortunately, none of the sound ideas are original, and none of 
the original ideas are particularly sound. And out of this 
intellectual morass of the socialist textbook thinking we have the 
Rosemont plan for the disruption of southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Let's take a look at the proposal to build this network of off-stream 
impoundments. Has the member produced any wildlife baselines? 
No. Has he even identified where these will be built? No. Has he 
determined whose property will be affected and to what extent a 
whole network of such impoundments will affect this property? 
No. Has he produced any geo-technical analysis that these can be 
safely built without endangering the life of those downstream? 
The answer again, Mr. Speaker, is no. 
 
The Rosemont plan calls for the expansion of the Weyburn and 
the Midale dams. Is he aware that the Weyburn dam cannot be 
expanded without significantly increasing the risk of flooding 
through the city of Weyburn? Well apparently no, or if he does, he 
doesn't care. 
 
Has he produced any hydrological analysis that would indicate the 
facilities would optimize the water storage-evaporation ratios, 
etc.? No. Has he produced any civil engineering analysis that 
indicates that it would  

even be possible to expand these dams? Once again the answer is 
no. 
 
He has no environmental assessment of his proposals, no analysis 
on the effects downstream, no information on the impact on 
wildlife, fisheries, soil or people, no information at all, Mr. 
Speaker, except that it would create a gargantuan network of 
government projects that fits in with the socialist dream. 
 
But that's not the end of the irresponsibility for that particular 
member, Mr. Speaker. He has gone the furthest mile in his 
commitment to the NDP and his disdain for the people. He has 
said that should the province ever have the misfortune to be 
governed by his party they would decommission the dams. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here we have a man proposing that even after the 
project has been built, after all of the millions of investment have 
been made, after the international treaties have been signed, the 
irrigation developed, after all of that, Mr. Speaker, he would tear it 
down, tear up the international agreements, unplug the irrigation, 
throw away the investment and destroy, Mr. Speaker, all that has 
been built — the height of irresponsibility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do not believe I have ever heard such outright 
contempt for the people of the province as I hear from that 
member when he speaks on this project. It is, to say the least, 
absurd; to say the most, a sinister warping of the democratic 
process. 
 
Genuine responsibility and genuine commitment, Mr. Speaker, 
speak loudly from the actions of this government. We will have 
security of supply in our electricity needs. We will have irrigation 
for 12,000 acres of farm land. We will have major new 
recreational facilities that will contribute to economic growth and 
diversification of this province, Mr. Speaker. We will have 
security of supply for municipalities that live under constant threat 
of shortages. We will have the security of property that comes 
from flood control, Mr. Speaker. We will have security for 
cattlemen — who even this spring may be hauling water for their 
livestock. We will have the benefits of the investment retained in 
Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan people, and at a saving of 50 per 
cent compared to the Manitoba hydro offer. We will do these 
things because we are committed to our people and we accept the 
responsibility they have placed in our hands, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1500) 
 
And before I leave the subject of SaskPower . . . Mr. Speaker, the 
member for Rosemont likes to roar about rate increases at 
SaskPower. And again, there is no credibility, none whatsoever, in 
those roarings, Mr. Speaker. Let me . . . One of his friends and 
allies, the member for Regina University in 1980, when they were, 
in fact, sitting on this side of the House, urged his government to 
increase power rates because to take that sort of action would lead 
to conservation — and I remember it well — increase the power 
rates to lead to conservation. And they practised that in some 
significant way when they had, in seven years prior to 1982, Mr.  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

187 
 
 

Speaker, a 99.9 per cent increase, 100 per cent larger than the 
increase in a comparable period since 1982. And I suppose that 
after the member for Saskatoon University gets together with his 
friend from Rosemont, a new part of the Rosemont plan will be to 
increase rates so that they are so prohibitive as to discourage 
people from putting on the lights at night. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, we have not followed the advice of the 
NDP and raised the rates at the pace they did. And since I've 
already put those rate increases and comparisons on record, Mr. 
Speaker, unless somebody has some compelling desire to hear 
them again . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: I'd like to hear them again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: Would you? Well, okay. I'll give them to you 
again. I'll give them to you again. And are you listening? 
 
An Hon. Member: I sure am. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: This goes back — this goes back to seven 
years prior to the April 26 election of 1982. And the electric rate 
. . . the electricity rates at SaskPower were increased during that 
period a total of 99.9 per cent, Mr. Speaker — 99.9 per cent, as 
compared to the six-and-a-half years following that election where 
the rates have increased by 42.9 per cent. That, Mr. Speaker, is 
less than half the rate increase of that comparable period under the 
NDP. 
 
In natural gas, on the gas side of the utility, the distinction is even 
more profound, Mr. Speaker. Under the NDP seven-year term, gas 
rates were pushed up 188.5 per cent — 188.5 per cent. And under 
this administration, Mr. Speaker, for a similar period, the total 
increase was 5.3 per cent. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, the rate of increase under the NDP 
exceeded that of the PC government by more than 35-fold. So 
when members opposite want to make a noise, perhaps part of the 
noise ought to include the record because they were part of it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Let me say, Mr. Speaker, that I will put the Rafferty-Alameda 
project beside the Rosemont plan any day. Let the test be who has 
provided the detailed information, the entire history of study, the 
proven economic benefits and environmental security, because on 
every one of those issues, Mr. Speaker, the Rosemont plan is not 
only deficient, it is silent. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, one of the fundamental objectives of this 
government, this government's commitment to the people, is 
economic growth and diversification. And I know the members 
opposite don't agree with growth, although they often try to gloss 
over that position, but if anyone needs reminding of the NDP 
position, all they have to do is look at the record. 
 
The member for Saskatoon University in this House, in the budget 
debate of 1980, demanded that legislation be passed to limit the 
growth of his own city, Saskatoon. He opposed the growth of 
Saskatoon because, he said, it caused social problems — social 
problems, I suppose,  

like more jobs, more tax revenue, more opportunities for our 
children; these terrible things are the things the NDP wished to 
stop. 
 
They also opposed the growth of the agricultural industry, Mr. 
Speaker, that happens with the wise use of farm chemicals, and in 
fact, just like the Rosemont plan for SaskPower, the Peter plan for 
agriculture involved schools being required to, quote: ". . . grow 
chemically free food in greenhouses on school property. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is the compelling and exciting Peter plan of the 
NDP for agricultural development in the province of 
Saskatchewan, so now we know what the Rosemont plan is, and 
we know what the Peter plan is, and we even have a good idea 
about the Riversdale plan, but we're not quite sure because he's yet 
to take a real position on any issue since being "coronated", Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where in all of this rhetoric and vitriol and hysteria 
coming out of the members across the way, where is there a 
Saskatchewan plan? Mr. Speaker, they just don't have one. 
 
Before I conclude, Mr. Speaker, I would like to touch on one more 
area where this government has demonstrated its commitment to 
the people of Saskatchewan, and that's through the activities of 
Agdevco (Agricultural Development Corporation). 
 
Mr. Speaker, Agdevco has grown exponentially under this 
government's management and commitment. In fact, in just the 
last three years Agdevco has grown from a concern doing about 
$10 million worth of foreign project contracts to one doing over 
$50 million, Mr. Speaker. That makes Agdevco the largest 
Canadian-based operator of international agricultural projects, Mr. 
Speaker — number one, and growing still under the Saskatchewan 
plan of Premier Devine and the Progressive Conservative 
government. 
 
To give you a quick example, Mr. Speaker: in just a few days, 
leaving Regina will be a plane load of beef cattle that will take off 
for the U.K. This will be the largest such shipment ever, resulting 
from agribition activities, Mr. Speaker, and the people who bought 
these livestock at agribition because of Agdevco's reputation and 
credibility in the international market-place were asked to 
facilitate this shipment. And I know members opposite don't much 
appreciate what Agdevco is doing for the people in the province of 
Saskatchewan, or people, for that matter, in the third World, Mr. 
Speaker. I'd like to make that the subject of a whole other debate, 
because that's quite a story as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am also pleased . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Are you asking us 
to privatize Agdevco? Is that what I heard members opposite say? 
Well I appreciate having your position on the records, Mr. 
Member for the Quill Lakes. 
 
I am pleased, Mr. Speaker, that as part of the agreement to have 
Hitachi, Marubeni-Hitachi plant established in Saskatoon, we also 
signed what is called an offset agreement. You will recall that 
Hitachi-Marubeni formed a joint venture called S.K. Turbines, and 
they have a plant  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

188 
 
 

in Saskatoon. And members opposite, I remember when the sod 
was turned, laughed about that particular project. But the project is 
real, the ribbon will be cut, and the equipment's in place, and they 
will be building turbines, Mr. Speaker, for the continental market 
and beyond. 
 
But we signed what is called an offset agreement when we signed 
the Shand turbine agreement, Mr. Speaker. That offset agreement 
provided for $72 million of incremental exports or investments in 
Saskatchewan by the companies Marubeni and Hitachi of Japan. 
That means that the company agrees to take a combination of $72 
million worth of our exports and . . . or to make investments in the 
province, and that, Mr. Speaker, I think is a pretty good example 
of how to build this province. 
 
And I want to tell you one more thing about Agdevco, Mr. 
Speaker. When we go into one of these foreign projects, we do so 
with a plan to use Saskatchewan goods and Saskatchewan people, 
so the equipment and parts and work-force are sourced right here 
in the province of Saskatchewan. It provides markets for our 
manufacturers and world-class experience for our people, and that, 
Mr. Speaker, is part of the building that this government is doing. 
 
Contrast that, Mr. Speaker, with the platform of members opposite 
to stop growth, to ban this and to ban that and to produce cheaper 
right here in the province of Saskatchewan. Contrast that concrete 
action of responsible members with the kinds of hysteria about 
Nazis and bank robbers and farm chemicals and boondoggles that 
arises out of the swamp across the way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm proud of the commitment shown in the throne 
speech to continue with the building of this province. I am proud 
that this government accepts its responsibility to the people of 
Saskatchewan and to the people of southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, particularly relative . . . I'm proud, Mr. Speaker, of 
the Rafferty-Alameda project and the Shand power station. I'm 
proud to stand I this House to try to provide the members opposite 
with a brief education, Mr. Speaker, and I can only hope that some 
of them have paid attention. And if they continue to ignore their 
responsibility, Mr. Speaker, to be accurate, fair and constructive, 
then they will have to face the people, the electorate, in due 
course. 
 
Because it is all well and good for the member for Rosemont to 
play at being an expert on the Souris, and it's all right for the 
member for Saskatoon University to pass himself off as an expert 
in agriculture, but, Mr. Speaker, at some point their constituents 
want to hear something from them that affects their lives, Mr. 
Speaker — their lives. And they do not want to hear their MLA 
opposing the growth of their city or fighting the building of this 
province or calling for the coddling of terrorists in far-off lands. So 
members opposite better get real and they had better do it quickly, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be proud to support the motion moved by the 
member for Rosthern and seconded by the  

member for Moosomin. Mr. Speaker, I will be opposing the 
amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale: Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might have the leave of 
the Assembly to introduce some guests in the gallery. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Goodale: Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to you, 
and to other members of this Assembly through you, a family 
from Gravelbourg which is seated in your gallery — Normand and 
Joanne Girardin from Gravelbourg, together with their children, 
Danielle, Gaëtan, Suzanne, and Lynne. And they are joined in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker, by Chris and Bob Steenhoff, and their 
children, Tony Keith, and Darrell, who are visiting Regina today 
and Gravelbourg in the company of the Girardins, from New 
Denver in British Columbia. And I would ask members of the 
House to join with me in welcoming them to our Assembly this 
afternoon. Bienvenue. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1515) 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Neudorf and the amendment 
thereto moved by Ms. Simard. 
 
Mr. Koskie: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I'm very pleased 
to enter in the debate on the throne speech. I can only say that 
listening to the Deputy Premier, it's a difficult act to follow. 
 
I want to say that the members opposite, in introducing this throne 
speech, I think what it indicates is that their spirit has been broken, 
their confidence riddled, and in order to escape any further 
retribution from the voters of this province, they decided that in 
this throne speech they should say nothing, do nothing, promise 
nothing — look like a smart Tory, in other words. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the members here thought that this 
was an opportunity for this government to show some leadership 
in respect to the main problem in Saskatchewan. But sadly to say, 
Mr. Speaker, this government has run out of ideas, has run out of 
steam; it has even run out of slogans. I want to say again that this 
document illustrates the moral and intellectual bankruptcy of this 
government. This should have been a major opportunity for this 
government to show leadership in the difficult times ahead in this 
province. 
 
And I want to say that the farm crisis, I maintain, should have 
been dealt with. Where is the solution to the  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

189 
 
 

problem in agriculture? In the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, all they 
had to say in respect to it as a result farm debt is a crisis — crisis 
proportions. Now this is not the first that they identified the 
problem, because last year in his budget the Minister of Finance 
indicated that farm debt was at crisis proportion. That's a year ago. 
And he said we must act on it. 
 
Now one year later, or approximately, they say farm debt is still a 
crisis proportion. And all they have to say to the farmers in this 
document is that tough times come and tough times pass. And I 
think what it should say is that . . . it better said, is that Tory times 
comes but Tory times will pass, and that Saskatchewan will be for 
the better when that happens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: Mr. Speaker, last year we saw this government again 
not supporting agriculture. I want to indicate and review the 
massiveness of the cuts that took place in respect to agriculture last 
year in last budget. And here again the government is also 
indicating they have no solution. 
 
And in fact that silent Minister of Finance, which puts out his 
budget before the budget day, admitted that this government is 
throwing its hands up in respect to the agricultural problem. He 
says, existing agricultural programs may be modified, but don't 
expect too many new programs in agriculture, he said. Most 
immediate problem facing Saskatchewan farmers today cannot be 
solved by the provincial treasury. The problem has shifted in the 
last few years — well, what a revelation! That's a clear indication 
from the Minister of Finance that this government is prepared to 
abandon the farmers who are in dire financial crisis. 
 
I want to indicate the degree of that crisis. The Royal Bank did a 
survey the other day, and a week — about a month ago — and 
they indicated that 17.5 per cent of all their farm loans in 
Saskatchewan is in arrears. That's twice as high as the national 
average, and higher than even Manitoba, which is 11.2 or 11.5 per 
cent. 
 
I predict, Mr. Speaker, unless this government comes to its senses 
and deals with the farm crisis, that there is going to be a massive 
exodus of farmers from their land and from their home. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: And I'll tell you, during the budget debate and during 
this debate we're going to be calling for action by this government 
on behalf of farm families throughout this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: Mr. Speaker, I was indicating — and I want to repeat 
for the record and for those farmers that may be watching this 
afternoon — that last year, as I indicated this government made 
massive cuts. They cut the agricultural department budget by 25 
per cent. They eliminated the property improvements grants. They 
cut the fuel rebate to farmers from 21 cents to 9 cents per gallon,  

and they phased out what they promised in a previous election, the 
land purchase program. They phased out all the provincial funding 
for agricultural fairs and exhibitions. They phased out funding for 
4-H regional programming. They reduced grants to the various 
producer groups such as Saskatchewan Livestock Association and 
the sheep-wool marketing commission. They plan to eliminate the 
provincial funding to the Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute 
— subsequently re-evaluated that. They cancelled travel grants 
and clinic operating grants for veterinarians. Hundred and twenty 
thousand in grants to R.M.s for perennial weed control — 
eliminated. Cancelled grants to the University of Saskatchewan 
totally $200,000 for feed testing, and they cancelled grants to the 
U of S totalling $80,000 for soil testing. 
 
That's what they did this year. Today in this budget they 
absolutely do not acknowledge more than that there is a crisis; 
indicate no solution whatsoever. And I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
that in our caucus we're going around this province and meeting 
with farmers. Meeting with them in homes — in kitchen settings 
where several farmers will meet with us. We have been discussing 
what farmers are asking, and they're asking for support from this 
government which deceived the farmers of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: Mr. Speaker, if we take a look at this here throne 
speech, there's no doubt that what we find is a government out of 
control, a government with no management, a government that has 
placed this province on its knees from a financial standpoint. 
 
This province, when this government took over, was the envy of 
Canada. This province was the best managed area in North 
America from a financial point of view. Our credit ratings were 
rising, and I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, we had the lowest per capita 
debt in all of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: And after seven years of Tory administration, Mr. 
Speaker, what is the record? We have had a deficit in every single 
year that they have brought in a budget. And I predict that they're 
going to come into this House with this budget on Thursday next, 
bragging about they have reduced the budget. Imagine, to $350 
million. And that's what the Minister of Finance allegedly leaked 
to the press. 
 
Let's take a look at what they have done to this province from the 
standpoint of fiscal management. The total accumulated debt 
without this budget on the backs of the people of this province is 
$3.4 billion — $3.4 billion. Mr. Speaker, to service the debt 
created by this government costs the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 
annually — last year, $294 million just to service that debt, and 
this government has indicated that they are efficient. That's their 
new kick: they're efficient administrators. I'll tell you, everything 
they have touched as been a disaster. 
 
The Minister of Finance, if you could believe him — but I want to 
indicate how this government has lost credibility. Going into the 
election in 1986-87, after the first minister  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

190 
 
 

was driven out of the portfolio, they brought in the current 
Minister of Finance, and he came in there and gave a pre-election 
budget, and he had the gall to state, as one of the highlights of his 
budget, that there was going to be a deficit of $389 million dollars 
and that would be a reduction from the previous year. 
 
And do you know what happened? During that year he ran up $1.2 
billion of debt — $1.2 billion. That was the cost and the waste to 
the taxpayers to get those birds elected. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: Yes, Mr. Speaker, certainly this government has 
increased our debt, has mortgaged our future, but they've done 
more. This government has imposed on the people of 
Saskatchewan one of the largest tax grabs in the history of Canada. 
Over the last four years the total amount of increase in taxes, direct 
taxes brought in and introduced in the budgets, exceeds $460 
million - $460 million of new taxes on the backs of the people, at 
the same time that they are driving up the accumulated deficit. 
 
And now the Minister of Finance is indicating that he has some 
more goodies for the people of Saskatchewan, and the leak 
indicates another $150 million of taxes on the backs of the people 
of this province. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan are 
getting the worst of every conceivable deal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: This government is driving this province into debt 
and it's taxing its people to death. But worse than that, Mr. 
Speaker, what this government has done is to undermine and cut 
those things that we had built up during the years. We had built up 
the best health care system in North America. We had a fine drug 
program that assisted those that needed drugs - our seniors and 
those that were ill - all prescribed by a doctor. And the Premier 
said, we love you, so we're going to make you pay for them 
yourself. 
 
But the problem is, Mr. Speaker, many of the people in 
Saskatchewan can't pay for them. I have gone from house to 
house, and I've visited seniors, and they're paying $185, $150. I 
went to my uncle and he's paying $115 a month and his wife is at 
$84 or $85 - $200 a month that hey have to put out. Now 
fortunately, as he said, we had saved a little money and we can 
afford it. But many people across this province can't afford it, and 
this cruel government, this government that would give away to 
the rich and expose the people that built this province to that type 
of treatment, needs to be kicked out of office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Koskie: And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, I feel confident out 
in Quill Lakes. I feel confident because this government has no 
longer any credibility - none. This  

government came into office, fanfare, farm production . . . on the 
farm purchase program. Where is it today? Gone; history; 
forgotten. 
 
They promised the people that they'd give them a better way of 
life. And ever since they came into office, I'll tell you, it has been a 
disaster for many of the people of this province. And I'll tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, they'll have an opportunity to test how well-received 
they are by the people of Saskatchewan. I challenge the Deputy 
Premier to get his Premier to call a by-election in Elphinstone and 
in Eastview. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: Mr. Speaker, I'd like to say that when a government 
comes in to office there has to be some respect between the 
government and the people of the province. 
 
An Hon. Member: Trust. 
 
Mr. Koskie: Trust, it's called. And I will tell you, that trust is 
gone. There is no trust left because this government has betrayed 
the people of Saskatchewan. They have betrayed them in respect 
to the promises they made; they betrayed them in respect to health 
care. And it's interesting to hear, Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier 
get up and read in that eloquent voice and performance today, held 
everyone just in abeyance, the edge of their seat, to say how well 
they're doing, how all of this privatization is growing and we're 
world class - world class in everything they touch. But I'll tell you, 
I'll tell you, Mr. Deputy Premier, you're not world class with the 
people of Saskatchewan; I'll tell you, you're low-class. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: Mr. Speaker, I'll tell you, when we continue the 
debate here, I want the . . . our party here are going to be exposing 
this government for its mismanagement, for its incompetence, for 
its patronage, for its lack of managerial skills. We're going to be 
exposing the heavy burden of taxation that had been laid on the 
backs of the people of this province while the major corporations 
get a free lunch. We're going to expose this party, the government, 
and remind them of all the promises they made and all of the 
promises they have broken. 
 
And I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, we're going to speak out in respect 
to health care and demand that the Premier and this government 
come to its senses and reinstitute those programs which they so 
disastrously destroyed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: And finally, Mr. Speaker, we're going to stand in this 
House and we're going to debate and we're gong to call on 
assistance to the agricultural community to help agricultural 
families throughout this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: Mr. Speaker, in closing, I just want to say that we 
here in this province and the people of this  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

191 
 
 

province have been very proud of its former premiers - Tommy 
Douglas and Woodrow Lloyd and Allan Blakeney. 
 
And I would have hoped that when time came, that we could have 
said the same thing about this Premier. But I'll tell you, on the 
record of this government there is no way that he will ever 
possibly be in the same pages of history in line with those that I 
have mentioned previously. 
 
I think that what we have to do is, as a people of this province, to 
remember those leaders with love and respect for their 
contribution to Saskatchewan. And I want to say that in my view 
they were people of vision, people with a dream and a 
determination to make that dream a reality. But they did not dream 
of an exercise of power just for power's sake; they dreamt of how 
power could be used by ordinary people for the good of all. They 
dreamt of building a better world by building a better province. 
And I want to say, those leaders of our party, they dreamt well, 
they built well, and they gave much to us to be proud of. And 
indeed they gave their life in the service to our province. 
 
And I say to the people of Saskatchewan that there is a better way 
than what we have been having during these seven years. And I 
ask the people of Saskatchewan to join with us, to join with us in a 
cause of building a compassionate and decent society, a society 
where opportunities are available not just for the rich but for all 
members of society. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: This government, when it went to its piratization, as 
it's called, went to Great Britain to seek out assistance of how to 
dispose of our assets. 
 
Now what the Minister of Finance is saying, we're going to bring 
in a budget and we're going to have a white paper on tax reform. 
And I'll tell you the type of tax reform the people of Saskatchewan 
can expect, because Margaret Thatcher has brought in some tax 
proposals in the U.K. And this says that, "Tax-cutting British 
budget snips cord of consensus politics" - by Richard Gwyn. 
 
And I want to indicate and to warn the people of Saskatchewan 
that when these people talk about tax reform and equality, they're 
talking the British style under Margaret Thatcher. And let's see 
how great a lady she was. Someone across the way said, great 
lady. Well I'll tell you, she brought in a little budget the other day 
and she had a sweet package for some, and let's see what it said: 
 

What Lawson, (he's the Exchequer, Chancellor of the 
Exchequer), (what Lawson) has done in turn is to turn 
Britain's haves into have everythings, and its have nots into 
have nothings. More than half of this $9 billion tax cut ends 
up in the wallets and the purses of the top five per cent of 
British income earners. Those at the bottom of the income 
ladder will actually pay a pittance more, if you can believe it. 

 
He goes on to say: 

The profound effects of this budget though, will be political. 
What this budget does, (and this is Margaret Thatcher's I'm 
talking about) it legitimizes greed by giving those who 
already have. It sanctifies meanness of spirit by giving 
nothing to those who now have nothing. 

 
That's the Tory vision for the future - hand-outs to the rich, govern 
for the rich, give to the rich, take from the poor. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: Mr. Speaker, we stand in this House committed to 
speak on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, and I'll tell you, 
when the budget is released on Thursday, that's when the fight will 
begin. And I'll tell you, we'll go to every corner of this province to 
indicate how mean, how indecent, how ruthless this government 
is. 
 
An Hon. Member: And incompetent. 
 
Mr. Koskie: And incompetent. Mr. Speaker, I want to close and 
say that obviously I can't support a document which obviously has 
nothing in it, and that's evident by what the members from across 
the way have been able to say, and I'll be voting against the main 
motion and voting for the amendment. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It's a pleasure and an 
honour for me to participate in this throne speech debate. First of 
all, I would like to welcome you back, sir, in your role. I, for one, 
have appreciated the fairness and rulings that you have brought 
into this House as we progressed through our daily procedures. As 
well, I have to congratulate you for your perseverance, Mr. 
Speaker, in maintaining decorum and operating this Assembly in 
honour and in dignity, as it should be. 
 
I would like to first of all thank my constituents again, in Regina 
South, for always providing me with their interest and their 
concerns — speaking with me, bringing all of the various things to 
my attention. And yes, it's fair to say including some criticisms, 
which I accept, because this is a democracy and well we should 
receive problems as well as our accolades. 
 
One of the main things that my people in Regina South have been 
talking to me about, Mr. Speaker, is the oil upgrader. It's located 
here in Regina, and it's an exciting piece of news for our city that it 
seems has been overlooked by certainly a lot of our civic people; 
as they go about their daily duties in this city they don't really 
seem to talk much about the upgrader. And it's interesting to see, 
Mr. Speaker, as well, the opposition benches as they decry this 
project. 
 
And basically it appears simple. It seems that because our 
government was able to put a deal together with, of all people, the 
co-ops, which was not supposed to happen with a Tory 
government, I guess, but we went about the business of dealing 
with them and talking with them and  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

192 
 
 

we now have this magnificent project in place for Regina. And 
very soon we will see the first production coming out of that 
project. Mr. Speaker, and I'm very excited about that. I toured it 
recently, and when you see all of the activity that's going on out 
there now, it's simply amazing. 
 
The other amazing part is this, and I say this to my constituents of 
Regina south as well, it seems that the NDP Party for some reason 
or other, and particularly their new leader, relishes and tries to 
bask in the new found support that they seem to think that they 
have - that of the small-business community. And it's kind of a 
joke really, and it's a sad joke because the small-business 
community is a vital and important part of our democratic society, 
and as well, it's a very important part of our society in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We totally understand, and we have ever since 1982, that it's small 
business that creates the employment in our province, small 
business that drives our economy. And the NDP seem to somehow 
have magically taken over this role of trying to become the small 
business advocate in this province. And it's sad to see them as they 
flounder through this because it seems that they go about their 
daily task of condemning the government for projects such the 
upgrader, for projects such as Weyerhaeuser, for projects such as 
Gainers and Vanguard; and say, well it's the big boys, they're all 
related to you, they're your first cousins, they're your friends, you 
line their pockets, and all of these other demeaning and degrading 
statements. 
 
And it goes to show you the mentality of the Leader of the 
Opposition. He's waited 17 years for his coronation to become 
Leader of the Opposition. With all due respect to his age - he's 
probably younger than I am; there is no question that he's older 
than our Premier - I doubt that he will ever live long enough to see 
the office of the Premier. And it's just sad to see how on one hand 
he can condemn these major projects, condemn these major 
projects while speaking out of the side of his mouth of being a 
friend of the small business community. 
 
(1545) 
 
My gosh, Mr. Deputy Speaker, doesn't he realize that these 
magnificent projects that this government put together is probably 
one of the largest single supports of small business in the province. 
We went through Weyerhaeuser the other day and I can't recall the 
figure offhand, but it's some millions and millions and millions of 
dollars, tens of millions of dollars that they've put in the local 
economy of Prince Albert. And the Leader of the Opposition 
condemns that project, says he's speaking out for small business 
and doesn't understand how small business interconnects and 
works complementary to that one project. 
 
Now think of the others, think for a moment of Vanguard - 
forgetting the fact that it created some 400 jobs, forget about that. 
They don't care about the jobs for our people anyhow, so forget 
that. But now just try to remember - the member from North 
Battleford, pay attention - so that you can go and talk to your 
chamber of commerce like you really appreciate small business. 
Those  

Vanguard people, those Gainer companies that you keep knocking 
all over the place, they use small business as a source of supply, as 
back-up, and all the rest of that that goes with . . . they never did 
understand small business, they never will. And you and your 
leader can go about spouting as much as you want and it won't 
change a thing, and I always hearken back in my discussions with 
my small-business community friends. 
 
Let's talk about the Regina Manifesto. He arbitrarily changed 
nomination rules for the NDP party. The president didn't do it; the 
leader of the party did. Now, if he can do that, why doesn't he 
change the Regina Manifesto? Why doesn't he do that, and really 
convince the small-business community that you do care for them 
. . . (inaudible) . . . I doubt it. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my constituents of Regina South, they 
recognize the importance of small business. A lot of the 
small-business community, men and women alike, live in Regina 
South and are good, proud people of businesses in our community. 
But by far, by far, most members of my constituency don't own 
and operate business; they are employed and work for small 
businesses. And they recognize, they truly recognize, the 
importance of the small-business sector to them because it's their 
livelihood and it's what pays them a living. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'd like to congratulate my colleague from 
Rosthern for delivering a sound, solid message in moving 
acceptance of the Speech from the Throne. I know that it's an 
important part of this process to be able to move indeed the throne 
speech. My colleague from Moosomin as well did a fine job in 
adding further the importance and input into exactly what this 
government is trying to do. 
 
The throne speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a very broad document 
that outlines some, some of the activity that our government 
intends to undertake, some of the planning. 
 
I was embarrassed during the throne speech . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Now there go the members speaking from their 
seat again. The member from Saskatoon South thinks he's funny, 
just as they did in that unfortunate, embarrassing situation when 
the throne speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, made a mention of vicious 
dog legislation. They laughed; they giggled; they thought that it 
was amusing. Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this is amusing to the NDP, 
it's the most unfortunate and regrettable thing that I can think of. 
 
In my role as the Minister of Urban Affairs, and my people from 
Regina south appreciate that, they know that the matter of 
dangerous dogs is a major issue across this continent, not only in 
Canada but in all of North America. Finally our government made 
the announcement that we believe that this year we're in a position 
to address that unfortunate problem that exists, and the member 
opposite giggled. Well, more than giggled, they downright 
laughed out loud at that issue. And since then, since then, we have 
heard them all referring sarcastically to the issue of dangerous 
dogs. Well, God willing, Saskatchewan won't have an unfortunate 
incident before this legislation is put into effect. 
 
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

193 
 
 

And I wonder, and I ask them if it would be that humorous, if it 
would be that comical, if one of their loved ones - their mother, a 
senior perhaps, their kids - were attacked by a vicious dog. And 
there goes the member from Saskatoon South, speaking from his 
seat, that thinks vicious dogs is a joke. You, sir, if a loved one of 
your family would be severely bitten and maimed for life, would 
you then think it's a joke? I doubt it. You should be ashamed of 
yourself for laughing at something as important as that. 
 
Since the opening of this new session, the Government of 
Saskatchewan is pleased to demonstrate its continuing 
commitment in ensuring that Saskatchewan will continue to have, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a first-rate health system. they laughed at 
that, too, when we announced the major task force to help build an 
design an blueprint for Saskatchewan health care in the years to 
come. 
 
Health care represents the foremost financial challenge facing the 
people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. More tax dollars 
are spent on health care than on any other program. At $1.3 billion 
it represents one-third of provincial government spending. 
 
This new task force will hold public hearings across the province 
to encourage the widest possible discussion from health care 
professionals and other organizations and interested groups and 
citizens with respect to renovations that may be needed to our 
existing health care system. Our health care system — indeed 
we've upheld it to be one of the finest in Canada — is now 25 
years old. Some renovations could be required, so we must get 
everybody involved — all of us in making any changes that may 
be needed. 
 
One of the major problems as I see it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is how 
do we maintain and improve on this system while at the same time 
we can control the ever-increasing costs? And that's the challenge 
facing the task force. 
 
The member from Saskatoon South is getting pretty annoying. He 
just seems to condemn everything that this government is doing, 
including the health costs and all the rest of it. I suppose he's got 
some magical answer. I don't know, but it would be interesting to 
see if he had anything either amusing or serious to say in regard to 
the Speech from the Throne. I doubt it. I'm sure that his 
constituents in Saskatoon South must be embarrassed by some of 
his activities in this House. 
 
But none the less, the establishment of this task force by the 
provincial government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is indeed a major 
step forward in the development and the planning of a health care 
system that will provide Saskatchewan citizens with first-class 
health care services for the next 25 years. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan further pledged at the opening 
of the new legislature, Mr. Deputy Speaker, its continued 
protection of our citizens that live in rural Saskatchewan. Our 
commitment to the protection of those who live in rural 
Saskatchewan remains as strong as the land. 
 

There is no dispute that agricultural policies around the world have 
threatened the very fabric of our rural society. We, as government, 
will continue to exert whatever influence we can, world-wide, to 
bring an end to these senseless policies. And you can expect 
further measures to be introduced in the coming weeks to provide 
greater protection for rural families during difficult times. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess I'll get them hooting and hollering 
again. They've been reasonably quiet on this subject, but I 
understand that their leader has finally taken a stand on the matter 
of store hours. And this is an issue that has been very much in the 
news for the past several months, and indeed it's an issue that we 
here in this province simply have got to come to grips with. 
 
We will be proceeding, of course, with input from the general 
public, varying opinions from municipal groups, indeed varying 
opinions from various church groups, and more varying opinions 
from business and retail groups, including the chambers of 
commerce across our province. It seems that it's a delicate issue 
and a difficult issue for everybody to handle. 
 
Over the past few years, both in Saskatchewan and indeed across 
Canada, there has been widespread interest, widespread concern, 
widespread attempts at solutions in this major problem of 
extended store hours. There has been considerable confusion, 
many, many court challenges to the application of the law as it 
stands on retail store hours. And retail store hours seems to be the 
last — oh, little guarded area, you might say — of a part of our 
sector regulated, and as everybody knows, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
our government chooses to deregulate. 
 
We don't choose to regulate the lives of our people, nor should 
they be. This is a democratic society that we all believe in — all of 
us free to speak, all of us free to go to church, all of us free to do 
and live within and respect our laws. 
 
So it's a very, very difficult issue to, indeed, deal with, but our 
government has concluded, Mr. Deputy Speaker, after careful 
consideration, that further tinkering with the present law tends to 
create more unfairness than it eliminates and only adds to the 
degree of uncertainty and challenges and confusion that already 
exists. 
 
To proceed only piecemeal with adjustments to an Act which has, 
quite simply, been overtaken by the times will really serve no 
useful purpose. Other societal pressures must now be 
accommodated. Demographic factors such as the significant 
increase in the labour force of the number of families in which 
both mother and father work, a greater recognition of single parent 
families have led many, many people to call for a less restrictive 
approach to Sunday openings. And indeed, people my age with 
their grandchildren tend to see shopping as a family expedition 
now, and to go out and look at the latest trends and the latest toys 
if you're with your grandkids, or even the latest athletic shoes that 
seem to be abounding in our market-place. 
 
But yet at the same time, as I travel this great province of ours, we 
in Saskatchewan must recognize that local market conditions vary 
tremendously across a province  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

194 
 
 

as large as ours. Factors that affect consumers and retailers in 
Nipawin and Prince Albert and Yorkton are quite different, for 
example, than problems that are discovered in Regina or in 
Saskatoon or in Moose Jaw. And as a result, different approaches 
and different solutions are required in different communities. We 
feel that a universal provincial law on extended shopping hours is 
simply not workable. 
 
For all of these reasons, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government has 
come to the conclusion that only a local municipality, only a local 
municipality itself, can best address the appropriate solutions for 
its own locality. Who knows best about their market conditions, 
their people, their attitudes, their habits, than the local 
municipality? 
 
These local municipalities too, Mr. Deputy Speaker, over the years 
have established their autonomy, have asked us to retain their 
autonomy, and we very much advocate that autonomy. And they 
should retain that. So being that the municipal government shave 
that autonomy, which we respect, and they are in the best position 
to determine their own local needs and the problems inherent in 
ensuring that equity and fairness prevail with respect to retail store 
openings, it only makes eminent sense that they continue to do 
that. 
 
(1600) 
 
In this way all of Saskatchewan will be guided by Sunday opening 
rules which better reflects the local condition and market-place 
and the attitude. Yes, indeed, it will reflect the wishes of the 
people, and that can be accommodated at the local level. And as 
we enshrine legislation in this great Assembly, we can't really 
reflect all of these local problems in one major piece of legislation. 
 
So last December we announced . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
There goes the member from Saskatoon South speaking from his 
seat again. Goldarn it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'll tell you, you know, 
if he would wait at least . . . I'll get to the ward system and we'll 
discuss that, and then you can . . . Right now I'm trying to talk 
some serious business about store hours, and I haven't heard too 
much from your benches except that I understand your leader 
finally made a position. He finally got off that fence. I don't know 
if he fell off or if he was pushed off. But in any event, I understand 
that he's got a position. I'd like to hear it. 
 
But last December, Mr. Deputy Speaker, pardon me, last 
December we announced that it was the government's intention to 
permit shopping seven days a week for those businesses that 
choose to open. We also announced that municipalities would 
continue as before to regulate both evening shopping and the 
opening of convenience stores after regular hours, which they do 
now. So it only made eminent sense, and we indicated that the 
new legislation would provide municipal governments with the 
option of closing stores one day a week of they so choose. 
 
So I was accused of washing my hands and abdicating the 
problem and all. It's a ridiculous charge, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
believe that our government took a leadership role on this issue of 
store hours, and clearly we indicated  

that in Saskatchewan we prefer not to legislate the people and not 
to regulate the people, but let the market-place decide. We 
prepared, we very visibly said, we want the stores to stay open 
seven days a week. So if that isn't leadership, if that's abdicating, I 
don't know how you can tie the two together. But out of respect to 
the autonomy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the local government, we 
did say that if they choose not to go with our legislation, then they 
would have the right to change it. 
 
Moose Jaw — we have two members from Moose Jaw in the 
opposite benches. In the existing store hours legislation they didn't 
put in a local by-law, they were prepared to live with the 
government legislation. And I have every reason to believe that 
they will continue to live with the government legislation once it's 
changed. As a matter of fact — and this might be a piece of news 
to the two members from Moose Jaw, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because I know that contrary to what their leader says they do not 
talk to their business community — but the Moose Jaw chamber 
of commerce did indeed come out in support of government 
stance and saying, right on, quit regulating us. Even in the 
chamber of commerce they can't agree whether they should open 
or not open, but in any event, let the people dictate. Let the people 
decide what to do. And they're supporting us. 
 
And they're yelling at me again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. All right, 
where does the general public stand on the issue of store hours? 
The general public — your voters, my voters — where do they 
stand? 
 
An Hon. Member: What about the ward system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: I'll get to the ward system. Let's find out where 
they stand on store hours first. 
 
What do our voters an the customers of the retail industry think 
about the situation? Well we should make no mistake about what 
the public wants, and there's no doubt that there's growing public 
demand for extended store hours, including Sunday shopping. 
 
For those consumers that choose not to shop on Sundays because 
of a family day or a religious belief or whatever their reason might 
be, Mr. Deputy Speaker, their solution is simple — don't shop. 
Don't shop, because their non-support of the businesses that may 
stay open would be a strong indication that extra hours are not 
available. Market-place, let the market-place decide. And if the 
people don't shop, the stores won't open. They're not going to open 
if they lose money. So for those that don't want to shop on 
Sundays, don't shop on Sundays; the market-place will dictate. 
 
There they go again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, now they're talking 
Superstore. They don't understand business. How can you let the 
super stores of this world open and unfairly tell all the other 
retailers to close. How can you do that? And how can you close, 
then Superstore and all of the little convenience stores equitably? 
Don't they realize anything about business, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
Don't they realize that there's a difference between a convenience 
store in Cedoux, Saskatchewan, my home town — don't they 
realize that there's a great difference between a convenience store 
in Cedoux and a  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

195 
 
 

convenience store in Regina or Saskatoon. 
 
Now how do you describe that convenience store? It's impossible, 
in universal legislation. But they can do it at the local level, and 
again, they have the option at the local level, at municipal 
government; they have the option at the local level of the business 
community, and they have the option at the local level of, indeed, 
the people of this province, simply by doing what they choose, 
either support or not support. Why should we tell anybody what to 
do or what not to do? 
 
Many consumers want the opportunity to shop in the evenings or 
on Sundays if the local market-place offers those extended hours. 
And I firmly believe that our various market-places across the 
province want to accommodate people who wish to shop for 
goods or services at their retail outlets. My gosh, that's why they're 
in business. That's why they're in business. 
 
And this is the last, little, separate, regulated area. I mean, who 
could imagine a community that has taxi-cab service, for instance, 
closing on Sundays? Or communications — can you imagine this 
great province of Saskatchewan if we didn't have television on 
Sundays, news reports; the list goes on and on. I mean, you don't 
even have to think about how our hospitals are open, and the 
workers that go along with that. The tourism industry — how it 
flourishes, and they have to work on Sundays, and the like. And 
people grow up in these industries and they accept their work-load 
and they do what they have to do, but we've got this one little 
piece left, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that of retail store hours, and I 
believe that the time has come to let the market-place indeed 
decide that. 
 
As part of the store hours legislation the entire package, I can 
assure the retailers of this province that steps will be taken to 
prevent owners of shopping malls from forcing their small-tenant 
businesses as a condition of their leases to remain open for an 
unreasonable number of hours. 
 
We will also monitor closely the labour legislation to ensure that 
our retail workers are fairly dealt with. I've had considerable 
meetings with the large retail chains, and interestingly enough 
some there too want to open, some don't want to pen. And I firmly 
believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that if the people don't support those 
businesses, whether they're large or small — and I've had fears 
expressed by some members of the small-business community. 
They need not fear. They need not fear. If they supply the goods 
and services regularly and attentively, they will maintain their 
customer base. But the large retailers that I have talked to have 
indicated that they are prepared to play fairly with their 
employees, and I have every reason to believe that they will. 
 
We're not breaking new ground in this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Saskatchewan isn't the first jurisdiction in the world that would 
have Sunday shopping. My gosh, it's going on all over the world, 
and in all areas of jurisdiction. And we can see that the employees 
have been dealt with fairly. We can see that in fact there have been 
a lot of jobs created, and I don't particularly buy the notion that 
they are only part-time jobs, because a lot of part-time jobs, 
because of the extended hours, would necessarily be converted to 
full-time jobs. 

But other jurisdictions, and other areas, have been open regularly 
and the small-business community has survived and is alive and is 
healthy and is vibrant and are doing well. 
 
We've had considerable input from organizations and groups right 
across the province with respect to the store hours situation. I think 
just about everybody, I think, that have had suggestions, criticisms 
to offer, have made their points, and now it's decision time. I 
believe that you will see that the legislation that will be introduced, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, will do a fair job of balancing the interests of 
municipalities and of retailers and of the consumers. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on October 26 of this year voters in cities, 
towns, and villages throughout the province will be going to the 
polls to elect their local mayors and aldermen. In preparation for 
these municipal elections, I will be introducing a number of 
amendments to The Local Government Election Act to ensure 
these elections are conducted as fairly and as equitably as possible. 
 
For example, one of the amendments will allow for a mobile poll 
to serve disabled people who have difficulty in using the standard 
polling place. And I believe that that is in keeping in step with the 
time. We have a lot of people in our Saskatchewan community 
that require assistance and are not able that mobile, and I believe 
that by bringing the poll to them they can exercise their franchise 
as they should, because they indeed do have a vested interest in 
their local municipal government. 
 
Another amendment will close the loophole that currently exists 
that allows any number of non-resident land owners to vote in a 
municipality by virtue of owning a single parcel of land. This 
amendment will curtail an unfortunate incident of municipal 
voting by limiting the number of non-residents who may vote by 
ownership of a single piece of property. That's an old piece of 
legislation, Mr. Deputy Mayor, that's been on our books, and 
indeed exists in the books across this country and until recently 
has not been any problem. But recently we are familiar with a 
problem that occurred, and I suppose that Saskatchewan will 
probably have the distinction of being the first provincial 
government that will have to deal with that interesting little piece 
of legislation to solve the problem. 
 
But perhaps the biggest change that could come about is for the 
municipalities that currently have the ward system in place. Now 
that isn't controlled under The Elections Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
but rather under the urban affairs Act, and as everybody knows we 
are certainly looking at examining the ward system, and perhaps 
looking at and examining the ward system, and perhaps the return 
to the election "at large" system that operates in the other 500-plus 
urban municipalities. 
 
The "at large" system is what had been in place in the province 
right up until 1973 when it was arbitrarily and just selectively 
imposed by the government of the day on our two major cities. 
And it was imposed by them in spite of the fact that prior 
plebiscites had indeed . . . the people of those cities had said no, 
they don't wan the ward system. But in any event the government, 
for whatever  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

196 
 
 

reason, chose to put the ward system in place. 
 
Well, I don't know what we're going to do yet, but we're 
examining it. As we heard today in question period, there were a 
few questions came out about it. But we indeed believe that the 
ward system is an inefficient and ineffective way of dealing with a 
government at the municipal level. And the ward system has been 
in place in Regina and Saskatoon since '73; Prince Albert since 
1985; Moose Jaw, who had the option of going into the ward 
system, never chose to use the ward system. They do elect their 
council at large and they don't have any problem with that. They 
don't have any outcries of how expensive it is to run as a 
candidate, at large. They don't have anybody coming out and 
complaining about what we hear the opposition — and certainly, 
unfortunately, the aldermen that exist in the wards — complaining 
about today. 
 
I firmly believe that if an alderman that is elected presently under 
the ward system has been doing his job, his or her job, properly — 
and they may very well have been — they should not fear an 
election "at large" process. If anything, as an incumbent, they 
would indeed have a distinct advantage, in my mind. 
 
(1615) 
 
The people . . . I give our taxpayers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, an awful 
lot of credit for intelligence. They will make themselves familiar 
with the issue; they will study who indeed will be running. And I 
believe that they want to vote for everybody in their community, 
not just one little person, and take out — carve out their little 
section of their own community and say, listen, by golly, this neck 
of the woods is more important than the city at large, because their 
taxes aren't based that way, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Their taxes are 
based on the operation of the city at large. And I believe that that 
should be the prime concern and prime function of the aldermen 
that are elected. 
 
Over the period of time that the ward system has been in place — 
and we have to remember that it was put in place simply to be a 
trial. I mean, after all, it had never been tried in Saskatchewan; it 
was "at large" elections until it was imposed on our cities. And it's 
fair to say that it would be put in as a trial system. 
 
And yes, there have been some plebiscites since, and whether the 
plebiscites were correctly worded or not, and whether indeed the 
people thought about it, time has a way of making people just feel 
that, you know, everything is going fine and that there is no 
problem and why change. 
 
But it's my responsibility to indeed try to assist municipalities as 
best I can, and if part of that assistance is by providing them with a 
better way in which to operate, I believe that that's my 
responsibility. And so we're having a look at that, because over the 
period of time that the wards have existed we can see . . . I can see 
and I hear that it has worked, in my mind, against the greater good 
of the cities that have been involved in it. 
 
And unfortunately, I believe that the city of Regina is a  

good example of the worst effects of the ward system. I have lived 
in Regina for a long, long time now — almost half a century I've 
lived in this city. I've seen the "at large" system, have voted in the 
"at large" system. I've seen the ward system; voted in the ward 
system. 
 
But unfortunately, I think that the city of Regina . . . I have seen 
particularly recently a good example of the worst effects of the 
ward system and how it brings additional burden and additional 
costs to the taxpayers. Week after week I have seen one councillor 
pitted against another, defending the narrow interests of his or her 
segment of the city, and all the while defeating a project that might 
be for the greater good of the city as a whole. 
 
I think about the recent city council debate over the rail line 
relocation. I think of how in my other portfolio of housing we 
were prepared to put in some public housing in Transcona area, 
only to see that project stalled, and I believe because of the ward 
system. 
 
You know, when three levels of government truly believe that a 
project as worthy as a housing project should go together, I believe 
that it would go together in the best interests of all the city as a 
whole, including the residents of that particular subdivision. And 
it's really unfortunate when you see a major project like that be 
opposed to, particularly when we've got the critical housing needs 
that we do have in our cities and towns. 
 
I think that there's a good deal of evidence around that supports the 
idea that the ward system does have increased civic expenditures. I 
read in the Regina Leader-Post, just a week or two ago, that since 
the ward system came into effect, civic expenditures in Regina 
have increased some 383 per cent. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that 
in view of our tight economic times, we can no longer afford the 
luxury of the ward system. 
 
As we enter into discussion and guesswork about what our 
government chooses to do with the ward system, it's interesting to 
see the various flags that are raised. It's interesting to read the 
various editorial comments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and to some 
degree, along with being interesting, it's sad. 
 
I see the editorial section of the Star-Phoenix, one of the major 
publications in our province, changing position. They were against 
the ward system in editorial comments in 1983 and they're against 
the "at large" system in 1988. And that proves my point, that times 
indeed change. 
 
And the editorials, you know, why do they change their position 
and they kind of catch it right on. When you make a change as 
significant as that, people have a tendency to forget and to accept 
and say, oh well. And I suppose that maybe even this editorial 
comment reflects that. The headline reads — and I don't know if 
it's against the rules of the Assembly to use my own name — I 
can't refer to others by name — but the headline reads, Klein may 
be stepping in the wrong direction, or words to that effect. I asked 
them is that fair? You know, when in the same paper, the editorial 
stance being changed, they carry an article by an expert, a 
professor in Saskatoon — and I don't know this gentleman, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — that goes on to say quite a few things. 
 
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

197 
 
 

He is a political science professor and he is an expert in municipal 
government, and he says that the resulting council would probably 
make wiser decisions, spend less money, and have better qualified 
councillors. He's a specialist of municipal government. 
 
The ward system, he says, has also made for myopic 
representations with short-sighted councillors focusing on ward 
approval rather than what's best for the city at whole. Once the 
new council has been elected, he foresees the non-partisan 
politicians would be more efficient in their decisions in spending. 
 
Losers . . . losers at the "at large" system, according to this expert, 
would be sophisticated community or business groups — or 
business groups, and I'll accept that — who leaned on their ward 
representative for political clout in fighting for specific interests or 
projects. 
 
On the flip side, and I have recognized this, the conscientious 
voter must do his homework before going to the polls. They will 
have to mull over a ballot listing candidates for the entire city. 
 
So I think that until we see if our government is in a position to 
make a change in that, we will have to wait, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
We do recognize that if a change will be made, it should be made 
in plenty of time to allow the voters, the taxpayers, time to reflect 
on the change, as well as those people that may choose to run for 
municipal office. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in his budget address a year ago, my 
colleague from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden announced the 
amalgamation of three regulatory functions under a single board to 
provide more efficient operation. In this session, we will be 
introducing legislation to amalgamate the responsibilities of the 
Saskatchewan Assessment Appeal Board, the Provincial Planning 
Appeal board, and the Local government Board. A new body, it 
will be called the Saskatchewan municipal board. It will be built 
on the foundations of the existing Local Government Board. 
 
One of the benefits, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the new municipal 
board is a greater flexibility in appeal hearings and, there it goes 
again, in service to the public. Because that's what we're 
concerned with on the government side, to be of service to the 
public, and we really believe that this new board will function in 
that capacity. 
 
The combination of the different backgrounds, and types of 
expertise that the board members and staff can offer will ensure a 
comprehensive approach to today's local government issues. Other 
provinces such as Ontario and Alberta have already moved in this 
direction and have established similar boards. So we're ready to 
take on the same challenge; we believe that it will be the best that 
we can offer for our taxpayers. 
 
Turning for a moment now to another area that we know will be 
coming, a matter of dangerous dogs. And I quote unfortunately 
from Hansard, "And there go the NDP laughing again." Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I don't know what I can do to impress on the 
members opposite that this is a very, very serious situation, and 
they just sit there  

and giggle. They seem to get some delight, I guess, in seeing a 
picture of a maimed child in the paper that has been attacked by a 
vicious dog, a little girl that may be scarred for life. Do you see 
humour in that? Do you see humour in a vicious dog attacking an 
elderly person that may be . . . Now listen. There they go yelling 
again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there they go yelling again. I'll explain 
. . . But you know when I have to quote out of Hansard, I quote a 
Speech from the Throne which concentrates on the problem of 
made dogs travelling through the wherever in roaming packs 
through the cities of Saskatchewan. I mean, what kind of nonsense 
is that? What kind of tripe, what kind of garbage are we talking 
about in this Assembly? 
 
I've been working on this piece of legislation for over a year, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, trying to advance the betterment and the quality 
of life for our urban people, trying to protect the unprotected 
against this kind of an attack, being serious about it, being 
responsible about it, and I read in Hansard a Speech from the 
Throne which concentrates on the problem of mad dogs travelling 
. . . roaming packs through the cities of Saskatchewan. Well my 
gosh, what kind of diatribe is that? 
 
And if that's the best that the Leader of the Opposition can talk 
about, then he shouldn't be your leader. Why don't you people 
grow up and recognize that what we're talking about here is indeed 
serious, and is indeed of concern to our citizens. You should be 
ashamed of yourselves for the attitude you take on an important 
issue like that. 
 
Control of dangerous dogs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has become a big 
concern throughout the North America, and we've had a number 
of requests from towns and cities to update and strengthen 
municipal powers t control dogs. Some people see this issue only 
in the terms of the pit bull terrier. They say, ban the pit bull and 
you've solved the problem. Well it's not that simple. It goes 
beyond the matter of pit bull; it goes beyond the matter of any 
breed. 
 
What's the solution? Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that it's a 
combination of tougher laws and responsible pet ownership. We 
don't want to destroy the family pet and the warmth of a family — 
my gosh, we've all had dogs and pets in our families and we're not 
out to destroy that — but we do know that we need responsible pet 
ownership. And based on input that we've received, indeed, from 
urban municipalities, we will present to the legislature this spring 
what I think will be the most comprehensive legislation to control 
dangerous dogs in all of Canada. 
 
An Hon. Member: World class, eh, Jack? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: As the member speaking from his chair, the 
member for Saskatoon Westmount indicates — world class. Yes. 
Yes, Mr. Member, it will be world class, and when that legislation 
is introduced, don't you dare giggle. Don't you dare laugh as you 
are now, because your people in Saskatoon Westmount, they will 
be concerned with this legislation, and they would be disappointed 
in you to hear you laughing about a situation such as that right 
now. 
 
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

198 
 
 

Mr. Speaker, it was just four and a half years ago that The 
Northern Municipalities Act was passed, establishing our northern 
municipalities and giving them the framework for local 
government and for local decision making. 
 
(1630) 
 
An Hon. Member: Why are you filibustering this debate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: Now I'm being accused of making a filibuster. 
Mr. Speaker, I think that I've been talking about topical issues. I 
think that I've been outlining the Speech from the Throne. I think 
I've been saying it's an encompassing document that dictates what 
our government is going to do. Now they're accusing me of a 
filibuster. I guess I just can't help it if I happen to have some major 
issues on my plate right now, albeit they seem to think that some 
of them are humorous, but I take my work seriously. 
 
After all, my people in Regina South take me seriously. They've 
elected me to do the job, and I think they think I'm doing it 
properly. The members from the North bring up issues which 
comes under my jurisdiction, so why do you say I'm filibustering, 
or why do you laugh about the northern problems? I'm trying to 
deal with something here, Mr. Speaker, that it seems that they're 
not concerned with. 
 
But as I was saying, it was about four and a half years ago that The 
Northern Municipalities Act was passed, establishing our northern 
municipalities and giving them the framework for local 
government and local decision making — again autonomy that 
they wanted, that they looked for, and that we believed that they 
were prepared and able to handle. It was a milestone in the 
development of our northern communities because it put the 
responsibility for local decisions where it belongs, with the local 
community leaders. And I commend our northern community 
leaders for having taken up the challenges of local government. 
 
And I'm indeed very proud, Mr. Speaker, of the job that those 
leader shave done. And I'm just pleased to say that I'm fortunate 
enough to seem to have worked for and gained their respect. I 
admire them. I work well with them, or try to, and I think they 
recognize that this government is on the right track with them, and 
we certainly recognize their ability and their hard work, 
particularly in the interests that they show of the further 
development of their communities. 
 
Many of these leaders have told us of the need to have ready 
access to additional land within local municipal boundaries. These 
requests have been supported by the Northern Development 
Advisory Council and recently by SUMA at its annual convention. 
And in conjunction with my colleagues, the ministers of Parks, 
Recreation and Culture, and the minister responsible for the 
Northern Affairs Secretariat, we recommended to cabinet the 
transfer of full ownership and control of unoccupied Crown land 
within municipal boundaries to northern municipalities. 
 
And I'm pleased to say that work is now under way to  

implement this transfer, and this decision really truly does 
demonstrate our government's confidence in northern local 
governments to manage and to develop their own communities. 
It's a concrete example of our government's commitment to 
working in partnership with our northern communities to help 
them develop their economic future, Mr. Speaker, and they're 
very, very excited about that prospect. This is something that 
they've been waiting for, for a long, long time, and now they 
finally have access to that so that they can do some planning, so 
that if they try to get commercial ventures, if they try to get into 
some small forms of economic development, to try to create some 
badly needed jobs in our northern communities, I believe that this, 
Mr. Speaker, will truly get them off and started on the right foot. 
They will now have their own land base to work with. They will 
now be able to approach the federal government with housing 
developments to satisfy the needs of their community and the like, 
and all done by these hard working, young leaders in these 
northern municipalities that are so vitally interested and so vitally 
concerned with their communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk for a moment, too, about another area 
that our department in Urban Affairs will be working on, too, and 
that is, to encourage municipalities at all levels, in the northern 
areas and in the southern areas, to review their own internal 
operations with a view to identifying areas that might be more 
efficiently run by the private sector in their own communities. 
 
I know that a lot of municipalities have already begun that process 
years and years ago, and so if you want to attach the word 
privatization to it, there's nothing new. Municipalities throughout 
the province, I've discovered — and we're compiling this now — 
they have contracted out their garbage collection in many, many 
communities to the private sector. They have contracted out street 
cleaning. Indeed, some communities have contracted out the 
maintenance of parks, the watering of the grass and the cutting of 
the grass and the like, in their communities. And to those 
communities that have done that, I have to send them bouquets 
because they are leading the attack on how to really reduce 
expenditures at the municipal level and are doing a major service 
to their taxpayers when it relates to holding the line on 
expenditures. 
 
Ideally, Mr. Speaker, privatization of municipal services will 
provide that double benefit to a community. I think that the 
increased efficiency should result in a cost saving for that 
municipality. And secondly, and this is where the members on the 
benches opposite really miss out in their new-found ally of small 
business — as they maintain — but as those municipalities put 
that privatization section in effect, it will provide an economic 
opportunity for enterprising local business people. 
 
Maybe indeed we would find that municipal public servants and 
the leaders . . . the leaders of those public servants are now putting 
me under attack, Mr. Speaker — the union leaders — for whatever 
reason, and they seem to think that they've got an argument with 
me. But yet their membership, their membership, Mr. Speaker, 
could very well have a major opportunity presented to them by a 
local government if a local government would choose to privatize 
some small section of their operation. That  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

199 
 
 

could be a tremendous opportunity for the employees to 
undertake, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So then it would make me question the union leaders. Are they 
against, you know, the betterment of these public employees 
bettering themselves? It really makes you wonder the underlying 
reason why the labour leaders of the public unions would attack 
me in my role. But I guess that's what I've learned to expect. 
 
Interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, the privatization movement 
that seems to be the buzz-word now around all levels of 
government. 
 
An Hon. Member: Piratization. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: There they go, they attach their name to it, 
speaking from their seat again. I don't know, they seem to think 
that this whole . . . you know, every time somebody says anything, 
they seem to come up with some, what they think, is a humorous 
line, a joke. Do they really believe, Mr. Speaker, that this whole 
system is a joke? That I am part of a joke? That they are part of a 
joke? I mean, it's a bad joke, as far as I'm concerned. 
 
But in any event. Privatization, Mr. Speaker, has been led in 
Britain by the federal government. And we're all aware of the 
massive success that privatization has been. Union people, just 
delighted with the process of privatization in the United States. 
People in Britain owning their own homes — homes that the 
government owned, now in Britain they can be their own personal 
little home owner, the way it should be, the way we know it here 
in Canada. So that was led by the federal government in Britain, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
In Canada, privatization is led by the provinces — all provinces 
are into it. And all opposition, of which the NDP seems to be these 
days, and will be again at the end of next month, in another 
opposition role, they seem to be against privatization, so . . . and it 
makes you wonder, if you kind of hook it together with their 
labour leader friends, you know. And their leader, their leader, Mr. 
Speaker, their leader that took a personal attack against me on 
small business and privatization and was accusing shadow 
cabinets in existence, you know, and naming people, and the like. 
I ask them the question: who is their leader federally? Is it really 
Mr. Broadbent, or is it somebody by the name of Bob White? 
 
Now let's find out the real underlying reason why they don't like 
privatization. And, Mr. Speaker, in the United States of America, 
our great neighbours to the south, privatization is indeed led by 
municipalities, and they are privatizing in all areas of municipal 
government. And I ask you why? 
 
And again, it's nothing new. This is not brand-new territory, 
brand-new swaths that they're cutting out to see how it works or 
playing games with or the like, but actual proof of where areas and 
municipal areas in the United States have privatized and have 
done those two things that I've referred to, Mr. Speaker — created 
opportunities for small business and, indeed, employees of the 
public service, and have saved literally, in the United States of 
America, hundreds of millions of dollars in tax payments  

by the citizens as the privatization has occurred right across the 
country of the United States. 
 
Another item that I seem to have on my platter, Mr. Speaker. 
There's been much talk lately about the business tax. This tax is 
controversial, to say the least. 
 
I bring up all of these issues, Mr. Speaker, because in spite of the 
fact . . . I had my first question today in question period, but I have 
a lot of major issues that they seem to be avoiding in question 
period, so I believe that if they won't bring my problems to me, 
that I will bring the problems to them and put them. I'm not afraid 
to talk about these issues. 
 
The business tax. There's been much talk lately about the business 
tax, and it's a very controversial tax, to say the least, Mr. Speaker. 
Some people say, get rid of the tax completely. Others say, keep it; 
it's a fair tax; it's a just tax. Still others say, reduce it by taking off 
the education portion of the tax. Some people have said, at least 
make the tax fairer by providing a level playing field with 
consistent assessment policies. 
 
Each of these options, Mr. Speaker, have their own supporters — 
some are pretty vocal, and some unfortunately are simply refusing 
to pay this tax. And I say unfortunately because we in 
Saskatchewan are a law-abiding group of citizens, Mr. Speaker, 
and it's really unfortunate when separate interest groups kind of 
takes the law in their own hands and say, well the heck with you. 
That's no answer, Mr. Speaker, there's other ways to handle that 
problem. I've never encouraged these people to not pay their taxes; 
none of us, I'm sure, enjoy paying taxes. It would be foolish if we 
enjoyed it. 
 
But in any event, it's the tax structure that indeed operates the 
governments, and that's the way the system works. If we can do 
something to reduce taxes, that's the key, and that's what we 
should do; but to withhold taxes is only creating another problem 
for the governments, particularly at the municipal level, to spend 
more money on. So why? To have to do . . . The recourse is there 
in the existing legislation. Municipal governments don't like using 
the recourse that are available. 
 
So I plead, I plead with the members of the business community 
that simply are not paying their taxes to pay their business tax. We 
will try to find the solution; we will work desperately to find the 
solution with them and with SUMA and with the other interested 
people that come into play in this. But ease everybody's burden: 
confrontation gets you nowhere, Mr. Speaker, consultation does. 
 
But this tax is nothing new. This tax has been in effect for about 
50 years. But because our government does listen and does consult 
with business people, listens and consults with community leaders, 
lives and consults with municipal leaders, we are now working in 
consulting with businesses and municipalities to try to resolve the 
very issue of business tax. 
 
(1645) 
 
The Local Government Finance Commission, Mr.  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

200 
 
 

Speaker, dealt with that issue and couldn't come up with what they 
considered to be a proper solution. Well we didn't throw our hand 
sup in the air and say, gee, that was wasted time and effort. The 
local government report took a long time to compile, Mr. Speaker. 
There was an awful lot of good people, an awful lot of time and 
talent and energy went into that report. And at the end of the day 
when that report was done, measured, studied, and looked at, and 
they couldn't find solutions, it didn't tell me that the report was no 
darned good. I suppose it was wishful thinking if we were all 
anticipating that they would have found every solution to every 
problem. 
 
But what it told me was, Mr. Speaker, that this is such a problem, 
such a deep, "enwinding," encompassing problem, that they 
weren't quite sure how to deal with it. So it told me that we must 
continue the process of consulting and listening and talking and 
discussing to try to work to an end to achieve this. 
 
In most respects the business tax is a municipal issue, but if this 
government can be a part of the solution, we would like to be that 
part of the solution. Most communities value their local autonomy, 
and as I previously indicated in my comments on store hours, I 
support that principle completely, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, at their 
provincial convention this past winter, took the position that the 
education portion of the business tax should be eliminated, with 
the provincial government making up the $20 million loss to the 
school system. Well it's nice and easy passing resolutions like that 
at conventions, but it's not quite as easy to find the $20 million that 
would be required to make that possible. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, no sooner had the municipalities passed that 
resolution than the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association let 
it be known that they wouldn't support that proposal, that they did 
not want provincial government grants to replace the funds 
collected by municipalities for schools and public libraries because 
they feel that it would weaken their autonomy on local school 
boards. 
 
So that's the position that senior government soften find 
themselves locked into, Mr. Speaker. Here we are trying to resolve 
an issue which is really a municipal problem, and two major 
organizations can't agree on a proposed solution put forth by one 
of them. 
 
At the community level, the lost revenues would have to be made 
up through higher residential taxation or through reductions in the 
cost of operating local governments. The cost cutting could 
conceivably be undertaken, Mr. Speaker, in a lot of communities, 
but it could be more difficult, I must admit, in others where they 
simply don't have the room to cut. 
 
Some municipalities have done a very good job of holding the line 
on expenditures, but we still feel that more can be done. Although 
we share provincial revenues, and they're declining and nobody 
can say they aren't because of the sharp drop in prices for our 
agricultural and resource products — although we share those as 
best we can with the municipalities of this  

province, we really have no way of controlling the expenditure 
level, Mr. Speaker, of these local municipalities, no way of 
controlling the goods that they purchase or the services that they 
render, no way of controlling the personnel that they hire or the 
wage rates that they pay, and the like. So on one hand, although 
we share the revenues on the revenue side, we don't have any 
control at all on the expenditure side. 
 
So I believe that municipalities, too, must be prepared to 
contribute somehow, somewhat, to the solution, and despite the 
problems, hopefully a solution can be found to resolve the 
business tax issue. 
 
And interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, the business community 
that seemed to indicate, as SUMA did, that, you know, let the 
government take over the education tax portion, I don't believe, 
Mr. Speaker, that that really and truly is the solution. It affects the 
local autonomy of the school boards, it would eventually lead 
perhaps to the government funding schools 100 per cent. We all 
know that that wouldn't be a good solution. 
 
But interestingly enough, I caught a show on television the other 
day, and I don't watch too much television, but in this show that I 
saw it showed a manufacturing plant down East, a good small 
business that employed some 200 people, and they were really 
concerned about their employees, and in particular, what sparked 
this whole thing was an employee, a long-time, faithful employee 
who had been in their service for 14 years, who time after time 
after time, although trying to get a promotion, couldn't get a 
promotion. So they found out why, and they found out that this 
employee only had a grade 3 education and was illiterate. 
 
Now that sparked an interest in this firm and they conducted a 
survey amongst their employees and they discovered to their 
amazement that half of the employees in their employ were also 
considered illiterate. So this company, in order to have people 
within their own ranks being able to be promoted within their own 
ranks, decided to upgrade their employees to provide them with 
the opportunity of advancement, and they had to pay for that 
education. 
 
So that led me to do something a little bit different then, Mr. 
Speaker. I grabbed a copy of our paper, the Leader-Post, and I 
went through the want ad columns. That's where ail the jobs are, 
small business. Governments don't create jobs, government can't 
create a job, small businesses do. So I looked in the want ads for 
the jobs. One of the first questions that is asked by small business: 
what is your education? Another important issue. Then as you get 
through into the high-profile, high-sector jobs, they needed people 
that were educators — they need chartered accountants, they 
needed lawyers, they needed scientists — all people that were 
dependent, Mr. Speaker, on the education system. 
 
So I started doing a little bit of thinking about it and since then I've 
been talking to my friends in the business community. And the 
very day that I was criticized by the Leader of the Opposition of 
not doing my job and not being out there and not going and talking 
to the business community, I saw, Mr. Speaker, more people from 
the  
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

201 
 
 

business community within two days of that remark than he 
probably conversed with in two months. 
 
The night before those remarks that he cast on me, the very 
evening before, I was speaking at a chamber of commerce meeting 
in a community in northern Saskatchewan. He made those 
remarks. At lunch time that day I had another meeting in Moose 
Jaw chamber of commerce and that night I was meeting with 
another business interest group — while he chastises me. 
 
I mean — but anyhow, I came to the conclusion, and I've been 
talking to my business friends about this, Mr. Speaker: I believe 
that the business community is looking for some measure of tax 
relief. And I don't believe that it's the matter of whether it goes to 
the education portion tax or wherever it goes, I think that they're 
just simply saying to all levels of government: we're pretty heavily 
taxed right now; we need some help in the business sector; can 
you do something to assist us? And if our government, indeed, can 
assist the small-business community, Mr. Speaker, we will 
certainly do that. 
 
I'll just talk for a moment, Mr. Speaker, on another issue . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Few programs . . . you know, there 
they go, talking out of their chairs again. Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 
think that I've something important to talk about. I think that my 
constituents in Regina South are interested in hearing what their 
member has to say, and, if they like, I could continue speaking 
from now until 10 o'clock tonight without any problem. 
 
I've got a lot of material here that I'd like to point out to them, and 
if they don't ask me questions in question period and give me the 
opportunity to express myself, how else can I do it than from a 
Speech from the Throne where I have the opportunity to talk about 
the major issues that I believe, number one, my constituents would 
like to listen to; number two, the taxpayers of this province would 
like to listen to; and, number three, the people in the business 
community would like to hear about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, few programs . . . and you hear them knocking this 
one and yet they don't ever question me in question period — this 
will probably get a little static from them too — but few programs 
ever introduced in our province have had the public appeal and, at 
the same time, generated the tremendous amount of economic 
activity for business and industry as the home improvement 
program. 
 
Up to the end of January in this year the value of home 
improvements have made under the matching grant program — 
and the reason that they're not going to be too noisy is because I 
know, Mr. Speaker, which one of those have used the program, so 
don't knock it. 
 
An Hon. Member: How do you know? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: But up to the end of January . . . because some of 
your members, indeed, asked me to help them complete their 
applications. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Klein: Mr. Speaker, up to the end of January of this 
year, Mr. Speaker, the value of home improvements made under 
the matching grant program reached the hefty total of $625 
million, including contributions by both the home owner and grant 
commitments from the government. And when you combine this 
with the home improvements made under the loan program, it 
means that we're closing in on a billion dollars worth of economic 
activity for small business and industries in this province. And 
they knock it, and they tell me that they're friends of small 
business — balderdash! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: And, Mr. Speaker, all of this business generated 
by one program of the provincial government. We estimate that 
this economic activity has resulted in either the maintenance or 
creation of some 16,000 jobs for the people of this province. It has 
helped to keep our unemployment rate among the lowest in 
Canada, even during a time of stress in the provincial economy. 
Every month, when the unemployment figures come out, Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan is still right there, either one, two or three. 
We have been since 1982 and this program goes a long way in 
doing just that, and that's helping to protect our jobs. 
 
And I have to confess, Mr. Speaker, that I'm sick and tired of the 
criticism emanating from the opposition benches concerning this 
program. And the member from Saskatoon south should be just 
pleased as punch with this program, because I know that a lot of 
people in his constituency have taken advantage of that program 
and will continue to. And it's about time that we started spreading 
some of the good news about that program. 
 
And you know I honestly have to ask them, Mr. Speaker, are they 
against creating jobs for the people of this province? My gosh, 
that's what . . . this program has helped to keep an awful lot of our 
business sector alive and well, particularly when the economy has 
been hit by a severe decline in world oil prices for our agricultural 
and resource products. And I guess even after six years, they're 
still against small business. After six years in opposition, they're 
still trying to win over the friends, and they're never going to do it. 
 
We're encouraging home owners to take full advantage of the 
program as well, Mr. Speaker, to improve one of the most 
important investments that they'll ever make. And that, Mr. 
Speaker, namely their own homes — pride of ownership. 
 
The continued economic activity for small business and industry 
that this program generates will help keep Saskatchewan working 
this spring. The home renovation industry, Mr. Speaker, is indeed 
one of the fastest growing industries in our province today. The 
revenues from this . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm getting a little bit 
dry from having to yell this information. 
 
  



 
March 29, 1988 

 

202 
 
 

The revenues from this industry continue to grow because people, 
young and old alike, are putting money into their homes to protect 
that tall-important investment. The Saskatchewan home program 
has been a very, very successful housing program. We've received 
thousands of applications for renovation work, and the average 
expenditure is much, much more than the $3,000 that you think 
that it might create. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the diversification of the home building industry is 
not unlike the challenges faced here in Saskatchewan today. And 
I'd like to speak for a long time yet on diversification and what 
we're trying to do and what we're trying to accomplish. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see that the time is nearing 5 o'clock, and I have 
much more to say as I switch topics momentarily, and at this time 
I beg leave to adjourn . . . I'm sorry. Being near 5 o'clock, I would 
ask that I be allowed to continue my remarks this evening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


