


















































April 25, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 25, 1988 
 
 

803 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Hagel:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure today to introduce to you, and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, 10 grade 10, 11, and 12 students 
from Central Collegiate in Moose Jaw. They are here today 
accompanied by their teacher, Brian Swanson. 
 
And it would be of interest to members of the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, that these students make up a little group called the 
Government Club at Central Collegiate, and they meet weekly 
at noon hour to discuss issues of the day, as well as hear from 
speakers, and debate about the political events going on in 
Saskatchewan and Canada. It may very well be that some day 
one or more of these students will take a chair on the floor of 
the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they will be staying for the proceedings of the 
Assembly until 3 o’clock, and then taking a tour of the 
buildings, and I’ll be meeting with them at 3:30 for pictures, 
drinks, and a discussion of the events of the day I would ask all 
members to join in making very welcome the members of the 
Government Club from Central Collegiate in Moose Jaw. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I would just like to add greetings 
with my colleague from Moose Jaw North to the members of 
the Government Club. A few weeks ago I had the opportunity 
to be with the club at one of their noon hour discussions. We 
discussed privatization. I think the member of the Government 
Club taught me as much as I taught them, and I hope they find 
this to be a learning experience this afternoon. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to take 
this opportunity to introduce to you, and through you to the 
members of the legislature, a distinguished delegation from the 
People’s Republic of China. I had the opportunity to meet these 
fine people this morning. They represent the Chinese People’s 
Institute for Foreign Affairs, and they’re a delegation that is in 
Canada. 
 
I want to introduce Mr. Chai, the head of the delegation, 
vice-president of Chinese People’s Institute for Foreign Affairs; 
I want to introduce Mr. Song, executive secretary of China 
Society for Research on Restructuring the Economic Systems; 
Mr. Zhu, deputy secretary-general of CPIFA(Chinese People’s 
Institute for Foreign Affairs); and, Mr. Bi, deputy division chief 
of North American Affairs, and interpreter; and Ms. Cui, staff 
member of the North American division. 
 
They will be meeting with Agdevco (agricultural development 
corporation), SaskTel International, the Minister of Science and 
Technology, various other  

departments, as well as the Department of Political Science at 
the University of Regina. 
 
Please join me in welcoming this delegation to Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  As well, Mr. Speaker, I want to take this 
opportunity to introduce to you and through you, the Albert 
Elementary School students, 25 students that are in the 
Speaker’s gallery waving at you, Mr. Speaker. Their teachers 
are Mr. Wayne Tranburg, Mrs. Pamela Goodale and Mrs. Rena 
Favel. 
 
I would like the legislature to please welcome the students and 
the teachers here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the 
Premier in welcoming our special guests from Albert School 
this afternoon. As you can imagine, Mr. Speaker, I have a 
special interest in this particular group visiting the legislature 
today. My wife, Pamela, is one of the teachers accompanying 
the group, along with Mr. Tranburg and Mrs. Favel. 
 
I would like to join with all members in wishing them an 
enjoyable visit in the legislature  I hope, an educational 
experience  and I look forward to meeting with them after 
question period to discuss some of the proceedings in this place 
and join them for some refreshments. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the official opposition I would like to join with other in 
extending a greeting and welcome to the grade 6 students from 
Albert School here in Regina, as well as their teachers. 
 
These students have come from a school in a constituency that 
was represented for many, many years  I think 27 years  by 
one of the more distinguished Canadian, Allan Blakeney, who, 
as they may well know, has retired and is now doing other 
things. But it’s an honour to have them here. We hope that they 
enjoy their visit, that they will learn a great deal from what 
happens here, and I’m sure that the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg will assist them afterwards when he 
meets with them. So, welcome, on behalf of the members of the 
official opposition. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 
behalf of the official opposition I, too, want to welcome the 
delegation from the People’s Republic of China. I was in the 
People’s Republic of China in 1972, shortly after your country 
became available for people to visit. I plan on returning to the 
People’s Republic in 1992, twenty years later, and I’m sure that 
you’ve made great progress since that time. And we welcome 
you to Saskatchewan. 
 
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

804 
 
 

Hon Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Privatization of Natural Gas Holdings of SPC 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question today is directed to the minister 
responsible for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. Mr. 
Minister, on Friday your government announced the 
privatization of the natural gas reserves of the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation. It means, Mr. Minister, that the 232,000 
Saskatchewan home owners which benefit from natural gas will 
have another increase in their natural gas rates. 
 
Mr. Minister, since your government took office, you’ve 
already increased the average family’s natural gas bill by $240. 
Now you’ve given away enough natural gas reserves to supply 
each and every household in Saskatchewan for the next 15 
years, and you’ve given those reserves to a privately owned 
company, 75 per cent owned outside the province of 
Saskatchewan. Simply put, Mr. Minister, simply put, you’ve 
engaged in a process of . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Order. Order, order! The hon. member 
is getting rather lengthy with his preamble. I believe he’s had 
more than enough time to set the question. I now ask him to put 
it. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, my question is this: in view of the unjustifiable utility 
rate increases you’ve imposed on Saskatchewan families, will 
you confirm here today in the House that your privatizing of 
natural gas means an increase, a further increase in their natural 
gas rates? 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson:  Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 
again, and I suppose to be expected, a little fast and loose with 
his numbers. I want to give you, as I have in this House before, 
Mr. Speaker, give you the actual numbers as it relates to rate 
increases in the seven-year period prior to 1982. 
 
Rate increases in the gas utility were 188.5 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker  188.5 per cent  for an average of 26.9 per cent per 
year for that seven-year period, Mr. Speaker. Now for a 
comparable period, the six and one-half years since April of 
1982, gas rate increases, Mr. Speaker, were a total of 5.3 per 
cent, for an average of 0.8 per cent per year for a comparable 
period post-’82, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now to deal with the question, Mr. Speaker, of the sale of the 
reserves to Saskoil, I think it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that the 
reserves were sold to a Saskatchewan-based company. I think 
it’s important, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . .  
 
I don’t know why these guys don’t like these answers, Mr. 
Speaker. I think it’s good for Saskatchewan, I think it’s good 
for SaskPower, I think it’s good for Saskoil that these reserves 
will now, rather than lie dormant, Mr. Speaker, will now be 
developed. 
 

It is expected that Saskoil will invest $100 million over the next 
five years in the development of those reserves. Mr. Speaker, 
that will give us additional revenue through transportation of 
gas at SaskPower. I expect that there will be no significant 
impact on the rates at the utility. And, Mr. Speaker, this will 
call for about 6 to 800 new gas wells in this province over the 
next five years. I think it’s a good deal for everybody, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A supplementary. Mr. 
Minister, the numbers that the people of Saskatchewan are 
interested in are the 58 per cent increase in the natural gas rates 
since your government took office; the $240 that you’ve . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order. Order, order. I 
think that we should get off on the right foot, so I’m 
interrupting early. We had a long question, a long answer, and 
let’s get down to short preambles or no preambles to 
supplementary, and short answers on the part of ministers. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Mr. Speaker, in light of the $240 increase it’s 
cost Saskatchewan families in natural gas increases, Mr. 
Minister, why is it that you can give tax breaks to corporations? 
Why is it that you can give away our natural resources? And 
why is it that every action, your blinded illogical actions, is 
going to result in a steeper rate increase for Saskatchewan 
people? Why is it that you’re pursuing this course? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson:  Mr. Speaker, they don’t listen, or they 
don’t want to hear. I don’t know what it is. We’ve been through 
this before. SaskPower has a horrendous debt  $2.6 billion. 
This sale, Mr. Speaker  and I’m not going to point fingers as 
to who rung the debt up  but the fact is, the second unit at 
Coronach and the Nipawin power project were projects that 
were committed to prior to this administration  and they were 
necessary projects, I don’t deny that  and so we have this 
debt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The net effect of selling this resource, Mr. Speaker, is 
equivalent to having an additional $30 million of profit in 
SaskPower. We estimate, Mr. Speaker, before this deal that 
over the next 10 years we can contain rate increases to at or 
below the rate of inflation. This deal, Mr. Speaker, helps us to 
even do better than that. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Supplementary to the 
same minister. Mr. Minister, you can save rate increases for 
Saskatchewan people by doing away with your billion-dollar 
boondoggle at shafferty, if you’re concerned. But it seems to be 
that, Mr. Minister, that that rationale is a smoke-screen. 
 
I want to ask you, I want to ask you, sir: why is it, why is it that 
your corporation president, during a press conference, 
announced that all of SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation) 
is up for sale at the right price, when your own government, 
including yourself, said that no  
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

805 
 
 

utilities in Saskatchewan are for sale? Won’t you admit that that 
course of action will result in nothing but price gouging of 
Saskatchewan consumer? 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson:  Mr. Speaker, first, of course he’s 
wrong again. And the president of SPC said nothing like that. I 
was there; I sat beside him, and I didn’t see the hon. member. I 
didn’t see the hon. member in the room. The other thing that he 
doesn’t understand, Mr. Speaker, is that sitting on these 
reserves is not an option. The method of the NDP . . . I mean, 
they didn’t even know there was natural gas in Saskatchewan; 
they thought it stopped right at the Alberta border, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because of incentives of this government, the private sector has 
found lots and lots of gas, Mr. Speaker, and the gas that we 
have under contract and the reserves that will be retained 
guarantee Saskatchewan a 40- to 50-year supply without the 
reserves that we’re selling, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons:  A new question to the same minister, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at the press conference held late on 
Friday you announced the deal for $325 million, the sale of the 
natural gas reserves. You say you’re going to take $125 million 
in cash, plus another $125 million or thereabouts in Saskoil 
shares, based on market valuation. Now when you add that up, 
it adds up to $250 million; it seems to be about 75 million short. 
 
Will you table here, Mr. Minister, the deal that you’ve worked 
out, with the financial addendum’s, so that the people of 
Saskatchewan can see the kind of arithmetic which is going to 
cost them literally tens of hundreds of thousands of dollars in 
rate increases over the next 10 years for the people of this 
province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson:  Mr. Speaker, that member may well be 
the only person in all of Saskatchewan that doesn’t like this 
deal. Mr. Speaker, when SaskPower bond  I think issue 
number five – is issued with the exchangeable feature for 
Saskoil shares, there are going to be a lot of happy people in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And I encourage that member to 
get on the bandwagon and be one of the happy folks in the 
province. 
 
Now what does SaskPower get? SaskPower get 325 million in 
cash and securities, broken down in the following manner, Mr. 
Speaker: 13 million Saskoil common shares to be issued from 
the treasury, valued at current market prices and cash  the two 
together to total $245 million; 5 million in Saskoil share 
purchase warrant, valued at $13 million; and cash flow royalty 
paid over a period of five years, valued at $25 million; a 
promissory note for $20 million, Mr. Speaker; and a growth 
overriding royalty valued at $22 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think it’s an excellent deal for Saskoil. It is an excellent deal, 
Mr. Speaker, for SaskPower. It is an excellent deal for the 
people of Saskatchewan, and it’s supported by fairness opinion 
by outside independent financial  

advisers, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation. Minister, earlier you said that we should listen to 
what you were saying and that we should learn something from 
it. And I’ve listened to what you’ve said in response to the 
question from the member from Rosemont, and I’m rather 
shocked by the minister’s refusal to table this document, but 
I’m not surprised. 
 
You have publicly announced an agreement  and that’s your 
word  to sell off or give away natural gas reserves on which 
hundreds of thousands of Saskatchewan families, homes, 
businesses and farms are dependent. Your press release talks of 
a sale price of around $325 million, but the numbers don’t add 
up, Minister. The financial deal you’ve described is bizarre in 
that the description is incomplete . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Order. I think the member should get 
to his question. He is using up his time. 
 
Mr. Solomon:  My question to the minister is this: what are 
you trying to hide? If it’s such a good deal, why don’t you table 
the document in this House today, and if you don’t table it, you 
must be hiding something. What is it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson:  Mr. Speaker, first, I’m not trying to 
hide anything, but secondly, they should hope that I was, 
because if their record was exposed prior to 1982 as it relates to 
the gas development in this province, they . . . well no, they 
know no shame. I doubt that they would be ashamed, Mr. 
Speaker. The fact is, in 1982 there were nine gas wells drilled in 
this province  nine. Is that right  nine in 1982? 
 
Because of the policies of this government and deregulation, 
Mr. Speaker, we have developed, or at least the private sector 
has developed, the gas resource in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
to the point where we are able to back out of some agreements 
with our neighbour, Alberta. I think we are now two-thirds . . . 
two-thirds of our gas supply is now supply is now supplied 
from within Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Over the next five 
years, we’re going to see 6 to 800 new wells drilled in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson:  I think that he would hope that I would 
hide those figures, Mr. Speaker. Now as it relates to . . .  
 
Mr. Solomon:  Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister 
responsible for SPC. Mr. Minister, you claim this is a good 
deal, but you refuse to table that deal in this House and, frankly, 
we on this side don’t believe you. You claim to have sold those 
assets, 40 per cent of Saskatchewan Power’s natural gas utility, 
at fair market value, and my question is this, Mr. Minister: did 
you obtain an independent appraisal of these assets, and will 
you at least table this appraisal in this House today? 
 
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

806 
 
 

Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson:  Mr. Speaker, I don’t know where he 
was for the first 15 minutes of question period. Yes, Mr. 
Speaker, we did have an appraisal and evaluation done of the 
reserves. That evaluation was done by Coles, Nikiforuk, Pennell 
Associates ltd. They are recognized as leaders in the industry 
and, Mr. Speaker, I saw the appraisal. I think it’s about 26 
volumes  I think it’s about 26 volumes. I’m sure they would 
want to read every last page of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the normal course of event, Mr. Speaker  and that member 
knows it; he’s been around here since 1975 with one brief little 
interruption where the people of Regina decided he ought not to 
be here, and they’re going to think that way again  but in the 
normal course of events, Mr. Speaker, he knows that you don’t 
table documents in question period, number one. And number 
two, Mr. Speaker, these kinds of questions are raised in the 
Crown Corporations Committee. That’s the proper course to 
take, and it’s one that I recommend to him, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 

Contingency Plans for Drought Conditions 
 
Mr. Goodale:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question to 
the Premier in his capacity as Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Premier, today for the fourth time I want to raise the 
question of potential drought or at least very dry moisture 
conditions across much of southern and western Saskatchewan 
this spring. I first raised this matter with you in early February, 
but to date I do not get the feeling that the government is taking 
this issue seriously. 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Premier, in the light of last week’s 
announcement of a $20 million emergency water program by 
the province of Alberta to help combat the driest spring 
conditions since 1889, will the Premier now acknowledge that 
Saskatchewan is facing a serious problem in this regard too, and 
will he announce a specific contingency plan to help farmers, 
ranchers, and rural communities to cope with this impending 
crisis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I share with the hon. 
member his concern about drought and the lack of water, 
particularly in southern Saskatchewan. It’s something that has 
been plaguing southern Saskatchewan for about the last 10 
years, as we’ve noticed the water table go down and down. 
 
One of the reasons that we established the water corporation 
was to co-ordinate activities federally and provincially and with 
municipal governments, so that we could have programs in 
place for water development, for drilling, for irrigation, to work 
with communities to make sure that we can have adequate water 
supplies. 
 
The water corporation works on an ongoing basis with the 
public, both farmers, ranchers, and municipalities. We are now 
in the process of putting together the programs with any new 
ideas that are coming forward from the municipal councils, and 
farmer, and ranchers,  

and the PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration). 
 
And the ongoing operations that we have here today are 
certainly helping and working if we need to move either 
livestock or we need to move feed because we’re going to leave 
some livestock where there is water, or a combination of things. 
 
If we need more money for drilling an exploration for water, 
we’re prepared to do that. We have got literally millions of 
dollars working now, and we are prepared to look at more. And 
hopefully the kind of programs that we can do with the federal 
government in co-operation with PFRA, our water corporation, 
and municipal government, we can address it as best we can 
here in the province, knowing that obviously you can’t make it 
snow or rain. 
 
Mr. Goodale:  Mr. Speaker, from what the Premier has just 
said, I gather that there is now beginning to be some movement 
toward a special contingency plan for this year. And I wonder if 
the premier could tell us specifically when he might be in a 
position to announce the full shape of that contingency plan for 
1988, because the problem is serious and it’s getting worse. 
 
And in that contingency plan, will the government specifically 
provide that the province will cover the cost of acquiring pumps 
and pipes for community and farm use in moving water where 
that’s required? At present there is a fee for that service, and I 
wonder if the government would specifically include that as an 
item to be covered by the government, in the face of very 
serious circumstances. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, that is precisely the kind of 
thing that we are discussing with municipalities and municipal 
councillors across southern Saskatchewan. They’re giving us 
their advice in dealing with the water corporation as well as 
with the Department of Agriculture and the federal government. 
So if we need to provide more assistance because of the 
particular problem, then we are prepared to look at that and 
work with the recommendations of the SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities). 

 
Privatization of Essential Utilities 

 
Ms. Atkinson:  My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the minister 
of privatization.  
 
Mr. Minister, your Premier and your government said your 
privatization ideology would not lead to the privatization of 
health care, but it did. You claimed that your privatization 
ideology would never lead to the privatization of Saskatchewan 
essential public services and utilities like SaskTel and 
SaskPower, but it has. You’ve already privatized SaskPower’s 
coal reserves through Manalta Coal of Alberta, and now you’re 
privatizing SaskPower’s natural gas reserves. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you admit that you are indeed privatizing 
Saskatchewan’s essential utilities? Will you admit that? 
 
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

807 
 
 

Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  No. Mr. Speaker, I don’t see any 
indication of that at all. I listened with interest to my colleague, 
the Minister of SaskPower, who indicated that from this sale 
and the development of the reserves that are here, the ones that I 
remember when I came in this House, the leader, now departed, 
the opposition wanted to keep for I don’t know when, kept it 
locked in the ground. We’re looking at developing 800 new 
wells and, as I heard the minister say just moments ago in this 
House, he feels that prior to this, with the actions that have been 
taken by SaskPower, that rates could be held near inflation or 
perhaps below. And with this other development, I think they 
will see that the utilities of this province, both in power and 
electricity, will be well served by this type of venture. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister 
of privatization. Mr. Minister, you privatized the highway 
workers and privatized the highways’ equipment and our taxes 
went up and our roads got worse. You privatized the provincial 
parks and our taxes went up, our park fees went up and the 
services got worse. You attacked the prescription drug plan and 
privatized the children’s dental plan and our taxes went up and 
the health care services for Saskatchewan families go worse. 
Now you’re privatizing still more of SaskPower, and our taxes 
and our utilities are still going up. Mr. Minister, will you stop 
this ideology of privatization, and will you stop destroying the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Well, most certainly, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
accept the statements of the member opposite about increases 
and services deteriorating. I think  and I’ll take the 
Department of Parks, for example. Having just been in the 
portfolio of Tourism, I can tell you fair well, Mr. Speaker, that 
if there had not been . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order, order. Order. The minister is 
attempting to answer the question but isn’t getting much 
co-operation, and so I ask for your co-operation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
was indicating as an example that having been the Minister of 
Tourism in the last year or so in Saskatchewan, I can tell you, 
without the initiatives in the parks where we have seen 
brand-new, state of the art, four-season resorts developed in the 
major parks of Saskatchewan, that that type of development 
would not have taken place. 
 
The member opposite likes to indicate park fees and so on, and 
I remember last week in this House when the Minister of parks 
and renewable resources indicated that the only reason that the 
park fees had gone up is that we were dragging far behind 
comparable park fees in other parts of western Canada. 
 
So I just want to reinforce, Mr. Speaker, for you and for the 
people of Saskatchewan, that without that infusion of  

private capital into the parks, we would not have the fine 
facilities that we have now in Duck Mountain, we have in 
Cypress hills, and we have in Kenosee. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  New question to the minister of privatization. 
Mr. Minister, you claimed you weren’t going to attack health 
care, but you did. You attacked the prescription drug plan and 
you destroyed the school-based children’s plan. That’s what 
your PC privatization ideology has meant so far  an attach on 
health care, higher taxes, and fewer services. 
 
Now you’re privatizing our public utilities, and you can’t deny 
that, Mr. Minister. The facts are clear. You’ve announced the 
privatization of SaskPower’s natural gas reserves, a deal that 
amounts to a sell-off of more than 40 per cent of the total value 
of Saskatchewan Power’s natural gas utility. 
 
My question is this: will you now admit that your privatization 
plans include everything in this province will you now admit 
that? 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Absolutely not, Mr. Speaker, that is a 
great exaggeration. And I would just like to remind this House, 
as I mentioned earlier, about the natural gas policy that the 
departed leader of the NDP had, which I didn’t agree with. 
 
I’d also like to remind the members opposite that the departed 
leader said, not too long before he left this House, that he felt 
some of the aspects of the Crown corporations  it was timely 
that they be seen to be certainly candidates for public 
participation. So when she tries to stand up here and say that 
everything is going to be privatized, the short answer is, it is 
not. 
 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
Mr. Speaker:  On April 21 before orders of the day, the 
member for Regina North East raised a point of order that the 
Minister of Education twice answered a question by making the 
response on the date he took as notice, and then making a 
further response in oral question period. At that time I agreed to 
review the record. 
 
On April 20 the member for prince Albert asked a specific 
question which the Minister of Education took as notice. The 
minister took notice directly, with few comments. The member 
for Prince Albert then asked a supplementary, but before doing 
so alluded to the minister’s competence for not having an 
answer at that particular moment. This of course provoked the 
minister into giving a response that went beyond simply taking 
notice of the supplementary. In no way, however, can that 
response be construed as answering the question. 
 
On April 21 the minister had the opportunity to answer both the 
question and supplementary. I found that he did so directly and 
to the point. This was the only time he  
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

808 
 
 

answered the question, therefore I find the member for Regina 
North East’s point of order not well taken. 
 
Before leaving this issue, I would like to take the opportunity to 
address the practice of ministers taking notice and then being 
asked supplementaries. Over the last decade it has become a 
practice of this House to permit a supplementary to a question 
that has been taken as notice. I have made an effort an ensure 
and, indeed, have ruled that ministers should not abuse question 
period by responding to a question at the same time as taking 
notice. This, in effect, is answering the same question twice. To 
enforce this principle, I found it necessary on April 21 to ask 
the Minister of Health to discontinue his remarks after he took 
notice. 
 
By the same token, however, supplementaries in such a 
situation should be without a preamble and narrowly worded for 
the purpose of eliciting further information. The case raised in 
the point of order shows what happens when members add 
provocative comments to their supplementaries. I find it an 
abuse which can only cause a degeneration of question period. 
 
Furthermore, members should not use a new question as a 
pretext to ask a supplementary question on the same issue. This 
happened on April 21 when the member for Regina Lakeview 
asked a series of questions on one particular case. If a minister 
is to be limited in his response after taking notice, it is only 
reasonable that the member asking a further question should 
also be limited. 
 
Finally, I ask that all members try to adhere to these accepted 
principles. And also I invite any members, who would like to 
discuss this issue further, to my office. My door is always open. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Andrew that Bill No. 2  An Act 
respecting the Use of the French and English Languages in 
Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to continue my comments in the debate which I 
terminated on Thursday, I believe. 
 
At the onset, Mr. Speaker, I want to express my considered 
opinion about one rather narrow legal question which relates to 
this Bill. I believe there was a second and valid argument that 
section 1(10) of the North-West Territories Act in effect meant 
that the laws of Saskatchewan needed only to be in English. 
 
I understand the position that the Department of Justice of the 
provincial government took on that question in essence, 
adopting that proposition  and I don’t propose to criticise 
them for it  while that may or may not have been a sound and 
valid legal point of view, it was not the  

position adopted by the Supreme Court, and that has made all 
the difference. 
 
Today circumstances are different because today we must act in 
the wake of the Supreme Court’s decision. We must face 
forward; we must address the future. Today Saskatchewan is a 
multicultural mosaic, a rich and varied tapestry of many 
cultures. In Saskatchewan, multiculturalism is not merely an 
abstract idea, it is an indisputable social fact, and we are 
stronger for it. Therein lies much of our dignity, therein lies 
much of our diversity, and therein lies our promise. I submit, 
Mr. Speaker, therein lies the future. 
 
Let me for a moment, Mr. Speaker, make a brief comment on 
the process, the public policy process, that has culminated in the 
consideration of these issues here today. All across 
Saskatchewan no values are felt more deeply by the 
Saskatchewan families, no values are cherished more dearly, 
than those associated with religion, language and culture. 
 
That cultural heritage and those cultural values are absolutely 
fundamental in the home, in the family, in the community. They 
help shape and define who we are. They are a powerful and 
positive force binding us together, in a way that enriches, to our 
family and our community. 
 
It is therefore regrettable that the government policy now before 
us in the legislature today has not been developed by a process 
of consultation with the Saskatchewan people. I’m aware, of 
course, that the government has undertaken some degree of 
consultation and discussion with the media in Toronto, with the 
Prime Minister in Ottawa, Premier Bourassa of Quebec. 
Unfortunately, the government has failed to consult with 
Saskatchewan people, failed to consult adequately, and in some 
cases failed to consult at all with those here in Saskatchewan 
who are most interested in, and affected by, this government’s 
policy. By its failure of consultation, this government has failed 
to recognize and respect the multicultural nature of 
Saskatchewan. I believe that the government’s failure of 
consultation has produced a flawed policy process, Mr. 
Speaker, and that flawed process has produced the flawed and 
regrettable government policy we see here today. 
 
I would like to turn, Mr. Speaker, for a moment, to a subject 
that I touched on for a few moments last week, to expand on 
what I believe is the really central and the fundamental issue 
before this Assembly today  the multicultural nature of 
Saskatchewan society and the government’s failure to 
acknowledge and respect Saskatchewan multiculturalism. 
 
There are some members of government opposite, Mr. Speaker, 
who appear to view the United States as a model society in 
which Saskatchewan should emulate. I certainly do not share 
that point of view. While there is much to respect about the 
United States, their traditions, their cultural pattern, and their 
social and cultural practices have all been different than ours, 
and I prefer the Canadian. 
 
Americans have often described their society, with a  
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

809 
 
 

positive connotation, as a melting pot, and they say it proudly. 
And I think that’s an accurate and fair description of the 
American experience. But Canada has not been a melting pot 
with one homogenized product end result. Canada has been not 
so much a melting pot as a stew, contribute to the richness of 
the final product, but each retains its separate identity in a rich 
and varied mosaic, a tapestry woven of cultural diversity, a 
tapestry woven of strong and distinctive cultural threads, each 
one vibrant and resilient. The multicultural mosaic  that is the 
Canadian way, and that is the Saskatchewan way. I am proud of 
that multicultural mosaic, Mr. Speaker. Regrettably, the 
government’s policy fails either to recognize it or to respect it. 
 
In his remarks yesterday in this Assembly, the minister spoke 
about a bilingual Canada and a unilingual Saskatchewan. He 
spoke of Saskatchewan’s history as though the only culture, the 
only language, the only reality, had always been English, and 
English alone. But I submit to you, the minister’s view is at 
variance with the multicultural heritage and the multicultural 
history of Saskatchewan. His view is at variance with the 
multicultural nature of Saskatchewan today, for that view fails 
to acknowledge the hundreds of thousands of men and women 
of wide and varying ethnic backgrounds who came from the 
four corners of the globe to settle Saskatchewan, and who have 
contributed so much to this province. 
 
(1445) 
 
They came to Canada and to Saskatchewan with determination, 
with courage, with strength of purpose, and noble goals. They 
came for hope, for freedom, for community, for opportunity, 
and for dignity. They came to build their future. They built the 
only province in Canada where both the French and English, 
taken together, do not constitute 50 per cent of Saskatchewan’s 
population. They built a province richer because of their 
contribution, and, because they retained their culture, a province 
richer because of our mosaic. 
 
I am therefore disappointed, Mr. Speaker, that the government’s 
policy has failed to recognize and respect that multiculturalism, 
and I’m disappointed that the government’s Bill and the 
government’s policy here before us today failed to make any 
commitment whatsoever to protect and enhance 
multiculturalism in Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s a source of considerable pride to me, Mr. Speaker, that it 
was a New Democratic government is Saskatchewan that 
introduced Saskatchewan’s and Canada’s first human rights 
code 16 years ago. And one of the duties explicitly assigned to 
the Human Rights Commission, by law,  it’s in section 25 of 
the Act  is to forward the principle that cultural diversity is a 
basic human right and a fundamental human value. That is the 
position of the New Democrats, and I am proud of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s important for all members of the 
Assembly, and all Saskatchewan people, to acknowledge that 
our history as a province has placed us within a common 
boundary and under a common law. All of us  

share in one precious possession  we are residents of 
Saskatchewan. And to a large extent, to live in Saskatchewan 
means to have initially been a stranger and to have left behind 
the familiar for the new. But as long as the policy of the 
provincial government, in the form advanced by the minister, 
continues to deny that stranger within us, continues to deny 
Saskatchewan’s multiculturalism, that policy is denying 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the 
legislation. The government has failed to consult adequately 
with the Bill before us, and I will not support the policy on 
which it’s based. The government’s policy itself fails to 
acknowledge and enhance the multicultural nature of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member for 
Regina North East, that all the words after “That” be deleted, 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 

That this Bill not now be read a second time because, 
inter alia: 

(a) the provincial government has failed to consult 
adequately with Saskatchewan people regarding 
the consequences of the Bill; and 

 
(b) the provincial government, as a collateral policy, 

has failed to enunciate new multicultural programs 
in recognition and support of Saskatchewan’s 
multicultural mosaic. 

 
Mr. Speaker:  The debate then continues on the amendment 
and the main motion and will continue concurrently. 
 
Mr. Goodale:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. as I 
begin to address a few remarks this afternoon to the subject of 
Bill 2, an Act respecting the Use of the English and French 
Languages in Saskatchewan, I want to start with an appeal, Mr. 
Speaker, to all members of this Assembly for reason and for 
tolerance and for statesmanship in dealing with this very 
important and very sensitive matter. 
 
This is an occasion, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, for all of us 
to put partisan considerations aside. A very important element 
of Canadian unity and Canadian life, indeed Saskatchewan 
unity and Saskatchewan life, Mr. Speaker, is involved in this 
debate, and it seems to me that it demands of all of us that we 
rise above the normal scenario of “politics as usual.” 
 
In that spirit, Mr. Speaker, I would like to begin my remarks 
today by commending some of the members of the government 
for the rhetorical commitment which they have made in the last 
number of weeks to the principle of Canadian unity and to the 
issue of minority language rights. Inside and outside of this 
Assembly, the Premier and the Minister of Justice, other 
members of the cabinet, other members of the government, 
have said that they intend to move and to respect and to give 
effect to those principles of minority language rights. They have 
not, Mr. Speaker, said how they intend to do that, nor have they 
said when they intend to do that, but they are, at  
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

810 
 
 

least, rhetorically committed to the principle, and sometimes, 
sometimes those statements on the part of members of the 
government have been expressed in very clear and unequivocal 
terms. 
 
My concern, Mr. Speaker, would be that those expressions of 
good intentions which have been made from time to time on the 
part of some members of the government have been expressed 
in speeches in this House or speeches outside this House, in 
press conferences and news interviews and so forth, but those 
expressions of good intentions, Mr. Speaker, do not appear in 
the legal language of the Bill itself that we are discussion this 
afternoon, and I think that is a serious defect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by the Meech Lake accord the government of 
Saskatchewan is committed to the preservation and the 
protection of minority language rights in our province. By the 
accord, that is the obligation of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, together with all other governments in this 
country. 
 
In the Mercure decision in the Supreme Court of Canada, the 
court has ruled that certain minority language rights exist in 
Saskatchewan by virtue of previous statutory law. The court 
ruled that Saskatchewan has two basic courses available to it 
now as we meet to discuss this issue in the spring of 1988. On 
the one hand the province of Saskatchewan could move to give 
some effect to those rights which the court ruled did exist, or on 
the other hand the government could move to abolish those 
rights. 
 
It would appear on the face of the legal language in the 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, that the government has chosen the 
latter course, effectively to abolish the rights. And I must say 
that I am disappointed in that narrow and legalistic approach. 
 
They have taken certain rights as defined by the Supreme Court 
of Canada and they have transformed those rights into 
discretionary privileges that may or may not be granted from 
time to time into the future by this and subsequent governments. 
In my view, Mr. Speaker, that approach is neither adequate nor 
appropriate in the circumstances. 
 
The abolition, effectively, of minority language rights, in my 
view is not consistent with the spirit of the Meech Lake accord. 
The legislation, it seems to me, should have indicated some 
acknowledgement of those rights, and it should have provided 
some schedule or timetable or framework of some find, Mr. 
Speaker, for giving some effect to those rights. And of course 
the nature of that effect and the timing of that effect is 
something that should have been worked out in some 
considerable detail by the government, in consultation with the 
francophone association in the province of Saskatchewan and 
the general population of the province of Saskatchewan who are 
interested in this subject. 
 
We must, of course, Mr. Speaker, take into account the realities 
of what makes up Saskatchewan’s population mixture. We must 
be mindful and respectful of our unique Saskatchewan patterns 
of original exploration and settlement and migration and 
immigration and  

population development. All of those factors must be taken into 
account. 
 
We must pay attention to our multicultural heritage and the 
deep roots in our province of wide variety of ethnic and cultural 
groupings. We must be careful about timing and pacing, and 
also about the cost involved. All of these things, Mr. Speaker, 
are important, and they are relevant considerations. 
 
But with reason and judgement and goodwill and constructive 
leadership, it should have been possible, Mr. Speaker; in my 
opinion, it should still be possible, to respect minority language 
rights in Saskatchewan and to have a plan for giving them some 
life and some effect, instead of taking the legalistic approach 
that is proposed in this legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know this issue is a sensitive one. If it is 
mishandled, it can spark strong emotions and is can do great 
damage. And that damage can potentially extend far beyond the 
four boundaries of Saskatchewan. It can have national 
repercussions and impair the delicate fabric of Canadian unity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to most other nations on the face of the earth, our 
Canada is still a very young country. We’re still in the relatively 
early stages of nation building if you compare us to most other 
countries in the world. And we must always be acutely aware of 
what a fragile thing Canadian unity really is. We can’t afford to 
abuse it; we can’t afford to take it for granted. We must 
constantly work at it, Mr. Speaker, for nation building, in the 
Canadian context, is a never-ending and a very human effort. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you were to sit down one day and just list on a 
piece of paper all of the things that would make nation building 
and national unity difficult and unlikely challenges to conquer, I 
think that you would come up with a list of factors that would 
pretty closely resemble an accurate description of Canada. 
 
We have a huge geographic land mass, the second biggest in the 
world, from ocean to ocean to ocean, east and west and north. 
We have some of the most formidable geophysical terrain 
you’ll find anywhere on the globe. We have a challenging 
climate and sometimes bizarre weather patterns. We have a land 
of dramatic regional diversity. We have a small but complicated 
population  first our aboriginal peoples, and then the French 
and the English explorers and settlers, and then wave after wave 
of international immigration. 
 
We have in our country, Mr. Speaker, every ethnic origin, every 
colour, every religion, every political point of view to be found 
anywhere on the face of the earth  and all of that mixed 
together unevenly, mixed together at different times in our 
history, and strung out sparsely along 4,000 miles of American 
boundary. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have all of our natural physical features 
on the North American continent running north and south, 
while we try to pull our country together east and west. 
 
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

811 
 
 

You could hardly imagine a more difficult set of circumstances 
from which to try to forge a country. But in fact, Mr. Speaker, 
we have forged one. To my mind, it’s the very best in the 
world. And how, in the face of all of these difficult 
circumstances, have we done that? How have we accomplished 
this remarkable achievement that we call Canada? 
First of all, with a lot of hard work. Secondly, with a little good 
luck. And thirdly, with the consistent and reliable application of 
some fundamental and typically Canadian characteristics. 
 
(1500) 
 
I refer, Mr. Speaker, to characteristics like fairness and 
generosity and compassion and tolerance and a keen and active 
sense of justice. I refer, Mr. Speaker, to our willingness to reach 
out to each other, to reach over our differences and our 
diversity, to join hands. I refer to our willingness to listen to 
each other and to understand one another. 
 
And having listen and understood, Mr. Speaker, we have a 
common Canadian characteristic that is a willingness to take 
action. To act, Mr. Speaker, not because the action we might 
take is necessarily in the sole interest of some comfortable 
majority, but because the action is right for the decent, tolerant, 
fair, and generous Canada that we want to have. It seems to me, 
Mr. Speaker, that that’s what Canada is all about. 
 
That’s what Canadian unity is all about. If it were just a 
numbers game, if Canada were nothing more than some 
mathematical computation, we would have severed 
Newfoundland long ago, Mr. Speaker. Nothing but Ontario and 
Quebec would really count. And our own Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, with a mere 4 per cent of Canada’s national 
population, our own Saskatchewan would have been cut adrift 
with no serious consideration. 
 
But Canada is, Mr. Speaker, substantially more than just 
arithmetic. It has a heart and a soul and a quality and a destiny 
that is larger than just the sum of its individual parts. And part 
of that intangible greatness of our nation, part of the essence of 
Canada, is our attitude toward minorities and our preparedness, 
Mr. Speaker, to treat minority issues with openness and with 
generosity. 
 
And I think that is at least in part because we are, all of us in 
this country, Mr. Speaker, we are in reality a nation of 
minorities. Because of our complexity and our diversity, we are 
all, in one way or another, part of some minority group. It may 
be a linguistic minority; it may be a cultural minority; it may be 
a regional minority; it may be an economic minority. Whatever 
it may be, Mr. Speaker, I think we all have a little bit of that 
sense that in one way or another we are all part of some 
minority. 
 
And Canadians realize, Mr. Speaker, that when we are in the 
majority on some issues, it is part of Canada’s wisdom and 
heritage that we respect the rights and the interests of the other 
side, the minority side. Because on some other occasion, in 
some other circumstances, we shall surely find ourselves on the 
minority side of the equation where we will want to find 
ourselves respected and treated with  

justice and with fairness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is because of those factors that I am not satisfied 
with the legalistic approach that the government has taken in 
respect of the legislation that is presently before us. And I 
would like to suggest to the minister, with the greatest of 
sincerity, that there are at least two suggestions for changes in 
that legislation that he ought to take very seriously into account. 
 
The first change that I recommend to the minister for 
consideration would be this: to take the spirit of what he and the 
Premier and other members of the government have said about 
the language rights issue  what they have said in this 
Chamber, what they have said outside this Chamber  and to 
embody that in some kind of preamble or some kind of 
statement of purpose to be included within the Bill itself. 
 
On other occasions, apart from the Bill, they have made on 
behalf of the government some strong statements with respect 
to Canadian unity, with respect to minority language rights. 
They have said that they have, in connection with this matter, 
the very best of intentions and they do have some long-term 
plan in mind. 
 
It would be in my view, Mr. Speaker, a substantial 
improvement in the Bill if those expressions of good intentions 
could be included within the craftsmanship of the Bill so that 
they become a part of the Bill itself, rather than just to be left to 
be read from time to time in the dusty copies of Hansard or in 
the newspaper clippings that might be accumulating 
somewhere. 
 
I would seriously suggest that the minister consider that point 
and to take what he has said, what the Premier and others have 
said, and incorporate some of that language and some of those 
good intentions into the Bill itself. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Speaker, my second suggestion to the 
government would be that they not leave this process as 
open-ended or non-ended, as the process is described in the 
legal language of the legislation. Surely it should be possible for 
the government, with all of the resources available to the 
government and in consultation with the minority language 
rights groups in the province of Saskatchewan, to come up with 
some mechanism for providing a timetable for the action which 
the government says it is the government’s intention to take. 
 
The intentions may be expressed with the very best of goodwill, 
Mr. Speaker, and the time frame that the premier and the 
Minister of Justice might have in mind may be a very specific 
and clear-cut time frame in their minds. The problem is, Mr. 
Speaker, that none of that appears in any way, shape, or form in 
the legislation that we have before us. And surely it must be 
possible for the government to be somewhat more specific than 
just this open-ended, perhaps never ending kind of process that 
has been included in the Bill itself. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I say again to the Minister of Justice and to the 
premier that I would hope that serious, responsible, and 
constructive suggestions, like the ones that I have just made, 
will still be possible for them to take into account and to include 
in the legislation before a final vote on this  
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

812 
 
 

matter is taken. 
 
And to repeat for the purposes of emphasis, Mr. Speaker, again 
some form of preamble or statement of purpose ought to be 
included in the legislation, consistent with the rhetorical 
comments which the Minister of Justice and the Premier 
himself has made; and secondly, some mechanism for defining 
what the long-term timetable is going to be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think there is still time in this debate for the 
government to think about these suggestions and to take them 
seriously. I think there is still time for the government to 
reconsider what view to be a narrow and legalistic approach on 
the part of the government, an opportunity for the government 
to be more generous and more realistic in dealing with this 
situation. 
 
I hope, Mr. Speaker, there is still time for the government to do 
better than it has done in the legislation tabled; to do better, Mr. 
Speaker, in the interest of statesmanship, setting aside partisan 
politics on this very sensitive and very important issue, and 
rising above what we might otherwise consider in this place to 
be a “politics as usual” type of event. 
 
I think the issue we are discussing today requires that 
statesmanship. It requires that we do better than just politics as 
usual, and I hope that in the discussion we will have today and 
on other occasions about this legislation, we can do as our 
ancestors and forefathers have done; that is, rise above our 
differences, reach over our diversity, join hands in common 
cause for the continuing building of a greater and better 
Saskatchewan and a greater and better Canada. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
an honour to rise in this House in support of this Bill No. 2 as 
presented by the Minister of Justice. It is an honour for me for 
two reasons, to speak on this Bill. First, because I am a 
Ukrainian and very proud of it, and secondly, because my 
constituency is basically made up of Slavic people. And I know 
I stand before you today expressing the views of the majority of 
the people of that constituency. 
 
It is an honour, Mr. Speaker, because this Bill is a reflection of 
the courage, the considered judgement, and the genuine concern 
that this government has, not only for the people of our 
province, but for the very idea that is Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, much has been said about the minority rights in 
the media and much has been said by the member of the 
opposition. I think, Mr. Speaker, that much of what has been 
said has been inaccurate, inarticulate, or simply unfair. 
 
I will not be overly partisan on this issue because it is an issue 
that truly should transcend parties. But let me just point out that 
while the member for Saskatoon Riversdale and the member for 
Regina Centre have been saying that this government has been 
breaking the law for the past six years by not having a fully 
bilingual legislature, their party  

broke the law for over 40 years without ever taking the 
necessary steps to remedy the situation. 
 
Let me point out further, Mr. Speaker, that the member for 
Riversdale was the deputy premier in charge of the 
intergovernmental affairs and constitutional matters. If he is so 
sincere today that the language rights of our French minority 
should be fully protected, why did it take a decision of the 
Supreme Court to force him to publicly state so? Why did he 
not enact the necessary legislation and pass necessary policies 
when he had the unquestioned right to do so? It is because, Mr. 
Speaker, I suggest that he is not sincere. He is in favour of 
whatever strikes the moment. And I do not think that that is the 
kind of attitude we want to see in a future premier. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk:  Mr. Speaker, I will preface those remarks I 
just made by saying possibly the future premier, and I might 
add, maybe never. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, the first observation that I think should in 
fairness be made is that this government has supported the 
rights of minorities across Canada in a very vigorous and active 
way. It should not be forgotten that this government has been 
funding French immersion education for years, and the growth 
in the number of our citizens who can speak both official 
languages fluently is a testament to the fairness of the 
government policy. 
 
It is also important to ask the question, Mr. Speaker, about 
which is truly more important to our French-speaking minority: 
is it more important that every law that was ever passed be 
translated into French as a statute of the Northwest Territories 
stated, or is it more important that the environment that our 
French minority operates in, that that environment include as 
many people as possible who can share their language? 
 
Mr. Speaker, let it be remembered that it was no court ruling 
that required, or to this day requires that the government 
provide French education or any French services. That is done 
as a matter of policy because it is right. Because this 
government respects the spirit of the law, it respects the Meech 
lake accord, and indeed it respects the law that was passed by 
the Territorial Council so many decades ago . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . .  
I would remind the member from Quill Lakes that he’ll get his 
opportunity to speak just as soon as I’m done, and I will listen 
to you with the same interest that you are showing towards my 
remarks. 
 
I think it is most important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is done 
because this government respects minorities, it respects all 
minorities, Mr. Speaker. As a representative of one of those 
minorities, the Ukrainian minority, let me say how appreciative 
and supportive I am of the position of the government, and as I 
stated earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of my 
constituency. 
 
(1515) 
 
As a Ukrainian Canadian I recognize, accept, and endorse the 
fact that Canada is a bilingual nation. And I  
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

813 
 
 

am also grateful that the constitution of our country recognizes 
that we are also a multicultural nation. Due respect is to be paid 
the Ukrainians, the Germans the Italians, indeed all of our 
ethnic minorities. Special measures have to be taken to ensure 
the respect and dignity of our native peoples, and they too have 
a special place in the constitution of this nation. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let it not be said that concern for any 
one, and indeed all of these minorities, represents any insult to, 
or dilution of the rights of, any other minority. We must 
recognize that the protection of each is the protection of all. 
 
In discussion this particular Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it 
is important to look at the broadest picture and to understand 
the implications of voting against it. To vote against this Bill, 
one must subscribe to one of two opinions. Either one will vote 
against it because one believes it does not go far enough, and 
that all of the laws should be immediately translated; or one will 
vote against it because one believes it goes too far and none of 
the laws should be translated. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me deal with these two positions 
and dispose of them. In the first instance, every person in this 
Assembly must recognize that while this nation is bilingual, in 
practice very few of our people speak French. The number is 
growing, the progress is there, and that is a very good thing. My 
own family, Mr. Speaker, I have four young ladies that all have 
taken French right through high school, and I have a daughter 
that is completely bilingual in French. 
 
I think the fact is that translating all of those laws will not 
increase the number of people who speak French, and it will do 
almost nothing to preserve the ability of those who now speak 
French to continue to do so. Those are the facts, Mr. Speaker. If 
anyone can explain to me how having every law translated into 
French, how that will actually preserve the French language in 
the towns and cities of our province, then I will reconsider. But 
it just isn’t there. 
 
So we have to consider how do we accomplish this important 
objective of maintaining the language and culture of our French 
minority. If we try to move too quickly, we will lose control 
over the situation, we will frighten people needlessly, and create 
social disruption instead of harmony. We will, Mr. Speaker, 
ultimately lose the objective we hope to gain, if we try to gain it 
too quickly. But let it be done as it has been done with the 
French language education; let it be done without compulsion, 
without loud vitriol; let it be done in a measured, managed way, 
and we will achieve greater successes. 
 
I think one only needs to look at the kind of rancorous acrimony 
that occurred in Manitoba to know how not to go about 
protecting minorities. And, Mr. Speaker, the laws will be 
translated as time goes on. They will be translated according to 
the importance to the people in their lives. And is that not a 
reasonable and fair approach? 
 
Ultimately, I think it would be a real plus to have the laws 
translated into many languages. And perhaps some day  

we ought to look at a private institute, or something, to do that 
job on behalf of our non-official language minorities. But right 
now, it is important for us to respond to the French-speaking 
people of our province and indeed to the people of Canada. 
 
Now the second argument, Mr. Speaker, one that is not 
represented by any member of this Assembly, but which has 
been heard in some extreme quarters, is that the law goes too 
far. And because it is not a credible position, I will devote little 
comment to it. But let me say this: even under this moderate 
legislation, if it is possible to have extremists arguing against it, 
then how much more activity would we have with legislation 
that incurred the large costs and the impossible time lines that 
some have advocated. 
 
I think we need to consider the nature of our province, the 
nature of our country, and the nature of our political system. We 
must respect the Meech Lake accord, and that accord sets out 
clearly the responsibilities of this legislature to act on behalf of 
its people in this matter. It provides that we should seek to 
protect our minorities, and I think this Bill does that, Mr. 
Speaker. It does it better than a more extreme approach could 
do. 
 
Meech Lake is also the symbol for co-operation and 
conciliation, Mr. Speaker, and in part, that means cultivating the 
co-operation of all of our people. It does not mean imposing a 
set of policies that you know will cause strong and unnecessary 
reaction. It does not mean pretending to attain a perfection that 
is not possible. It means to move forward with awareness and 
consideration of all segments of our society. It means a 
measured approach to linguistic development. And it means, 
Mr. Speaker, that we must have the ability to manage that 
development through the political process. 
 
It is clear to me, as I believe it should be clear to every member 
of this Assembly, that this Bill is consistent with those 
principles, and that it deserves the unanimous support of this 
legislature. Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the main motion 
and voting against the amendment. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Yes, Mr. Speaker. Let me respond to the 
observations by my hon. friend from Regina Centre and the 
observations by the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, first 
of all dealing with the comments made by the member from 
Regina Centre. 
 
What he has asked this assembly to do, Mr. Speaker, is to delay 
the passage of this Bill for six months which is commonly 
referred to as the six-month hoist . . .  
 
An Hon. Member:  Effectively killing the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  That effectively kills the Bill. And that’s 
the nature and the tradition of that type of an amendment, and 
that’s what that amendment is advanced to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

814 
 
 

Let me pose the following questions to all members of this 
Assembly. If we are to support, or this Assembly was to support 
that amendment, the net result is that we would not proceed 
with this Bill, and this Bill would ineffectively be killed. What 
are we then left with, Mr. Speaker? Should that type of 
amendment pass? 
 
We are left in the untenable position, as I indicated in my 
opening remarks and second reading of Bill 2, with the 
following situation: one, any legislation introduced into this 
Assembly would require and need to be in both official 
languages. We have indicated on many occasions we do not 
have the capacity to do that. 
 
Let me give you an example. We will be soon introducing a Bill 
relating to the securities Commission, that is some 200 pages 
long. In order for us to introduce that Bill, we would have to 
have it translated. And the net result would be that that 
amendment would backlog all of the legislation and the 
legislative agenda to be pursued in this spring session, other 
than the ones that we can have translated, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But it would go farther than that because the Assembly would 
be speaking to it. It would go further than that in this sense, Mr. 
Speaker. If one is to read the Supreme Court decision in the 
Mercure case, one would find  and certainly the legal opinion 
that we have had both inside and outside our department  
would be that all laws are now in existence would be invalid 
because it has to, at the earliest possible opportunity, to speak to 
it. 
 
And so the hoist, as proposed by the member from Regina 
Centre, would have the effect of invalidating all legislation we 
have today, and invalidating all the rights or privileges or 
services arising out of those statutes, and that legislation that 
has been passed by this Assembly over the last 80-some years. 
And that’s what it would mean, Mr. Speaker. So it would totally 
handcuff the legislature. 
 
Now I know it’s not always safe to read what you hear in the 
media or believe what you see in the media, but I was sure that I 
had read the media last Thursday wherein the member from 
Regina Centre said, we have no intention of holding this Bill 
up; we have not intention of somehow causing havoc to the way 
that this House functions. That’s what he said. And I understand 
the Leader of the Opposition is quoted as saying exactly the 
same thing this morning in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps that is not what they meant to say, or 
perhaps the media quoted them wrong. and on this issue the 
media has, I would suggest, done a less than adequate job of 
reporting what this issue is about. But the member opposite, if 
he believes what he said on Thursday, if he was properly quoted 
on Thursday, then I ask him: how does he square that with a 
motion that says, handcuff this Assembly for the next six 
months till we have an opportunity to deal with it further. That 
point number one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Point number two, the motion goes on to talk about failure to 
consult with the people of Saskatchewan, and I assume what the 
hon. member was referring to there is failure to consult with the 
francophone community. And I  

can advise the hon. member that I have met on several 
occasions with the members of that francophone community. 
 
They have stated their position very strongly, perhaps reflected 
by the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg who tend to in 
some degree reflect their view. And that’s fair enough; he 
represents the largest part of them in this province. But the 
member opposite would somehow suggest that you cannot pass 
legislation (a) without consultation, or (b) that there has been no 
consultation. And that consultation has been there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me make two observations with regard to that consultation 
that I find somewhat inconsistent with what has been said in the 
House today. First, in all the consultation with the francophone 
community, in all consultation with them, Mr. Speaker, they 
wish to speak only to the rights of the French minority. And 
each time, whether it was myself or the Premier were to raise a 
question  well what about further education of the 
anglophone; what about further promoting of bilingualism in 
Saskatchewan  their observation always was, that is not at 
issue here, that is not at issue here. 
 
And when in that consultation we posed the question to them: is 
it not, or would it not in fact be true that if more 
non-French-speaking people in our province became bilingual, 
would that not help your lot or your rights, or would you not 
feel more comfortable being able to communicate to them in 
your language? Their answer was, we are not interested in 
anglophone rights, we are interested in the rights of 
francophones, and we are concerned that our society is going to 
be assimilated. Protect us from assimilation, they said, protect 
us from assimilation. That is our interest, that is what is 
fundamental. And if you want to have more English-speaking 
people learn French, well, good for you. 
 
That, I found difficult. I will also say, Mr. Speaker, in those 
conversations I spoke about the multicultural and multilingual 
nature of a province like Saskatchewan. As I said in my 
opening remarks, there are other first languages than French and 
they are in a greater majority than is the French language. 
 
So I talked to the francophone community with regards to other 
languages. And the response to move further, as would be 
suggested by the member from Regina Centre, dealing with 
other languages would be a further insult to the 
French-speaking people of this province. 
 
Their argument to us would be as follows. If you were to put 
German and Ukrainian or Cree into the same bag or rules with 
French, that would be tantamount to saying French is not an 
official language of Canada. That would be tantamount to 
saying, you are taking further rights away from us. That’s not 
me speaking, Mr. Speaker, that is the francophone community 
of this province. 
 
(1530) 
 
So do not confuse, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite with the 
easy argument of saying, well we will cover all languages; we 
should speak to all languages; we should  
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

815 
 
 

speak to all minorities and all people that have come to our 
province. 
 
This country does have two official languages. That is what this 
debate is about, Mr. Speaker. This is not a debate about the 
Ukrainian language. Whether one would like to do that or deal 
with that or not, I think I accept what the francophones say, that 
to mix that in with French, you are taking away and turning 
back the meaning of two officials languages in this country. 
 
The member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg presents his 
argument, Mr. Speaker, in what I will refer to, for the sake of 
trying to denote it, as a federalist response. 
 
And I just wish to reassert the point I made last week when I 
introduced this Bill, and that is, in 1905 when The 
Saskatchewan Act was being debated in the parliament of 
Canada, and a motion was put forward by a member of the 
parliament of Canada to add to The Saskatchewan Act what we 
could call the Manitoba clause, that says both languages shall 
be the official language of the province of Manitoba, they 
wanted that clause into The Saskatchewan Act. And the 
Parliament of Canada said no. 
 
And that debate, Mr. Speaker, and that argument was led by Sir 
Wilfrid Laurier. And what Sir Wilfrid Laurier said was the 
following: he did not believe there was enough French-speaking 
people in Saskatchewan to warrant then to have the right to use 
French. That is not us speaking, Mr. Speaker, that is Wilfrid 
Laurier’s words of 1905. 
 
Now when all the great champions, or so-called champions, of 
rights, why did they not refer to that? One could hardly say 
Wilfrid Laurier, the first francophone-speaking prime minister 
of this country, did not have an interest in the rights of 
French-speaking minorities across this country, but he said no. 
He said that should be left to this legislature to determine, that it 
must be left to this legislature to determine. 
 
So I say to the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg when he 
talks about the meaning of this country, that he should not look 
at this from the eyes of a federalist, he must also look at this 
from the eyes of who we are and what the constitution assigns 
to us to determine. 
 
And he should also look at the last 83 years of history in this 
province where many people of francophone ancestry 
represented seats in this Assembly and held positions of 
authority in this legislature during times when the language 
issue was far more heated than it is today. Not once was that 
matter raised. Not once was the idea debated in this Assembly. 
And that, Mr. Speaker, tells me something about the custom and 
the tradition and the history of this Assembly. 
 
I say to the members opposite, and speaking specifically now to 
the amendment of the member from Regina Centre, Mr. 
Speaker, I would encourage all members of this House not to 
support this amendment. To do so we might as well . . . and if it 
was to pass, Mr. Speaker, we might as well pack up and go 
home for six months because there wouldn’t be a great deal that 
we could do  

in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it should be seen for what it is, and what it 
is nothing more than a delay tactic, a tactic to stall this, a tactic 
not to have to deal with it. Mr. Speaker, I say we must deal with 
this, and we must deal with this in a proper way. 
 
I wish to make one further point before taking my seat, Mr. 
Speaker, and that is the question on Meech Lake. As I indicated 
last week, but for Meech Lake, Mr. Speaker, we would not have 
Bill 2. If it was only for the decision of the Supreme Court, 
which I believe used a loophole to get to its decision . . . clearly 
gave back to the province though, in no uncertain terms, that it 
was for each local jurisdiction to determine whether or not that 
was a relevant policy for that particular province. 
 
This Bill, and our commitment to a greater use of French in the 
courts, Mr. Speaker, is because of Meech Lake. The fact that we 
are going to introduce . . . translate into statute both languages, 
Mr. Speaker, is because of our commitment to Meech Lake  
the fact that we will soon be introducing a motion into this 
Assembly, allowing for the translation of French speeches in 
this House, or speeches in the French language to be translated, 
and for the rules that judge us or guard us or determine us in 
this Assembly to be translated, along with the rules of court and 
many others. 
 
And when this Bill is passed, we will undertake to provide in 
regulation the number of statutes that we propose to do in the 
near term, in our first round, if you like, at this particular issue. 
I ask all members to think before they vote on this question, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I also throw this challenge to the members of this Assembly. I 
think all members should stand in their place and vote on this, 
and I’m encouraged to see the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. I would hope we would also see the 
member from Riversdale stand in his place  the Leader of the 
Opposition  and state where he stands, Mr. Speaker, state 
where he stands by standing in his place and voting, which is 
the ultimate thing you do in this Assembly. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that all support this Bill and 
vote against the amendment, the member from Regina Centre. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
(1547) 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  15 
Prebble Shillington 
Tchorzewski Koskie 
Simard Koenker 
Atkinson Hagel 
Lyons Calvert 
Lautermilch Trew 
Smart Goodale 

 
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

816 
 
 

  Goulet 
Nays  28 

Devine Duncan 
McLeod Andrew 
Berntson Taylor 
Smith Swan 
Maxwell Schmidt 
Hodgins Gerich 
Hepworth Hardy 
Klein Pickering 
Martin Toth 
Johnson McLaren 
Hopfner Swenson 
Martens Baker 
Gleim Gardner 
Kopelchuk Britton 

 
(1551) 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 
Yeas  28 

 
Devine Duncan 
McLeod Andrew 
Berntson Taylor 
Smith Swan 
Maxwell Schmidt 
Hodgins Gerich 
Hepworth Hardy 
Klein Pickering 
Martin Toth 
Johnson McLaren 
Hopfner Swenson 
Martens Baker 
Gleim Gardner 
Kopelchuk Britton 

 
Nays  15 

Prebble Shillington 
Tchorzewski Koskie 
Simard Koenker 
Atkinson Goulet 
Hagel Lyons 
Calvert Lautermilch 
Trew Smart 
Goodale  

 
The Bill read a second time and, by leave of the Assembly, 
referred to a Committee of the Whole later this day. 

 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 
Bill No. 2  An Act respecting the Use of the English and 

French Languages in Saskatchewan 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker  
Minister  only a little premature, I say to the member from 
Moosomin. Just a couple of years.  

I want to ask the minister for your timetable and your schedule 
for translating laws into French. What do you plan to translate 
into French, and over what period of time do you plan to do it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Well, Mr. Speaker, as the Bill indicates 
that there is not a schedule per se in the sense of what is going 
to be done over an extended period of time, let me say to the 
hon. member the following: what I’ve indicated in the past is 
that the first area of translation will involve translating laws as 
it relates to the court system; and shortly, when the minister or 
some of the assistants arrive, some of the people from the 
department, I can give you an idea of the type of legislation 
we’re looking at. 
 
Suffice it to say that if you were to read the decision, primarily 
it related to also due process, and therefore it would be our 
intention to translate in the areas it relates to the courts, the 
various laws that apply to the court, and they’re about 40 or 50 
in number. And those are the ones that we are set about to do in 
the first brush. 
 
And when I say first brush, the intention would be as follows: 
that as you introduce Bills or amendments into the House in this 
session that relate to the legal process, those would be 
introduced in both languages. Translators will then identify the 
Bills. We will then set about translating those and then bring 
them in a block and pass them in this House, as has been done 
in some of the other assemblies. 
 
I can’t give you the specifics of that, because what I’ve 
undertaken to do to the francophone community is to give them 
a copy of the proposed Bills that we would do, get their 
comment back before we pass them into regulation. 
 
Mr. Shillington:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for that silent 
recognition, yes. Mr. Minister, do you intend to translate the 
rules of court also in a bilingual form? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  It is our intention  I have 
communicated this to the francophone community  is that the 
rules of court is the one that will be translated first. We’ve 
undertaken to do that, and we are in the process of trying to 
begin that process right now. 
 
Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Minister, you were, I may say, 
relatively forthcoming in your response to my question as to 
what you intend to translate. You intend to translate statues 
relating to the court and the way the court functions. You didn’t 
however, answer my question as to over what period of time 
you expected to translate them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  I think what we would seek to do is to 
do the justice ones first, then to proceed from there with the 
education statutes, and then we will see from there how it 
unfolds and how it goes. And whether it will take us five years 
or 10 years or whatever, that is certainly something that we 
have not made a decision yet. 
 
We’re going to see (a) how much is involved in the process, 
number one  how much it cost, how much time is involved, 
etc.  and then we’ll be able to give you a better idea a year 
from now when we go through that process. That’s number one. 
 
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

817 
 
 

Number two, I think where the hon. member has to understand 
is that how far do you go with the regulations on this particular 
statues. And let me give you an example. If one is to translate 
The Highway Traffic Act or The Vehicles Act, which we have 
identified as ones that would be done, then do you also have to, 
if you’re doing both the Act and regulations  and as we all 
know, contained in those regulations are the form of a traffic 
ticket, of a summons that you would . . . if you’re stopped for 
speeding  and so if you’re translating that, do you also 
translate the speeding summons, and therefore do you have to 
have that in both languages? 
 
(1600) 
 
And those are questions yet that are still being grappled with 
and wrestled with. So it’s one thing to say legislation must be in 
French, but also everything arising out of legislation, does that 
also have to be in French, or do you have the right to do some 
of it only in French or some in both languages and some only in 
English? 
 
And so that’s the thing that I suppose we yet have to deal with. 
And my guess is this may be . . . ultimately going to be the 
court that will tell us whether we have to or do not have to do 
that. And so I hope the hon. member could understand if that 
applied to the courts, does it also apply to, let’s say, the health 
care field, where you would have to have all your documents 
and forms again in both languages? And that would create a 
great deal of costs as well, and I think a great deal of perhaps 
increased administration. 
 
So I think those are the things that we have to overcome in the 
first year as we proceed to deal with that to get a better idea of 
how long this will take. 
 
Mr. Shillington:  What I understand the minister to be 
saying is that not very much is going to be done until after the 
next election. I think that’s a fair summary of what you’re 
saying, and certainly nothing the public will ever see. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could expand a bit on the institute 
coming in at, I think, $10 million, some tens of millions of 
dollars, and the expansion to French language education coming 
in at some hundreds of millions of dollars that the Premier 
referred to. I wonder if you could just expand a bit on those 
programs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  I will try to give you an overall view, 
and until the officials get here, I can’t give you the total details 
of what we’re talking about, but I will when we get them. With 
regard to education, what we were referring to is the following. 
In Saskatchewan today, roughly 40 per cent of the students, 40 
per cent of the students in the K to 12 system study core French 
 40 per cent  and that’s up significantly from where it was 
two and three and four years ago. 
 
Now if we were to make an effort that says that we will allow 
or provide additional funding to school boards to provide core 
French; if you were to take that to the full 100 per cent of 
children in K to 12 taking at least one class in French, or the 
core French, what is involved there is the  

number of teachers that would have to (a) be trained to be able 
to teach it, or (b) recruited. Over a 10–year period one is talking 
about $425 million . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, you 
talked to me about the question of French language. 
 
In the area of French immersion, if you are to increase the 
number of schools that are taking or are French immersion 
schools, obviously you have to retrain more teachers for that. 
Number one, if you are to give more rights to the francophones 
to run their own schools and their own school boards, that’s 
obviously going to cost more money as well. 
 
With regard to the institute, what we indicated to the federal 
government  to get to your question on the institute  was 
the following. Twenty and 25 years ago in the province of 
Quebec, when bilingualism became the rule, there was many, 
many people in Quebec that could only speak French. They 
complained loud and long about having been denied the right to 
have access to jobs in the federal public service, access to jobs 
in the RCMP, access to jobs in the Canadian military, and 
various other opportunities, whether in the world of business or 
the world of government. 
 
And the response of the government of Canada, at that time, 
primarily the government of Canada, was to put a French 
immersion school in Quebec that allowed adult Quebecers to go 
to that school, at no cost, to learn to speak English and become 
bilingual. And in so being able to speak English, they then 
qualified for various jobs. 
 
What happened in the Canadian civil service, as well, is they 
started then to impose quotas or rules with regard to 
bilingualism, or bilingual skills, in order for promotions, etc. 
We’ve all heard those stories. 
 
What we indicated to the federal government was the following, 
is that we think if that was good enough for the people of 
Quebec 20 years ago, perhaps a similar institution in the West 
would also be valid today. So that if you have a young chap 
wanting to go to the RCMP, graduation from Wynyard High 
School, perhaps in not fluently bilingual, from what we can 
gather, if he then applies for entrance into the RCMP and he 
stands with equal qualifications to somebody that is bilingual, 
the bilingual person is going to get the job ahead of the young 
chap from Wynyard. 
 
Now should that be the case, there or in the military or in the 
public service, it seems to us that we are not being fairly dealt 
with. And that was the basis of our decision to the federal 
government is that you might consider putting that type of an 
institution in Saskatchewan; or to put it more succinctly, that 
you pay for it, but because it’s a dimension of education, we in 
Saskatchewan would run it because we have the constitutional 
jurisdiction to run it. 
 
And that, quite frankly, is the cost of that could run in the 
neighbourhood of 70 to $75 million over the 10-year period that 
we would be talking about. And that’s roughly the cost we’re 
talking about; that’s roughly the concept we’re talking about, in 
our view, is it should be financed primarily by the federal 
government, not by the provincial government. 
 
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

818 
 
 

Mr. Shillington:  What assistance was offered by the federal 
government in translating statues? There were reports, both 
from Ottawa . . . emanating both from Ottawa and from the 
French community that there was offers of assistance. What 
were those offers, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  They were two in number, to the hon. 
member. One, they have sent to Saskatchewan some people 
skilled in translation of statutes. They are here now working on 
statutes, both ones to be presented and the ones that are in 
existence today, translating them so we can be in position, 
hopefully, or later this session, to bring in the ones that are done 
and pass them through this Assembly. They are doing that. 
 
Number two, we are also still in the process of negotiating with 
the federal government a framework agreement by which the 
federal government would assist in that particular job, 
financially. those framework agreements have not been 
completed. There is a number of them; they have not yet been 
completed, but suffice it to say that the federal government have 
been prepared to pony up a significant part of the money as it 
relates to translation. 
 
Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Minister, I gather you have fine tuned, 
to some degree at least, the list of statues that you’re going to 
translate. Would you undertake to give me at least a preliminary 
list of those statutes so far as you have now ascertained them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  The ones that we have identified to look 
at  and you have to understand that I undertook to the 
francophone community that we would submit the list to them 
for their recommendations as to whether it’s valid or not valid 
ones to do. But the type of thing we’re talking about is the 
Provincial Court Act, The Court of Queen’s Bench Act, The 
Court of Appeal Act, The Surrogate Court Act, The Small 
claims Enforcement Act, The Justices of the Peace Act, The 
Jury Act, that type of thing. And as you know in having been 
here as long as you have that there is a large number of those 
that are specifically related to the courts and the legal process in 
the province, and that’s the ones that we would identify and be 
prepared to deal with this year. 
 
Mr. Shillington:  You made that clear earlier, Mr. Minister. I 
was wondering if you could give me the list. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  I will not give you the list for the 
following reason: the list as . . . I undertook to the francophone 
community before we passed into regulations that we would 
send the list to them. We’re in the process right now of 
compiling that list along with the translators to determine how 
long approximately it would take, that we would hope to have 
that very soon after this Bill is passed, made public  but prior 
to it being made public, that we would send it to their 
community, to their group, Rupert Baudais, for their comments 
on it before we officially pass it by regulation. 
 
Now when that is ready, and I would suggest it to be ready 
within the next 10 days, I undertook to send that to Mr. 
Baudais; I would undertake to send it to you as well at that 
point in time, but not before. 
 

Mr. Shillington:  Okay. I’ll accept that undertaking. 
 
Clause 1 agree to. 
 
Clause 2 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . or Mr. 
Chairman, there are several amendments to be advanced to the 
Bill  all of them in the French version, all of them spelling 
mistakes identified by people that we have in our employ in 
Saskatchewan, all of them translated initially by people that we 
contracted from the federal government, all of them spelling 
mistakes, I am advised. But someone more capable in the 
French language will have to tell you what they are. So I would 
undertake that the . . . perhaps the chairman could read the 
various amendments out, and we’ll take it from there. 
 
Mr. Shillington:  Yes, with respect to all of these 
amendments, I will be listening attentively for the chairman 
when he reads them. I may say that I note that they were all 
grammatical . . . all typos in a sense, and I have no intention of 
making any comment on any of these amendments on this list, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman:  

 

Amend section 2 of the French version of the printed Bill 
by striking out “de tribunaux visées au paragraphe 11(a) 
ou” in the definition of “règlements” and substituting . . .  

 

Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Chairman, I have heard all I wanted. 
Let’s just . . . (inaudible) . . . Out of respect for the beauty of the 
French language . . . (inaudible) . . .  

 
Mr. Chairman:  I’m sorry. I thought I was doing 
fairly well . . . (inaudible) . . .  
 
Clause 2 as amended agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman:  You’ll have to excuse me, I’ve got to initial 
two different copies. I also have to inform this House that the 
amendments are available in the French version. 
 
Clauses 3 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 
 
Mr. Goodale:  I have one question I would like to put to the 
minister which relates to a number of the sections of the Bill, 
section 6 being one of them, but the question could be asked 
with respect to a number of other sections in the Bill. 
 
Where the legislation proposes that the lieutenant Governor in 
Council may by regulation designate certain things to be done 
in both languages, I wonder if the minister could indicate what 
criteria the government of Saskatchewan will use to decide 
when to issue such a designation. I wonder what factors are in 
the minister’s mind in terms of whether a particular Act or 
regulation or other instrument ought to be designated as 
requiring enactment or publication in both languages, and in 
what circumstances would such a designation be issued. 
 
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

819 
 
 

(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  I indicated to the hon. member form 
Regina Centre that the way we would approach this would be, 
initially, to deal with legislation that relates to the court, or 
would have a direct bearing on the court. That means the rules 
of court, as you see in the Bill, is going to be translated 
probably long in advance of 1993. 
 
We will do the various court Acts  The Court of appeal Act, 
Court of Queen’s Bench Act, The Provincial court Act, those 
types of things  probably The Saskatchewan Evidence Act, 
various things that would have a bearing on court. Because if 
you look and think about the practical application of this Bill, is 
it the place where you’re going to see the French community 
having the rights initially to use their language which will be in 
our courts of law. They already have the right now as it relates 
to criminal trials. they will have the rights as it relates to 
quasi-criminal trials. And then we will deal with some civil 
trials as well. 
 
What we will do then is in the . . . Primarily we’re dealing here 
with the quasi-criminal trials. Well, then we would have those 
 at least the statue in French so that they could not argue that 
this was undue hardship on them. 
 
When we’ve completed that, we would then move into the area 
of education, because education we would see is probably the 
next priority. As well there’s ongoing negotiations today with 
the francophone community with regards to their desire to have 
francophone school boards in Saskatchewan, and you know the 
problems associated with that particular issue. So we would see 
dealing with education next. 
 
Then we have to determine whether or not, or what in fact 
would mean  as I indicated in The Vehicles Act  do you 
have to then, in regulation, make them bilingual? Does an 
individual then have the right to have a speeding ticket issued to 
him in both languages? 
 
Now if we’re to look at other jurisdictions. In the province of 
New Brunswick, the way it works would be the following way: 
if an individual is stopped, he is given a ticket in both 
languages. If the officer is unable to communicate with him in 
French, then they have a bilingual person at the depot that can 
in fact speak to him in French. 
 
Now what I’m saying is that if we were to adopt that type of 
system or the courts superimpose that type of system upon us, 
then it’s going to take a lot longer to implement this than it 
would otherwise. If it’s just statutes in the house passed in this 
Assembly, quite frankly, I don’t see it taking a long time. 
 
Mr. Goodale:  Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the minister would 
be in a position sometime fairly soon to issue a statement that 
would list the criteria or the various factor upon which the 
government will be making its decision in these matters. I think 
it would be helpful for all concerned to know what factors the 
government considers to be relevant in any language decisions 
it is making now or into the future. And I would just ask the  

minister, would it be possible for him to make those factors 
public, if not today, then at some reasonable time in the near 
future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Well as I indicated before to the hon. 
member, that in our view would be that we would deal with 
stuff related to the court, and then move from there to 
education. I also indicated to the hon. members of this House 
that we would . . . once we prepared the list that would be then 
included in regulation, we would consult with the francophone 
community to get their observations. 
 
Now I think from a criteria point of view, the thing that I would 
see as a criteria would be: what would have the most relevance 
today? Now if you want to translate the Securities Commission 
. . . or the new Securities Act, that (a) the only people that are 
likely to read it is some security dealers and very few other 
people. Do we want to go through the expense of doing that? 
I’ve referred that to the francophone community, and quite 
frankly, their answer was: well we’re not terribly interested in 
that. 
 
So I think from a . . . really from a practical point of view is: 
what type of, you know, the extension of it, are you going to in 
fact use? The courts would be obviously one; the schools are 
obviously two. And after that, I suppose, it’s going to be a 
matter of further discussion as to what we would do. 
 
Mr. Goodale:  Mr. Chairman, in terms of this further 
discussion that the minister talks about, I think it might be 
useful for him and for the legislature to pursue a comment from 
Mr. Baudais which is widely quoted in the media today. I won’t 
read all of the text of what Mr. Baudais is quoted as saying, but 
one small portion of it reads as follows: 

 

We don’t want to make the province officially bilingual. 
We don’t want to force people to speak French. We want 
something more practical. 

 
I think in the elaboration of the answer to the question I’ve been 
putting to the minister, it might be instructive for all of us to 
know exactly the meaning of that quotation that is attributed 
today to Mr. Baudais, and I presume the minister would want to 
follow up a comment of that kind which might be instructive to 
all of us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Well, let me make two observations 
with regard to Mr. Baudais. I find it somewhat strange that he 
would not endorse the idea of us creating an environment where 
more and more anglophones could become bilingual. he’s not 
terribly interested in that, quite frankly, and if you had met with 
him, as I have met with him, that’s one of the first things they 
are going to tell you, because they are not interested terribly in 
that. They’re interested in preserving their culture and their 
language in Saskatchewan. So that whether more and more 
anglophones want to learn French, that’s not terribly relevant. 
 
What they want is all statutes in French. They want to be able to 
speak French in this House, translation of it. They want all 
trials, including civil trials, to be bilingual trials. 
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

820 
 
 

I simply say to Mr. Baudais, and to yourself, it seems to me it’s 
one thing to say that if an accused is charged with a crime the 
people that are prosecuting it is the government, or the Crown, 
and that person clearly requires due process to be able to speak 
in his own language to have a fair trial. I have no objection to 
that. 
 
That can apply equally to a quasi-criminal trial, I suppose, 
given that it’s not abused. When you come to civil trials, it 
strikes me it’s a little different because now it’s an individual 
versus an individual, and the additional cost associated with 
that, it strikes me there should be different rules. And I think the 
supreme Court in the Mercure case said exactly that. But it’s a 
different type of situation there, and really it needs translation. 
Or in other words, they said, no different than what you would 
provide to somebody, let’s say, that could only speak Ukrainian 
or Polish or whatever, would also be entitled to that in our 
courts of law. 
 
So that tends to be what he has said, other than the fact that 
we’ve undertaken to provide those pieces of legislation that we 
intend to do. He’s going to have an opportunity to review that. 
His only hang-up, so he says, is that he wants it guaranteed that 
they will all be translated  all of them  and he wants them 
all translated in five years. 
 
And the other question as well, he says publicly he does not 
want services in French. You know and I know, as lawyers, that 
that’s the natural extension as to what the court is going to say, 
and so I think he’s being less than straight up on that particular 
issue. 
 
Clause 6 agreed to. 
 
Clause 7 agreed to. 
 
Clause 8 
 
Mr. Chairman:  We have an amendment to item 8. Will the 
members take it as read? Item 8 as amended agreed? 
 
Clause 8 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 9 and 10 agreed to. 
 
Clause 11 
 
Mr. Chairman:  We have an amendment to item no. 11. 
Will the members take it as read? 
 
Clause 11 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 12 agreed to. 
 
Clause 13 
 
Mr. Chairman:  There’s an amendment to item no. 13. Will 
the members take it as read? 
 
Clause 13 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 14 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Mr. Chairman, I make one . . . I  

make only one comment, and I think it’s this: is that when we 
pass Bills in two languages, they have equal force in effect of 
law, and therefore if they have a different meaning, they create 
different laws, depending on which language you seek to use. 
 
And while that is a situation that exists in other provinces where 
there is bilingual Assemblies and bilingual laws passed, I think 
we also must be mindful in this Assembly that we are relying 
totally upon the interpretation in advance by a particular 
draftsman as to whether they are in fact the same. And I think 
that that, I guess, is part of growing up with this particular 
question. 
 
But it can provide some uneasiness perhaps in very sensitive 
areas of drafting, when very few people of this Assembly 
comprehend or understand that second official language. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 
(1630) 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 2  An Act respecting the Use of the English and 
French Languages in Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
amendments be now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Mr. Speaker, with leave of the 
Assembly, I move that the Bill be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Economic Development and Tourism 

Ordinary Expenditure  Vote 45 
 
Mr. Chairman:  I’d like to ask the minister to introduce her 
officials, please. 
 
Hon Mrs. Duncan:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have with 
me this afternoon, Dr. David Rothwell, deputy minister. Dr. 
Rothwell is fairly new to our province and to this department, 
and this is his first experience with Committee of Finance, so 
I’m sure he’ll find it interesting. I also have with me the 
assistant deputy minister, Ken McNabb. Seated behind me are 
Bob Folk, assistant deputy minister and Harvey Murchison, 
director of administration. Thank you. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, too, would 
like to welcome the minister’s officials to the estimates and the 
proceedings, and I hope that we will be able to go through the 
Estimates in a timely fashion and draw out the information that 
I’m sure the public, the people of Saskatchewan, would like to 
know about this  
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

821 
 
 

particular department. 
 
I would like to start by indicating my disappointment, first of 
all, with the way the government has treated parts of our society 
and parts of our economic base in this province, and I would 
want to say, Madam Minister, that I refer to the small-business 
sector that has been, in my opinion, and in the opinion of many 
others in this province, completely abandoned by this 
government. 
 
Small business, at a time when the economy is tough, needs 
some assistance and some direction from government, and 
clearly this administration has avoided its responsibility in that 
regard. it’s made it harder for small business to function by 
increasing the tax load through funding cuts to municipal 
government and to school boards and, as I said, it’s created a 
heavier tax burden on the business community, and I frankly 
don’t find it acceptable, and I believe that the business 
community in this province find it in the same 
light that I do. 
 
And I say there’s been cut-backs and there’s been indication 
that this government wants some fiscal responsibility for 
municipal governments, and I think that’s fine, I think that’s 
fair. But I would want to remind the minister that the 
municipalities aren’t the governments with seven consecutive 
deficits; this government is. And they’re not known for their 
mismanagement; this government is. 
 
Your government, Madam Minister, has become famous for 
wasteful spending and financial mismanagement, when the 
government has caused, through the mismanagement, increases 
in business taxes, it’s caused increases in school board taxes, 
and I say once again this year you’ve turned your back on the 
small-business sector. 
 
This provincial government should be accepting responsibility 
for the fact that small-business owners are having tough times. 
And during the course of these estimates, Madam Minister, I’m 
going to be sharing with you some statistics that will show 
clearly the problems that they’re facing. The bankruptcies, the 
business closures, the out-migration of our young people, have 
been caused by this government. 
 
I see in this department and in this government no long-range 
planning, programs announced and never implemented  
programs that sound good, that look good on paper, but that 
never happened. And it’s been consistent, Madam Minister, 
with this department and the rest of your government since 
1982, since you were first elected. 
 
And the programs that are in place, I would suggest, Madam 
Minister, and I think we’ll see this during the course of the 
estimates, have not been directed to Saskatchewan business 
people, families who have made their living in this province and 
in or communities over the years, but they’ve been directed to 
others  other whose interests, others whose fortunes, are from 
outside of this province and not with Saskatchewan people. 
 
I note as well in Tourism, programs announced  the  

same as it is with the small-business sector in the Economic 
Development portion of this department  programs 
announced, but when it comes time for the implementation of 
those programs, we get nothing but more announcements, and 
the programs don’t happen. And I will be citing some examples 
of these to you, Madam Minister, during the course of these 
events. 
 
What sounded like programs to benefit tourism, the tourism 
industry in this province, became nothing but political jargon  
programs announced in 1986, prior to the election. 
 
We’ve gone through estimates with the former minister, we’ve 
asked him where these programs are; he says, later, later. We 
ask how much later? He doesn’t know. Now that minister’s 
responsibilities have shifted to you, and I’m hoping today that 
we’re not going to get the same kind of answers that we had in 
last year’s estimates, I’m hoping that you will be more 
responsible than was your predecessor. 
 
And I say the kind of government, Madam Minister, that you’re 
delivering is squandering opportunities for Saskatchewan’s 
business people, because what could be a bright future for this 
province is being decimated by the massive deficit budgeting 
that you’ve perpetrated  and I say massive deficit budgeting. 
When you add up and look at the cost of just servicing that 
deficit, it tells me that there are going to be some tax increases 
on home owners and on business owners and would-be 
entrepreneurs to pay for your mismanagement of the 1980s. 
 
I say, along with many, many people in this province, that the 
sooner we remove you from office and start budgeting properly 
in this province and start doing some long-range planning, 
planning with a vision to the future and future generation, the 
easier it will be down the road. 
 
I’ve mentioned increased taxes. We also know that services 
have been cut back and that business growth has been stifled. 
And figures, not my figures, Madam Minister, your 
government’s own figures, statistics from the federal 
government, clearly indicate what you’ve done to the business 
sector in this province. And I would suggest to you, Madam 
Minister, that if you have no more of a vision for the future of 
this province, if you have no more of direction in terms of 
changing the kind of government you’ve been delivering, that 
you’re going to be a disaster as a minister for this department 
the same as was your predecessor and his predecessor. 
 
The reorganization of this department was a disappointment to 
me and others. No longer is there any mention of a 
small-business department in this province. No longer is there a 
department of co-operatives in this province, and I say to you 
that it places and tells me clearly, clearly where your priorities 
are. 
 
I look through the programs that have been implemented by this 
government since 1982  looking for a program to stimulate 
the economy by using small business and helping this province 
grow economically, using small business as one of the tools and 
one of the vehicles. And when I see the programs implemented, 
they always appear to me to be geared to out-of-province  
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

822 
 
 

corporations, or your friends. And I say to you that we find it 
unfair on this side of the House, and I would suggest that the 
majority of the business community in the province do as well. 
 
Madam Minister, I’m going to ask today what your vision for 
this province is. What do you see for the future in terms of 
economic development and in terms of development through 
tourism? I’m going to ask you what you see in the future and 
how you plan to see this future growth achieved. And I said 
before, and I indicated before, that I’m hoping that you don’t 
disappoint us, but I’m afraid you will, like so many of your 
colleagues have disappointed the people of this province. 
 
And I would say, Madam Minister, if you don’t have a 
workable vision for the future of the province, then the Premier 
has betrayed the people as well, because clearly it’s his decision 
as to who sits in these chairs and who is developing programs 
and policy. And I want to say to you that I have little faith, but 
I’m willing to go through the process to see if in fact you know 
where you’re taking this department and where this government 
is taking the province. 
 
So I ask you, Madam Minister  I know and I understand 
you’re new in your role  I ask you what you see, what you 
envision for Saskatchewan, how you see this province develop. 
And I would like to know specifically what vehicles you see as 
being used. 
 
Are you willing to turn about and start using the small-business, 
or is your government in your department still hell-bent on 
throwing millions at Peter Pocklington and his kind? I say, 
Madam Minister, if that’s your vision, then you’ll be a 
disappointment as a minister of this department. 
 
And I’ll ask you now if you would share with us, with the 
people of the province and the members of the opposition, just 
exactly what’s your vision for this particular department and for 
the future of Saskatchewan entrepreneurs might be? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon Mrs. Duncan:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to respond 
to some of the outlandish statements made by the member 
opposite. And his statements are pure rhetoric, which is the only 
thing that we’ve come to expect from members opposite, 
because the members opposite never, ever deal in fact, Mr. 
Chairman. In fact, never deal in fact, purely fiction. 
 
Mr. Chairman, 1987 was actually a good year for 
Saskatchewan, and 1987 was also a good year for economic 
performance in our province. And I would like to share some 
facts with the member opposite, should he care to listen and 
perhaps jot them down. 
 
In 1987 our unemployment rate fell to 7.3 per cent from 7.7 in 
’86. New capital investment in the province was 4,324 million, 
one of the highest levels of investment in the 1980s to date. And 
I should repeat that in case the  

member opposite did not get that. last year in Saskatchewan we 
had total investment of $4324 million. 
 
Another interesting fact . . . I mean, you listen to the members 
opposite, every one of them dealing in their fiction, and they 
like to indicate to the people of Saskatchewan that somehow, 
since 1982, the people have been fleeing the province, the 
businesses have been pulling out of the province. Well that is 
just not true. 
 
I might also, before I get into these statistics, say to the member 
 he said, well I have talked to many business men  well I 
can tell the member opposite that over 1,400 business people 
joined the Premier for dinner last Friday night and clearly 
enjoyed them, and I understand 134 showed up at wherever the 
Leader of the Opposition was speaking. 
 
We had 3,208 incorporations of Saskatchewan-based 
businesses, and that’s a net increase of 640 Saskatchewan 
businesses; 33,000 jobs have been created since 1982  33,000 
new jobs created, Mr. Chairman, since 1982; the cumulative 
investment . . . new capital investment between 1982 and 1987, 
Mr. Chairman, is $23.54 billion, hardly what I would call small 
change. Since 1982 we’ve had 6,023 more businesses registered 
with the workmans’ compensation, and I might say that in 1987 
the values of building permits, in the commercial sector only, 
rose by 70 per cent. 
 
I think if you look at what happened in the province in 1987 it 
is not just the doom and gloom  even though we are dealing 
with some fairly significant problems in the area of some of the 
resource sectors and our agriculture sector  but the province 
saw significant new industrial projects being built in 1987. 
 
These included: Gainers bacon plant in North Battleford; 
Canada Packers poultry processing plant in Saskatoon; 
expansions at Thomson Meats in Melfort; Canada Packers 
expanded into Moose Jaw; Intercontinental Packers of 
Saskatoon announced an expansion: we saw the Vanguard 
recreational vehicles plant at North Battleford come in; a liquid 
phosphate plant was announced in Moose Jaw; the Co-op heavy 
oil upgrader is being built here in Saskatchewan, right here in 
Regina, Mr. Chairman; we’ve seen an expansion of a pulp mill 
in Prince Albert, and the construction of a new paper plant 
under way in that city. 
 
The member asked for my vision. I think the future is very 
bright for Saskatchewan. We look at what is going on in 
northern Saskatchewan in the area of mining resources, that 
type of thing. I think we have three mines today producing or 
refining ore, or gold from ore. 
 
The department’s 12 business resource centres last year 
responded to 36,000 requests for information. That’s a record, 
Mr. Chairman. That’s more than four times the level of 
inquiries that we had in 1984. We had 36 new venture capital 
corporations form in 1987-88, and that brings to 151 the 
number of venture capital corporations that have been created 
since the inception of the program; 151 VCCs (venture capital 
corporations) have net capitalization of over 73 millions of 
dollars and over $58 million of that have been invested in those 
small  
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

823 
 
 

businesses which are eligible. This is new investment equity 
capital, I might add. 
 
The industrial incentive program has had a major impact on the 
manufacturing and processing sector. We paid out 
approximately twelve and a half million dollars to date on 294 
projects, representing almost $84 million worth of new 
investments and approximately 770 new jobs. 
 
Last year we had 60 new co-operatives incorporated within the 
department, and that exceeded the five-year average of 54.4. 
And yet the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake stands up 
there in his place dealing in fiction rather than fact, and saying 
there is nothing for co-operatives, there is nothing for small 
business, and, Mr. Chairman, that is totally inaccurate and, I 
would say, somewhat misleading. 
 
As a department, Mr. Chairman, we are building on the 
strengths that the department has brought forward. We have 
done a lot of consolidation in the last number of years, and the 
department was reorganized last January. 
 
And really what has happened, Mr. Chairman, it’s really 
become an even stronger business department. It is a 
department which continues to provide very, very effective 
services to small businesses. It has a major role to play in 
industrial development of our province. It encourages new and 
existing co-operatives. And on that fact, Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to indicate to the member that the number of co-operatives 
formed since 1982, I believe, is more than three times the total 
of co-operatives incorporated under an NDP government from 
the early ’70s till that infamous night, April 26, 1982. 
 
The department continues to nurture the industry that I would 
classify as probably the most dynamic, fastest growing industry, 
not only here in the province but world-wide, and that of course 
is the tourism industry. We’re working very closely with 
various organizations  TISASK (Tourism Industry 
Association of Saskatchewan) and the likes  to really come 
up with a strategy, which I will share with the member later, on 
how to make Saskatchewan a key destination point, not only for 
other Canadians but for the international market. 
 
Basically I would say that my department has the major 
government responsibility for economic development activities 
in the province. We serve businesses, and these businesses are 
recognized as what could be described as an essential 
component or an essential cog in the development of our 
province. We do place special emphasis on tourism because of 
the enormous potential in that area for economic diversification, 
either through the tourism industry itself or the related service 
sectors. 
 
My new department is a consolidated, expanded version of the 
former department of tourism, small business and co-operatives. 
And the member opposite decried the fact that nowhere in the 
department’s title do we refer to small business or 
co-operatives. Well we believe that small business and co-
operatives really stand for economic development. 
 
So we basically remain a very client-oriented department. We 
are very attentive to the grass roots  

concerns of business that they bring to us, and we will continue 
to provide that type of leadership and help as we are called on. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Madam Minister, as I suspected, you talk 
about rhetoric, and I want to indicate to you that we’re going to 
get into the numbers here in the course of these estimates. 
We’re going to talk about unemployment. We’re going to talk 
about cut-backs. We’re going to talk about the lack of economic 
growth in the province; the business closures we’ll talk about; 
program cuts, I think I’ve mentioned. 
 
I think we’ll talk a little bit about unemployment, and as you 
share with us the bright picture of 1987, you neglect to mention 
the 45,000 unemployed in this province and the number of 
business bankruptcies that happened in that particular year. And 
I want to say to you, that we’re going to talk about those as 
well. 
 
But before I get into the business portion  and I see we’re 
running close to 5 o’clock, Madam Minister  I want to give 
you some food for thought prior to supper. And I want to, if I 
can, talk about tourism a little bit. And I’d like to refer 
specifically, Madam Minister, to the Fort Carlton-Batoche 
destination area study that was promised to be completed last 
year in these estimates. And I’m asking, Madam Minister, 
where that study is and how far along that has come; or why we 
haven’t had that tabled as was promised. 
 
And I’d like to as well indicate to you, Madam Minister, that 
that was a commitment made to the people of the Duck Lake 
area prior to 1986 election, and we’ve asked you for this, and it 
hasn’t been coming. I see you’re sending it across, and if that in 
fact is the case, then let me ask you, Madam Minister, since we 
haven’t had a chance to have a look at this study, I want to 
know what you’re going to now do with the study. Can the 
people of Duck Lake and the Fort Carlton-Batoche area expect 
more study of the study; or can they expect some concrete 
action in terms of what’s going to happen in that area? 
 
Hon Mrs. Duncan:  I received that document a couple of 
weeks ago. It’s very, very interesting and it really puts the focus 
on our cultural heritage and things that we can use to build a 
strong tourism base here in Saskatchewan. 
 
What we will be doing with that report is beginning May 9 
there will be a series of . . . the book will be distributed to 
interested groups and organizations, and beginning May 9 we 
will be beginning a round of public hearings for their reaction 
on that particular report. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Madam Minister, I would suggest to you 
that the people of that area are very familiar with their heritage 
and the history of that particular are. They’ve been waiting for 
this study. I ask two questions: when did you receive this 
document? And the other question . . .  
 
An Hon. Member:  She said two weeks ago. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  I never heard, sir, and if you want to get 
involved in the estimates, you get involved; but other than that, 
I would suggest you let the minister and I continue our 
dialogue. That’s what this is all about, and I  
  



 
April 25, 1988 

 

824 
 
 

think we can handle it ourselves. 
 
I would like to know how long these hearings and these little 
tours throughout out the area will be going on. I’d like to know 
when they’re starting, where they’re going to be held and who 
will be asked to participate. 
 
Hon Mrs. Duncan:  The meetings that take place on May 9 
 we will be sharing that proposal because there are a lot of 
recommendations in it. And I know the people in that area are 
very familiar with the history of that area. I happen to come 
from that area myself, so I’m familiar with it. 
 
But to develop a long-term, forceful tourism strategy, you can’t 
do that at the drop of a hat or overnight. You say, well good 
heavens, you’ve been doing this since 1986 or 1987. There has 
never been a focus to develop a strategy to capture that tourism 
dollar  the dollar that is most sought after world-wide. This 
government is going to do that, but we’re going to do it in a 
well thought out way. When we get the responses from the 
meetings held in May, I would hope to have a proposal to 
cabinet some time in June. 
 
Mr. Chairman:  Order. Being near 5 o’clock this assembly 
stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


	ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS
	Hon. Members: Hear, hear!
	Hon. Members: Hear, hear!
	Hon. Members: Hear, hear!
	Hon. Members: Hear, hear!
	Hon. Members: Hear, hear!
	Hon. Members: Hear, hear!
	ORAL QUESTIONS
	Privatization of Natural Gas Holdings of SPC
	Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear!
	Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear!
	Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear!
	Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear!
	Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear!
	Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear!
	Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear!
	Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear!
	Contingency Plans for Drought Conditions
	Privatization of Essential Utilities
	Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear!
	Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear!
	Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear!
	Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear!
	Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear!
	STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER
	Ruling on a Point of Order

	ORDERS OF THE DAY
	GOVERNMENT ORDERS
	ADJOURNED DEBATES
	SECOND READINGS
	Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear!
	Mr. Speaker: ( Order.

	Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear!
	Yeas ( 15
	Nays ( 28
	Yeas ( 28
	Nays ( 15
	COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE
	Bill No. 2 ( An Act respecting the Use of the English and French Languages in Saskatchewan
	Clause 1
	Clause 2
	Mr. Chairman: (

	Mr. Chairman: ( I’m sorry. I thought I was doing fairly well . . . (inaudible) . . .
	Clause 6
	Clause 8
	Clause 11
	Clause 13

	THIRD READINGS
	Bill No. 2 ( An Act respecting the Use of the English and French Languages in Saskatchewan

	COMMITTEE OF FINANCE
	Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure
	Item 1



