


















































June 21, 1988 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 21, 1988 
 

2295 
 

AFTERNOON SITTING 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my real pleasure today to be 
introducing to you, and through you to all members of the 
House, 41 students from grades 4, 5, and 6 at St. Mary’s School 
in Moose Jaw. I want to, on behalf of all members, welcome 
the students and to particularly welcome them because, Mr. 
Speaker, St. Mary’s School is about one block from our house 
and so I feel like I’m welcoming many neighbours in the 
Chamber today. 
 
With the students from St. Mary’s are Mr. McGrane, Mr. 
Pearce, and Mrs. Whitney. I look forward to meeting the 
students later this afternoon and ask all members to help me 
welcome them here. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure to day to introduce a group of students from 
McClellan School in Young, Saskatchewan, which is my home 
town. They are accompanied by their teacher Connie Fritzler, 
Merv and Vivian Zerbin, Bill Cline, and my wife, Lee Upshall. 
 
I hope they have a good time today and a good tour of the 
legislature. I’ll be meeting them later for drinks and questions 
on the front lawn. I’m also very pleased because my daughter 
in one of the students in the class. So I’d like all members to 
welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
afternoon I have two of my constituents from Regina South in 
your gallery, Ken and Margaret Marsden, and they are here 
with some family members that reside in Bolton, England, 
Freda and Bill Starkie. 
 
They have been visiting here for about a month. They are going 
to be leaving for home in England very soon. We would thank 
them for including a visit to this legislature in their visit to 
Saskatchewan. We hope that they enjoyed their stay and we 
wish them a safe journey back to England. 
 
Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great deal 
of pleasure today to pinch-hit for the member for Regina 
Elphinstone and ask members of the Assembly to join me in 
welcoming — there’s 45 students from Wascana School, 
accompanied by their teacher Conrad Nelson. 
 
But in addition to that group, we have an informal addition, 
most of which is from my constituency of Regina North, 
former students of Mr. Nelson whom he met outside while he 
was having his tour with the Wascana School. And there’s 
about a half a dozen students from McGuigan and Robert 
Usher which, as I 

mentioned, is in my constituency. 
 
So please join me in welcoming the two groups that have 
amalgamated to one, and I hope you enjoy the proceedings in 
the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Acquisition of Develcon 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Minister 
of Science and Technology and it concerns the bail-out of 
Develcon in Saskatoon. Mr. Minister, there have been press 
reports that your government blocked attempts by Canadian 
Marconi of Ottawa in a possible acquisition of Develcon in 
favour of an acquisition by Fairfax Financial Holdings of 
Toronto, a deal which included a $7 million loan from SEDCO 
(Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation). 
 
Mr. Minister, if this is the case, why would your government 
freeze out Canadian Marconi from a possible acquisition? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, my simple answer to 
the member opposite would be that the government did not 
freeze out an offer from Marconi. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary. Mr. Minister, I have here a 
letter from the Canadian Marconi Company to the board of 
directors of Develcon and it’s dated March 17, 1988, and it 
states the following: “We understand . . .” 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Hon. member knows why I’ve 
risen, I’m sure. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a new question then. As I 
was saying, the letter states: 
 

We understand that should you elect to authorize 
conditional acceptance of that proposal, you are being 
required (and I underline required) to concurrently 
prohibit Develcon from pursuing any further discussions 
of negotiations with us. 

 
If your intention, Mr. Minister, was to get the best possible deal 
for the taxpayers’ money, why would you favour one 
company’s proposal and disallow another from even 
investigating the possibilities of acquiring Develcon? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, I would point out to 
the member opposite that a quote from one of the shareholders 
at the recent meeting that they had when they authorized the 
company to go ahead with the Fairfax deal, and I would simply 
say that the shareholder was quoted as saying that: 
 

Develcon met with a number of interested parties over the 
year and held detailed investigations, but 

  



 
June, 21, 1988 

2296 
 

only one transaction reached the point of being an offer, 
and it’s this one. 

 
And that’s in reference to the Fairfax, so whether or not there 
were discussions with Marconi, and I assume that there were, 
there certainly, according to the statement made by the 
shareholder, there was not any offer put forward by Marconi 
and I would simply reiterate again that the provincial 
government did not have anything to do in so far as whether 
Marconi had an offer there, or whether it could be accepted by 
Develcon or not. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — A new question to the Minister of Science 
and Technology. Mr. Minister, you have given Fairfax $7 
million to loan to Develcon, and the money is secured against 
Develcon’s assets. The holding company, DEI, which is a 
subsidiary of Fairfax, stands to profit on the showing Develcon 
makes in the stock-market. 
 
In essence, Mr. Minister, DEI has been given $7 million to play 
the stock-market, and that money is secured against the 
Develcon property, as it would have been secured had you 
simply loaned the money to Develcon directly. Fairfax, in this 
case, Mr. Minister, reaps the profits on this $7 million loan, and 
Saskatchewan taxpayers are at risk. How is that, Mr. Minister, a 
good deal for Saskatchewan people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, the Government of 
Saskatchewan has provided a good deal of support to the high-
tech industry in this province over the last five to six years and 
will certainly continue to do so in the future. There’s no doubt 
about it that Develcon has very good products and has very 
good people on staff, but I think the member opposite must 
keep in mind the fact that over the last three years that losses at 
Develcon total some 16 and a half millions of dollars. 
 
And the feeling, as was mentioned in the article in the Star-
Phoenix today, had indicated that simply putting more money 
into the company was not the answer. I think that we felt that 
the company also had to be looking at seriously what their 
plans were going to be. In so far as the loan with SEDCO 
(Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation), if you 
want some more details from SEDCO, I would suggest that you 
get in touch with them or ask the question of the minister. 
 
But there was negotiation, there’s no doubt, between SEDCO 
and Fairfax with regard to the loan. And as I understand it — 
and the only information that I have on that is the fact that they 
have been given an interest-free period, I believe up until 1990, 
when they will not be paying this particular interest — but this 
was a contract that was negotiated between SEDCO and the 
company involved. And I would suggest that if you want more 
detail on it, you’ll have to get that from them, because I don’t 
have it. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary. Mr. Minister, as I 
understand the deal, SEDCO loans DEI $7 million, and DEI 
pays no interest for two years. DEI then loans the $7 million to 
Develcon, and they are expected to pay interest 

at commercial rates of 9.75 per cent on $7 million. 
 
Mr. Minister, you didn’t answer the question. Why should 
Fairfax reap those kinds of profits while they don’t have to pay 
back any of the interest for two years and Saskatchewan people 
take the risk? How is that a good deal, Mr. Minister, for 
Saskatchewan taxpayers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, the member asks how 
this is a good deal for the province of Saskatchewan. The fact 
of the matter is that we still have a very good company that’s 
employing a good number of people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We anticipate, with the new products that 
they’re going to be coming forth with within the next few 
months, that it is certainly going to be providing more income, 
more revenues for the province of Saskatchewan. It’s going to 
be securing those particular jobs. So I think that there’s no 
doubt about it that that’s good for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We also know that the company is going to be remaining in 
Saskatoon. There has been, of course; the shareholders of 
Develcon of course are not just from Saskatchewan, never have 
been. They’re from all across the country. So we feel good 
about the fact it’s remaining in Saskatoon, and I would hope 
that as time goes on that they will be able to get their new 
products going and in fact they will become a very viable 
company again. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Final question. Mr. Minister, why would you 
block a deal which involved no investment on the part of the 
Saskatchewan treasury in favour of one which does nothing but 
possibly allow a financial holding company to make a quick 
profit while leaving all of the risk to Saskatchewan taxpayers? 
Why would you do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve already 
indicated to the member, the Government of Saskatchewan did 
not block a deal with Canadian Marconi. In looking at the 
comments that were made by the shareholder at the 
shareholders’ meeting, a substantial offer from Marconi 
apparently was never received because the indication was that 
the only offer that was received was the one from Fairfax, and 
that in fact was the one that was accepted by the board of 
directors and also by the shareholders. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also want to 
question the Minister of Science and Technology regarding the 
Develcon deal. And as Minister of Science and Technology, I 
suggest that he should get more of the details of this deal 
because the high-tech industry is depending on you to be 
supportive of it. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, will you confirm that Mr. Dick 
MacPherson, the new president and chief executive officer of 
Develcon, has received a base salary of $150,000; a $50,000 
relocation allowance; a $75,000 signing bonus; stock options; a 
new Cadillac; all expenses for the Cadillac, including 
insurance; a $225,000 severance package; and Develcon will 
pick up any settlement made necessary by Mr. MacPherson 
leaving his previous employer on short notice. Mr. Minister, 
how do you explain using SEDCO money, the 
  



 
June, 21, 1988 

2297 
 

taxpayers’ money, for these kinds of expenditures? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Certainly, Mr. Speaker, the member 
wasn’t necessarily accurate, and I have no reason to believe that 
there’s any difference at this time. I’m not really sure how she 
would expect that we on this side of the House would be aware 
of the particular agreement that there would be between this 
individual and Develcon. The only involvement that my 
department has had is with regard to the moneys for research 
and development, and nothing else. 
 
So as far as any kind of details with contracts between this 
individual and Develcon, certainly I can’t say whether or not 
that is the case. You’d have to get that information from 
Develcon. 
 
Ms. Smart: — New question, Mr. Speaker. In June of 1988, 
while laying off 32 employees at Develcon, Mr. MacPherson 
said, the lay-offs are necessary to bring the company’s cost 
structure in line. I ask, what kind of value are the people of 
Saskatchewan getting for their SEDCO money when you 
swapped 32 jobs for MacPherson’s extensive perks package. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, I dare say that any 
company that has lost in excess of 16 millions of dollars over 
the last three years would certainly want to be taking a very 
good look at the way in which the company is being operated 
and how, in fact, they could be getting the company back to a 
viable position. So I don’t have any doubt that decisions like 
this had to be made, and hopefully the company now will be 
back into a very good position. 
 
Ms. Smart: — New question, Mr. Speaker. In March when the 
minister responsible for SEDCO announced the loan, she said: 
this assistance demonstrates the government’s commitment to 
the high-tech industry in Saskatchewan generally, and in 
particular to the approximately 180 jobs provided in the 
province by Develcon. 
 
That’s a great commitment. But what we actually see 
demonstrated is a commitment to a huge salary and benefit 
packages for a few management personnel and lay-offs for the 
wage-earners. Didn’t your government make any demands on 
Fairfax about employment levels as a condition for lending 
them that $7 million in SEDCO’s taxpayers’ money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am not too sure 
whether that member has ever really been in support of the 
science and technology industry in this province. Certainly her 
actions would prove otherwise. 
 
I’ve also indicated that we certainly have no way of knowing 
what the details are of any agreement between this individual 
and the company is so far as the negotiations that took place 
between SEDCO and Fairfax 

and Develcon. I don’t have the details of that particular 
arrangement. 
 
I think that we can assure the member opposite and the people 
of Saskatchewan that we still have a lot of faith in the high-tech 
industry in this province. We have faith in Develcon, and I’m 
sure that Fairfax, in view of the fact that they’re putting $1.5 
million into this particular company, they are going to be 
providing new management skills. They’re also providing 
marketing expertise which I think are going to be very, very 
beneficial to getting this company back on its feet. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have a supplementary to 
the minister. In light of the fact that he does not seem to be able 
to provide the answers here, will he undertake now to table the 
documents with regard to this deal as soon as possible in this 
House this week. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure which 
documents the individual is referring to. If he’s referring to the 
documents between SEDCO and Fairfax, I would suggest that 
if that information is to be forthcoming, that he should ask the 
minister responsible for that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister, will you 
undertake to table all of the relevant information regarding the 
deal between SEDCO and the other principals which you have 
responsibility for? Will you do that and stop evading the 
question and stop evading the issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, I am not evading any 
issue. I have laid the details out as I understand them, and as far 
as the responsibility of Science and Technology is concerned, 
that is, to do with the moneys that were part forward as far as 
for research and development, that information certainly has 
been made public. In regard to details of any arrangement 
between SEDCO and Fairfax or Develcon, certainly I will not 
be putting any of those papers on the table. 
 

Policy Regarding Drought Situation 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the absence of 
the Premier, I have a question that I would like to put to the 
Deputy Premier. It has to do with the drought situation which is 
still persisting in the province of Saskatchewan even though the 
government has not yet brought forward a program to deal with 
the situation. Mr. Deputy Premier, it is now well past the 
government’s own time frame of two weeks, as promised back 
in May, for some definite announcement of government policy 
to deal with drought. 
 
Yesterday the federal Minister of Agriculture said he was 
receiving, yesterday I believe, a new proposal from the 
Canadian Cattlemen’s Association regarding some new herd 
maintenance proposal for livestock producers in drought 
situations. Will the minister tell us today what is the nature of 
that new proposal that has been brought forward by the 
Canadian Cattlemen’s Association, and how long will that 
proposal be under consideration before the government finally 
comes forward with a decision in this matter? 
  



 
June, 21, 1988 

2298 
 

 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, my understanding is 
that negotiations are still going on, not only between the 
western provinces and the federal government but as well 
between producer groups and the governments. 
 
I think what our Premier has heard here in meetings with 
cattlemen’s association, the stock growers association, the 
cattle feeders’ association, for example, is that, yes, everybody 
recognizes a very serious and severe drought across much of 
western Canada and indeed right on through down into the 
United States. Everyone recognizes the urgency of the 
situation, but I think the wise counsel of the producer groups 
was that, be in a hurry to do it, but do it right. And I think that’s 
what the consultation and the negotiations and the discussions 
are all about. 
 
I might remind the hon. member that everyone’s first concern 
was water supplies and ensuring adequate water supplies. And 
steps have been announced, the increased assistance has been 
announced in several categories there to make sure that, 
whether it be for domestic farm use or for the cattle herds, that 
help has been in place for water supplies. That was our first 
priority, and it’s been addressed by both levels of government, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if we can have a 
specific assurance from the Acting Minister of Agriculture that 
all this dilly-dallying will not result in there in fact not being a 
program at all this year? Will the minister give us his firm 
assurance that there will be some form of a herd maintenance 
program and some adjustments to the crop insurance program 
to adequately cope with this situation? Will he give us that firm 
assurance? And will he also tell us that whatever the 
government’s decision is going to be, that his government will 
be in a position to announce that, specifically, while this 
legislature is still in session. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to 
commit to a specific time frame, given that negotiations are still 
going on Quite frankly, I would be surprised that the hon. 
member would expect us to unilaterally make a decision when 
obviously some of the producer groups are still wanting to have 
input on program design. 
 
I recall well, Mr. Speaker, when the Liberal Party, represented 
at that time by Senator Hazen Argue, designed a drought 
program that was seen largely by all the cattle producers, 
indeed all the people of Saskatchewan, as one big fiasco that 
was repeated at weekly intervals. We don’t operate that way, 
Mr. Speaker. We want to have this well thought out so it can be 
fair and in the best interest of the livestock producer and indeed 
of the consumers across Canada. 
 
As I said earlier, in terms of action there have been changes 
relative to water assistance, there have been changes relative to 
crop insurance, and you will see subsequent announcements in 
the days ahead, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Construction of Rafferty Dam 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question today is to the Deputy Premier, the 

minister in charge of Saskatchewan Power Corporation. Mr. 
Deputy Premier, given this sad day for environmentalists and 
the environment in Canada, in so far as that your pet political 
project, the shafferty, has now been approved, I wonder, sir, 
would you mind tabling the licences which grants permission 
for your government to go ahead with the construction of the 
dams. It’s my understanding that these licences are the first 
ever issued in Canada that have on them conditions prior to the 
construction of a project. Would you be so kind as to table to 
the House the licences and all those conditions, sir. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the member has been 
here long enough to know that you can’t table documents in 
question period; and the member has probably even been here 
long enough to know that the licence would be issued to Sask 
Water, and not SaskPower, but that it would authorize the 
Souris Basin Development Authority to construct the dams, 
with water monitoring at the border, etc. And I take issue with 
the hon. member because I think there are a significant number 
of very, very happy people in Saskatchewan today as a result of 
this licence being issued, Mr. Speaker, so that we can get on 
with a very major water management project in the Souris 
River Basin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, environmentalists and water management 
proponents alike support what is happening here. In 
Saskatchewan we have probably the largest water-fowl 
hatchery in the world. This year, Mr. Speaker, because of the 
drought, the water-fowl hatch will be down probably by 50 per 
cent or more. And it’s only in those areas, Mr. Speaker, where 
there is water, like around Diefenbaker Lake and the Gardiner 
dam, like around the Squaw Rapids and Tobin, and like 
Nipawin, and so on, Mr. Speaker, that we will have a water-
fowl hatch this year. And for the life of me, Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t know why people on that side of the House still continue 
to oppose water management in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the same 
minister. Mr. Minister, you know very well that there are 
hundreds of hundreds of groups in this province representing 
thousands and thousands of citizens who have opposed that 
project. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder, in developing and trying to ram 
through this project and impose it on the people of the 
province, I have a two-part question for you. First of all, why is 
it that your government demanded that the . . . demand of the 
federal government that they not carry out the federal 
environmental assessment process? And part two, why is that 
you pressured — some used the word “blackmail,” but I won’t 
— but why is it that you pressured the federal government into 
granting you a licence for Rafferty-Alameda at the threat of 
withdrawing and withholding any approval to go ahead with 
the grasslands national park? Why is it that you did that? Is that 
any way to do business? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
  



 
June, 21, 1988 

2299 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I quite frankly . . . the 
first-part question was: why did we not allow the federal 
government to go ahead with its part of the environmental 
assessment study, I think. 
 
I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, where that member’s been. I don’t 
know of any member, Mr. Speaker, that would believe that a 
provincial government would have the clout to say, federal 
government, you cannot do that. I mean, it’s nuts. 
 
Number two, Mr. Speaker, the Souris Basin Development 
Authority has absolutely nothing to do with the grasslands park, 
nor does SaskPower have anything to do with the grasslands 
park, Mr. Speaker, nothing. 
 
The final point I want to make, Mr. Speaker, is these people, in 
the middle of what is very close to a desert, are opposed to any 
kind of water management, even, Mr. Speaker, when it is to be 
used for a coolant for a much needed 300 megawatt electrical 
generator at Shand. Their suggestion, Mr. Speaker, is that we 
should not build that plant, but that we should buy that 
electricity from Manitoba. Mr. Speaker, Manitoba has no 
electricity to sell. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, a final supplementary to the 
minister, Mr. Minister, despite your protestations to the 
contrary, the federal Minister of the Environment today, in the 
House of Commons, said that he was not doing an 
environmental assessment process on requests from the 
province of Saskatchewan, and in fact that he was going to rely 
on your environmental assessment process, which every 
independent body in this North American continent says is 
flawed. 
 
Why is it, Mr. Speaker, that you would not . . . pardon me, Mr. 
Minister, that you would not allow your environmental 
assessment to go before the international joint commission for a 
basin-wide scientifically credible study? Why didn’t you? Why 
didn’t you do that? Is it because you are not sure of your facts, 
and you are not sure of your own finding; that it’s nothing more 
than a political boondoggle? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — A political boondoggle, a political 
boondoggle, Mr. Speaker, a political boondoggle would have 
been to opt, as members opposite wanted, for the Manitoba 
purchase. 
 
A Manitoba purchase, Mr. Speaker, to buy electricity from a 
utility that has none to sell; from a utility whose exports are 
down 57 per cent; from a utility who is virtually totally 
dependent on hydro for their electricity, Mr. Speaker, at a time 
when there is no river flow, Mr. Speaker. Now wouldn’t it be 
great for the lights to go out and you call on Manitoba for 300 
megawatts and it ain’t there? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, getting to the specific project and the 
environmental impact study done here in Saskatchewan, there 
has never been a project in Saskatchewan subjected 

to more public scrutiny than this one. And I think — and I 
didn’t hear the federal minister in question period — but if he 
said what that member said he said, I think it attests to the good 
judgement of that minister, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 
 
At 2:33 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 24 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 
Agricultural Returns Stabilization Act 
Bill No. 25 — An Act to amend The Occupational Health and 
Safety Act 
Bill No. 26 — An Act to amend The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Act 
Bill No. 41 — An Act to amend The Teachers’ Dental Plan Act 
Bill No. 42 — An Act to amend The Controverted Municipal 
Elections Act 
Bill No. 43 — An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act 
Bill No. 44 — An Act to amend The Department of Finance 
Act, 1983 
Bill No. 48 — An Act to amend The Department of Social 
Services Act 
Bill No. 82 — An Act to amend The Litter Control Act 
Bill No. 37 — An Act to provide for Security for Saskatchewan 
Family Farms 
Bill No. 54 — An Act to amend The Land Titles Act 
Bill No. 85 — An Act respecting Certified Nursing Assistants 
Bill No. 86 — An Act respecting Registered Nurses 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:35 p.m. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — I ask for leave to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you, and through you to members of this House, a 
group of some 33 grades 6 and 7 students from West Central 
School just outside of Prince Albert. They are accompanied by 
their teacher Elmer Malec, Doreen White; chaperons Mrs. Khn, 
Mrs. Zelewsky, Mr. Dzioba; and Mr. Denis Neudorf, their bus 
driver. 
 
I would be meeting them for pictures and refreshments outside 
on the front lawn in a few minutes, and I would ask all 
members to make them welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Finance 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 18 
  



 
June, 21, 1988 

2300 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I was 
reviewing with you the budgetary revenue items on page 10, 
and I have just a couple more questions in respect to that. 
 
I note there what would appear to be somewhat of a lack of 
confidence in the economic growth of the province relative to 
the other provinces of Canada, because I note that in 
equalization payments that last year you estimated 185 million; 
you received over 302 million in equalization payments, and 
that this year you are estimating $360 million for equalization 
payment. I guess the question is: is that a clear indication of the 
sluggishness of the economic performance of Saskatchewan, 
relative to the other provinces? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well it’s an indication that the relative 
growth of one province could be less than that of another. You 
could get a superheated growth, say, in Ontario, and all other 
provinces in the country could be growing at 3 per cent. It 
could in fact bring equalization into those receiving provinces, 
so it’s a reflection of that. 
 
It as well, of course, can be a reflection, as it was in the past, of 
a rather dramatic drop in oil prices. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — But would it not correspondently also indicate 
that your projection in estimating the amount of equalization 
payments does take into consideration your estimate of the 
economic growth in this province relative to, say, Ontario and 
Quebec and other provinces which are contributing primarily to 
the equalization payment? There has to be certainly some 
assumption that there is a sluggishness in the economic 
performance of the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — But understand, with the equalization, we 
try, along with the national government, to try and do an 
estimate as to what the economies of all provinces would do 
when we do that estimate, because equalization is a national 
formula. 
 
I’ve given to the hon. member what our overall projections are 
for growth and our estimates for growth in our budget planning. 
I’m just having a little difficulty responding to the specific 
question that the hon. member asked because when we look at 
equalization, we’re really trying to get an estimate of all 
economies. 
 
(1445) 
 
Obviously last year, for example, central Canada, Toronto in 
particular, surged ahead of virtually all growth projections. And 
of course that has the effect of rising above norm, and of course 
those provinces receiving equalization would get more by 
virtue of the fact of one province having a rather significant 
growth. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, in respect to the estimated 
revenue from oil, I think you indicated this morning that the 
projected revenue was based on the per barrel price of $18.45 if 
I’m not correct. I wonder whether the minister has seen the 
offering of memorandum of SaskPower 

wherein they indicate the projection of crude oil prices. And 
they say West Texas Intermediate at Cushing, U.S. per barrel 
1988, $17 a barrel; and Edmonton city gate, Canadian, $20.50 
per barrel. This is in the Saskatchewan Power Corporation 
offering of $210 million. And what it continues to do is to 
project the oil prices for subsequent years. 
 
I wonder whether you’re familiar with that document, and are 
you in general agreement with the projections of prices that 
they have set out in the memorandum. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well it’s one of the difficult questions that 
we wrestle with. I have before me . . . I’ve indicated to you that 
WTI (West Texas Intermediate) price forecast for the budget, 
18.45; federal government budgeted $18 in ‘88, $20 in ‘89; 
Goldman Sachs, 17.75 with $20 in ‘89; Wood Gundy is 18.40 
in ‘88; DRI is 17.93 in ‘88, and we have all of these estimates 
as to what that price will be. 
 
I can’t disagree with anybody’s estimate as to what the price 
will be. All that I can use and give you the information what we 
use to base our estimates for budgetary purposes, and that’s all I 
can tell you. It is, as the hon. member well knows, an estimate, 
and we have so many different projections and estimates by so 
many different forecasters that it, quite frankly, is a judgement 
call. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I guess what I’m interested in knowing 
whether, you know, in fact the minister is in concurrence with 
the memorandum and the indication of crude oil prices which s 
being put out to the general public, which indicates from 1988 
the price per barrel Canadian at $20.50, and by the year 2000, 
$50.25 per barrel. That is what the . . . another document by 
your government in the memorandum is being put out to the 
Saskatchewan people who are purchasing bonds and/or share 
options. 
 
And I wonder whether the minister could be more definitive 
whether or not he has reviewed those projections, and whether 
there is a general concurrence with the information that you 
have that the price of oil, from the year 1988 at 20.50 per barrel 
Canadian, up to $50.25 in the year 2000. This is the projection 
that they have in this document, and I’d like to know whether 
there is any concurrence in respect to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well let me indicate to the hon. member 
that the estimate that we’ve given is what we are basing our 
budgetary review estimates on. We can have, and it would be 
expected, we can have different estimates. Obviously SPC 
(Saskatchewan Power Corporation) is taking an extremely 
cautious view. We think that we’re taking a very small “c” 
conservative view with ours. 
 
We don’t, I just advise the hon. member, we don’t have any 
long-term projections of the oil prices; ours are a little bit more 
immediate for Finance’s purposes than what someone would 
make for investment purposes. So I am advised that we don’t 
have those long-term estimates. We wouldn’t use the long-term 
estimates. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well obviously, Mr. Minister, it’s 
  



 
June, 21, 1988 

2301 
 

somewhat disturbing to have one document from your 
government which is soliciting a major investment by the 
people of Saskatchewan. wherein they appear to have facts 
which indicate that the price of oil will rise for the year ‘88, 
1988, from $20.50 a barrel, to the year 2000, where they 
estimate it’d be $50.25 a barrel. 
 
And what I wanted to know is whether a senior portfolio of 
government would be in a position to advise the potential 
investors whether indeed in the forecasts of revenues, whether 
you could in fact concur so that the public, who are investing in 
the offerings, would have some assurances that the Department 
of Finance, which is vitally concerned with the revenue aspect 
of the oil, would be able to confirm those figures. 
 
I take it that you’re not in a position to do that, or unwilling to 
do that. I am surprised that here would not have been some co-
ordination between the Department of Finance and SaskPower 
in formulating a memorandum in respect to the oil prices. 
 
I can only say that I am very concerned that we would be 
putting out a document here indicating a potential of such 
revenues for Saskoil, based on those prices, and at the same 
time when I questioned you in respect to the revenue 
projections, you indicate that you indeed do not have any long-
term projection in respect to the price of oil. 
 
I can only say that it’s disturbing that the public would possibly 
be potentially misled in respect to it. I would have thought that 
it would have been confirmed. 
 
I guess my question to you, in the preparation of the 
memorandum and the indication of the price of oil: would not 
the Department of Finance have some input in the information 
that is being provided by SaskPower to the public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — But with respect, I ask the hon. member to 
make the distinction between estimates and, as you use the 
word, “facts”. They are taking, obviously, an extremely 
cautious estimate as to what they believe oil prices will be. 
Certainly ours is higher for our budgetary purposes. 
 
I believe that for the purposes of encouraging people to invest 
in the company that the extremely cautious estimates that they 
are using are probably wise for those specific purposes, and 
certainly they should be some comfort to people investing in 
Saskoil that they would use such cautious estimates as they are 
as to price. 
 
Secondly, you should keep in mind that they have their use of 
estimates for different purposes. It would be unwise, for 
example, for a company issuing shares in a prospectus, and if at 
a particular time of the year at the time of the issue the price of 
oil was, say, 15 — everybody expecting it to average 20 
throughout the year — that they came with a price that was out 
of line for that particular time in the market. 
 
So they are for different purposes. None of them are necessarily 
wrong. They can only be proven correct or wrong, 
unfortunately, in hindsight, but they are being . . . 

estimates used for different purposes, ours being for a 
prognostication as to what we can expect from revenues; theirs 
to value shares and encourage people to buy shares. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, I want to turn to and address 
another serious concern that we have in respect to the financial 
management of this province under your stewardship and under 
the government that you represent. 
 
I want to lay as a background, Mr. Minister, that you took over 
from an administration that had Saskatchewan in number one 
place in all of Canada. You took over an administration of a 
province that was in excellent shape by every indicator 
imagined. I want to set a base as to what indeed your 
administration inherited, and I read here from The Globe and 
Mail, and this is prior to ‘82, And I want to indicate what 
McLeod Young and Weir’s had to say in respect to the 
economic conditions of Saskatchewan, and this is what was 
said: 
 

“Saskatchewan is in excellent health, even better than 
Alberta in terms of future financial footing,” said John 
Rosart of McLeod Young Weir’s government finance 
department. 

 
He went on to say: 
 

Their resource sectors look very strong; they have an 
extremely capable administration, and they tend to be a lot 
more prudent than other provinces in the way they spend 
their money. 

 
He was talking about the previous administration, the Allan 
Blakeney administration, from 1971 up until 1981 when this 
article was written. 
 
I want only to indicate a further, not me speaking in respect to 
the economic performance of the Saskatchewan economy 
during ‘71 to ‘82, but I quote further from this article. And it 
goes on to quote a local entrepreneur here in Regina, Mr. Paul 
Hill, and Mr. Hill indicated the following. He says: 
 

I believe in free enterprise (he grins), but I have to say that 
Blakeney’s doing a good job. 

 
Saskatchewan is different. Blakeney has gone the route of 
Crown corporations. He’s created head offices here that 
wouldn’t exist otherwise. He’s attracted good people back 
to the province to work in challenging jobs. He’s given us 
some power over our economy. “Without the Crowns,” 
Paul Hill said, “we’d just be a branch plant, hewers of 
wood.” 

 
And he taps the conference table in emphasis, and he said: 
 

Saskatchewan has the most capable administration in the 
country. 

 
That’s some of the background that I want to indicate to you in 
respect to what you inherited from the Blakeney administration. 
  



 
June, 21, 1988 

2302 
 

And you go on to confirm the situation of the economic 
progress that had taken place from ‘72 to ‘82. And in your own 
bible that you produced to send out to the rest of Canada, The 
Saskatchewan promise, you further indicate what magnificent 
growth that had gone on from ‘72 to ‘82, and some of the 
highlights that you indicate in respect to the magnificent growth 
that took place under the Blakeney regime: 
 

The province’s compound annual rate of growth was 4.2 
per cent between 1972 and 1982, compared to 2.7 per cent 
for Canada as a whole. 

 
Gross domestic product rose strongly from 3.4 billion in 
real terms in 1972 to 5.2 billion in ‘82. (They go on to say) 
Total personal income rose rapidly in the 10-year period, 
from 2.8 billion to $12 billion. Per capita incomes have 
grown similarly, exceeding national average. The value of 
commodity exports expanded by four times, (this is from 
1972-82) to 6.5 billion by 1982. The population jumped 
almost 10 per cent in 8 years, just under 1 million in 1982. 

 
(1500) 
 
These are the statements that your government put together; 
these are the facts that you put together. And it goes on, and it 
says: 
 

And one of the lowest per capita debt burdens in the 
country. That’s Saskatchewan’s opportunity. 

 
And you look at every indicator during that period, you will 
find that it exceeded the national performance. Gross domestic 
product, percentage change from ‘72-82, 51 per cent; in 
Canada, 30 per cent. Non-residential investment in 
Saskatchewan, 338 per cent increase; in Canada, 275. Retail 
sales increased during those years 197 per cent, as compared 
with rest of Canada, 186 per cent. And personal disposable 
income rose 333 per cent, compared to 267 per cent for the rest 
of Canada. 
 
So I say to you, Mr. Minister, those were some of the facts, 
enunciated in your own document, of how this province was 
run and how it was performing relative to the rest of Canada. 
And I guess the question is, Mr. Minister: what went wrong 
when your government assumed office? Here we had a Premier 
that stood up and said things were going so well in 
Saskatchewan that you could afford to mismanage and still 
break even. 
 
But I say to you, Mr. Minister, the facts don’t bear out that 
there was any management or any competence in your 
administration. I can say to you, Mr. Minister, that the total 
debt of this province when you assumed office was $3.5 billion. 
That was the total debt that was accumulated in 77 years since 
confederation — $3.5 billion. Today, after six years plus a few 
months of your administration, that debt has increased to $11.6 
billion — $8 billion additional debt during six plus a few 
months of office by the Tory government. 
 
I want to say that in respect to the province’s net debt, in 1981-
82, when you assumed office, the net debt, the 

province’s equity was $1 billion to the good, plus . . . assets 
over liabilities, we had $1 billion to the good. After your 
administration, six years of it, the province’s equity net debt is 
now a minus $2.9 billion. 
 
You saw under the previous administration, in respect to the 
Consolidated Fund, 11 balanced budgets, and when you 
assumed office, Mr. Minister, there was surplus in the 1981-82 
budget of $139.2 million. Seven years under this Tory 
administration and seven years of incompetence, of waste, and 
of mismanagement has passed this province into seven 
successive deficits with a total accumulated deficit of the 
Consolidated Fund in the neighbourhood of $4 billion. It’s 3.7, 
and then the auditor indicated that you didn’t account for 
another $181 million, so it’s about $3.9 billion of debt. 
 
That is the legacy of your administration, and that is the 
stewardship of your government — a 12 . . . almost a $12 
billion total debt, a deficit in the Consolidated Fund of over 
$3.9 billion. The three years that you have set forward a budget, 
Mr. Minister, it averages out to $700 million on average per 
year of deficit during the three years that you have been 
Finance minister. 
 
And this, it seems to me, casts a tremendous burden upon the 
people of Saskatchewan and the next generations. And I guess 
the people of Saskatchewan would not object if they could look 
and say, we are building or we’re progressing; we’re investing 
for the future; our programs are being maintained, but none of 
these facts seem to me to be very true. 
 
I want to ask the minister — in respect to the deficit, in respect 
to the total amount of debt that we have accumulated — Mr. 
Minister: how do you account for such a regrettable 
performance by your government in respect to the amassing of 
such huge debt and amassing of such successive deficits? 
 
I don’t think it’s possible that you can stand here and indicate 
that the circumstances from ‘82 to ‘85 were not receptive for 
balancing budgets. I’ll generally acknowledge that there have 
been some difficult and some softening in some of the aspects 
of the economy. But the fact remains, Mr. Minister, how can 
the people of Saskatchewan believe you? 
 
I look at the incredible facts that you stated in one of your 
budget addresses, the first one that you brought down just 
before the election, and you stood in this Chamber expecting 
the people of this province to believe you. And you know what 
you said in closing, the very last . . . second last paragraph of 
your budget address. Brought down that year a deficit of $389 
million. And he was going into an election, and he said this: a 
reduction in the deficit and a commitment to balance the budget 
in five years. 
 
A reduction in the deficit. That was in 1986-87. When you 
brought down the 389 projected deficit, you said to the people 
of Saskatchewan, based on my financial analysis and my 
financial expertise within my department, I am saying to you, 
you can trust me that the deficit is less than the previous year 
and that it will be a balanced budget in five years. 
  



 
June, 21, 1988 

2303 
 

You know what you’ve done since that? You completely and 
totally either didn’t believe that, or demonstrated an 
incompetence which I can’t believe any Finance minister 
would continue in that office unless it was a callous, conscious 
decision because of the election year. And what you did, you 
didn’t bring down a reduction in the deficit; you brought upon 
the people of this province a deficit of $1.2 billion — $800 
million over the estimated budget deficit which you said was 
going to be less than the previous year. 
 
And this is the type of management that the people of 
Saskatchewan are looking at. And we take a look at the debt of 
the provinces. In 1982, as I said, it was 3.5 billion. And that 
continued to increase, and today is $11,684 billion. 
 
I want to say that in the 77 years, Mr. Minister, before you 
assumed office, from 1905 to 1982, Saskatchewan had built 
schools; it built roads and hospitals and technical institutes; 
they’ve developed a university; they developed the new Regina 
campus; there was rural electrification; there was power and 
dams and coal fire generating plants; natural gas system; 
highways were in good to excellent shape compared to what 
they are today. And we find that here in Saskatchewan during 
that period of time, and certain from ‘71 to ‘82, that we had the 
finest safety net in North America for people. 
 
We had the finest health care system in North America. We had 
a drug program which the people of this province were proud 
of, and also we had the school-based dental program, which 
was the best in North America. 
 
All of that has been slashed under your government, but at the 
same time, Mr. Minister, to the amazement of the people of this 
province, while you have slashed and cut programs, 
underfunded education, underfunded health, the debt has 
increased, programs have been cut, and taxes have increased 
dramatically. 
 
And so I just want to ask the minister, in light of this 
tremendous burden that is laid upon the backs of people of 
Saskatchewan, I ask you, how do you justify such a huge debt 
placed on our future generations? How can you justify such a 
magnitude of deficits and virtually little to show for it? 
 
I’d like, Mr. Minister, for your justification of this 
incompetence, this mismanagement, and this waste, and which, 
I suggest to you, that if it continues, the people of 
Saskatchewan are fed up with the mismanagement that has 
been placed upon them by your government, I specifically ask 
you, Mr. Minister, how is it possible for you to stand in this 
House in ‘86-87, going into election, promising that there 
would be a reduction in the deficit when you estimate it at 389 
and then balloon it to $1.2 billion; I ask you, Mr. Minister: — 
how do you explain it to the young people of this province who 
will bear the responsibility of the payment of this massive debt? 
And how do you justify it in the light of the massive cuts in 
programs that we have encountered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, Mr. Chairman, this is a debate that 
has now been going on for about six and a half years 

and I’m sure it will continue. I do appreciate the hon. member 
reminding me of the quotes of a gentleman named Paul Hill, 
and those quotes were amply used and I think well publicized, 
if I recall, in the 1982 election. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Darn right. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — And darn right says the hon. member. My 
recollection at that time, before you used those quotes you were 
winning in the polls, and as soon as you ran those ads quoting 
Paul Hill, all of a sudden the whole 1982 election campaign 
turned around. So I suggest to the hon. member, I would be a 
little cautious if I were you, reciting those, because it had a 
rather negative effect in the 1982 election. 
 
I’d like to put a couple of things in perspective just so the hon. 
member knows, because one in particular I know that the 
debate will heat up and I personally believe that the issue will 
be a major one come the next provincial election. And of 
course the hon. member knows that in 1982 there was not a 
surplus left. There was a budgetary surplus, but when the books 
were opened the deficit was really 200-and-some million. But 
I’m going to, for argument’s sake, I’m going to take the 
budgetary numbers used by the government in its last budget, 
which it did not bring to a vote in this Assembly, I might add. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, no. That’s not what I asked. 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Oh, I know you didn’t, but I think that the 
public would be quite interested to hear this, that if we take 
those budgetary estimates of the government of the day, the 
New Democratic Party, that they had, after record years of 
potash prices, record years of oil prices, record resource 
revenues, that they could come out with a surplus of $131 
million. 
 
An Hon. Member: — 39 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — $139 million. It’s very, very interesting. 
It’s very, very interesting when everybody in the world knows 
that Saskatchewan has a highly cyclical economy. The wise 
government would have built up tremendous surpluses, so 
when we have a downturn the surpluses are there. That would 
have been very, very wise government. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, even accepting the NDP’s figures — and I 
will prove to the hon. member that they were totally wrong — 
there was not left in their budget enough to run government for 
13 days on the expenditures in 1982. That’s how much of a 
legacy the Blakeney administration, of which the hon. member 
was a part, they left in their budget enough to run government 
for 13 days. Thank you for the hoard of money, and thank you 
for saving for a rainy day. 
 
Here’s where the hon. member was further wrong. Included in 
that estimate was an overpayment of $120 million under 
equalization which this government had to negotiate to pay 
back over five years, which we just did last year. So even in 
that figure it was not correct. So I suggest to the hon. member, 
we can debate that for some 
  



 
June, 21, 1988 

2304 
 

time and I’m sure we will. 
 
Let me take what I believe to be an issue in the next campaign, 
and we’ve had some debate here now, and it’s the question of 
potash. And I know, I know it’s a very positive argument to 
take to the people of this province to ask them if instead of 
buying potash mines and spending the 800-and-some millions 
of dollars and borrowing that money, just think of what the 
economy could have been if that same amount of money had of 
been leveraged into new jobs, new businesses, new industries 
and new opportunities, instead of buying mines that were 
already there. 
 
I think any fair-minded person, any fair-minded person has to 
consider just what that would have done for economic 
diversification. If the choice had have been made . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sure, you’d have spent it all; you’d have 
given it away. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, even if you had have spent it. I’m not 
arguing who spent it. All I’m saying is that if the choice had 
have been made, to buying potash or taking the same amount of 
money and put it into new buildings, new projects, new 
opportunity, new jobs, new small business, I’ll tell you that the 
economy would have been so diversified already. 
 
So I suggest to the hon. member that there’s little doubt in my 
mind that potash will be a major debate and the options will be 
resurrected by the next provincial election. 
 
And I look forward to that debate because every one of you 
know that potash nationalization out there is no longer a 
positive issue for the NDP. Every single New Democratic 
member in this province knows full well, and they say full well, 
and they will admit that potash nationalization was a 
tremendous error, and they all admit to that mistake. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve presented to this legislature and to the 
people of this province a very simple calculation about two 
years ago . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It was simple, all right. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well it had to be for the hon. members; it 
had to be for the hon. members. 
 
If, instead of buying the potash industry as the NDP wanted to 
do, if that money had have been put into a credit union at the 
same interest rate as the average person would get in the credit 
union, by 1986 there would have been no deficit. That was the 
calculations — not at prime rates or rates that very select clients 
get, but the same interest rate that the average Saskatchewan 
person gets in his credit union. If that had have been just put 
aside, just put aside, there would have been surpluses. 
 
The hon. member says that he built new nursing homes . . . 

An Hon. Member: — I never mentioned nursing homes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Oh, oh, oh, oh. Oh, he says he never 
mentioned nursing homes; he talked about hospitals and health 
care facilities. I’m glad he never mentioned nursing homes, in 
which case I apologize to the hon. member, because I know he 
likes to be reminded of the famous memo that thousands of 
people in this province hold in their hands — a memo in the 
Blakeney government that there will be a moratorium on new 
nursing home construction and we promise never, the NDP 
promised never, ever, ever, ever to build another nursing home 
in this province, and that was a commitment. 
 
And now we have the new Leader of the New Democratic 
Party saying that he supports the moratorium. He won’t build 
new nursing homes because he does not want to see our seniors 
be put into nursing home, and that’s a commitment that he’s 
made and a commitment he’s made to the people of this 
province. I think that will be a matter of some debate. 
 
So having said, that, Mr. Speaker, this debate that we’ve had 
has been going on for some considerable period of time. I 
believe that the people of this province want to see the 
economic diversification. I believe that the people want to see 
their opportunity to own more and more of the provincial 
economy themselves. I believe that the people of this province 
want the opportunity to be able to make a commitment and a 
personal investment in the economic development of this 
province, and I believe most strongly that they do want that 
opportunity. That’s not an opportunity they’ve ever had before, 
and certainly not an opportunity that the New Democratic Party 
would give to them. 
 
I believe, as well, that the new opportunities like heavy oil 
upgraders and paper mills and the expansion of the economy so 
that the first time in this province’s history the labour force 
exceeds a half a million people, for the first time that we end up 
with a population of over a million — and I could go on and on 
with protection for home-makers at the same time and home 
owners and a Saskatchewan Pension Plan, and I look at help for 
farmers that need it in some difficult times. 
 
And I suggest to the hon. member, I suggest to the hon. 
member that there are some fundamental choices that the 
people will make in the next election. And I believe, I believe 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Darn mad, they’ll kick you out. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I hope that you keep thinking that because 
that was a commitment you made to me prior to the last 
election. All I suggest to the hon. member . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What about Eastview? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Ah, the hon. member says what about 
Eastview? They certainly don’t talk about the voter turn-out. 
They’ve been rather quiet. And I haven’t heard, Mr. Speaker, 
and I know the press hasn’t heard — I haven’t heard one NDP 
member, including their national leader, talk about their 
resounding successes in Quebec 
  



 
June, 21, 1988 

2305 
 

with their promises of breakthrough. 
 
So I suggest to the hon. member we’re having our traditional 
debate in the Committee of Finance. I suggest to the hon. 
member that there should have been a tremendous surplus. 
 
I believe that fundamentally that the nationalization of the 
potash industry and buying the P.A. pulp mill was wrong — it 
was not the Saskatchewan way. I don’t believe that spending 
hundreds of millions of dollars of buying prime farm land was 
the Saskatchewan way. I don’t believe it will be the 
Saskatchewan way a year from now or two years from now, 
and I dare you to say it will be three years from now — that 
buying potash mines is the Saskatchewan way. 
 
I don’t believe that that will be the case, and I don’t believe, I 
don’t believe, Mr. Speaker, that the opposition will 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . Oh, they say we’re going to give 
away the . . . I wished I could give away a potash mine, let me 
tell you, and take the debt with it — take the debt with it, Mr. 
Speaker, take the debt with it, because the taxpayers have paid 
so much for your social and political and economic 
experimentation that they won’t buy it again. 
 
So I suggest to the hon. member, you can talk about the past, 
you can talk about the past and what you did, but the people 
don’t want to see it, Mr. Speaker, and I believe that the 
Saskatchewan way and what we will see going into the next 
election is the vision of the province that the people have, 
where they’re participating as individuals and as people in the 
economic development of their province. And, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s what the debate will be. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, the minister indicated that he 
made yet another calculation. And he is going to tell the people 
now what has calculation is. Well, I just got finished telling you 
no one believes you. You made a calculation in 1986-87, and 
you said there would be a reduction in the deficit, and your 
calculation was out over $800 million. Now who’s going to 
listen to your calculations? And you give guarantees, too, Mr. 
Minister, and nobody believes you on guarantees either. 
 
I just want to raise one guarantee that you gave to the people of 
your constituency. “Guarantee” is the heading. 
 

Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan is 
committed to continue medicare system in our province. 
The Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan 
rejects any form of deterrent fees or health insurance 
premiums. The Progressive Conservative Party of 
Saskatchewan will abolish the unfair deterrent fees for 
prescription drugs. 

 
This was said by the minister, now the Minister of Finance — 
guarantee he gave to the people of Saskatchewan. I say, I want 
him and his credibility to go forward in the next election. And I 
have a suspicion that he won’t have the nerve to run again 
under the circumstances of the mess that he has left behind. 
 
He’s more likely to run for cover as he did when his party 

initially was in trouble — the former Liberal. And when they 
were in trouble, he ran for his own convenience. 
 
And I’ll tell you, when this party gets into trouble that man will 
not stand and protect his party when the people of 
Saskatchewan turn with scorn against his mismanagement and 
his deception and his guarantees that are not even worth the 
paper that they’re written on — not even worth the paper it’s 
written on. That’s the man that’s going to win the next election, 
a man that has deceived the people of this province in every 
turn. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, you’re so willing to give away 
potash mines. I wonder why, when a group approached you in 
respect to the purchase of it, that you didn’t in fact take up 
serious negotiations? 
 
An Hon. Member: — We never got an offer even. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Ah, you didn’t meet with them and they 
indicated that you wouldn’t meet with them. 
 
But let’s take a little closer look, because what you have 
excluded from your subsequent budgets is what was included in 
the budgets previously, and that’s called financial debt 
indicators. And I’d like the minister, if he would, to fill in some 
of the blanks in respect to the financial indicators under his 
fiscal management. And first of all, in March 31, ‘82, the per 
capita debt was 3,426, because that came out of the 1983 
budget brought in by your predecessor. I’d like if you could 
indicate to me what the per capita debt is as of March 31, ‘88. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Gross debt at March 31, 1988 is $10,594. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A fair little jump, I may say. I would ask if you 
would also indicate, as a percentage of combined budgetary 
revenue — March 31, ‘82, the debt of the province as a 
percentage of the combined budgetary revenues was 124.5 per 
cent. Would you indicate what the percentage . . . as a 
percentage of combined budgetary revenue as of March 31, 
‘88. 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The officials will work that out. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want, while you’re working, also to 
determine in respect to the debt as a percentage of the gross 
domestic product. In March 31 of ‘82 it was 22.8 per cent. 
Would you indicate what our debt represents in respect to the 
. . . as of March 31, ‘88, in respect to the gross domestic 
product? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well again, we’ll do the calculations and 
get those for you. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And, Mr. Minister, would you also have your 
officials indicate the interest payments on government portion 
of total debt as a percentage of the budget revenue? 
 
In March 31, 1982 it was 1.6 per cent. For every dollar that was 
raised as revenue, 1.6 cents went towards paying of payment of 
debt. Could you indicate what percentage 
  



 
June, 21, 1988 

2306 
 

is, as of March 31, ‘88, goes towards interest payments, as a 
portion of the total debt, as a percentage of the budget revenue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — 8.42 per cent. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That is the figures that we have worked out, 
Mr. Minister, and that takes us to March 31, ‘88. And there’s 
just a slight variance with yours. 
 
The per capita when you took over was 3,426. AS of March 31 
of ‘88 it exceeded $10,000 for every man, woman, and child. 
And now it’s up. In ‘88-89 your deficit has . . . your debt rather, 
has increased to $11.6 billion, and you divide it by 
approximately a million people, that’s approximately $11,600 
for every man, woman, and child. 
 
As a percentage of the combined budgetary revenue — if you 
haven’t figured it out — in March 31, ‘82 was 124.5 per cent. 
Today, Mr. Minister, it represents 345 per cent. As a percentage 
of the gross domestic product, in March 31, ‘82 it represented 
22.8 per cent. Today it represents, in our figures, 57 per cent. 
Interest payment on government portion of total debt as a 
percentage of the budget revenue was 1.6 per cent. And your 
calculation is in the neighbourhood of 8.4 per cent; our 
calculation was 9.2 per cent as of March 31. Now that’s 
excluding the massive increase in the debt from the previous 
year, up to $11.6 billion. 
 
So this is what has happened under your stewardship. Now if 
you had a economic policy, Mr. Minister . . . First of all you 
came with the promotion of “open for business,” and that was 
supposed to generate great economic growth in this province. 
And then that didn’t work because it ended up being “hoping 
for business.” And then you turned your mind to the onslaught 
of privatization. 
 
And so what I want to ask you now, Mr. Minister: — can you 
indicate in respect to the privatization plans that you have put in 
effect to date — we know of the coal mine at Manalta; that was 
sold off at Coronach, was sold to Manalta Coal. We know that 
you auctioned off the highway equipment. We know that 
you’ve sold a large percentage of Saskoil. WE know that 
you’ve sold off or given away Weyerhaeuser, the PAPCO 
(Prince Albert Pulp Company). We know that you’ve sold off 
Sask Minerals. We know that you’re selling off SMDC 
(Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation). We know 
that you’re selling off and have commissioned the sale of 
SaskCOMP — and the list goes on. 
 
But what I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: can you indicate 
what revenues have already been brought into the provincial 
treasury in respect to privatization; that is, in respect to the coal 
mine, the highway equipment, the Saskoil, the Weyerhaeuser, 
the Sask Minerals, the SaskCOMP, SMDC, and any other 
privatization? I’d like to know whether you could give us a 
breakdown of the amounts of revenue that was received by the 
Government of Saskatchewan, either by a Crown management 
or directly by Finance. But surely the Finance minister would 
indeed be on top of the revenues that are coming in from 
privatization. I ask the minister, could you 

provide us with those figures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We’ve received zero dollars. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well if the coal mine at . . . Okay, you’re 
saying, you received . . . Now are you saying that the 
Department of Finance . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m talking about the Consolidated Fund. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’m asking in respect . . . I’m talking about the 
gross debt of this province, and you have indicated what the 
amount of the gross debt of this province is. And what I want to 
know: what amount has been received by this government in 
respect to privatization, and is it reflected in that figure of $11.6 
billion of debt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Let’s be clear. The gross debt you’re 
talking about is not . . . that includes the debt of the Crown 
corporation. We can’t answer for Crown Management Board. 
That’s the . . .(inaudible interjection). . . No, that’s the . . . I’m 
not the minister responsible for the Crown Management Board. 
Secondly, I advise the hon. member that I believe that that’s 
done in another forum. 
 
But I’m telling the hon. member that in the Consolidated Fund 
we’ve received no dollars on privatization. The only change in 
the Consolidated Fund with regard to privatization, which we 
will I’m sure discuss later with the hon. member from Regina 
Victoria, is the fact that the investment corporation . . . some of 
the activities previously done by Finance will now be done by 
the investment corporation, which we will be discussing over 
the next few days. But as far as the Consolidated Fund is 
concerned, we’ve received zero dollars, as I’ve indicated. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’m not asking in respect to the Consolidated 
Fund, but I would have thought that when you were putting 
down the total debt of the province, the gross debt, which 
includes the combination of the Consolidated Fund and the 
Crown corporations, that you would be knowledgeable in 
writing down that figure as to what goes into it. 
 
In other words, I would have thought, Mr. Minister, that if 
money was paid in as a result of privatization, that that would 
have been reflected in the figure that you incorporate in your 
budget in respect to the debt of the Crown corporations. And I 
don’t know how you can come down in this House, put down a 
figure in respect to the total debt, which is a combination of the 
two, and not have knowledge in respect to the returns that were 
received by the province in respect to the privatization. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — To the hon. member, there’s been no 
dividends taken from the Crown Management Board since 
1983. So certainly I will give the hon. member this — to take 
the debate into the realm of what happens to the moneys from a 
privatization, and as I’ve indicated, none have come into the 
Consolidated Fund; that will be a matter for Crown 
Management Board to make the decisions to how those funds 
are going to be allocated. They do not go into the budget 
planning, and they don’t go into the Consolidated Fund. 
  



 
June, 21, 1988 

2307 
 

 
Mr. Koskie: — Just one further question. I know all that, and I 
know that they’re paid into Crown management . . . likely are 
to be paid into Crown management. But what I’m asking you 
is, you’re indicating in your document the total debt of the 
province, and that includes Crowns. 
 
Now how can you come into this House and state a figure as to 
the amount of debt of the Crown corporations — and it’s listed 
in your budget address — without knowing the figures as to 
what is the income in respect to the privatization? It’s ludicrous, 
because how can you depend on the figures? Obviously there 
has been some money paid into the government, either in the 
Crown sector or in the consolidated. You say there hasn’t been 
no dividend paid to the consolidated, so leave that aside. 
 
Now I ask you in respect to arriving at the figure, in respect to 
the debt of the Crown corporations, is it included, the moneys 
received in respect to privatization? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The hon. member will see that, for 
example, the sale of Crown corporation will show up in the 
next year’s position of the Crown Management Board, and its 
position, and certainly will have some effect on the gross debt 
— I can’t tell you what effect. We’re basing our report on the 
assumption of no revenues from privatization, and we had to 
plan that way. We will certainly be able to report next year as to 
the overall position, but we . . . well, the hon. member shakes 
his head. I mean, we can’t sit and make an assumption that, 
even though a transaction’s being negotiated, that it’s 
necessarily going to take place until it’s finally done. And so 
we could not put that into the estimates until a transaction is 
completed and money is received. I mean, I don’t think the hon. 
member would expect anything else. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairperson. Mr. 
Minister, two years ago Saskoil was sold by your government. I 
understand there was in excess of $75 million that was accrued 
to the province as a result of that sale. Can you tell me where 
that money went? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That accrued to the Crown Management 
Board. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, can you advise me whether or 
not it’s reflected in the Crown Management Board’s statement 
of debt that shows up in your annual budgetary statements. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m advised that it would show up perhaps 
as an operating income, which would reduce the loss that 
Crown Management Board would have. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, in your budget address in 
March of 1988, you indicated to the people of this province that 
we had a gross debt of some $11.2 billion. You indicated to the 
people of this province that we had a total Crown corporation 
debt of $7.4 billion. In 1988 there was an estimate of Crown 
corporation debt of $7.1 billion. Can you give me the actuals in 
terms of Crown corporation debt for the year 1988? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Would you tell us, because the figure that 
you used was March 31, ‘89, of the 11.2, but not ‘88, 

and the hon. member from Quill Lakes . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . No, but the hon. member for Quill Lakes had 
asked at ‘88, so there are different figures obviously. 
 
(1545) 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, your budget address is dated 
March ‘88. If you turn to page 37 you have an estimate for 
1989. I suspect I would have stated it 1988-89, but you stated it 
as 1989, a total Crown corporation debt of $7.4 billion. 
 
Under your estimated Crown corporation debt for 1988 — I 
would have stated it 1987-88, but you stated it 1988 — you say 
that there’s a Crown corporation debt of $7.1 billion. I’m 
asking you to tell me what the actual Crown corporation debt 
was for the year 1987-88, or as you stated in this document, 
1988. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Just so the hon. member understands, 
we’re . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh I understand . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, no. What we’re talking about, if you 
refer to page 37, okay? You’ve got the estimated debt. I will 
give you the figures as we did with the hon. member through 
the revenue side, okay? The estimated on the Crown 
corporation at March 31, ‘88, the preliminary estimate we have 
now is 6,850,088,000. 
 
There will be a slight reduction on the next category, which is 
“other,” if you want to . . . The amount set out is 193,562 in the 
estimated ‘88. Our preliminary estimates are now 193,453. 
 
The non-reimbursable debt, which is $3,303,929,000 in the 
Estimates — our preliminary estimates are now 3,171,257,000. 
And the total gross debt estimated in the budget is 
10,671,786,000. It will be 10 billion . . . preliminary estimates 
are 10,214,798,000. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well that doesn’t do anything at all, Mr. 
Minister, other than to tell me that once again you have 
miscalculated, as usual, information that’s contained in these 
documents that indicate to the people of Saskatchewan the 
financial situation for our citizens. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, we want to talk about privatization. Your 
government has this ideological bent that says, sell at all costs, 
sell everything. And we don’t quite understand why. We’re 
trying to get at here whether or not this “sell at all costs” is to 
lower the gross debt of our province. 
 
In 1986 you sold Saskoil. You can’t show me where in these 
documents this has lowered the gross debt of our province. In 
1986 you sold PAPCO to Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, 
Washington. Where in this document would I find the 
Weyerhaeuser sale, the money that has accrued from the 
Weyerhaeuser sale? Where would it be in terms of lowering the 
gross debt of our province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I hate to tell the hon. member that the 
reason for the change in the estimates — and understand, 
they’re estimates — is that the Crown 
  



 
June, 21, 1988 

2308 
 

corporations actually borrowed less than they had estimated 
they were going to do a year ago. That’s the reason for the 
difference. It’s not any great, nefarious . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Or it could be privatization. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, it’s not. The privatization, if there are 
any revenues, would shop up in Crown Management Board. 
Keep in mind as well that if an asset ended up with a significant 
debt, selling it for the amount of the debt doesn’t get you any 
great return to generally reduce . . . have significant reduction. 
 
And finally, keep in mind, that . . . you’ve indicated that 
privatization is an ideological vent to try and reduce the deficit. 
That is not true. What I suggest to the hon. member, that the 
objectives of public participation and privatization are to 
diversify the economy, create jobs, create new opportunities, 
and to give the people of this province a direct involvement in 
the economy, and a direct involvement, if they’re employees, in 
the operations of the company for which they work. 
 
And I suggest to the hon. member that that debate we will have 
for some considerable time with regard to the specifics as to 
where it flows within Crown Management Board. There is 
another forum to deal with Crown Management Board, and I 
suggest that the hon. member take her questions to the Crown 
Management Board. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well earlier this afternoon in question 
period, the Minister of Science and Technology was suggesting 
that we take our questions on the Develcon deal to the SEDCO 
minister. This afternoon, with the Minister of Finance, he’s 
suggesting that we take our questions with regard to the overall 
operations of our province, not only the Consolidated Fund 
operations but also the Crown corporations of our province, he 
says, take our questions to Crown Management Board. 
 
Mr. Minister, you are the Finance minister of this province. 
You are in charge of the industrial strategy of this province as it 
pertains to collecting revenue and expenditures in this province. 
That’s your job, Mr. Minister, and you can grimace all you 
want, but that is in fact the case. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you say that privatization, Tory style, is not 
to reduce the deficit. If privatization is not to reduce the deficit, 
Mr. Minister, what’s happening to all of this money that 
apparently is being accrued from the sales of Saskatchewan 
assets? Where is that money going and why can’t you give us 
an accounting for it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Again, I suggest to the hon. member that 
you can’t take a look at the use of those moneys if the deal is 
still not finalized, or if the deal . . . the transaction is payment 
over time. You’ve had all the documents on Weyerhaeuser; 
you’ve had ample opportunity to debate and you’ve expressed 
your views. Your views are not being accepted by the people of 
the province with regard to Weyerhaeuser and the hon. member 
knows that. 
 
And so I suggest . . . and for you to try and leave the impression 
that the use of a holding company as a vehicle for government 
management is new, let me tell you that 

that is not the case; that Crown investments corporation, the 
predecessor to CMB (Crown Management Board), was set up 
some many years ago. 
 
Secondly, keep in mind that under the previous administration 
there was a separate minister responsible and reporting for 
Crown Management Board. So that is not new. To try and 
suggest historically that the Minister of Finance has been 
involved in all of the economic activity, is not correct, and it’s 
probably not wise for that to be the case. There are other 
ministers involved and there are other avenues to deal with the 
Crown Management Board, which is Crown Corporations 
Committee. 
 
That’s all I’m suggesting to the hon. member. It is not a new 
process; it’s not a new procedure and that’s the proper forum. 
And to expect the Minister of Finance, who is not the minister 
responsible to the Crown Management Board to be intimately 
involved in all of this, is simply not correct. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, we have a budget 
address dated March of 1988 where you laid out the strategy of 
your provincial government for the coming year in terms of the 
collection of revenues and expenditures on behalf of the people 
of our province. And in this document, Mr. Minister, we have a 
statement on page 36 and 37 of the total debt of our province. 
We have a statement as to the gross debt by allocation. We 
have a statement where a Crown corporation debt is laid out. 
We have a statement, Mr. Minister, that indicates that Crown 
corporation debt will increase a significant amount of money in 
view of the fact of what you are now actually predicting for the 
year ending March of 1988. Crown corporation debt, Mr. 
Minister, will increase by some $600 million. 
 
Now we, Mr. Minister, have seen your government sell off 
some very lucrative assets that have been accrued by the people 
of our province. Saskatchewan Oil, for instance, was sold off 
by your government. Apparently you reaped $75 million. I’m 
asking you where this would show up in this budgetary 
statement in terms of debt. Where would the sell-off of the 
SaskPower Corporation properties show up in this statement 
that you provided? Where would the sell-off of Sask Minerals 
show up? Where would the sell-off of SaskCOMP, the 
highways equipment, the dental equipment, where is this 
money going to, Mr. Minister? 
 
I want an explanation; I want you to account for all of the assets 
that have been sold off. And apparently Saskatchewan people 
are supposed to be reaping some sort of benefit from this sell-
off, and I’m wondering where the money’s going to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well there are several different 
components. And let’s assume, which is not likely on some of 
the investments made by the previous administration, that 
there’s a capital gains on the sale. If there is a capital gain on 
the sale, that will go in to Crown Management Board income, 
okay? Obviously at some point the government will have to 
decide what to do with that. 
  



 
June, 21, 1988 

2309 
 

On the Saskoil, I’m told that the moneys were used to repay the 
Heritage Fund — which was another creation of some years 
back — investment. So they to date have stayed in the Crown 
sector. 
 
(1600) 
 
But secondly, as I’ve raised with the hon. member, at some 
point there may have to be a decision, if there are capital gains, 
a to what to do with that income. But to date, that has not been 
the case, and as I indicated that they can . . . if the asset had 
substantial debt, it would simply go to repay the debt of that 
particular asset. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, are you saying then that with the 
$11.6 billion estimated debt, gross debt, that it has indeed taken 
into account — I mean that money that from the sale-off of 
assets has been structured into the whole financial picture of the 
province? And when you have the $11.6 billion debt, can you 
advise this House that in fact takes into consideration the 
moneys received from the sale of the highway equipment; that 
it received from the sell-off of the dental program and 
equipment? That the 11.6 billion includes and recognizes the 
sale-off of Saskoil and the moneys received by the province? 
Does it also take into consideration the 11.6 billion debt, the 
money received, if any, from Weyerhaeuser? Sask Minerals? 
And the lists go on. 
 
But specifically what we’re asking, does the $11.6 billion of 
debt hoisted upon the province also include the sale-off and 
recognize the revenues received from the sale-off of assets? 
That’s the key question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Except keep in mind that we can’t take 
those into account in doing our budgetary planning for the very 
simple fact that the transaction may not be closed, and it may 
not close. 
 
Let’s take a look at . . . I am advised that the Saskoil went to 
repay the Heritage Fund investment. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Okay, highway equipment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Highways equipment, we’ll get you that 
information. But I’m sure that all that would do is reduce some 
cash requirements of the government. 
 
With regard to the hon. member, I don’t want the hon. member 
to be interpreting the estimated reduction as coming from 
privatization, that is, coming in a reduction in the borrowing 
requirements to Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well what you have really indicated to us, Mr. 
Minister, is the following: — that we have a debt of $11.6 
billion; we have a consolidated debt of 3.7 or 3.9, depending on 
whether you listen to the auditor or yourself — and I prefer the 
auditor, for obvious reasons. 
 
The fact remains here, Mr. Minister, with $11.6 billion, what 
we have seen, the accumulation of that massive debt, estimated 
debt, and at the same time we have seen the disposal of a coal-
mine, highway equipment, Saskoil, Weyerhaeuser, PAPCO, 
Sask Minerals, Saskoil, and the list goes on. 

This situation is even worse than what I projected initially, 
because not only do we have a massive debt on the backs of the 
people, you have sold off a substantial amount of assets of this 
province and the debt has risen each year. 
 
This is the problem that we have with you, Mr. Minister, and 
the economic policies of your government. But not only have 
you sold off the assets, you haven’t even been able to reduce 
the debt. It’s gone up another billion this year. And at the same 
time, what you have heaped upon the people of this province, 
massive tax increases. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, a few specific questions in 
respect to the debt. Will you agree and publicly indicate to the 
public that under your . . . as Minister of Finance, that the 
accumulated deficit during the three budgets that you have 
brought down is in excess of $2.1 billion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We’ll do the total, but I just correct the 
hon. member that you’ve been using 11.6 for some reason, and 
I’ve just indicated to the member from Saskatoon that the 
preliminary estimates are down from the estimated set out in 
the budget papers, so that figure is not correct. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, I want to further indicate to you 
in respect to getting back to the mismanagement of your 
government, to take a look at the history of this province, to go 
back all the way to 1947 up to the present. And during those 
years from 1947 up to 1982, ‘81-82, there was only two very 
small deficits in this province — in 1962 there was 3,359,000, 
and in 1961 there was $2,421,000. 
 
Now these were difficult times too, if you recall, Mr. Minister. 
In 1960-61 we were hit with a major drought; in the mid-’60s 
we had the problem of surplus of grains and introduction by the 
federal government of a “lift” program. And throughout all 
those years, all those years, previous governments were able to 
balance their books with the exception of about $5 million in 
‘61-62. And here we have a government, the so-called 
managers they claim, and the deficits have accumulated in 
every successive year that you have operated. You started in 
‘82-83, and every subsequent year a massive deficit has been 
accumulated. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, why is it so necessary . . . how 
do you account that this province throughout its years when it 
didn’t have its massive resource base, when agriculture was . . . 
I doubt if it was developed to the same degree that it was today, 
but throughout all those years, from ‘47 up until you assumed 
office, were able to balance the books and to develop this 
province, which was the envy, I may say, of Canada. There’s 
no doubt that the financial institutions in dealing with 
Saskatchewan indicated under the Blakeney years that it was 
the best financially managed area in North America. And I ask 
you to remember that, Mr. Chairman, because that stated, and 
that is true. 
 
And I may say that during those years our credit rating didn’t 
go down. Our credit rating went up and up. And it’s only under 
your administration the deficit has accumulated, the debt has 
accumulated, the credit rating 
  



 
June, 21, 1988 

2310 
 

has gone down, and also, Mr. Minister, the taxes on the backs 
of the people of this province have risen massively. 
 
And I can only say, Mr. Minister, you must have a better 
explanation of why the consequences of this economic policy 
has cast a shadow on the fiscal future of this here province, 
because that is a massive debt to lay on the backs of a million 
people. And you talk about balancing a deficit, but that doesn’t 
solve the problem of your mismanagement, because in your 
own estimates you’re indicating that it’s almost $330 million 
annually just to service the debt. That’s almost a million dollars 
a day just to pay interest on the debt that you have accumulated, 
$329 million of interest. No wonder with this mismanagement 
that we have a backlog of waiting lists at our hospitals and a cut 
in our education funding and our health care programs being 
slashed. 
 
I want to ask, Mr. Minister, two things: one, can you confirm 
that we have come from the lowest per capita debt in Canada to 
being now number one, the highest per capita debt in Canada? 
— per capita. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well the hon. member has to keep in mind 
that gross debt includes the debt of the Crown corporations. 
And I find . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Well he knows that, 
but I find it very, very interesting that no other government in 
Canada chose to establish a potash Crown corporation and 
borrow money and increase the debt through that Crown 
corporation. 
 
No other government in Canada made the decision to buy into 
the uranium industry and run up debt in the province on that 
Crown corporation . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Oh yes, which 
. . . oh yes, which is in the gross debt of this province. So I can 
. . . No other province that I’m aware of chose to buy a pulp 
mill and increase the debt of the province. And then, Mr. 
Speaker, the gross debt — and the hon. member should 
remember that — includes things like the potash corporation. It 
includes corporations like the Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation. It includes all of those commercial 
Crown corporations that the hon. member chose to put 
taxpayers’ money into. 
 
So when you talk about gross debt, we are in a unique position. 
We’re in a unique position because we were the Social 
Democrats’ economic experimentation crucible here, whereby 
they would get into the resource industry and buy up 
companies, that they would buy up pulp mills, they would buy 
up farm land. No other province in Canada, Mr. Speaker, 
embarked down that rather slippery slope. 
 
I suggest to the hon. member that when we look at the 
province’s debt charges as a percentage of revenue, 
Saskatchewan is the third lowest. Our percentage, as I’ve 
indicated, is 8.42 per cent, Alberta, 4.22 per cent, and British 
Columbia, 5.28 per cent. 
 
An Hon. Member: — All happened in the last six years. 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker . . . and that’s not correct 
when the hon. member says, all in the last six years - 

that’s not correct. Manitoba, for example, under the NDP, 
11.23; and I can go on and on and on, Mr. Speaker, but we do 
have the third lowest in the country. 
 
I can compare our rating with Manitoba’s, for example. We’re 
AA, Standard & Poor’s, AA minus; Manitoba under the NDP, 
A plus. DBRS (Dominion Bond Rating Service), Saskatchewan 
is an A high, Manitoba an A low. So I can give some 
comparisons when you talk about ratings. 
 
But to compare, compare your social economic 
experimentation, and try and say that that’s not a factor in the 
gross debt of this province, is wrong, and the hon. member 
knows it’s wrong. In the gross debt of the province is included 
the debt of the Crown corporations, for which you have to take 
a degree of responsibility, and the people out there are not 
letting you avoid it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, just a simple question. Can you 
confirm, in respect to the three budgets that you brought down, 
that the accumulation of the deficit of those three budgets 
exceeds $2.1 billion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — 2,137. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You add on the part that was left off, and the 
auditor indicated it would be somewhere in the neighbourhood 
of $2.3 billion, an average of $700 million each year. That’s 
great fiscal management, Mr. Minister. 
 
Just for the record, I have here — source is Midland Doherty, 
provincial budget reports, and it indicates clearly here that 
standing as number one — it was the best in Canada under the 
previous administration. And now under this administration it is 
number one — world class, Tory style. It has Saskatchewan 
leading all other provinces with per capita debt, and that’s debt 
per capita, ‘87 budgets — 8,369. That’s the facts. That’s the 
financial institution that confirms our position, Mr. Minister, 
and you can’t get around it. 
 
I want to turn also to the devastation that you have placed upon 
the people of Saskatchewan with your mismanagement and 
incompetence, and that takes us to the area of taxes. And I want 
to go over some of the tax policies of your government, and I 
want to ask you whether you think you’ve been fair to the 
people of this province. 
 
If I take a look at the personal income tax from 1983 to ‘84 up 
to ‘88-89, we find that you have increased the total personal 
income tax by $266 million. From ‘83-84 it was 565 million, 
and you’ve increased it to 800 . . . estimated 831 million, or a 
difference of $266 million for ‘83-84. 
 
In the sales tax revenue, which hits a lot of ordinary 
Saskatchewan citizens, you’ve increased that from 340 in ‘83-
84 to 476 million estimated in ‘88-89 — a total increase again 
of $136 million. 
 
If you take a look at the . . . on the other hand, in respect to the 
corporate income tax for the same period of time, from ‘83-84 
up to ‘88-89 estimate, a miserable increase of $1.7 million. 
Corporate income tax, from ‘83 to ‘84 up to ‘88-89, increased 
by $1.7 million. At the same time, 
  



 
June, 21, 1988 

2311 
 

personal income taxes increased by $266 million; sales tax 
revenue increased by $136 million. Clear indication here, Mr. 
Minister, that what you have done is to lay the taxation policies 
and increase in taxes on the backs of ordinary Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
And I say to you that the personal income tax that we pay here 
in Saskatchewan in ‘87 was the second highest personal income 
tax in Canada for a person earning 35,000 income. And that’s 
in your own ‘87-88 estimate book. And this year what you did 
was to increase again the flat tax and added on yet another 
substantial increase on the backs of ordinary people. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, the other obvious things that is 
happening, and if you look at your charts in your budget 
address, is that the revenue or a portion of the revenue from 
non-renewable resources has decreased — has decreased from 
13.2 per cent down to a little over 11 per cent. The only one 
that seems to be rising is your equalization payment. 
 
And so I don’t know how you can stand here and try to justify 
an economic policy with every single indicator indicating the 
reverse. Massive debt, deficit every single year, and now we 
turn to the imposition of heavy taxation burden on the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I ask you, just for comparison sake, I want to reiterate, from 
‘83-84 to ‘88-89 corporate income taxes increased by 1.7 
million, personal income taxes by 266, sales tax by 136 million. 
The extra revenue from corporate income plus corporate 
capital, combined, is an additional $63 million. The extra 
revenue from personal income plus sales tax, combined, is 
$402 million, Mr. Minister. 
 
This is the shift that you have made. You have created a debt 
by handing out large amounts of money to the corporate sector, 
the Pocklingtons of the world, the Weyerhaeusers of the world 
— and the list goes on. And you have created debt, and now the 
ordinary people of Saskatchewan are burdened with the 
massive increase. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you why you think it’s fair that the 
people of Saskatchewan, who have built this province, should 
now be faced with the burden of your incompetence and your 
deficits, when indeed what you have been doing with a large 
percentage of the money is either handing it out to your 
corporate friends — the million dollars that you handed out to 
Canada Packers; the 21 million that you handed out to Peter 
Pocklington; the cushy deal that Weyerhaeuser either sucked 
you into with your incompetence or certainly a deal, I think, 
that any corporation would jump at. 
 
And so I guess the question that the people are asking is, at the 
same time that you are devastating them with increase in taxes, 
you had the utter gall to reduce the property improvement grant 
— some $83 million that was helping to reduce the taxes paid 
throughout the province, and I ask you, and the people of this 
province are also asking, Mr. Minister: how do you justify that 
during the period of 1982 to ‘85, when in fact you . . . indeed, 
oil production doubled, from $2.1 billion in value — $1.2 to 
$2.4 billion — that no additional revenue was received from 
the oil companies? And in fact in ‘82-83 the revenue from oil 

revenues was 700 million; and ‘85-87, with double the value of 
oil produced, you received for the people of this province $674 
million. 
 
Obviously what the problem is, in part at least, Mr. Minister, is 
the priorities of your government. What you have decided to do 
is to tax the people of Saskatchewan that built this province, 
and to the oil companies, you erred in not getting a reasonable 
return during that period from ‘82 to ‘85-86. 
 
I guess the people of the province are asking us to ask you to 
justify why you should impose on them massive increases at 
the same time that you cut programs and that you’re intending 
to give further corporate benefits in royalty tax reductions. 
 
Those are the questions they’re asking, Mr. Minister. I’d like to 
ask you to respond whether you think your taxation policies 
have been fair to the people of this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I would like the hon. member 
to take a look at the real facts, and now that we have all 
provincial budgets in, I’m going to tell the hon. member and the 
people of this province where Saskatchewan stands relative to 
the other provinces. And this is now that all provincial budgets 
have been tabled. 
 
For a taxpayer earning $20,000 a year or less, Saskatchewan is 
in second place, second to Manitoba. For a taxpayer earning 
$30,000 a year, Saskatchewan has the third lowest taxes in 
Canada after Alberta and Manitoba. For a taxpayer earning 
$40,000 a year, Saskatchewan has the second lowest taxes in 
Canada after Alberta. And, Mr. Speaker, for someone earning 
$50,000 a year, the taxes and charges in Saskatchewan are 
second only to Alberta, the second lowest in Canada. And for a 
taxpayer earning $60,000 a year, the taxes and charges in 
Saskatchewan are the third lowest in Canada. 
 
I ask the hon. member to take a look at the budget address and 
when you take a look at the taxes and charges, and I think it 
only fair that you do, because other provinces don’t exempt, for 
example, power bills from E&H tax, and other provinces do not 
exempt clothing as Saskatchewan does. 
 
And when we take a look at other provinces charging a fuel tax, 
including the province of Alberta, and ours is rebated to the 
average taxpayer of this province, Mr. Speaker. And when one 
takes a look at those and takes a look at the charges of 
government, that Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, for someone 
earning $20,000 per year, I believe the second lowest in Canada 
to Manitoba, the difference being about $150. For a taxpayer 
earning $40,000 a year, Saskatchewan has the second lowest in 
Canada, Mr. Speaker. Taxpayer earning $60,000 a year, when 
you take a look at those other charges, Saskatchewan taxpayer 
again, third lowest in Canada. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, yes, taxes are unfortunately a fact of life. And 
I suggest to the hon. member and to the people of this province, 
when we compare with the tax situations in other jurisdictions, 
when we are consistently the second or third lowest in Canada, 
that the opposition should be made aware of that. 
  



 
June, 21, 1988 

2312 
 

When the hon. member talks about a comparison with 
corporate and personal income taxes, I just ask the hon. 
member to understand that if we have half a million individual 
taxpayers and 100 corporations, in all likelihood there’s going 
to be a great deal more revenue from individuals than there is 
from companies. I really expect, Mr. Speaker, I really expect 
the hon. member to support this government’s initiatives to 
diversify the economy so we get more corporate revenue. 
 
But let me correct the hon. member further. He says we’re 
reducing it in 1988. That’s not correct. We’ve indicated in 1989 
there will be some changes with regard to corporate income 
tax. But let me tell you, the hon. member forgets that since 
1982 the corporate capital tax on large corporations has gone 
up 365.6 per cent, Mr. Speaker; that the combined corporate 
taxes of corporate income tax, and the corporate capital tax 
have in fact gone up 99 per cent since 1982, Mr. Speaker. 
Corporate taxes . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Well the hon. 
member doesn’t want to hear it, but in fact corporate taxes have 
gone up more dramatically, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1630) 
 
I advise the hon. member, certainly there was an increase in the 
corporate capital tax in this budget. I’ve indicated to the hon. 
member and to the people of this province, it is being brought 
in in a way to try and give as much benefit to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan as possible, and it will track the federal 
government tax reform initiatives. So that effective this July 1, I 
believe, in another ten days, the people . . . 95 per cent of the 
taxpayers will have a higher take home, Mr. Speaker, as a result 
of the relationship between the tax increase in Saskatchewan on 
the flat tax and the federal tax reform reductions. So we have 
tried to ease the tax burden. 
 
The hon. member complains about, and I know the small-
business community is starting to be concerned about the New 
Democratic Party position when they are so strongly objecting 
to this government trying to reduce the business tax. All I can 
tell the hon. member, we will try and reduce the business tax. 
We have made a commitment in 1989 for $10 million in 
expenditures to try and reduce that tax. 
 
We have put out for public discussion, and I hope that the 
opposition will make a contribution, to what form the personal 
income tax system should take in Saskatchewan starting, 
hopefully, in 1989. That can mean some significant differences 
to the average taxpayer. 
 
So I suggest to the hon. member, we will obviously continue 
this debate for a long period of time. We’ve had it for several 
years, but I think that when we hold ourselves up to scrutiny 
compared to other provinces, Saskatchewan holds up rather 
well. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, would it be possible to make that 
shift? Do you have the other staff? We could finish off SaskTel 
and what else? SaskTel and Telephones or whatever it is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Let me get the officials. 

Mr. Koskie: — Yes. If you would, if we could finish that off 
within the half hour and perhaps after . . . at seven we could 
come back on Finance. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Department of Telephones 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 38 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I would like to introduce to the committee, 
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Doug Smith, deputy minister, Department 
of Telephones 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, I’m sure this will appear 
as welcome relief to you after the last department you were 
dealing with. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could give me a 
brief sketch of the communications policy area in the 
Department of Telephones and what’s happening there 
recently. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ll give quickly to the hon. member the 
mandate. The Department of Telephones has a lead role in 
conducting federal-provincial negotiations on 
telecommunications policy, monitoring federal regulatory 
process, particularly the CRTC (Canadian Radio-television and 
Telecommunications Commission), preparation of provincial 
government submissions if any are necessary to the CRTC, 
obviously the normal activities in terms of preparation for any 
federal-provincial meetings or provincial meetings with regard 
to communications policies and plans. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — In the previous year, how many 
submissions were made, presentations that would qualify, in 
your word, as submissions, were made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — To whom, CRTC of federal . . . 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — And other jurisdictions, other bodies. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We’re estimating. If you want to get a 
precise list, we’ll have to prepare that for you, but there have 
been two major studies of all jurisdictions, including the federal 
government, over the last couple of years, trying to get a 
national policy, for example, on the impacts of competition on 
long distance . . . competition in the telephone system and the 
impact on long distance. The deputy indicates there are 
probably at least 12 presentations and efforts in that regard with 
those ongoing committees. 
 
We have numerous representations before the CRTC, 
particularly in regard to cable television outlets in the province 
in terms of trying to expand the number of local rural 
communities under our program that have access to cable 
television. That’s an ongoing function. We would have to get 
the total list of those. The deputy estimates there would be 
somewhere around 12, including any representation before the 
Department of Communications in Ottawa. 
  



 
June, 21, 1988 

2313 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — At a later time, Mr. Minister, could you 
make available to me that list of 12 and if there is executive 
summary of each of them. If not, the submission itself. 
 
And a final question on this section: — do you anticipate the 
level of submissions to continue at about the same as it was in 
the previous year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I would expect myself that they would 
increase because of the pressures on long distance. We’ve 
stated our policy before the Crown Corporations Committee 
and in this Assembly before, that we fully support the cross-
subsidization and the ability of our telecommunications 
company to subsidize the lower local rates with long distance 
revenues. 
 
I’ve indicated to the hon. member that the increasing problem is 
no longer a philosophical one, as I think it was some time in the 
past with some jurisdictions. It’s just now that the 
communications technology is such that we can have large 
Saskatchewan data base users, for example, just access a 
satellite and bypass the telephone system. We’re starting to see 
large national users simply set up their own systems. 
 
So those problems are there, and I see that those problems will 
intensify, and I believe that we would see more representations 
trying to maintain the province’s position in that changing 
environment. 
 
I want to be cautious with the member. When I said the 
estimate was 12 submissions, that’s what we’re guessing on 
that . . . the difference; the number may be higher or lower 
when we do give you that list. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — You will provide the list and the 
summaries. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, you have listed here 
members of the Executive Council, item 4, legislative 
secretaries, and the amount of $6,900. That’s for what? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That’s my Legislative Secretary, the 
member from Arm River. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I believe in Crown corporations you said 
the member for Arm River dealt with ILS (individual line 
service) program and so forth. And that is . . . Are you 
suggesting ILS is under here or under Sask 
Telecommunications? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, the ILS is the Department of 
Telephones. That’s, I’m advised, is the practice, to have the 
Legislative Secretary report under one department. I might 
advise that he will have, and has, some occasional duties in 
terms of a local community wanting the cable television system 
and process and procedures, etc. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, when you rose you said 
the ILS was under Department of Telephones. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — ILS is under the SaskTel. 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Okay. You see no reason why you 
shouldn’t charge the Legislative Secretary to SaskTel rather 
than Department of Telephones? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I would hate to see the hon. member miss 
the opportunity to debate the Legislative Secretary in 
Committee of Finance if that was the case, and so you have a 
second opportunity to deal with it. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I don’t think it matters that much, Mr. 
Minister; just curiosity on my part. 
 
I do want to deal with item 3, which is payments to the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. Going from 
the estimated 1987-88 to the present estimates, it’s increased by 
$9,900, and that’s an increase of 14 per cent. Why is there an 
increase of over 14 per cent payment to the property 
management corporation? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I’m advised that the $9,000 increase 
is the figures from property management. Their normal 
escalation factor is based on operating costs and lease 
escalations. That’s the only information I have. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Fourteen per cent — 14 per cent. I think, 
Mr. Minister, you may be getting ripped off by the property 
management corporation. 
 
And I would like you to, at a later time, give me a more 
detailed accounting of this 14 per cent increase of payments to 
the property management corporation and what it’s for, what 
space it’s for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I’m advised about two years ago the 
department moved to new space, Saskatchewan Place. And as 
property management’s gone through its evaluations, that’s 
what they have. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — In other words, what you’re telling me, 
Mr. Minister, that there was no change in the amount of space 
you’re using; it’s just that property management corporation 
jacked up your rate over 14 per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That increase, as you say, came from the 
property management. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How does he account for it? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — He’s not accounting for it. What the 
minister is saying to us is that the property management 
corporation said, your rate’s gone up 14 per cent and no ifs, 
ands, or buts — pay it. 
 
Mr. Minister, does the SaskTel relay service come under 
SaskTel and not under the department? This is with regard to 
the deaf. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, that would come under SaskTel. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Under SaskTel, okay. That’s all I have 
on that particular department, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If the hon. member wants to deal with it 
now, the deputy minister and I will be able to respond, I 
  



 
June, 21, 1988 

2314 
 

think, to the question. 
 
An Hon. Member: — On what? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — On the relay service. If you’re referring to 
the handicapped service, the relay service for the hearing 
impaired, we can deal with that now if you wish. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, I gather we’re going next 
to Sask Telecommunications which appears on page 97. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — As soon as we finish telephones. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes, okay. Well, we’ll deal with the 
relay service as well. I am concerned, Mr. Minister, and I 
would like to get from you, Mr. Minister, with regard to the 14 
. . . in excess of 14 per cent increase in your rent, I want to 
know what the breakdown is — whether that is just rent or 
whether that’s other services provided to the department by 
property management corporation. And what portion of it is 
rent; what are the other components of the charge? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m advised it’s rent and parking. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Can you at a later time, Mr. Minister, 
provide me with the detail on that? I’d like to have that. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I have a letter which has been sent to you, 
of course, and I’ve received a copy because the person 
understood that I was the critic for SaskTel, and it has to do 
with the SaskTel relay service. And it’s from an official of the 
Saskatchewan deaf association. And the person raises some, 
what appear to be, on the surface, some very valid issues with 
regard to service on the deaf. 
 
The vice-president, in his letter, states that in 1986 you made a 
number of commitments with regard to service for the deaf in 
Saskatchewan, and they feel that the government . . . or SaskTel 
is not living up to the commitments that they’ve made, and they 
raise the concern with me by copy of this letter. They have four 
areas of concern, and I want to get the minister to comment on 
each of these and to, if he can, indicate when SaskTel is going 
to meet the commitment the minister made two years ago with 
regard to the deaf. 
 
The first issue that’s raised is with regard to the number of calls 
per ring-up. Members of the Assembly will have to understand 
that the . . . in order to use the service, it’s necessary to use a 1-
800 number and then have the . . . so that the member’s actually 
dialling 11 numbers. A person that’s using the service is 
actually dialling 11 numbers. And they feel this is a bit of a 
problem for them, and they would like to have more than one 
call per ring-up. 
 
And the second area is that they feel that SaskTel operators 
require more training. And this is a matter of concern to them 
because on long-distance calls they get the impression that the 
service is being strung out and it’s costing them more because 
possibly the staff is not as highly trained as they can be. And I 
was wondering if the minister has some comment about 
training of the staff to be sure that it’s up to a level of high 
efficiency. 

And the other point which is especially a concern to the vice-
president of this organization is that you have not set up an 
advisory committee, and that that should receive immediate 
attention. Now you’ve been telling them for a year or more now 
that it’ll be set up . . . the set-up of this advisory committee is 
imminent, and they’ve begun now to not believe you, Mr. 
Minister. And I wonder if you could comment on this area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes, I received a copy of the letter. I am 
having the matter reviewed by the corporation. 
 
Let me explain on the relay service that with the handicap 
surcharge we increase the number of relays, I believe, from one 
to four. In other words, a 400 per cent increase. The number of 
calls, my recollection, increase only about 1 per cent. 
 
So we’re trying to figure out where exactly the problem raised 
by the hearing impaired arises, because the ability to handle 
calls went up 400 per cent; the number of calls only increased 
the 1 per cent. And we’re trying to figure out exactly where the 
problem is, but we have undertaken to respond to them. 
 
Secondly, with regard to the rates, the handicapped get much 
reduced rate and a much reduced long-distance rate. 
 
I have difficulty responding to the question of whether there is 
access. I remember one . . . if I recall one part of the concern 
raised was that a call very early one morning . . . or in the 
morning there was a delay of trying to get through; it was busy. 
That can happen at various times, even with the increase in 
relays. We’ll try and deal with it as best we can. 
 
But on the training of the SaskTel employees, they do take 
sensitivity training, and they take some basic sign language 
training as well, as part of the process. The delay in the 
advisory is certainly the fault of the minister, and we’ve had 
some difficulty trying to resolve the question. Certainly the 
hearing impaired want the advisory committee to represent 
solely the hearing impaired. Others that are handicapped want 
to see the advisory committee more broadened to represent 
other disabilities so that they have an outlet to ensure that both 
the technology is there and that SaskTel is responding to their 
concerns, and that’s what I will try and respond to, and I will 
try and respond to certainly within the next couple of weeks. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, you said the number of 
relays was increased from one to four. I want to know when 
that occurred. 
 
And as it relates to appointing the advisory committee, it 
seems, Mr. Minister, you’re frozen by indecision. You’ve been 
putting them off for two years about setting up the advisory 
committee, and if there’s concern about who will be served by 
it, I’m sure that the minister can at least establish some advisory 
committee and get it started and add to it later if it’s felt 
necessary to do so. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I did . . . I’m prepared to accept the 
criticism for the delay. That is certainly my 
  



 
June, 21, 1988 

2315 
 

responsibility. 
 
I did indicate that there are other handicapped in the province 
who believe that the advisory committee should be more broad 
than just the hearing handicapped. The hearing handicapped 
don’t, in some cases, subscribe to that view, and so that’s the 
difficulty we’re wrestling with. But we have, I believe, that 
virtually everybody has now been contacted to see whether 
they will serve or not on the advisory committee. I can’t 
confirm that 100 per cent for you, but I believe that to be the 
case. 
 
And I, as I say, I’m prepared to accept the criticism. I can 
respond by saying I believe that we will have the advisory 
committee within the next couple of weeks. I think we’re 
imminent in terms of being able to make that announcement. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — When were the number of relays 
increased, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m subject to correction, but I believe 
some time in the fall; if I recall, it’s November of ‘87. But I’m 
subject to correction on that, and I can supply that information 
in detail to the hon. member. I did give the information to the 
Crown Corporations Committee as to the precise date, and 
including the statistical analysis of the calls, the percentage 
increase of the relays, etc., and specifics as to the training. I will 
undertake to supply that to the hon. member, again in the next 
couple of days. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I want to urge you, Mr. Minister, to 
make progress on this particular program because I think it 
sounds eminently reasonable, what the vice-president is saying. 
And I want to give you every encouragement to go ahead and 
do that. 
 
I wanted to . . . I hope I’m not off the topic, but I wanted to ask 
a question about the Sask Telecommunications statutory 
appropriation, the advances. I wonder if the minister could 
outline the change there? It was estimated in the previous fiscal 
period, $35 million. It’s now estimated at $59 million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m advised that it’s primarily rural 
individual line service — switch modernization, which we’ve 
announced, to move to computerized digital switching 
throughout the network, and the overall digital network 
modernization program. 
 
If I could just revert quickly back to the relay service. I know 
the difficulty, and I can apologize to those affected. But we 
have been — just so the hon. member can take some comfort, 
many within the industry, including CRTC and others, believe 
that the Saskatchewan system is the best anywhere in Canada. 
So it’s not that we’re reluctant to make the changes to upgrade 
that system. But we will respond to the issues raised by the hon. 
member, but I’m advised those are the capital budget, main 
program expenditures. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — And you’re not just talking about the 
increase, Mr. Minister, you’re talking about the aggregate 
amount? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes. 

Mr. Brockelbank: — That’s mainly for ILS? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — All three — ILS, switch modernization, 
and the digital network modernization program. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Okay. That’s all I have, Mr. Minister, 
but I must say that I’m going to talk to your landlord. 
 
(1700) 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, just one quick question. Could 
you tell me what you estimate you will raise on that tax that 
you have implemented on telephone bills, the tax upon the 
federal tax? A number of people have talked to me about it. In 
fact, I wasn’t even aware it was on until I looked at my bill last 
month, and I’m estimating now that I will be paying, between 
the federal government and the provincial government, 
between 10 and $12 a month on taxes on my telephone bill. 
Could you tell me what you estimate you will raise by that tax? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I don’t have that information but I’m 
prepared to supply it to the hon. member. 
 
One of the difficulties is that, of course, the provincial taxation 
has to be a direct tax and it must show up on the bottom line. 
That’s not an argument for it; it’s historically been that way. I 
think if anybody takes a look at a printing bill, for example, that 
they get from a printer, you will see that there will be a federal 
excise tax, the federal sales tax, and then the provincial sales 
tax, always the one on the bottom line. Secondly, in terms of 
the federal communication tax, it doesn’t apply to the whole 
bill; it only applies to certain designated long-distance services. 
 
So I don’t have the information. I will get it for the hon. 
member just as quickly as I can, what the revenue impact is. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Item 4 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 38 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 153 

 
Vote 153 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Saskatchewan Municipal Financing Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 151 
 
Item 1 — Statutory 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I just . . . keeping track of 
the time and because I don’t have many questions on this, 
probably we can do this now — it won’t take very long. But as 
I look at the Municipal Financing Corporation, I’m looking at 
the last page of the report of 1987, December 31, in which it 
indicates that the board 
  



 
June, 21, 1988 

2316 
 

of directors had approved the purchase of debentures from 
certain local governments of which $5.8 million were not 
purchased. Is that a usual occurrence, or is that something that 
happened to a larger extent this year than in any other year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m advised that that’s a normal process. 
They will send in their application. The deal may not be closed 
before year-end, and they’ll still get approval on it. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, I’m familiar with that. I remember 
doing some of this myself. But is the amount unusually large 
this time, or is that the standard amount that has happened in 
the past? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m advised it’s not unusual. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, this may not be . . . It’s 
related, but it’s not exactly on the Municipal Financing 
Corporation. I want to ask, Mr. Minister, several questions on 
the Local Government Finance Commission. 
 
In the estimates last year, when the Minister of Urban Affairs 
was questioned on this, he said that the lead agency for that 
commission and the follow-up work on it would be the 
Department of Finance. Is it the Department of Finance that’s 
the lead agency in looking after the Local Government Finance 
Commission report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We’re just checking whether that 
expenditure was . . . We know we paid the cost of the finance 
commission and the operation of that. I don’t know whether it 
was subsequently turned over to Urban Affairs or not, but even 
if it was we’ll undertake to get the information for you. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I appreciate that. Since I have no further 
question on the Municipal Financing Corporation . . . I just 
simply wanted to clarify that one point, so I’m prepared to let 
that one go. So if you have officials that are here specifically 
for that, you won’t have to keep them. 
 
And then later this evening, so that you can look into the Local 
Government Finance Commission, I’ll tell you ahead of time, I 
want to ask some questions; I want to ask some questions about 
the costs. I think I know what they are; I want them confirmed. 
I want to ask some questions about what has been the follow-up 
on the review process, and what are some of the conclusions 
that you may have reached on them, Mr. Minister. 
 
But seeing that it is near 5 o’clock, but in fact beyond it, maybe 
since we are done now with the Municipal Financing 
Corporation report, we can call it 5 o’clock, if it’s okay with the 
minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes, and we’ll go back and get what 
information we can, even if it has been transferred, to try and 
give you as much information as we can. 
 
An Hon. Member: — There won’t be much there, Gary, just 
. . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, I understand. 

Mr. Chairman: — Any more questions on Municipal 
Financing Corporation? 
 
Being near 5 o’clock, the committee will recess until 7 p.m. 
 
The committee recessed until 7 p.m. 


