


















































June 22, 1988 Hansard Morning


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 22, 1988 
 

2351 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Question period will be at 2 p.m. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Auto Fund Annual Report — Tabling 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure today to 
present to this Assembly the annual report of the Saskatchewan 
auto fund for the fiscal year ending December 31, 1987. 
 
As members know, the auto fund provides Saskatchewan’s 
program of universal automobile insurance — your plate 
insurance, as it is commonly known. While it is administered by 
SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), I emphasize that the 
auto fund operates separately from SGI’s general insurance 
business, and as a monopoly, the auto fund is designed to break 
even over time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of this Assembly are well aware of the 
difficulties the auto fund has been experiencing due to rising class 
of claims, especially liability claims, and the 1985 decision of the 
former public utilities review commission. As a result, the auto 
fund recorded a $6 million operating deficit in 1986, and a 28.7 
million deficit for ’87. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is important that members of this Assembly and 
motorists throughout Saskatchewan fully appreciate . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I appreciate the minister’s desire to make a 
speech in the House, but, Mr. Speaker, my point of order is simply 
this: it is highly unusual — if you will check the rules and 
requirements for ministerial statements — it’s highly unusual to 
have a ministerial statement simply to table an annual report. 
 
I’ve listened to the minister in his remarks, and he is simply 
referring to his annual report and the tabling of the annual report. I 
believe that’s out of order. I ask you to rule on that, Mr. Speaker, 
and determine whether the minister has the privilege to make a 
ministerial statement, which quite frankly in this House in the last 
session, in this past session, has become a very frivolous use of 
time by ministers, and I think it’s time that you put your foot down 
and dealt with it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I believe, Mr. Speaker, that something that 
is as important as the auto fund, and the operation of that, is 
something that is well worthy to be discussed and put forward in 
this chamber in a ministerial statement. I ask your permission to 
continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, we would be very, very 
happy to make your life easy, and of course the antagonistic 
mentality that seems to be developing ought  

to be avoided at almost any cost. And my friend from Quill Lakes, 
I think, agrees with me, Mr. Speaker. So I’m going to invite my 
friend and colleague, the member for Indian Head-Wolseley, to 
simply withdraw his ministerial statement and take it directly to 
the media, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. I have listened 
to the point of order, and I have listened to the responses to the 
point of order. Generally speaking, ministerial statements have 
always been brief and factual and have pertained to some 
particular government policy of a specific nature. I appreciate the 
fact that the minister has withdrawn his ministerial statement. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Just for the well-being and the good 
operation of the House in future, I still think, Mr. Speaker, we 
need a ruling from you, and whether you do it today or come back 
tomorrow on this issue . . . It’s not of concern to me that the 
minister has something to say, because I am sure we will have 
something to say about what he has to say. 
 
What is of concern to me, Mr. Speaker, is how this House is going 
to function in this session and in future sessions. And I think, from 
your position in the Chair, you should clarify what constitutes a 
ministerial statement so that in future we know what to understand 
and so that we don’t get into this kind of a log-jam. 
 
And so . . . You have not made that ruling, and if you wish to take 
it under advisement and come back, I would appreciate it, and so 
would the other members of this House, particularly on this side. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d be happy to support my 
friend, the member for Regina North East, in having you set out 
what constitutes a ministerial statement. 
 
Having said that, I think he put you in a most difficult position to 
rule on what may or may not be a ministerial statement when you 
haven’t yet heard it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I believe we can cover this if we simply refer to 
a previous statement found in the Votes and Proceedings of June 
10, 1988. I will just read two or three statements from that ruling, 
and I believe that that will cover off the question that the hon. 
members are asking. 
 

The Speaker emphasized that both the Government and the 
Opposition contribution should be brief and factual. The 
purpose of the ministerial statement is to convey 
information, not to encourage debate. 
 
This is based on Standing Order 15 of the House of 
Commons, which I quote: 
 
On statements by Ministers . . . a Minister of the Crown may 
make a short factual announcement or statement of 
government policy. 

 
It goes on further to indicate that the ministerial statement which 
was under question at the time did not convey a  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2352 
 

new government policy and therefore it was ruled out of order. 
And on that basis, if the hon. member’s alleged ministerial 
statement did not convey new government policy, it was out of 
order. 
 
(1015) 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I would ask leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce some 
visitors. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Yes, I would like to introduce to you and through 
you, Mr. Speaker, a visitor, Chief Art Kaisowatum and band 
members up in the gallery. We’d like to give the usual welcome to 
them in this House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 25 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would, 
indeed, like to introduce my officials. Seated right next to me is 
Ron Scrimshaw, the acting secretary for Indian and Native Affairs 
Secretariat; behind me are Lorri Lampard, senior fiscal and 
strategic planning analyst, as well as John Reid, director of Indian 
economic development. Other officials attending today are Jerry 
Walsh, director of native services; Doug Drummond, director of 
lands and resources; Eugene Larocque, director of native 
economic development, as well as Marian Dinwoodie, senior 
policy analyst and special projects. 
 
And I, Mr. Chairman, would like to pay tribute to the staff at 
Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat. I have only worked with 
them for a few short months, but I have found them to be indeed 
most professional, and I commend all of them on their work. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I am pleased to be here to introduce the estimates 
for the 1988-89 fiscal year, of Indian and Native Affairs 
Secretariat. I welcome this opportunity to review the many 
accomplishments that we have had in Indian and Native Affairs 
portfolio. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat is the 
agency which co-ordinates and promotes government programs 
and policies related to the social and economic development of 
Indian and native peoples. Among the key responsibilities of the 
secretariat is the co-ordination of Indian and native program and 
policy activities between provincial governments, between the 
federal and the provincial governments, and between both the 
public and the private sector. 
 
The secretariat has the lead role within government in working 
with the federal government and Indian bands on treaty land 
entitlement. 
 

In addition, the secretariat maintains a program delivery function 
in economic and career development. During the past year, a great 
deal has been accomplished by aboriginal peoples and 
government. In 1983-84 this government established an Indian 
economic development program to assist Indian people to become 
involved in business ventures. 
 
During the past five years, the provincial government has made 
contributions of 8.4 millions of dollars to the Indian economic 
development program. That program has funded 321 Indian 
businesses. It has created more than 1,700 jobs for Indian people 
in manufacturing, tourism, agriculture, arts and crafts, and many 
service industries. Much of this funding provided has been 
instrumental in the development of these businesses. 
 
The provision of this funding has levered an additional $27.8 
million from other sources, including the federal government, 
banks, and the private sector. And I am pleased, Mr. Chairman, to 
report that the majority of these businesses are successful and the 
success is due . . . and the credit must go to the Indian 
entrepreneurs. 
 
Through a second area, the Special Agriculture and Regional 
Development Agreement, Special ARDA, which was extended in 
1987 for an additional two years, further economic development 
initiatives have been supported. This federal-provincial agreement 
has continued to provide funding to aboriginal people for business 
and resource development as well as training services. 
 
Under the Special ARDA program or agreement, a total of 42 
projects were funded during the 1987-88 fiscal year. Mr. 
Chairman, the Government of Saskatchewan is proud of the 
successful Indian and native initiatives mounted under these 
programs. These initiatives are to the economic development 
benefit of the aboriginal community and to the province as a 
whole. 
 
During 1987-88 the native services branch of the Employment 
Development Agency was moved over to the Indian and Native 
Affairs Secretariat as part of government reorganization. The 
native career development program trains native individuals for 
permanent full-time positions in private sector businesses, Crown 
corporations, certain non-profit organization such as municipal 
governments, boards, and various commissions. 
 
Since 1983 the program productivity has increased from 85 
training and employment opportunities to more than 500 in 
1987-88. The province, Mr. Chairman, remains committed to 
seeking a resolution to outstanding treaty land entitlements, as we 
realize, of the fundamental importance of this issue to native 
people. The province recognizes the federal government’s lead 
responsibility in this important area and continues to work in close 
co-operation with the federal government and Indian bands. 
 
This government, Mr. Chairman, also recognizes the important 
contribution of Indian and Metis women in our province. In this 
regard, the Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat has continued to 
provide funding support for  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2353 
 

the Saskatchewan Indian (Native) Women’s Association and the 
Aboriginal Women’s Council of Saskatchewan. 
 
In summary, Mr. Chairman, the provincial government, through 
its Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat, will continue to work 
closely with aboriginal people to discuss issues of mutual concern. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Chairperson, first of all, I would like to also, 
in regards to the staff of Indian and Native (Affairs) Secretariat, to 
acknowledge, you know, the work that they have done in the past 
year, because one well knows that the material support services 
that you do have, which put you under a tremendous amount of 
stress to be able to deal with economic, socio-cultural, and other 
issues as well. So I too would like to congratulate the staff for their 
perseverance. 
 
In regards to the first part, I will deal with the . . . some nitty gritty 
information, first of all, in regards to the Indian and Native 
Secretariat. And since we started out with congratulating the staff, 
you sent me some information on the salaries and the specific 
amount of money, I guess, that have been paid to the Indian and 
Native Secretariat staff. 
 
I’m just wondering, in regards to the existing staff that you have, 
how many of those people have received raises this past year, and 
what amounts were the raises on the existing staff you had? 
 
I recognize you have new staff, and maybe the second part of the 
question is on the new staff that came in on this year: what are 
their salary levels in comparison to the previous position that was 
there before? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. For the 
member’s information, I am advised that there were a few 
reclassifications. I believe four or five individuals received 
reclassifications. Other than that, salary increases per se, the only 
increases were 2 per cent performance merit increase that went to 
out-of-scope employees. So that was, once again, 2 per cent. 
 
As far as the new staff goes, I can get that information and provide 
that to you. There was only a few new people hired in the year, 
and I’ll send that information to you on their salary levels. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Okay, then I would like to get some information 
in regards to the four or five reclassifications. What was their 
previous classification, what’s the new classification, and also 
what was the increase in the amount on the change to the new 
classification? Could I get that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — In the interest of time, I would suggest that 
we send that information to you, and we will work on it here and 
send it over to you. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Other more specific items relate to the following 
questions. I would like to have an itemized list  

of facilities provided by your department to Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation. Along with that I would like 
the number of square feet, or in the case of parking lots the 
number of stalls, in each of the facilities outlined in question 
number one. 
 
Number three, in those instances where the facility is not leased, 
would you indicate the amount which the department is paying the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation for its use 
today, and how much was paid in the fiscal year of ’87-88. 
 
And number four, in the case of all the facilities outlined above, 
would you indicate the use each is presently being put to. 
 
And the last question in this series is: provide an itemized list of 
services being provided by the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation and the amount being charged to the 
department for those services today, and as well, how much was 
paid in the fiscal year ’87-88. So I could get those questions 
answered as well. 
 
(1030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Okay, there’s not a long list here of 
facilities or services that we rent from Saskatchewan Property 
Management, but as you will know, with a reorganization in 
government, SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation) now rents space and provides services to most 
government departments. 
 
And within Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat, we do rent space 
in Regina here, at Saskatchewan Place, the third floor; that’s 511.7 
square metres. We also rent space at the crow Stand Centre in 
Kamsack, 14.7 square metres; the R.M. office in Fort Qu’Appelle, 
11.7 square metres; Arlington Building in Saskatoon, 84.2 square 
metres; the E. A. Davies Building in Saskatoon, 257.65 square 
metres. 
 
The other service that is provided by property management is mail 
services, and for those mail services we pay a total of $8,300. The 
rental spaces that I just outlined, the rental amount is a total of 
$129,500. 
 
You had asked about the number of parking stalls, and you’ll be 
pleased to know that in Regina we have a total of 12 parking stalls. 
In Saskatoon, it is scramble parking. If there’s any other specific 
information, please ask. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Chairperson, I will now direct my questions 
in the area of the importance of the cultural heritage of Indian 
people in this province and whether or not there is a strategy from 
your department to deal with this issue. 
 
I will deal with a couple of cases first that, you know, have been 
occurring in the past. One was in relation to the North Battleford 
case where a lot of the Indian heritage that was collected by a 
private collector could have been purchased by this government. 
And it so happened that that was not done. Instead the Alberta 
government helped out another private collector in Alberta to 
transfer part of our Saskatchewan Indian cultural heritage which 
will now be leaving the province. 
 
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2354 
 

And I was wondering whether or not, since you are responsible 
also in the area of cultural heritage in an indirect way, because you 
could deal with, you know, the culture and recreation department 
or the tourism department, you know, to deal with this issue, but 
you would play the lead role in regards to being the critic in charge 
of Indian and Metis issues. 
 
My question to you is this: what plans have you got in recovering 
this Saskatchewan Indian cultural heritage in the North Battleford 
area and bringing it back home under the control of the Indian 
people in North Battleford area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too share the 
member’s concern, on behalf of not only Indian and native people 
but all the people of Saskatchewan, that cultural artefacts be 
retained within the province of Saskatchewan. And when a major 
collection or very unique pieces leave the province, it’s certainly a 
concern to me. 
 
On the specific issue that arose in North Battleford, I can tell you 
that I am not totally familiar with all the details. I do know that 
this has been a subject of debate in the legislature, and the prime 
responsibility, of course, is with my colleague in Parks and 
renewable resources, and, to a certain extent, Tourism. I, although, 
do feel responsible to ensure that major collections like these do 
not leave the province en masse. 
 
I can tell you that over the years we have provided various grants 
and funding directly to Indian people for the retention of Indian 
artefacts or cultural type of items. And when I look at the area of 
Battleford, I recall that in 1986-87 fiscal year, the Battlefords 
Treaty 6 Tribal Council was issued a grant in the neighbourhood 
of $41,000 for the development of an authentic Indian village. I do 
know that those moneys were very much appreciated in that area. I 
trust that they were very well spent. 
 
And I could list other areas or other examples where we have 
expended moneys, but I will give the member my assurance that 
within the Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat we try to keep 
abreast of Indian artefacts leaving the province, and we want to do 
everything that we can to encourage the retention of artefacts of 
that sort. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — My specific question was: do you have a specific 
plan to deal with the particular case in North Battleford? Since you 
told me that you do not know that much about the case, are you 
willing to find out more about the case and then go back and deal 
with that specific one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes indeed I would be pleased to, and I 
have chatted briefly with my colleagues about the case, but indeed 
I will instruct my officials to follow that case up. I’m frankly not 
certain that there is much we can do. 
 
However, you do raise a good point, and I certainly will make the 
commitment that we will follow through and just explore if there 
are any alternatives and if we may  

indeed bring back those artefacts. But I will make you that 
commitment, and I will also commit to keeping you informed of 
our progress. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — The other issue that has crept up in the area of 
cultural heritage, Indian cultural heritage, in the province has been 
in relation to the exposure of new Indian artefacts as a result of the 
drought and the sand blowing in the . . . (inaudible) . . . An 
archaeologist from the province has stated very clearly that some 
of these artefacts were now being taken away and being removed. 
And there was very deliberate concern again that the province was 
not dealing with this specific issue. 
 
Could you tell me, and I notice now that the Minister of Culture 
and Recreation is right beside you, do you have a specific plan to 
deal with this particular issue that has been raised in the past 
month? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Indeed you 
bring up another good point. I am advised from my colleague, the 
Minister of Parks and renewable resources that indeed, when this 
situation arose, and with the dry year that we have been having, 
there have been a number of Indian artefacts that have risen to the 
surface when all the dust has been blowing. And the minister has 
issued a release. It has been carried in the media quite extensively 
that these artefacts that surface do indeed belong to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and it has been well publicized. 
 
So I want to congratulate my colleague, on behalf of the people of 
the province and the Indian people, that indeed we are taking steps 
to ensure that these artefacts are known to be the property of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — There was also another specific proposal in 
relation to the museum on College and Albert, the aspect of Indian 
artefacts within the museum. There was a proposal that some of 
the museum pieces were being stores away, and there was a 
two-set proposal: one, that there should be a connection between 
the artefacts and Indian cultural tradition and the prayers and the 
blessings that go along with the artefacts. And there are a lot of 
elders in this province who know about, you know, the coming, 
not only just the artefact aspect, but the cultural tradition as well. 
 
And I was wondering — there was a proposal by one of the banks 
in this area to come out with a special blessing from the different 
elders from all the Indian nations in this province, and that there 
was a cost attachment to that. And I was wondering, since you 
have the cultural and recreation minister right besides you there 
again, what plans are there to proceed with this issue, this very 
specific issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — As you can well appreciate, various 
departments of government receive many proposals, and I’m sure 
my colleague, the member for Turtleford, is no exception. And I 
would say that neither of us have had this proposal brought before 
us. I certainly have not met with the proponents of the idea, neither 
has my colleague. But it does indeed sound like an interesting 
proposal, and I wish you could provide to me the names of the 
individuals and I would be quite prepared to meet with them to 
explore further their suggestion. 
 
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2355 
 

(1045) 
 
I am advised by my colleague that Indian art works and artefacts 
are displayed currently in this very building in which we are 
speaking, and there is an expansion to that display planned. And 
I’ll be pleased to work with my colleague in expanding the Indian 
art works that will be displayed in the legislature of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — One more question in relation to that. Part of the 
Saskatchewan policy in relation to the protection of our cultural 
heritage is a two-pronged strategy where you have museums, you 
know, on more or less centralized levels to deal with the issue. 
Then there is a local strategy where individual communities start 
taking part in the protection of their cultural heritage at the 
community level. Do you see a similar strategy in relation to the 
reserves and other native communities in the province, to proceed 
in conjunction with the museum’s approach, and so on, and have it 
done at the local level? Is that one of your policies then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I understand that there is . . . over history, 
has been fairly successful initiatives undertaken, both . . . well 
primarily by the federal government with respect to preservation 
of Indian culture. And I believe it was first established in 1971, the 
cultural education program. And I’m sure you’ll be well familiar 
with the Saskatoon Indian . . . or the Saskatchewan Indian Cultural 
College in Saskatoon, affiliated with Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indians. And I do believe that that college has gone a long ways to 
protecting and preserving Indian culture and cultural artefacts. 
Your question with . . . And we believe that that is the rightful 
place, the rightful place for the preservation of culture and cultural 
artefacts. And I don’t think anyone knows any better than the 
affiliates or associates of FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations) on how to preserve those types of artefacts. 
 
With respect to your question of on-reserve collections or 
preservations, we very strongly support that. As far as putting 
direct dollars into the preservation of artefacts on reserves, I don’t 
know that we can allocate any more than we do to a program such 
as that. I think Indian people well recognize their own individual 
responsibility to play a part in preserving their cultural and their 
cultural artefacts. I do believe also, for the most part, they do a 
very good job of that. 
 
So I say to you that we’re certainly pleased and proud of the 
preservation thus far. I strongly encourage preservation by all 
Indian people of these cultural artefacts and, indeed, their culture 
that goes right along with. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I would like to state that preservation of cultural 
heritage in the province of Saskatchewan is not only something 
that is supported by word — it has to be supported by action in 
regards to material resources to be done, not only at the centralized 
level but at the decentralized level, just as is done for other cultural 
heritages in this province. And I would like to see that in action for 
the future. I’m not going to be debating that point. 
 

One of the key things that are very important in the aspect of 
cultural heritage is the tie in from Indian people and the land issue. 
And the land issue is probably one of the foremost issues ever 
since the signing of the treaties, and even prior to the treaties — 
even back in the 1700s. The land issue has remained one of the 
top-notch issues that exists. 
 
And with just those introductory comments, I’d like to pass it on 
to my colleague from Riversdale to deal with the issue of land. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 
MLA. I’d like to direct a few questions to the minister in charge of 
the secretariat, but before I do, I want to stage the background for 
my questions. If my background is erroneous, I would invite of 
course the minister and his officials to correct me. This deals with 
the question of treaty and land entitlements. 
 
As I understand the situation, in 1930 the federal government at 
Ottawa, in the enactment of The Natural Resources Transfer 
Agreement Act, transferred certain rights and properties to the 
provinces, one of which of course is the province of 
Saskatchewan. With that transfer was set out the legal obligation 
in that Act — I would argue the constitutional obligation higher 
than legal — that Crown lands would be used in the fulfilment, 
notwithstanding the transfer of the land from Ottawa to the 
provinces, in the fulfilment of the federal government’s or 
Ottawa’s overarching constitutional obligation or special 
relationship with the Indian peoples of this country. 
 
This statutory provision has been further buttressed — its 
importance — by the subsequent constitutional discussions of the 
1979 to 1982 period, culminating in 1981-82 with the insertion in 
the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms of section 35, a 
section which in effect confirms the treaty rights, or, if you will, 
the treaty obligations on the part of the federal government with 
respect to native people generally, but speaking here for the 
moment about treaty Indian people. 
 
So clearly, as I understand the historical development of the law, 
there is a strong constitutional legal obligation, primarily on the 
federal government, but very closely followed by the provincial 
government by virtue of the provisions of The Natural Resources 
Transfer Agreements Act, and other conventions of constitution, 
that treaty obligations and land entitlements be fulfilled. 
 
I would say to the members of the House this is not a wish; it’s not 
in the category even of a mere statue; it’s in a category according 
to the parliamentarians over years, according to the Indian 
interpretation of the way treaties developed and the seeding of 
rights. This is something higher. This is in the category of 
constitutional obligation. I would even argue that one could 
submit the view that it is in the category of a moral obligation, in 
addition to the constitutional and legal obligations that I have set 
out. 
 
Sadly we have, all of us, been very slow in the fulfilment of those 
obligation and moral rights. In 1976 the provincial government of 
Saskatchewan, in concert with the federal government at Ottawa 
and the Indian  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2356 
 

governments here in Saskatchewan as represented by the FSIN, 
reached an agreement in principle and in specifics on a formula 
which would begin to start the transfer of land entitlements to 
Indian bands pursuant to those constitutional obligations which I 
have just set out earlier. 
 
I think that my understanding of the formula in general terms is 
correct. It was based on a per capita allotment of 128 acres per 
capita, based on the population at year’s end, December 31 of 
1976. And roughly speaking, without being precise on the exact 
numbers — because I think those are important but secondary to 
the point that I wish to make — the obligation overall in 
Saskatchewan amounted to approximately 1.4 million acres and 
involved something like in the order of 32 . . . or 30, I guess, 
Indian bands. 
 
And in fact, although I’ll ask a question about this, it seems as 
though two settlements were reached — two for sure, since the 
1980s; Stony Rapids and Fond du Lac as well, 1986 — pursuant 
to this 1976 agreement. At least I will assume that, and I want to 
ask some questions about that. 
 
Now I don’t want to politicize this, but I do think that there is an 
important historical development here, and that is the election of 
the provincial PC government in 1982 and then the election of a 
PC government federally in 1984. As I understand it, the first 
thing the provincial government did was put a freeze on the 
Saskatchewan formula and undertook a review of its policies. 
However, the Black Lake . . . or Fond du Lac agreement was 
effected. 
 
And the Deputy Premier, from his seat, says they threw it out, 
which I guess speeds up a lot of my questioning, but I’ll want to 
raise this specifically to the minister in charge of the secretariat to 
put it on record. 
 
In the federal government, Mr. Nielsen, who headed up the 
Nielsen task force, in fact signalled the change in attitude — 
massive cut-backs to native people and Indian people — stated 
that there would be no comprehensive land claims; in effect, told 
the Indian people that they had to go through the costly, 
time-consuming court process, as opposed to negotiation. And 
essentially the policy was one based on need as assessed by 
bureaucrats, presumably, and governments, on the basis of 
consultation with Indian governments. 
 
And then something else seemed to enter into the picture with 
respect to the 1976 Saskatchewan formula, a concept, a relatively 
new concept, in terms of assessing the amount of land to be 
transferred. Instead of using December 31, 1976 as the base, as 
was agreed to by the two governments and the Indian 
governments, we now find the injection of the principle of the date 
of first survey, which in effect means that the numbers are 
dramatically reduced from something in the order of 1.4 million 
acres under the 1976 formula to about 75,000 acres — Mr. Goulet, 
is that correct? — or a loss of 87 per cent of the land — 1.1 acres 
of the land from what was agreed to by the three parties involved 
back in 1976. 
 
Seemingly this policy change has been made, seemingly — 
because I want to hear the minister respond — in the  

absence of any legal justification. In fact, I would argue, in the 
face of legal opinion to the contrary, that the agreement of 1976 is 
binding, seemingly, in the flying in the face of section 35 in the 
constitutional obligations and the treaties themselves; seemingly in 
the face of the 1930 Natural Resources Transfer Agreement Act, 
which transferred to the province this land and carrying with it a 
trust obligation to be fulfilled to the first Canadians. 
 
And the reports that I get from all over Saskatchewan is that there 
is a level of frustration which is mounting as Indian leaders and 
chiefs, who have been struggling for all of this while to realize on 
their rights, and thought they had finally a breakthrough in ’76, 
and even some hopeful signs thereafter with a few successful 
completions of land entitlements, now being in effect stymied, 
checkmated. And the frustration level has increased because no 
one is prepared to give them a clear-cut statement as to where 
things stand. What does this government believe in to be the 
formula, and what legal justification for that formula? 
 
(1100) 
 
That’s the situation today. At least that’s the situation as I 
understand it to be today. And so I will stop there and request the 
minister — keeping in mind his obligation within his 
responsibility to Indian and Metis people in this province, and 
forgetting for the moment the gibes of his fellow ministers who 
would urge him to do something, I think, rash and even more 
unfair to the native people of this country — I would invite the 
minister to give us, to give me, a specific answer to this question: 
is it the position of the present provincial government that the 
1976 formula with respect to land entitlements is, as the Deputy 
Premier has said from his seat, dead? And if it is dead, on what 
basis are negotiations proceeding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I thank the member, both for his 
comments and his question, and the member opposite speaks with 
a fair degree of knowledge, I might add. The member opposite, as 
the people of Saskatchewan well know, was intimately involved in 
the constitutional talks prior to 1982, and for the most part you 
have accurately summarized much of the history and many of the 
legal obligations and how they came about. 
 
I was very interested to hear your comment that all of us, and I’ll 
quote: “all of us have been slow to fulfil our obligations”. And 
indeed that is most true. I would say that Indian people throughout 
the province of Saskatchewan have indeed shown a tremendous 
amount of patience in awaiting the fulfilment of their entitlements. 
 
I think we all know and understand that this is a complex issue. It 
is an issue not easily or quickly resolved in many areas. And to 
demonstrate the difficulties that both the prior administration, 
under a New Democratic Party, and the current administration in 
government in this province has had, I want to make it perfectly 
clear that in the 10-year history of the NDP administration, only 
one entitlement was fulfilled and came to pass, and that was, 
correctly, the Stony Rapids entitlement selection. 
 
In fairness, under this current administration, in six years, there 
has been but one entitlement fulfilled. I do want to  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2357 
 

say that a significant amount of progress has been made by this 
administration on other land entitlements. And I look with a fair 
degree of pride, although I also say, with a great deal of 
frustration, that we would wish that these entitlements would 
proceed quicker. 
 
When we talk specifically about the constitution and specifically 
about the obligation by the provincial government in the 1930 
Natural Resources Transfer Agreement (Act) and the rights of 
Indian people entrenched in both that agreement and in the 
constitution, indeed, and I openly will say, that these are legal 
obligation sot Indian people. These are obligations written directly 
into a constitution, directly into the agreement of the 1930 natural 
transfer agreement. 
 
And I want to say that as a provincial government we have every 
intention of living up to our legal, and indeed moral, obligations. 
When we speak into getting into more detail on the 1976 formula 
vis-a-vis the date of first survey that has been suggested, indeed it 
is a sensitive issue. Indeed the difference between the 1976 
formula and the date of first survey quantum is a considerable 
number of acres. 
 
The member opposite has suggested some approximate figures ore 
reductions in acreages from the date of first survey to the 1976 
formula, and those are a significant number. I cannot quantify or 
clarify that you are or you are not correct in those figures, but 
indeed there is a drastic difference. 
 
I want to state very clearly to the members opposite and to the 
people of Saskatchewan, and especially the Indian people of this 
province, that this government has every intention of living up to 
our legal obligations. That legal obligation in the 1930 Natural 
Resource Transfer Agreement (Act) obligations this government 
or the people of Saskatchewan, on request by the federal 
government, to fulfil treaty entitlements with Crown land. 
 
The amount of Crown land, of course, is dependent on what 
formula you may use. There is, as I have stated, a tremendous 
difference between the amounts of land under the 1976 formula 
and the date of first survey. And the position of the provincial 
government is simply to fulfil the legal obligations within the 1930 
Natural Resources Transfer Agreement (Act), at whatever formula 
may be appropriate. 
 
I can tell the hon. member that this subject is currently under 
discussion, not only by the federal government and Indian people 
but by this provincial government as well. I have spent many 
hours chatting with my officials on the subject. The subject is not, 
in any sense of the word, resolved. I would hope, for the benefit of 
all Indian and native people, that this issue will get resolved. At 
this time I can only commit to the people of Saskatchewan and to 
the Indian people that this government has every intention of 
fulfilling its legal obligation. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I might have 
leave of the Assembly to introduce some guests. 
 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to introduce to 
you, and through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, 
some 16 grade 4 students seated in the Speaker’s gallery, from 
Weyburn, from the Assiniboia School in Weyburn. They’re 
accompanied by their teacher Kim Berger, and as well, some 
chaperons: Mr. Katschke, Mrs. Seitz, Mrs. Binns, Mrs. Sarahs, 
and as well, their bus driver Roy Loose. 
 
And I would like all members to join with me in welcoming them 
here today, but before we do so, I might add that I had the chance 
to meet with them on the steps of the legislature to answer some 
very good questions that the students put forward. I congratulate 
their teacher and their parents for showing the interest and taking 
the time and the effort to bring these young people to Regina to 
see the legislature, and indeed to have a chance to see it 
functioning. I wish them a safe trip back home, and we always 
appreciate the efforts of the bus drivers who come with these 
young people and who, across this province every day, transport 
200,000 children, or thereabouts, safely. 
 
So I would ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in 
welcoming these young people to the legislature today, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 25 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to pursue 
the minister’s answer for a moment, if I can, on this important 
issue. 
 
I hear what the minister says about intent, but I’m moving the 
minister beyond intent because I think we have progressed to the 
point where we can answer some specific questions with some 
specific answers. I want to ask you, specifically, whether or not 
the 1976 formula, as the basis for the transfer of land in the 
realization of land entitlements is, in your mind and in the minds 
of the Premier and this government, no longer applicable with 
respect to Saskatchewan. 
 
I suspect — I don’t want to answer the question for you, but I 
suspect that it is because of your words today. You say words like, 
we will transfer land “at whatever level may be appropriate.” Now 
I thought that the three levels, the Indian governments, the 
provincial government, and the federal government had decided 
that the appropriate level was the 1976 formula. Here we are 12 
years later and you’re telling the House, and presumably the 
Indian people, that there is a new standard, and that is a floating 
standard. It is a level “which may be appropriate.” Moreover, my 
information is that in other situations you  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2358 
 

have been much more definitive about the 1976 formula. 
 
You might confirm or deny this, but as I understand it, on or about 
March 18 of 1988, you wrote to your counterpart in the federal 
government, the hon. Mr. William McKnight, in these terms in the 
context of the formula. You said: 
 

We are not willing to supply more land than the federal 
government requests to fulfil its treaty entitlement 
obligations. We are prepared to work with the federal 
government and entitlement bands to deal with entitlements 
on the basis which your government has outlined, i.e., on the 
basis of the date of first survey. 

 
Now that doesn’t seem to be what you told us a moment ago — at 
an appropriate level — because those words implied that there 
may be some other appropriate level in some other circumstances. 
This letter seems to indicate that the appropriate level has been 
defined to be the basis of the date of first survey by your 
government. 
 
Now I just want you to tell me and to tell the Indian people, in 
1988 what is that appropriate level? And I don’t mean to be 
badgering you; I genuinely believe that you are genuinely 
concerned about the problem. And I do know it’s difficult; I know 
that. But for the purposes of this estimates, I want to know 
specifically, what is your situation? Are you 1976, or are you date 
of first survey, or are you something entirely different? And if it’s 
entirely different, please define it for us. 
 
(1115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. chairman. Respecting 
your comments on my words, “at whatever level may be 
appropriate” — and I do not want to confuse the issue — I can tell 
you what I had in mind, or what was going through my mind at 
the time is that we have dealt with different selections and with the 
federal government on levels, or acres of land if you like, that have 
not corresponded to either formula. 
 
And I think specifically, I think specifically of that letter which 
you quoted from. That letter respected the Cree Lake selection of 
the English River Band, an we had recommended to the federal 
government . . . the federal government had sent us a letter 
rejecting our position on the entitlement. The federal government 
indicated that they would not go along with the amount of land 
because it was in excess of date of first survey. 
 
I want to tell you that this government in principle, in this specific 
case, has taken the position that we will settle with an amount of 
land in excess of date of first survey, so in some cases I don’t 
believe that a hard and fast rule can apply. I do believe in some 
specific instances common sense should prevail, and this specific 
selection, the Cree Lake selection, is a very good example. 
 
The member opposite has questioned and wishes that I take a 
position on the 1976 formula or on date of first survey. And I once 
again want to emphasize that it is the government’s obligation, it is 
the government’s obligation through the constitution, through The 
Natural  

Resources Transfer (Agreement) Act of 1930 to transfer lands at 
the request of the federal government. 
 
The federal government most recently has taken the position that 
date of fist survey is the basis on which they will settle entitlement 
claims. I will tell you that the issue is still under discussion 
between the province of Saskatchewan and the federal 
government, and it is not an easy one to resolve. 
 
The member talks about the 1976 formula being such a good 
formula, and he wishes the provincial government to take the 
position that the 1976 formula should be the formula that this 
administration supports. And yet, if we look at it fairly, if we look 
at it fairly, only one entitlement in the 10-year period prior to 1982 
was fulfilled; 1976 to 1982 when the formula came in place — 
that is a period of six years — only a single entitlement was 
fulfilled. 
 
I say this government is committed to fulfilling its obligations. We 
will continue our discussions, and our first concern, our first 
concern has to be a fair and reasonable settlement both for Indian 
people and the province of Saskatchewan. I feel that we have 
made significant progress in this respect, and I would match our 
progress vis-a-vis the progress of administrations previous in a 
very good light. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I’m sorry to say this, but I can 
sure understand why some of the Indian leadership senses the 
frustration about this problem, listening to the minister’s answers 
in explaining the government’s position, because I have no other 
way but to translate what you’re telling me but in these terms. You 
are saying that the 1976 formula is not dead, but it’s not accepted. 
You’re saying the date of first survey is not dead, nor is it 
necessarily accepted. What you’re saying in effect to the Indian 
people is, let’s play a little game of Russian roulette, whatever the 
applicable level is, given the applicable circumstances will work. 
 
I don’t say 1976 is such a great formula. To me that’s almost 
irrelevant. What is relevant is that there was (a) an agreement 
signed, sealed, and delivered involving the Indian people, the 
Saskatchewan government, and the Ottawa government. I don’t 
even made the issue about whether the agreement was being 
followed expeditiously. 
 
If you want to criticize us for not having done enough from ’76 to 
’82, I confess, I admit, we weren’t perfect there. That’s not what 
I’m speaking to. What I’m speaking to is, in the light of fact that 
there is a 1976 agreement, is the position of the current 
government in 1988 that it is going to break the terms and 
conditions of that 1976 agreement and follow, as in your words 
you use, “whatever level is applicable.” Because if that’s the test, 
then there can be nothing but bitterness by those who have felt that 
they had an understanding on the arrangement, for good, bad, or 
otherwise, now being told by you, to me and to them, well just 
wait and see. We don’t know what the formula is. It will be based 
on a catch-as-catch-can, ad hoc basis. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, to speed this up a bit . . . I’m not trying to put 
words in your mouth; you have to do whatever you  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2359 
 

have to do, of course, by way of answers, and I can’t elicit any 
more from you than what you say. But I think it would help 
everybody — me, you, the Indian people, non-Indian people — 
just to answer specifically this question: does your government 
view the 1976 agreement to be a legally binding agreement? If not 
legally, a morally binding agreement? And if so — ruling out date 
of first survey, or any other formula — and if so, have you 
communicated the same to the federal government? And if so, will 
you, in pursuance of that legal advice that you’ve got, pursue the 
’76 so we can get on with the job to get this injustice righted as is 
expeditiously possible? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’m on my feet, Mr. Chairman, to get leave to 
introduce a . . . Deputy Chairman, get leave to introduce a group 
of students. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I have the 
honour to introduce at this time to the legislature 28 grade 5 
students from the Wynyard Elementary School at Wynyard. 
They’re seated in the Speaker’s gallery. I’ve had the . . . They’re 
accompanied by their teacher Shaunda Halldorson, Mrs. Bell, and 
Nick Onyskevich, their bus driver. 
 
I had the opportunity of meeting with this group, and I want to say 
that they were the most inquiring group and had many questions in 
respect to the operation of the legislature, in respect to free trade, 
in respect to what will be done for the farmers in their plight. I 
want to welcome them here, and certainly wish them a safe trip 
back home. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 25 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — I once again, Mr. Chairman, want to 
review the record with respect to settlements under the 1976 
formula. There have been only a few, both in the prior 
administration and our administration, that have been settled using 
the 1976 formula. I do know that the Fond-du-Lac settlement that 
was settled by this administration was settled on a basis of more 
than the 1976 formula. 
 
The 1976 formula has many problems. One of the problems was 
the rigidity, lack of flexibility, and the inequity that would exist if 
you stuck strictly with the 1976 formula. And I think the record of 
success of entitlements, of entitlement fulfilments, speaks very 
well to the problems associated with the 1976 formula. 
 

I can tell the member opposite that in approximately 1983 or 1984, 
the current Attorney General stated very openly to the public of 
Saskatchewan many of the problems that existed with the ’76 
formula. And at that time the ’76 formula was rejected as 
something we would stick strictly with. Since that time there has 
been settlements achieved that used the ’76 formula as a point of 
reference, as a starting point in negotiations. But to say that the 
position of the government should be to strictly stick with a ’76 
formula, I don’t believe is in the best interests of Indian and native 
people. 
 
Once again, I want to emphasize that it is the province’s 
responsibility to fulfil their obligations under the 1930 Natural 
Resources Transfer Agreement Act. The federal government has 
now taken the position of date of first survey, and legally we are 
bound, legally we are bound to follow that obligation, and we have 
every intent of doing so. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I want to read into the 
record and to ask the minister to confirm, or amend, or deny. And 
then I want to make a comment about the Fond-du-Lac settlement 
— is it? — 1986, ask a question about that. 
 
What I want to read into the record is a part of a letter — actually I 
don’t have the letter, it’s a summary prepared for me here which I 
will not table if somebody asks. Actually, I don’t mind tabling it 
because it’s prepared by my colleague, Mr. Goulet, and it’s 
perfectly straightforward. 
 
(1130) 
 
I’ll word it this way: would the minister confirm that in 1984 there 
was a letter from the federal Indian Affairs minister, at the time 
John Monroe, to Sid Dutchak, at the time the PC provincial 
minister in charge of Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat, talking 
about the 1976 formula in these terms, at page 4: 
 

The nature of the Saskatchewan agreement is such that it is 
binding on all the three parties. Our legal counsel advises 
that there are strong arguments in favour of the legal 
enforceability of the agreement embodies in the exchange of 
letters. 

 
And then, referring to June 1984, a provincial cabinet document 
— your cabinet document, June 1984 — which incorporates into it 
a review of the attorney general of Saskatchewan’s assessment of 
the impact of the ’76 formula where it is stated in part: 
 

If we depart (quoting the provincial AG), if we depart from 
the 1976 formula, we will likely be faced with litigation, 
with a serious risk of losing. There is an outside chance that 
litigation result in the province’s being bound to transfer 
more land than the 1976 formula would require. 

 
Now the net effect of those two statements, if you accept them as 
being statements communicated to your government, one from the 
federal government in 1984, one from your own attorney general, 
is that there is a legal binding on 1976 and a serious risk of losing. 
And as your  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2360 
 

attorney general in 1984 — I don’t know who he was — says, not 
only a serious risk of losing but a serious chance of more. 
 
My two questions are to the minister: is that the position of the 
government today with respect to 1976 formula in the context of 
its legal impact? And my second question is: based on the 
settlement that you referred to in 1986, Fond-du-Lac, is it the 
policy of this government now that future settlements, recognizing 
what might be the legal obligation of ’76, will always be either at 
’76 or more, but not less than ’76? Is that the lesson out of 
Fond-du-Lac? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the Leader of the 
Opposition has not provided me the specific letter, so I have a little 
difficulty in getting into the details of them. But as I think most 
reasonable people know, when you get lawyers involved in 
expressing opinions, I don’t think there’s any other area that I 
know of where there can be such a vast difference of opinion. And 
you can have one lawyer tell you that this is legally binding, and 
you can have another lawyer that will tell you that it’s not legally 
binding. And I guess one of the problems we face in society today, 
Mr. Speaker, is those differences of opinions between lawyers. So 
I suppose I could go and hire a lawyer to give me about any 
opinion I wanted on it. 
 
When we speak of the amount of land that we will settle, that we 
have settled on . . . I once again want to tell the member opposite 
that in some cases we have gone further than what our so-called 
legal commitments may be. I also want to emphasize to the 
member opposite that Indian people and the people of 
Saskatchewan know full well that the 1976 formula was a very 
strict and rigid formula. The people of Saskatchewan and the 
Indian people know that there are tremendous differences in land; 
tremendous differences in developments have taken place in this 
province. And I don’t think that one could fairly say, let’s stick it 
so many acres; and one selection of land may have a gold mine on 
it, another selection of land may well be rock pile, another 
selection of land may have great opportunities for tourist or 
mining or other resource developments. 
 
I want the members opposite to know that this government has 
taken Indian economic development very seriously. Our record in 
that respect is a good one. And I think that most reasonable 
thinking Indian people today recognize the problems with the ’76 
formula, recognize the differences in land in different areas of the 
province, and that there should be some flexibility in any formula 
of land entitlements. 
 
I believe that through the co-operation of the federal government 
and the provincial government, that a reasonable resolve can be 
found to this situation. I believe that the record of this 
administration, together with that co-operation from the federal 
government in the years to come, will be a good one and will be to 
the benefit of Indian people. 
 
And I say once again — I stress, as a matter of fact — that if the 
1976 formula was so good, that why has there been the dismal 
record of success? And I don’t fault entirely the members 
opposite; I speak as well with the record of success in fulfilling 
treaty land entitlements of this  

administration, and I’d say the problems can be directly associated 
with the 1976 formula. So I would debate most strenuously that 
the 1976 formula is a formula that cannot be strictly adhered to. 
 
I stress once again that our position as a province is that we will 
fulfil any legal obligations whatsoever that we have under the 
1930 Natural Resources Transfer Agreement (Act). 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I am disappointed to 
hear the minister’s response because in effect he says that the 
Saskatchewan formula is not on. And it may not be on; maybe 
there are good and valid reasons why it shouldn’t be on, but he has 
failed and refuses to articulate what alternative formula, with the 
agreement of the Indian governments, this provincial and federal 
government would accept — refuses. It says date of first survey is 
not accepted, and it’s an argument which is basically saying to the 
Indian people and to the non-Indian people, well we’ll just wait 
and see; we’ll see what comes up. 
 
That, I think, is a regressive step because we had no formula in 
place at all from 1930 Natural Resources Transfer Agreement 
(Act) until ’76. It took us 46 years to get that far. And now, from 
’76 to ’88, we have a reversal back to the pre-’76 situation, 
seemingly, where there is no formula. 
 
And I might add, parenthetically, that notwithstanding the fact that 
this just isn’t some lawyer who says the ’76 agreement is binding, 
it is your lawyer, your colleague, the Attorney General. You just 
sit beside him, you know, when you’re around the cabinet table, 
just sort of say, he, Mr. Attorney General, will you advise us as to 
what our legal rights are. That’s his job. That’s what he gets that 
big fat salary for. He’s supposed to tell you what your obligations 
are and whether you’re to act within the law or not. 
 
So I mean, I don’t buy that argument that, well, you know, you get 
lawyers and you get all kinds of opinions. These are your lawyers 
setting out a legal and constitutional obligation and you, sir, are 
reneging on that because you are flying in the face of that legal 
opinion and are apparently setting up some other regime. 
 
Now I want to make one point here, before I take my place — in 
general terms, not necessarily to the members of this Chamber, but 
I guess I’m in this Chamber so I speak to this Chamber — and that 
is to the public at large who might have the belief that the claims 
pursuant to treaty rights are somehow gigantic in size and will 
have enormous socio-economic consequences. I admit with the 
minister that they are not easy to settle and they’ll take patience 
and skill to achieve. 
 
But you know, if you consider the fact that land set aside, for 
example, for parks in Canada roughly totalled, if I’m correct, five 
times the amount of land already set aside for Indian reserves, you 
see what we’re talking about. 
 
If you take a look at Weyerhaeuser right here in Prince Albert in 
Saskatchewan, and the amount of land that it has — it has set 
aside to it more land than all of the reserves in  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2361 
 

Canada, Weyerhaeuser does. And here’s the situation that we’re 
faced with, and this is an issue of fairness — this is what it is. It’s 
an issue of dealing equitably with people. 
 
The situation is that Weyerhaeuser comes forward with a specific 
economic proposal, and it doesn’t take Weyerhaeuser 46 years, 
they’re able to get 12 million acres set aside, approximately, for 
them, 1988. When it comes to the Indian people, however, under 
the Saskatchewan formula, instead of having . . . They had 1.3, 1.4 
million acres under the Saskatchewan formula. 
 
If the date of first survey is accepted, they drop from 1.3 million to 
175,000 acres or a loss of 1.1. million acres. That’s a drop of 
nearly 90 per cent of what they thought they had as the basis of 
negotiations — 1.4 million acres stacked up against 
Weyerhaeuser’s 12 million acres — 12 million acres. 
 
And I don’t mean this in any pejorative terms, but there is an 
important message here of a multinational corporation, albeit 
providing jobs for people in Saskatchewan — to that extent it’s a 
beneficial economic development and to the community, and not 
the first time, I’ve said that elsewhere — but the profits of which 
essentially end up out of province and out of country, the 
development of which ends up essentially out of the control of 
Indian people. You might argue the provincial government’s got a 
control on Weyerhaeuser, as the rate of development and the rate 
of receding that it may or may not have. That’s another issue for 
another estimate. Twelve million acres in two years or less, 
negotiated for Weyerhaeuser, and we’re going for our Indian 
people from 1.4 million, compared to 12, down to 175,000 acres 
or some indefinite number, because this government says it has 
good intentions, but it’s got no specific formula. 
 
Now I say to you, sir, and I say to anybody who’s watching, is that 
fair? Is that fair? Somebody says that it’s fair. I think it’s the 
Deputy Premier who says it’s fair. I think he says it cavalierly to 
do this. But I tell you, I don’t think it’s fair. I don’t think it’s fair. I 
don’t think it’s fair. And if it is not fair, then either the Deputy 
Premier or the Premier or you, sir, as the responsible minister, has 
got to say that it’s not fair and that there is, if ’76 is not applicable, 
a better formula which is fair, and not somewhere down the road, 
you know, in the long run. In the long run, we’re all dead. 
 
Now! We need to act now! We can’t play on fears. We can’t 
exaggerate prejudices. We can’t look for legal obfuscation. We 
can’t avoid those problems. We’ve got to act, all of us, now. 
 
So I say to you, Mr. Minister, that this is indeed a very serious, 
and in some ways, sad business which affects a growing and 
important segment of our population in Saskatchewan, and the 
government seemingly is stuck in the mud. Somebody should be 
saying to this government, never say whoa in a mud hole. Keep it 
going. I think it’s an excellent phrase actually to use — never say 
whoa in a mud hole. 
 
But you’re stuck in this policy and I urge you as strongly as I can, 
Mr. Minister, to get it clarified, and get it clarified because 
obviously I can’t in my questioning here. 
 

Now before I take my seat, in the interest of time, I want to give 
notice to the minister, and I’m doing it here by formal record, that 
I want him to give to me answers, specific answers to the 
following eight questions which I will put on the record, which are 
specific . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon me? What’s the 
minister of privatization have to say about this? I’m sorry, what do 
you have to say about this? 
 
An Hon. Member: — I just thought you weren’t saying . . . 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well the minister of privatization says I’m not 
saying things correctly. I invite him to come to the debate; in fact I 
invite him to tell the minister where I’m in error. I’ll take my place 
and in fact give the minister a chance to rebut to my general 
proposition and also invite the minister to tell me where I’m in 
error — or the minister of privatization. 
 
(1145) 
 
Come on in the debate and tell me where you think it’s fair that 
Weyerhaeuser has 12 million acres and the Indian people, the first 
Canadians — the first Canadians — the highest rate of poverty 
and suicide and alcoholism. You take your chair, you take your 
chair and tell me that it’s fair. You take your chair; come on in 
here; not from the back. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He has no right to . . . 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Can we have some order in the 
House, please, and allow the member to continue his questioning. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I’m going to sit down and I’m 
going to ask the minister of privatization to come from the back, 
behind the bar, now, to take his chair and to put his comments on 
record, now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, we have heard lectures by this 
Premier about behaviour unbecoming. I want to say to the minister 
of privatization, your behaviour from behind the bar, yelling like 
that at me on this issue on points we can’t hear about, is 
unbecoming to all the members of this House, and it’s just too bad 
that there aren’t any children on this floor. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Now obviously you don’t have the courtesy to 
me or to this House to come forward, so let me resume this with 
the minister in charge of the native secretariat. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Item one agreed? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Not agreed. I want to put to the minister the 
following — you can respond if you want, or leave it on this basis 
of answering these questions in writing, which is another way of 
responding to what I said  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2362 
 

verbally to you. You choose how you want to handle the 
estimates. We’re prepared to continue it in any way going. 
 
The questions are as follows: one, in view of the letter sent by the 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member over there says it’s a 
good job. He compliments the minister of privatization. And I tell 
you, that’s the problem for this minister. The problem for this 
minister in this secretariat is that he is trying to genuinely deal 
with a sensitive problem involving culture, constitution, and 
legality. He gets interfered with by other members of the 
Progressive Conservative caucus who refuse to let him to do it; 
based on, putting it bluntly, a perverted sense of legalities and 
moralities. And he’s cheered on by back-benchers who have the 
temerity never to stand up to speak on the record on this issue, but 
silently applaud those who work against what this minister says. 
Shame on that back-bencher over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Shame on you. Yes, the member from 
Shaunavon. And again if you think that the Indian people don’t 
have this right, if you think it’s fair to do this, for goodness sakes, 
stand up and put it on record so that they know and we know. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Item one agreed? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — It is not agreed. You know, with the Minister 
of Social Services, there’s another member. We’re trying to deal 
with a serious issue. I am, with the minister, on an intelligent 
discussion of the issues, complicated as they are, and differences, 
and the Minister of Social Services . . . this is the person who, by 
the way, by his Social Services policies has victimized not only 
white, non-Indian people, but Indian people by the thousands, also 
lending in his support. What kind of a government is this? We’re 
trying to deal with a serious issue and you people chirp in on 
estimates. It’s a shameful display. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to leave my involvement in this situation, I 
want to leave my involvement by putting these questions to you. 
And you can respond to me as you see fit, either now — if you 
feel it’s necessary to rebut on your side, fair enough; I’ll wait the 
rebuttal and make a response if I think that’s necessary — or in 
writing. The questions are as follows. 
 
One, in view of a letter sent by the Hon. Grant Hodgins to the 
federal Minister of Indian and Northern Affairs on March 18, last, 
on Saskatchewan’s obligation to supply land for Indian treaty land 
entitlements, will the provincial government tell this House, and 
the bands who have selected lands leased upon the 1976 
agreement, whether or not those lands that have been selected are 
to be leased, sold, or otherwise alienated until the issue between 
Canada and the bands on how these lands will be transferred or 
settled at the negotiating table or the courts? 
 
I understand these are complicated questions and I don’t expect an 
immediate answer, but give them to me in writing. 
 

Two, in 1981 the provincial government made official 
commitments to transfer 18 selections of land made by nine bands. 
Those selections totalled 211,516 acres of land. Those 
commitments were formally accepted in writing by the Minister of 
Indian Affairs. Is it the intention of this government, your 
government, to honour the commitment made concerning those 
transfers? 
 
Third, could the minister inform me on whether or not the 
government views the 1976 formula as a legal and legitimate basis 
today for the determination of entitlement acreage and whether or 
not the government intends to honour it? You’ve given me your 
answers in that regard, and perhaps a summary restating it would 
be sufficient. 
 
Four, in 1976 an agreement was entered into by the federal and 
provincial governments and the Indian bands in Saskatchewan. 
The agreement became known as the 1976 Saskatchewan 
agreement. One of the essential understandings that came of this 
agreement was that the process would be moved expeditiously. 
Since that time, two bands have received, as the minister has 
pointed out, their full entitlements under this agreement. There are 
other bands that are growing anxious to have their entitlements 
met using this criteria. 
 
Could the minister advise me and the House what his time table is 
for the implementation of those requests and those land 
entitlements? 
 
Five, Canada said that the supply of land for entitlements, 
including any costs of purchase, is entirely a provincial 
responsibility. What is your provincial government’s position on 
this, in view of Canada’s responsibilities for treaties to Indians 
under the constitution, as I tried to outline in my view of the laws 
at the beginning of our discussion? Is the province prepared to 
work with the bands to persuade the federal government, the 
current federal government, to change its views, and to propose 
discussions with Ottawa towards cost-sharing arrangements? 
 
Six, Canada says that entitlements should be based on the shortfall 
at date of first survey. We talked about this. Canoe Lake, like 
English River, is already above this figure but has an outstanding 
entitlement under the Saskatchewan formula agreement of 1976. 
The province apparently has agreed in principle to transfer Kyle 
Lake selection to the band, but the federal government at Ottawa 
says the parcel will not necessarily be given reserve status. What is 
the province’s view on this particular issue, and what action will 
you take, if any, to support the band and its claim? 
 
Two more. Seven, costs of transfer of land include compensation 
to affected municipalities which lose or may lose part of their tax 
base. You may add here, parenthetically, part of the problem that 
the minister and I both acknowledge. Canada says the province 
should pay these costs. This issue is holding up the transfer of 
some selections. What is the province prepared to do specifically 
to resolve this particular issue in order to make sure that our 
municipalities are properly compensated? 
 
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2363 
 

And finally, eight. The province apparently wants to retain certain 
water rights in transferred selections. This affects many selections 
including, for example, (a) the traditional area selected by Peter 
Ballantyne Band on the Churchill and Reindeer Rivers; and (b) the 
waters and bed of an intermittently flowing stream on the Lucky 
Man Band’s selection in the Meeting Lake pasture. Is the province 
willing to enter into discussions with the entitlement bands to 
identify where there might be legitimate need for joint jurisdiction 
over water resources, and what acceptable forms of joint 
management are being devised? And would the minister provide 
those for me as well? 
 
Those are some of the questions. We’ve touched on them in our 
questions and answers here. I don’t expect an answer overnight. 
Obviously your officials will have to take some care in the 
preparation and the wording of them. The legislature may be 
adjourned by that time. I will rest my involvement in these 
estimates, on this occasion, if the minister gives me a commitment 
that he will, as is convenient and is as possible, give me a response 
in writing to those questions, which of course the record will have 
full notice of. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well, I thank the hon. Leader of the 
Opposition for those questions, and I certainly will make a 
commitment to provide, in writing, responses to each one of those 
questions. And as you could imagine, I had difficulty in just 
copying down the questions, let alone giving you a verbal answer 
here today. 
 
But I think if you look at all of the issues brought up in the specific 
questions that you asked, and we talk about tax lost to 
municipalities, we talk about water rights, we talk about a 
definitive timetable, and the legalities of whether the ’87 formula 
may or may not be legal — all of these things are extremely 
complex, extremely complex. 
 
And I guess I would like to focus on the question of: is the ’76 
formula legal? I would think a better question, a better question 
that may be asked is: is the ’76 formula practical? Is the ’76 
formula in the best interests of Indian people? And I think the 
record of success in fulfilling land entitlements would answer that 
question as being no, the ’76 formula is not a practical formula. 
 
I believe that the record of success of this administration in 
working with Indian people is a good record of success. I would 
hope that the record of success will be better in years to come, and 
I will make the commitment to Indian people that I will work 
closely with them. If it takes extensive negotiations with Ottawa, 
we are quite prepared to do that in a co-operative sense. 
 
The member from the opposition has said . . . has spent a fair bit of 
time in his speech about saying, is it fair? Well I want to tell the 
members opposite, and the Indian people of Saskatchewan, that 
the whole basis of our approach to Indian people and Indian 
problems is one of fairness. 
 
I look at the Indian economic development programs that this 
administration has undertaken, and I look at the success of Indian 
people, I look at the success rate of Indian people in many of these 
economic development  

initiatives, the success of the individual entrepreneurship that is 
existent today in Saskatchewan, all over Saskatchewan, in many 
different Indian bands. And I say that there’s a lot more room to 
improve, but I think our record in that respect is a good one. I 
think our dedication to economic development on Indian reserves 
and off of Indian reserves is one of fairness. 
 
So I once again emphasize, Mr. Chairman, that we are working 
very hard in Indian and Native Affairs to be fair with Indian 
people, to address their problems of concern. 
 
The issues out there today are not easy, Mr. Chairman, but I will 
make the commitment to all Indian people that through my 
ministry I will work as closely as I can with them in a co-operative 
fashion. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that we can look forward to 
developments to the benefit of all Indian and native people. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I’m prepared to conclude. I 
just want the minister to give me a definite commitment if he can. 
I think he has, but I wasn’t certain about it. 
 
With respect to the eight questions that I’ve directed to you, will 
the minister commit to me and to the House that he will give a 
response in writing, as best as he can — I understand these are 
complex issues, but I’m talking about policy direction — as soon 
as possible, and let’s say no later than within a month? Will you 
. . . can you give me that? 
 
And if . . . I’ll sit down if you can say yes to that. My colleague 
has another 10 or 15 minutes, and I think we can complete the 
consideration of this estimates if we stop the clock. We would 
make some progress there. Can you give me that commitment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, I’d be pleased to provide that 
commitment. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — The question is one of a general nature in regards 
to the health, social services issue, and it’s one that has to do with 
the area of jurisdiction and also in the area of action. And I just 
have here a report, for example, that . . . it was just researched. It’s 
called A Study of the Unmet Needs of Off-Reserve Indian and 
Metis Elderly in Saskatchewan, and it’s researched by the 
Saskatchewan Senior Citizens’ Provincial Council on June ’88, 
and it was released on the 21st. 
 
And basically it says that many off-reserve Indian and Metis 
elderly are living tragic lives. They are often forced to reside in 
very inadequate housing. They have very serious unmet health 
needs and poor access to transportation. Many live well below the 
poverty line. 
 
In relation to these grave issues, and last year I presented the idea 
that even in northern Saskatchewan, and I can see the same 
applying in the more rural areas where the services are not at the 
same level as in the urban areas, that some people have to move 
from their areas because they don’t have the level four, or even 
three, services at the community level. 
 
And I’m wondering what the Minister of Indian and  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2364 
 

Native Affairs will do in regards to working with the other 
departments and making sure that there is an effective strategy to 
deal with this issue. What are you going to do? I know I have 
raised this question last year, and it’s been raised before. What will 
you do to deal with the social services issues and the health issues 
that creep up from time to time on individual Indian and Metis 
people? 
 
(1200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well, Mr. Chairman, you may know that 
the report of which the member opposite speaks was just received, 
I believe, yesterday. It is a very comprehensive report, according 
to my information. I have not seen the report myself, but I will tell 
the member that I will be asking for a summary of that report be 
given to me. 
 
The whole question of seniors and the problems faced by seniors 
is indeed a subject that has to be dealt with. It is not, as well, an 
easy fix. I believe that the demographics would show you that 
people in general are living longer today. There are more people in 
the senior category today on reserve and off reserve than ever 
before, and of course, the costs associated with providing a healthy 
atmosphere, a healthy living for these people, are quite high. 
 
I have worked, or have met, since I’ve become minister, in the last 
few months, a number of time with Indian leaders. This particular 
subject has been touched on but not dealt with at length, and it 
would be one of the subjects that I do plan to discuss in future 
meetings with Indian leaders and take very seriously. 
 
I would also tell the member opposite that in my discussions with 
other ministers on the government side of the House, this subject 
is one that will be a subject that will be discussed. 
 
And I do not have any easy answers or quick solutions to the 
problems of the elderly. The member opposite knows from 
first-hand experience, and far better than I, the very sincere 
problems that these people have. And he knows . . . you know full 
well that it’s not an easy issue to address. I can only make the 
commitment that in a compassionate way I will deal as best I can 
with my officials and with my colleagues in addressing the needs 
of seniors, both on reserves and off reserves. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — One of the statements you made before in regards 
to dealing with the land issue was a problem . . . a question of 
legality and jurisdiction. I raised this issue before, and it’s been 
raised many times before, and that’s the question of clarifying the 
jurisdictions. 
 
But I haven’t seen any reports. I haven’t seen any summaries, or I 
haven’t seen any real direction in regards to how to deal 
effectively with the jurisdictional questions on the area of social 
services and health. And I haven’t seen any policy directives from 
your government to deal with this issue. 
 
Will you work with the proper ministers in Health and in Social 
Services and other areas as well to clarify the jurisdictional issues 
and, at the same time, to have a short-term strategy not to leave 
those people out in the  

cold, as has often been done in the past, so that we can have not 
only a long-term strategy on jurisdiction, but a short-term strategy 
on dealing with the daily issues that hit people on a daily basis? 
Could you also make a commitment on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Yes, the member opposite raises a good 
point. And I can say that just the other day, in one of my meetings 
with my officials, this very subject in a broader sense was 
discussed. 
 
I want to reaffirm the mandate of the Indian and Native Affairs 
Secretariat, and that mandate in part is most certainly to clarify 
jurisdictions, whether it’s in our own government or between the 
provincial government and the federal government, and make it 
easier and make it better known, more widely know, to Indian 
people on how they access this big thing we call government. 
 
I do know that it is tremendously difficult, and especially for 
people who are physically a long ways from Regina, for instance, 
to find their way into the right appropriate department for 
whatever assistance they may need. And I strongly, strongly 
reaffirm the mandate of this department to assist Indian people in 
finding their way into this thing called government, and to be of as 
much assistance as we can throughout all departments. And I now 
that same feeling is shared by all of my colleagues, to assist Indian 
people in whatever way we can. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Again, being the new minister, I would like also a 
commitment in the area of the hunting, trapping, and issues in 
relation to treaty rights. In many cases they have been treated as 
secondary to new regulations that have come out from time to 
time, and very little consultation has occurred. And many times, as 
I travel around, there has been this need to have real consultation, 
not just to consult your staff, which is important, but to consult the 
people at the band level, at the community level, to consult people 
at the district level, to consult people at provincial organizational 
level. 
 
What is your commitment in a strategy of effectively involving 
Indian and Metis people in dealing with these issues, especially in 
the area of hunting, fishing, and trapping? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — The issue of hunting, fishing, and trapping 
rights is an important issue amongst all peoples of Saskatchewan. I 
can tell the hon. member that just last November the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indians met with a cabinet caucus committee on 
this very issue. With our representation in our government from 
virtually all areas of the province, I feel that our government, our 
caucus, has a very good understanding of the issues of hunting and 
fishing and trapping. 
 
Indeed, more consultation is necessary. I would tell the member 
opposite this: I, myself, am not an expert on hunting and all of the 
issues. Most of these issues, of course, are dealt with by my 
colleague, the Minister of Parks, Recreation and Culture, but it is 
an area in which I want to get more involved in, more 
knowledgeable. I do understand and very much respect that 
hunting, fishing, and trapping are very much a part of Indian 
culture and Indian heritage and Indian rights. And it is something 
that  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2365 
 

I want to work very hard to maintain and keep these rights for 
Indian people. But I also know that there are some problems. 
 
I do know that there are some people who have concerns over 
certain individuals, in isolated cases, where hunting rights or 
privileges are abused. And I believe that it is only by working 
co-operatively with not only the bands and the individuals but 
with the federation and with the district chiefs, together with 
colleagues like mine in the Department of Parks and renewable 
resources, and as well, the wildlife association. And that 
co-operativeness has to be the order of the day if we are to retain 
full hunting rights and privileges and yet maintain the wildlife in 
Saskatchewan as we all wish to do. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I want to deal with the issue now of economic 
development and jobs. Last year I raised the issue that 66 per cent 
of the Indian economic development fund was cut back from 3 
million to $1 million. This year I noticed that it was exactly the 
same cut-back; that indeed we still were on $1 million and there 
was no increase in regards to Indian economic development, 
although when I look back at the records of the previous minister, 
that there was going to be great stress put on that. 
 
But that hasn’t been the case. It still remains the same. When I 
look at the fact, when I checked through the year of how well they 
were getting the mechanisms to get the Indian economic 
development loans and grants in place, it was very slow — it was 
very slow moving. 
 
And I am wondering, since I’ve . . . could you get me a complete 
copy again, just in writing, on all the economic development loans 
and grants that have been given out to Indian and Metis people, 
and also, not only the Indian economic development fund but also 
in the native economic development program. So I would like that 
information. So if you could send that to me into the future. 
 
And secondly I would like to say that the affirmative action 
strategies of the government has been less than adequate. I have 
raised from time to time the issue o Key Lake and the fact that the 
legal obligation shave not been met in regards to the Key Lake 
agreement. You mentioned the legal obligations of individuals in 
relation to fishing, but you yourself as a government have not 
followed up with the legal obligations. 
 
Some people have even suggested that in regards to Rafferty, a 
large, huge $1 billion development, that there should be an 
affirmative action lease agreement tied to that to make sure that 
there’s a lot of the southern bands, that have been used to 
construction work and that type of thing, could get part of the jobs 
and have a definite level, because a lot have the skill levels and so 
on. But many are worried that they will be only hired for a short 
term and not looked upon in more long-term permanent jobs. 
 
You have given me figures of 17,000 jobs and so on, but in many 
those are not permanent jobs, and they’re more short-term 
program, project-oriented type programs. And a lot of people are 
asking, what commitment do you make to affirmative action  

agreements in the North to live up to the legal obligations? And 
secondly, what are you doing in regards to new program 
development, such as Rafferty, to make sure that Indian-Metis 
people are not only promised jobs but that they indeed do get the 
jobs? What kind of program have you got in that regard? 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — In response to the member’s first part of 
his question, he asked about a specific list for a provincial Indian 
economic development program, the specific projects. I indeed 
would be very pleased to send over to you a complete list of 
approved projects under that program. And it’s a list that I look to 
with a great deal of pride, and I only wished we weren’t a little late 
for lunch and I would very much like to go through and talk about 
every one of these, every one of these businesses. 
 
And I’m not about to say that every one of them is a success or 
will be a success, but the overall record is a good one, and the 
diversity of these businesses is very amazing and we have 
everything from convenience stores to motor garages, to hotels, 
steam cleaning businesses, restaurant businesses, electrical 
businesses, and thoroughbred raising, and on and on down the 
line. 
 
So at this time, suffice it to say that I congratulate all of those who 
have been successful in the application for these projects, and I’ll 
be pleased to provide you with that information. 
 
With respect to affirmative action programs and the question the 
member asks is, what is this government doing to ensure that 
Indian and native people are employed at such projects as the two 
power dams of which you speak. I can tell the member opposite, 
through this department of . . . or the Indian and Native Affairs 
Secretariat, that we have worked closely with Power in facilitating 
meetings for Indian people, and indeed there is very much of a 
recognition by such Crown corporations as SaskPower that more 
Indian people, Indian native people, should be employed. 
 
I understand those discussions are going very well, and I think the 
member opposite may look with pride at the Indian and native 
people that will be employed in Saskatchewan on such projects as 
the Rafferty dam, as an example. 
 
Ms. Smart: — I’ll be brief, Mr. Minister, but I want to raise your 
attention again to the report that was released yesterday on the 
unmet needs of the Indian and Metis elderly, and urge you to 
become familiar with the entire content of that report. It’s a very 
good research project, and it shows that the elderly Indian and 
Metis people are a whole lot worse off than the seniors in the rest 
of the population, and they have very, very severe problems, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
And what I would like from you is a commitment that you will 
work with the Minister of Human Resources, who’s responsible 
for the Senior citizens’ Provincial Council, to see that they get the 
support they need to carry out the consultation with the Indian and 
Metis elderly that they have promised that they will do in this 
report. This is a  
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2366 
 

very good research report, but the Minister of human Resources 
has cut the funds for those research projects, has cut that staff back 
quite considerably, and he will need every bit of pressure on 
behalf of Indian and Metis people, to see that this report is 
followed through with. 
 
And I would like a commitment from you that you will take equal 
partnership, as the minister responsible for the Indian and native 
secretariat, to see that this report is carried through because we 
can’t have this go on in this province any longer. We have an 
excellent research report here, and it’s up to you to build on it. 
Have I got that commitment, that you will be concerned for this 
report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Well I once again would state that indeed I 
will pay personal attention to the report, and you may rest assured 
that I, and the minister in charge of Social Services, will be 
discussing the contents of the report. I, as I mentioned before, have 
not had the opportunity. It’s a very comprehensive report, but I 
will be asking for a summary of it very quickly. 
 
And you may rest assured that the concerns that you have for the 
elderly Indian and native people in the province of Saskatchewan 
are very much shared by this administration, and we will be 
looking at the issue in meetings with Indian leaders across the 
province, and it is an issue that we indeed take very seriously. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — This will be my final summary comment in 
regards to, you know, your previous comments in the many areas. 
Number one, I would say that, when we discuss the issue of 
cultural heritage, I think you have to do a lot of work to make sure 
that something indeed will be done in regards to the questions of 
the Indian cultural heritage in this province, not only working at 
the central level, but also at the local levels, to try and integrate a 
plan with the museum’s approach and so on, to be controlled by 
the people themselves. 
 
And in regards to the area of land, it has been well stated by the 
member from Riversdale that again, there is a very deep difference 
between the treatment of large-scale corporations and the 
treatment to Indian people in regards to land. When we look at the 
Conservative government about a hundred years ago, you know, 
with John A. Macdonald, you have to look at the CPR (Canadian 
Pacific Railway) and 25 millions of acres of land being given. 
 
When we look at the fact of Weyerhaeuser today, it’s about 12 
million acres of land. When we look at the needs of Indian people 
in this province in regards to the rightful treaty land obligation via 
the 1930 Natural Resources Transfer Agreement (Act), what we 
are looking at is one-tenth of what Weyerhaeuser is getting — we 
are looking at one-tenth of the land. 
 
And the question that the member from Riversdale raised was one 
of fairness. Are we fair? Are we committed? You always fall back 
to legal obligations, but these are treaty obligations. These are 
represented in the law courts across Canada, whether you go to the 
modern Musqueam case, and it shows very clearly that the land 
entitlement issue is a legal issue and it’s a legal obligation. 
 

And to couch a lot of the answers behind just legalism without 
looking at also the combined history of the spirit and intent of 
treaties is something that has to be recognized. I’m sure as a new 
minister you have heard that from time to time, that there is not 
only a question of just pure legal aspect, but you combine legal 
aspect with the cultural tradition and history of native people in 
regards to the overall treaty obligation, the trust responsibility 
from the federal level and the provincial role in regards to the land 
transfers agreement. And I’m sure that the minister, being the new 
minister, is starting to be well aware of the issue. 
 
But I’ll be following very closely this coming year in relation to 
what specific action you will indeed be taking, because 
commitment is more than promises. We have heard that too often 
in the past. We have heard too many statements go down the drain 
and not having been dealt with properly. We would like to see 
you, as the new minister, deal with these problems of the land 
issue fairly, because I think that your sincerity is there. But you 
have to make a commitment and the action, because even as I 
heard the rumblings as you talked, I knew there was opposition 
from within your caucus. But I know that you have to deal with it 
a lot stronger than ever before. Because this issue is something . . . 
we can’t only deal with parks and save our grasslands or our 
raspberries or whooping cranes, and so on, and not worry about 
people. We have to be concerned of people. There has to be that 
commitment to Indian people in this province. And I hope that, as 
a new minister, you will follow up on the commitment you made 
today. 
 
I hope that you will not be bought into this date of first survey 
because it’s a ridiculous concept. To me, who would think that the 
grant system in this province, the municipalities, should be only 
back in 1905. We look at the population, the per capita situation of 
the province of Saskatchewan, and say, yes, that is right and fair, 
Saskatchewan should be only getting federal dollars to the rate that 
the population was in 1905. We would say that’s highly unfair. 
We want to get the per capita in 1980s and ’89, wherever we are 
into the future. 
 
We also see that in municipal grant systems. We don’t say, give 
the per capita income to what Saskatoon was at the time 
Saskatoon made its first legal case as being a municipality in this 
province; we look at what Saskatoon gets in 1988. And that’s what 
we should be working towards in regards to dealing with the land 
issue on aboriginal people in relation to the land. 
 
Economic development, the same thing. You have to follow up on 
the legalities of affirmative action. You have to follow the law in 
that regard. You have to make sure that it’s not only a promise for 
jobs. We’ve heard that time and time again. We had been 
successful in the ’70s, but now we’re backtracking. We’re going 
back to the area where only 1 or 2 or 3 per cent get hired. We want 
to move it to a higher level — 50, 20 per cent in specific areas. 
 
When we look at cultural . . . the aspect of integrating all the 
economic land issues with socio-cultural issues, that has to be also 
considered. They cannot take a back seat. 
 
  



 
June 22, 1988 

2367 
 

So with that, Mr. Minister, I would say that there’s a lot of 
expectations on you as a new minister; that hopefully for the first 
time in the six-year history of the Progressive Conservative 
government, that we have very definite policies, very definite 
practices, and very definite timetables to deal with those issues 
that we’ve presented today. So we’ll be waiting as to what your 
act will be in the future, Mr. Minister. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 25 agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 
 
 


