


















































March 21, 1988 Hansard Morning


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 March 21, 1988 
 

4077 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

PROROGATION 
 
At 10:01 a.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber and took his seat upon the Throne. 
 
His Honour was then pleased to deliver the following speech: 
 
Mr. Speaker,  
 
Members of the Legislative Assembly: 
 
It is my duty to relieve you of further attendance at the first session 
of the twenty-first legislation. In doing so, I wish to thank you and 
congratulate you on the work you have completed. 
 
When this session opened, I indicated my government's intention 
to provide protection for the people of this province from forces 
beyond their control, to further diversify and develop the economy 
of Saskatchewan, and to maximize the efficiency and effectiveness 
of government in the modern context. 
 
To that end, you have enacted legislation to provide home owners 
with protection from high interest rates by setting a ten year 
maximum rate of nine and three-quarters per cent on home 
mortgages. You have enacted The Clean Air Act to protect the 
public and the environment from air pollution caused by industrial 
and commercial activities. 
 
The application of The Farm Land Security Act and The Farm 
Security Act was extended to ensure the integrity of the family 
farm during difficult economic times. 
 
You enacted legislation to protect and preserve the livelihood of 
employees and the value of investment in the Saskatchewan 
potash industry by enacting The Potash Resources Act. 
 
You have worked to improve the economic and social 
development of rural Saskatchewan by passage of The Rural 
Development Act to facilitate the creation and development of 
rural development corporations. 
 
You have enacted legislation to establish the Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology and Regional 
Colleges throughout the province. These new entities will provide 
the mechanisms to allow our children across the province to meet 
the considerable challenges of the future presented by new 
technologies and rapidly changing career opportunities. 
 
The Government Organization Act was enacted by you to permit 
adjustments to be made to the basic structure of the bureaucracy 
assigned to assist my ministers in responding to new issues and 
priorities as they arise, without in any way affecting the duties, 
responsibilities  

and mandates assigned by the Legislative Assembly. 
 
You have taken measures to become the first legislature outside of 
Quebec to endorse the principles of the Meech Lake accord, and 
thereby demonstrated your support for the full participation by all 
provinces in the new Constitution of Canada. 
 
In taking leave of you, I thank you for the manner in which you 
have devoted your energies to the activities of the session and 
wish you the full blessings of Providence. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, and members of the 
Legislative Assembly, it is the will and pleasure of His Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor that this Legislative Assembly be prorogued 
until later today, the 21st day of March, 1988, at 2 o'clock p.m., 
and this Legislative Assembly accordingly is prorogued. 
 
His Honour then retired from the Chamber at 10:05 a.m. 
 
  



 
March 21, 1988 

4078 
 

ADDENDUM 
 
On page 3715 of Hansard 107B, Friday, October 30, 1987, at 
the end of the list of Bills receiving Royal Assent, please add: 
 
Bill No. 86 — An Act for granting Her Majesty certain sums of 
Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year ending on 
March 31, 1988. 
 
[NOTE: The online version has been corrected.] 
 
 

CORRIGENDUM 
 
On page 4071 of the Hansard NO. 112C, Thursday, November 
5, 1987 there was a typesetting error. 
 
The first item under the heading THIRD READINGS in the 
left-hand column should read: 
 
Bill No. 55 — An Act to provide for the Division of 
Saskatchewan into Constituencies for the Election of 
Members of the Legislative Assembly 
 
The verbatim does refer to the above Bill. Readers will note that 
Bill No. 94 is dealt with in the right-hand column on the same 
page. 
 
We apologize for any confusion this may have created. 
 
[NOTE: The online version has been corrected.] 


