


















































April 22, 1988 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 22, 1988 
 
 

777 
 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk:  According to order, I wish to report to the Assembly 
that I have examined the following petitions, and under rule 
11(7) hereby lay on the Table petitions: 
 

Of the Stephen and Michelene Worobetz Foundation, of 
the city of Saskatoon, in the province of Saskatchewan, 
praying for an Act of incorporation. 
 
Of the Full Gospel Bible Institute, of the town of Eston, in 
the province of Saskatchewan, praying for an Act to amend 
its Act of incorporation. 
 
Of Pastor Walter Boldt, Art Ratzlaff and Barry Hertz, of 
the city of Saskatoon, in the province of Saskatchewan, 
praying for an Act of incorporation. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, 
and to this Assembly, 27 cubs from the Rosetown 1st Cub Pack. 
This group are visiting our legislature today. They are 
accompanied by their leaders: Graham Mickleborough, Bob and 
Bev Gardiner, Dave Ryan, Dave Hoffart, Wilf Shille, and Ellen 
Fraser and John Huffman. 
 
I’d be very pleased to meet with this group following question 
period in the time that they have their tour of the building. I 
would ask the members to welcome them here this morning, 
and I look forward to meeting with them later. 
 
Hon Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gerich:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, through 
you and to the members of the Assembly, I would like to 
introduce to you, sitting in the Speaker’s gallery, a group of 
elementary kids from the Sinclair Elementary School in 
Sinclair, Manitoba. From grades 1 to 8, there’s 39 students. 
They’re accompanied with their teacher, Mr. Joe Cop and Rob 
Thome, and their chaperons, Barb Keyes, Mavis Halls and 
Marlene Cop, and their bus driver is Trevor Pateman. 
 
I hope that they have an educational and informative morning 
here today. I’d ask the members to please welcome our guests. 
 
Hon Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you, and to other members of the Assembly, 65 
students from grade 8 at Ruth M. Buck School in the 
constituency of Regina Rosemont. The students are here 
accompanied with three of their chaperons, Mr. Fred Chriest, 
Donna Holbrow, and Rene 
 

Flett. I would ask all members of the Assembly to welcome 
these students here to watch the proceedings of the Assembly 
today. 
 
Hon Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
my colleague, the member from Regina Rosemont, in 
welcoming the students from Ruth Buck School. I live down the 
street from the school, and it’s just on my south boundary in 
Rosemont constituency. 
 
I know many of your teachers and many of your parents as well. 
I’d like to take this opportunity to welcome you here this 
morning. 
 
Hon Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Hospital Waiting Lists in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question, in the absence of the Minister of Health, is to the 
Premier. It deals with the hospital bed waiting list in Saskatoon, 
now approaching, as the Premier knows, 11,000 in number. 
 
My question to the Premier is this: can the Premier, on behalf of 
the minister and the government, assure the people of 
Saskatchewan, and particularly the people of Saskatoon, that 
this year, unlike last year, there will be adequate and sufficient 
government funding for all three of the Saskatoon hospitals to 
make sure that they operate at a full capacity all summer long? 
 
Hon Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, I can tell the hon. member 
that despite his news conferences in front of the hospitals 
saying that the new wings that we are building will not be 
functional, that in fact they will be functional. 
 
And the whole key in providing the new facilities  which 
were not built before, Mr. Speaker  being built now, is to 
provide the beds and the new facilities and the revenue, Mr. 
Speaker, as you know. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Are you going to close any beds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  I just want the children to listen again to 
the member from Quill Lakes, okay? Just keep speaking up. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Answer the question. 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. The Premier cannot 
answer the question if he is continuously being interrupted in 
his attempts to answer the question, and I ask the members to 
abide by that request. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to 
say, as the hon. member knows, we’ve taken the health budget 
from 700 million to 1.2 billion  over 65 per cent increase. We 
are building a new City Hospital in the city  
  



 
April 22, 1988 

 

778 
 

of Saskatoon, a brand new wing at the University Hospital, and 
an addition to St. Paul’s Hospital; and they will all be funded, 
Mr. Speaker  a tremendous increase in capacity  and the 
new beds and the new facilities will be reducing the waiting 
lines, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the funds are up, the facilities are up, and indeed we will be 
providing the funds to make sure  and it’s overdue  that the 
people of Saskatchewan can have the best health care facilities 
any place in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Premier. The Premier will, of course, recollect that what I was 
inquiring about was the question of the summer bed situation in 
Saskatoon and the 11,000 people on the waiting lists. I think all 
of us would welcome the additional capacity which the 
government has announced, but the question here is an 
immediate one. 
 
And therefore it is to you as follows, Mr. Premier: can you give 
the people of this province assurance that there will be funding 
this summer for the three Saskatoon hospitals sufficient to make 
sure that none of them close during the summer months like 
they did last year, in order to ease this crisis for waiting lists? 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, I believe in the Saskatoon 
paper this morning they are suggesting that they won’t be 
closing anywhere close to what they were last year because of 
the increased funding. And it pointed out that something like 
110 beds closed last year in City Hospital, and now they’re 
looking at maybe something like 40, 45 beds because of the 
increased funding that we’ve provided. 
 
Now that’s the whole point, Mr. Speaker. We are funding more 
beds; we’re building more hospitals; the budget has gone from 
700 million to 1.2 billion. We’re adding that capacity, Mr. 
Speaker, so that in fact we can address the waiting lists. 
Operating procedures per capita per hospital are way up, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’re addressing it head-on, and we would appreciate the 
support and the encouragement from the opposition as opposed 
to having their picture taken in front of a new wing of a 
hospital. I suppose you could have a picture when we were 
digging the dirt in front of the new City Hospital, and saying, 
well there’s 500 new beds but they’re not full yet. We got to 
build them first, Mr. Speaker, before we can actually use them. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. 
I realize his sensitivity, but I would ask the Premier not to 
over-react to the question, which I think is a legitimate 
question, and I want to specifically refer to the newspaper story 
that he himself has referred to. 
 
Today’s Saskatoon Star-Phoenix says that there will be a 
closure of 45 hospital beds at City Hospital for 10 weeks 

between June and September, including a 35-bed, in-patient 
surgical ward. Now I want to ask the Premier: how in the world 
does this kind of a closure help to reduce the waiting lists in 
excess of 10,000 people in the Saskatoon? How does this help 
out the situation? 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member would 
share with the public the rest of the article, it points out that we 
have provided well over $1 million to improve the procedures 
at City Hospital so that, in fact, they don’t have to close 110 
beds. And it’s normally a fact that when you’re looking at 
holidays for the nursing staff and/or medical profession, that 
you will have some summer closures, but we have provided 
money to cut those lines and those reductions in over 50 per 
cent. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I say to the hon. member in a straightforward 
way, where last summer 110 beds were closed, this summer 
they’re talking about 45 because we come up with the 
additional money. Now we’ve never spent so much money in 
health care in the history of the province. We’ve gone from 
$700 million to 1.2 billion, and I keep pointing that out so that 
the public knows that we are building hospitals, funding beds, 
and decreasing the line-ups because we’ve had the courage to 
face health care and spend the money where it should be spent. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. 
The Premier, who is long on rhetoric about funding but short, 
unfortunately, on the facts about funding, which is very 
inadequate in the province of Saskatchewan . . .  
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:   . . . but my question relates to the 
University Hospital. As the Premier will know, he referred to 
this himself in response to an earlier question, something like 
79 new hospital beds, not current ones, but new hospital beds at 
the University Hospital sit unused at the current time because, 
as we are advised, there are insufficient funds to staff those 79 
beds. 
 
Now I understand that the Department of Health  and maybe 
that explains the Minister of Health’s absence this morning 
from question period  is meeting today with University 
Hospital officials who are concerned about the situation today, 
in order to come to some resolution of it. 
 
My question to the Premier is this: is it correct that 79 beds, 
new beds, are lying unused because of insufficient funding; and 
if that’s so, will the Premier assure the House and the people of 
Saskatoon and area that funding will be provided forthwith to 
open those hospital beds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, I notice that the Leader of 
the Opposition hedged his point a little, and I congratulate him 
for that, because it’s not true. I mean, you can still smell the 
paint in the new wing. We haven’t finished everything that 
should be done. And, Mr. Speaker, when you build a brand-new 
facility  we’re  
  



 
April 22, 1988 

 

779 
 

just finishing the facility  he’s standing up and saying but the 
beds aren’t full yet. 
 
Well obviously, Mr. Speaker, as you go through a situation 
where you’ve just built a new wing with 79 new beds and the 
operating things, and you want to provide the staff, when you 
want to provide the staff, then Mr. Speaker, you say, here’s the 
operating budget and now we can start to use the new wing. I 
mean, we’ve just . . . we haven’t even, Mr. Speaker, finished all 
the things that have to be done in the new wing, and he’s 
saying, well for Heaven’s sakes, they’re not filling the beds. 
 
I trust the hon. member will acknowledge when I say that the 
new wing will be functional, it will be operating, there will be 
funds for that new wing, that he will take it at the Premier’s 
word that that will be the case and, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be able 
to make effective use of it this year. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. 
I assume that we’re going to have somebody in this government 
watching the paint dry at the University Hospital in order to tell 
us when those beds are going to be opened. 
 
The Premier knows the situation is not as he’s described it. The 
television cameras were there at University Hospital yesterday, 
actually physically and visually demonstrating to the people of 
Saskatoon that they’re open, or capable of opening. I mean, 
that’s the reality. 
 
But even assuming that there is some legitimacy to your 
argument, when will this money be forthcoming? You can tell 
this House that, surely, can you not? Are we expecting it one 
week from now, one month from now; is there a commitment to 
fund it? And if so, please tell us the specific date so that the 
people at University Hospital and more importantly, the people 
who have got more important things to do than watch paint dry 
can be assured that they’ve got a chance at a hospital bed. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, I’ve already said to the hon. 
member that we will fund and are funding it the new facility. 
We are just finishing building it, and it will be funded, and they 
will have it open as soon as you have the capacity to run it and 
use it properly. Now it’s just completed. I mean, it is really 
interesting, Mr. Speaker, we build new facilities and all the hon. 
member can talk about is watching the paint dry in the facilities. 
 
He didn’t have the money or the courage or the wherewithal to 
build them. He didn’t build them. He had a moratorium on 
nursing home beds for half a decade. He wouldn’t build one 
new position. When we build it, Mr. Speaker, he says, well the 
paint’s got to dry so that we can use the facilities. 
 
I’ll say to the hon. member, when the paint is dry, Mr. Speaker, 
and when the facilities are finished, you will see that they will 
be funded. The people of the province have my commitment; 
they’ll be using that new facility, and I hope he’s as proud of it 
as we will be, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, a new question. I’m going to 
try one more time with the Premier. He’s the one, with the 
greatest respect, Mr. Speaker, who raised the “paint dry” as an 
argument for not funding it  not this side. And as one of my 
colleagues says, it must be very slow-drying paint. 
 
Look, I want to ask the Premier a very simple, straightforward 
question, and you can give us the rhetoric if you want, but just 
give us, if you will please, sir, a specific answer to this: is it 
correct that your department officials are meeting today with 
the University Hospital officials with the specific objective in 
mind of opening up the 79 beds, as I’m advised is the situation, 
and if so, will you undertake to this House to tell the people of 
Saskatoon and Saskatchewan, after this meeting, with precision, 
when it is that you’re going to fund those 79 new hospital beds 
so we can get on with the job of getting these beds serviced? 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, I’m advised that the 
Minister of health is in St. Walburg opening up a new dental 
clinic, and he’s not in Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  I’m also advised that the minister’s . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order, order. Once more the Premier is being 
interrupted and before being given a chance to answer the 
question. I ask you to give him the opportunity to answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate 
that. An secondly, that if the medical staff and/or the Health 
officials are meeting with the hospital officials, that’s precisely 
what they’ll be talking about in terms of what has to be done to 
finish the new ward, what kind of staff has to be there, what 
kind . . . the number of nurses, the number of doctors, and the 
kind of budgets that are necessary for it. That’s what they do 
when they’re about to open it. So they’re meeting on it today, or 
they may be meeting on it today or tomorrow or over the 
weekend or the next few weeks. That’s what they do when they 
open up a brand-new wing. 
 
And I’m saying to the public and to the minister . . . or to the 
member opposite, the wing will be funded; we’ve already built 
it; the operating rooms are about ready to go; we have a few 
more things left to do, and when they’re ready, that the hon. 
member will see that people have access to that brand-new ward 
 79 new beds in the city of Saskatoon  as quickly as 
possible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the hon. member obviously must be in a hurry for some 
reason because he’s holding news conferences in front of this 
ward. It must be something else that’s on his mind, Mr. 
Speaker, rather than just the fact that we have a brand-new 
facility that he didn’t happen to fund. 
 
  



 
April 22, 1988 

 

780 
 

Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, a new question, and for me 
this will be the last question because obviously the Premier is 
either unwilling or unable to give us a straightforward answer. I 
do want to say to the Premier, as he will know, there must be 
some . . . how many officials in the Department of Health? 
 
An Hon. Member:  Close to 2,000. 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Fifteen hundred, 2,000 officials. The 
minister is away on other duties, but the officials of the 
department are there to do their job. There will be a meeting, as 
the Premier has acknowledged, today on the question of 
hospital bed funding for University Hospital. 
 
My question still remains unanswered, which I direct to you, 
sir, again: namely, after the meeting today with the officials of 
your Department of Health and University Hospital, will you 
undertake to advise publicly, at the conclusion of the meeting, 
the timetable for funding the 79 new hospital beds? After all, 
how in the world could it be that any government would 
construct the beds and then have inadequate funding, and 
unable to tell us as to a timetable when those beds will be 
operational. Surely you can tell us that information today. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, it’s really interesting that 
the opposition wouldn’t fund new hospital facilities when they 
were in power. When we build them they come back and say, 
well could you give us the date when you’re going to open the 
door. I’ll tell the hon. member, as soon as the Health officials 
advise me, I will send a personal invitation to the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member from Riversdale, inviting him to the 
opening so that we can go through the new beds together. 
 
I tell him today, Mr. Speaker, the beds will be funded, the wing 
will be funded, and the officials are doing that right now, 
putting together the package, and the hon. member will be the 
first to get an invitation to come and look at the new facility 
which will be operating in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
This is all they’ve got, Mr. Speaker. Tell us the day when they 
can go cheer for the new opening. That’s all they’ve got left to 
talk about. I mean, we’ve got problems and other things that we 
can address, and that’s what the hon. member stands there and 
says, when will the door open on your publicly brand-new 
hospital. He’ll be among the first to know. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 

Prescription Drug Plan  Special Cases 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Minister of 
Health, my question’s directed to the Premier, and it deals with 
yet another example of how the cuts, the PC cuts to the 
prescription drug plan, are causing hardships to Saskatchewan 
families. And I refer, Mr. Premier, to the Shepherd family who 
are sitting in the  

Speaker’s gallery today. 
 
For more than a week now, Mr. Premier, they’ve had $130 in 
prescriptions which they have been unable to buy because they 
simply don’t have the money. One is for Mrs. Shepherd who 
was in a car accident a few days ago and has a sever whiplash. 
The other is for their 10-year-old daughter who has a reaction to 
sunlight, and has not been able to go outside for approximately 
a week now, and I understand she’s been missing school and 
missing exams as a result, because they can’t afford the 
prescription to enable her to go outside. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, I want you to tell the Shepherd family and 
thousands more like them what they are supposed to do to get 
needed medication? 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, I believe that it is appalling 
that the member opposite would stand and exploit the Shepherd 
family and say that there are thousands of people just like the, 
when in fact she knows that there are not thousands of people 
going through what she purports to have happening here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I believe 
the Premier has the right to answer a question without constant 
interruption. As we know, in question period there are 
occasional comments made from seats, but it shouldn’t be 
constant, and this is happening. And I ask the hon. members to 
please refrain. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I acknowledge 
your decision. I believe it’s the fourth time you’ve had to 
quieten the opposition so that at least we could have some civil 
activity here in the legislature. 
 
I would just say to the hon. member, I would be glad to review 
it as the Minister of Health is. As he knows and I know and the 
hon. member knows, if there are special circumstances, we have 
responded to those that may have a chronic problem or an 
accident or something else; if they bring it to the attention of the 
officials, that we will be dealing with it. 
 
I also mentioned to the hon. member, I just want her to watch 
very carefully because, obviously, it’s something that they 
didn’t have the courage to address. 
 
The problem of both  and the challenge of both  providing 
prescription drugs to people who need them, and I’ll take it at 
your word that the Shepherd family needs them and to make 
sure that there’s not the abuse that we find in today’s paper in 
the city of Regina and Saskatoon is very important. 
 
Mr. Speaker  and I want the members opposite  Mr. 
Speaker I want the members opposite to just please bear with 
me. Mr. Speaker, they don’t want to listen to this they don’t 
want to listen to this. I draw it to the attention of the children 
sitting in the gallery then, and to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. You listen to this: half the drug problem, half 
the drug problem addressed today in the city of Regina is free 
prescription drugs, Mr.  
  



 
April 22, 1988 

 

781 
 

Speaker, and we’ve had the courage to address it to protect the 
children and the families and, Mr. Speaker, the opposition  
doesn’t want to . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Order. I believe the Premier has more 
than made his point. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Speaker, the Premier talks about 
exploiting families in Saskatchewan, and it’s their government 
that’s exploiting Saskatchewan families. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard:  The audacity of the Premier of this province to 
equate sick people to criminals. That’s disgusting. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Speaker, the Premier talks about giving 
special circumstances or special allowances to sick people. Well 
the Shepherds have contacted the Department of Health, and 
we’ve contacted the Department of Health, and there has been 
no help forthcoming for the Shepherd family  no help. 
 
The problem is, the answer we get from the Department of 
Health, Mr. Speaker, is that they should pay for their 
prescriptions and claim the refund. The problem is, they don’t 
have the money to pay for their prescriptions up front; they 
simply don’t have the money. 
 
Now I want the Premier to give us a real answer today about 
what the Shepherd family is supposed to do to rectify their 
situation, and I want some action now. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, the 
hon. member knows that I’ve made a standing offer, and the 
Minister of Health knows, that if families want to provide 
assistance in special . . . in special cases, and if they don’t have 
sufficient funds, then we’ll provide the funds. And the hon. 
member knows that. 
 
I raise again, Deputy Speaker, we took on the drug abuse 
problem because half of the drug problem in the city of Regina 
is prescription drugs, Mr. Speaker. And the opposition doesn’t 
want to mention this, and they don’t want to talk about that. 
They said half the problem in the drug bust  in the drug bust 
 is the abuse of prescription drugs in the city of Regina and 
the city of Saskatoon. We can make up to $6,000 a day selling 
free prescription drugs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the children in this province need more than just 
rhetoric; they need somebody who is prepared to address that. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to address it because we have 
the courage to address free prescription drugs that are in abuse, 
or whether it’s double-doctoring, or whether it’s crime, or 
whether it’s prostitution, or whether it is drug abuse on the 
streets, Mr. Speaker, or in the schools. We are going to address 
it and not hide behind philosophy and socialism, because 
they’re afraid  

to take it on. We’re going to take it on, Mr. Speaker, and we’re 
not going to let our children be abused. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Premier, the Shepherd family have 
contacted your department on numerous occasions, and we 
have, and they’re getting no help. And I tell you what: the 
Shepherd family are not criminals . . .  
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard:  To equate sick people to criminals is simply 
outrageous, Mr. Premier  outrageous. Now I want to know: 
what are you and your government going to do for families in 
Saskatchewan and sick people who are suffering, and what are 
you going to do, Mr. Premier, about this family in the gallery? 
What are you going to do to help them? Tell us, and tell us 
something concrete. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, we have . . . Mr. Speaker, 
this is . . . Mr. Speaker, this is the nub, this is the nub of the 
difference between that side of the House and this side of the 
House here, right here. And I’m glad that they’ve noticed it. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Clearly it is, Mr. Speaker . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  And I’m glad that they agree because at 
least it will be on the record. When the public sees that we can 
and do address those that need help in the health care and build 
hospitals, provide drugs and provide prescriptions  provide 
that security  and at the same time have the courage to take 
on drug abuse in the streets, now that’s government. That’s 
what we should be doing. The opposition just says . . .  
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:   . . . the opposition just says, I’ll tell you 
what you do, you provide more free drugs. They said, if it could 
be a $100 million, or 200 million a year in free drugs, go do it; 
provide more money for just everybody on welfare. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we could end up with drug addicts in our schools, 
abuse and crime and prostitution on the streets, publicly funded, 
Mr. Speaker  free drugs  that’s what they’re talking. 
They’re picking up the addicts here in the province of 
Saskatchewan on the streets of Regina. 
 
Now what I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, this government can help 
those that need it, but it can also have the courage, through the 
legal system and the justice system and the health care system, 
to protect the kids and the families in the streets of Regina and 
Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:  A new question to the Premier. I had not 
intended to get into this series of questioning. I do want to ask 
the Premier, however, to consider carefully and reconsider his 
remarks. This newspaper story which  
  



 
April 22, 1988 

 

782 
 

talks about a drug bust of 66 charges, some of which are 
prescription drugs illegally overprescribed, I don’t see any 
reference to the drug plan in there, I don’t see any reference to 
Grant Devine  or sorry, the Premier  or the Minister of 
Health. 
 
Surely the Premier is not equating the rationale for the drug 
plan with its consequences on people like those sitting in the 
gallery and hundreds and thousands like them in Saskatchewan 
. . . hundreds of thousands in Saskatchewan, to a criminal 
activity  all of which we support. 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Will the Premier reconsider and apologize 
and withdraw those remarks, those scurrilous remarks. 
Apologize and withdraw. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, you see why . . . Mr. 
Speaker, you can see what their problem is: they cannot 
separate out drug abuse from help in health. They put them all 
together. 
 
What I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, is we are funding a new drug 
rehab centre for young people at Yorkton, and we’re very proud 
of that. And we are going to fund a prescription drug system 
here that helps the Shepherds but does not help those that are 
pushing drugs on our children. Now there’s a significant 
difference and he knows it but he won’t admit it. 
 
I am not going to sit back and see free prescription drugs into 
hundreds of millions of dollars be traded on the streets of 
Regina. I am not going to do that. And if I have to take it on, 
I’m going to take it on. It’s the most serious, serious crime we 
have in urban society today. Free prescription drugs and drug 
abuse go hand in hand. 
 
What we’re asking, Mr. Speaker, is that the opposition 
co-operate with us in building a new drug rehab centre, 
educating the young people, and making sure that free drugs are 
not traded on the streets. Now you should help us in that regard. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Order. Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Science and Technology 

Ordinary Expenditure  Vote 15 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Mr. Minister, I have a question that deals 
with your statement, the statement made yesterday by the chief 
acting officer of Joytec Ltd. in Saskatoon, and your 
non-answers in estimates last night. 
 

Saskatchewan taxpayers have sunk millions of dollars into 
Joytec in the form of tax breaks and research grants at the 
federal and provincial levels. Now the company is saying that if 
it ever gets to manufacturing its computerized golf simulators, 
it’ll do so in Japan, not in Saskatoon. 
 
And you know as well as I did that the Joytec official said, 
quote, “The reality in high tech today is offshore 
manufacturing.” Can you explain, Mr. Minister, why taxpayers 
have sunk millions into this company, only to see Joytec create 
jobs in Japan? Can you explain that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 
opposite likes to exaggerate and mislead. He’s talking about the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers having millions of dollars in this 
particular company. 
 
In fact I believe that the amount of taxpayers’ dollars, as such, 
would be in the neighbourhood of 1.5, something like that, that 
was put into the VCC (Venture Capital Corporation) 
 
I would point out to the hon. member that in order for a group 
of individuals to qualify for a VCC, that there are certain 
criteria that have to be met. And I’m quite sure that the criteria, 
at the time that this venture was put together, that all of the 
criteria were met. 
 
To this point in time, the company is still in operation. There 
has been no loss to the investors in the company of the 
taxpayers of this province. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Nobody’s written it off. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, I don’t know which 
debate we’re in here. 
 
An Hon. Member:  We’re listening with bated breath. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well I wish you would. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Wouldn’t miss a word of it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  I wish you wouldn’t. 
 
In so far as the article that you’re quoting from is concerned, it 
does not indicate that all of the manufacturing is going to be 
done in Japan. The article that you’re quoting from does not 
indicate that all of the manufacturing is going to be done in 
Japan. I’ve indicated to you, on past occasions, that for the 
Japanese market, indeed the manufacturing will be done in 
Japan, and that makes an awful lot of sense. As far as the other 
markets are concerned, we have no reason to believe that the 
products will not be manufactured in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Mr. Minister, just what kind of research or 
analysis have you done with respect to the marketing studies 
that you have funded by your department for Joytec? What kind 
of analysis have you done of these studies to see whether, in 
fact, there is even a prayer that manufacturing will be done and 
that machines will be produced in Saskatoon and sold here in 
North America? Have you done anything in that regard? 
 
  



 
April 22, 1988 

 

783 
 

Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, some of the funds 
that were allotted to Joytec from Science and Technology some 
two years ago were indeed for market studies. And at that time 
the information that was gained from the studies indicated that 
there was indeed a market for this particular type of product. 
 
This is an example of very good technology. It’s a product that 
was well received in so far as the people that were contacted. 
My officials are in contact with companies that have received 
grants from us. There is a fair degree of follow-up as to what is 
happening and whether, in fact, the grants were put to the use 
that they were intended. 
 
We also, of course, have a process within the Department of 
Science and Technology as to how companies can qualify for 
funds. There’s a certain criteria that has to be met. And some of 
the accusations that the member opposite was making last night 
certainly is putting a bad light, I think, on the officials of the 
Department of Science and Technology. 
 
The criteria is there. It is examined very, very closely as to the 
ideas that are put forth, and after everything has been looked 
into very thoroughly, the officials then make the 
recommendations as to whether or not that’s a product or 
process that should be going forward. And while you might 
very well question the criteria that we would have as to which 
projects are funded and which ones aren’t, I would point out to 
you that the Saskatchewan model was the first one put in place 
in this country, we were the first province in Canada to have a 
Department of Science and Technology, and our model in fact 
is being used by all of the other provinces across the country. 
 
So I think that not only in Saskatchewan do we feel that the 
ideas are good, but they obviously feel that they’re good all 
across the country. So I don’t think that you can question the 
manner in which companies are provided with grants. Certainly 
there is follow-up in so far as the grants are concerned, and also 
as far as Joytec is concerned. Every reason was there to believe 
that this was a sound product and that it was going to be a good 
deal for Saskatchewan down the road. 
 
And to this point in time, Mr. Chairman, we don’t have any 
reason to believe that that company is not going to succeed. 
You know full well, you know full well from some of your own 
comments that it takes a fair bit of time for some of these 
companies to come out with a successful product. There is a lot 
of risk in it; you’ve also made those comments. You’ve also 
made the comments that there is a great deal of risk when it 
comes to venture capital, but that’s part of life, and those were 
your words. 
 
I would also point out to you that as far as Joytec is concerned, 
and you talk about your concern for employees and for the 
shareholders, I can’t see that you’re doing one little bit of good 
for either of those groups with some of the comments that 
you’ve been making in this House. 
 
We have a company that’s still in business; there are some 25 
jobs that are still being provided, and have been going on for 
nearly a year now since there were any  

lay-offs. And I don’t know what kind of a message you’re 
putting out to the employees or to the shareholders in so far as 
Joytec is concerned, certainly one that is far from being 
positive. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Mr. Minister, I think that the public, that 
shareholders in Joytec equities and taxpayers are looking to you 
to see what kind of protection you’re providing for them, given 
your particular responsibilities as minister. Taxpayers and 
shareholders have a right to expect something  something 
in return for the one and a half million dollars that they’ve put 
into this company. And that something is very clearly jobs here 
is Saskatchewan, and not seeing Joytec go to Japan. 
 
Have you told the officials at Joytec that for every job that they 
create in Japan, as opposed, as opposed to Saskatoon, they will 
be required to pay back some of that money to Saskatchewan 
taxpayers that was advanced to them to create jobs here in 
Saskatoon? Have you done that? 
 
(1045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, in so far as any of the 
products that are going to be manufactured in Japan, Joytec is 
going to be receiving benefit from that through royalties. Also, I 
would point out to the member opposite that the software 
products are still going to be manufactured by Joytec. So there 
are still going to be jobs provided here in Saskatchewan with 
the production of those particular materials. 
 
In so far as the expectation that the member opposite has, that 
there hasn’t been revenue coming in yet, I pointed out to him 
last night that for the last several months the operation of that 
company has been totally funded by Technigen, the owner of it. 
And I would also point out that in all cases, with high-tech 
companies in particular, there is no guarantee of success in a 
short time and, in some cases it may not occur. 
 
I also listed some of the successful high-tech companies that we 
have in this province that are doing very well, and certainly 
their success did not come overnight, and I would just give you 
two examples. 
 
I would suggest to you that International Road Dynamics, 
which was incorporated in 1980, carried on for several years 
before they really had a breakthrough in so far as their products 
were concerned. They also received money from the 
Department of Science and Technology; in fact they received 
$116,000 for their particular research and development. But the 
main thing was that they had a good product, they had good 
technology, but it took time to get the product to the stage 
where it was marketable, and also to establish those markets 
which now are in many different countries all over the world. 
So here we are in 1988, where International Road Dynamics is 
now a very successful company, but it didn’t happen overnight. 
 
The other one that I would point out was Capa Software. This 
was a company that also struggled for many years before it 
finally reached the stage where it had a product that it was ready 
to move out into the market and do very, very well. 
 
  



 
April 22, 1988 

 

784 
 

And I might also point out to the member opposite that in either 
of those cases that I have just mentioned, there was certainly no 
way in which the officials of Science and Technology were 
going to be going to the officials of those companies and 
inquiring of them as to the terms of specific deals that they had 
put together. 
 
Are you suggesting that we should be going to Capa Software 
and asking them the terms of the deal that they’re putting 
together with AT&T (American Telephone and 
Telecommunication)? Are you suggesting that we should be 
going to SCI-TEC and asking them of the terms of the deal that 
they have put together with the Soviet Union? I mean, this is 
something that is not a responsibility of the Department of 
Science and Technology. 
 
We examine their requests for funding assistance, and we 
provide them that assistance if in fact they meet the criteria. So 
as far a Joytec is concerned, they have been in operation for 
nearly five years, and there is no reason to think now that the 
products are not going to be manufactured in Saskatoon. 
 
We know they have a good product. I think the fact that the 
Japanese are very, very interested in that, and are purchasing the 
technology, is a good indication that they believe that it’s a 
good product. And Joytec employees are still going to be 
actively involved as they work on products, not only for Canada 
but also particularly on the software materials that are going to 
be needed wherever those machines are being built, and sold. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Mr. Minister, you’re very ready to talk about 
all sorts of other companies. But my point is rarely have other 
high technology companies, particularly small or fledgling 
companies, gotten the kind of extravagant benefits and elegant 
hand-outs from your government as Joytec has. Last year it was 
indicated that your department was prepared to give industrial 
incentives grants to Joytec  $7,500 for each new job created. 
Have you given industrial incentive jobs to Joytec? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I would point 
out to the member opposite that I have nothing to do with the 
industrial incentive program, and I would suggest that you will 
have to direct that question to the minister in charge. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Mr. Minister, would you be prepared to 
recommend to the minister in charge that Joytec receive 
industrial incentive grants  $7,500 for each new job created? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well I’m informed, Mr. Chairman, 
that they do have a request in to the Department of Economic 
Development, but no funds have been issued to that company 
under that particular program. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  In your view, should funds from industrial 
incentives be advanced to Joytec? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well, Mr. Chairman, if their  

request should meet the criteria, I would assume that that’s up 
to that particular department to make that decision. It’s not up 
to me. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  And would your, Mr. Minister, and would 
your department be investigating Technigen, the parent 
company, to see just what kind of stability Technigen was 
prepared to give to Joytec. Or would you abrogate that 
responsibility entirely? 
 
Technigen, the parent company, as you well know, has been the 
subject of some very intense scrutiny for the last year and a half 
in Vancouver, in the Vancouver Stock Exchange. There are a 
lot of questions surrounding the deals that Technigen has signed 
with Computech, and Datadee, and Corporacion Relacio, and 
those are all questions  more than questions  those are 
pieces of information that I have given you during the last 
year’s estimates in Science and Technology. 
 
And given that kind of information, I’m wondering if you 
followed up on it, and whether you’re prepared to analyse 
whether a further infusion of government money into this 
company would be warranted, given the track record and some 
of the circumstances surrounding Technigen, the parent 
company. 
 
Are you still prepared to recommended to the minister 
responsible for the industrial incentives program that Joytec 
would yet get another hand-out from the public trough? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, in so far as 
Technigen is concerned, they have no request to us for any type 
of assistance. The only dealings that Science and Technology 
have had in any connection to Technigen was with Joytec, and 
that goes back some two years ago. We are certainly monitoring 
the situation out of the interest for the company in that it is a 
high-tech company. We are following up on that. 
 
In so far as the industrial incentive program is concerned, that 
program was cancelled last year, so I would not certainly be in a 
position to be recommending to the minister in charge that in 
fact they would be receiving any funds under that program. 
 
If at some time Joytec should return to Science and technology 
with a proposal for assistance, it would be examined by my 
officials. And if in fact it were to meet all of the criteria, and 
would certainly be good for the province of Saskatchewan, and 
that we still feel confident that the company is going to be 
going ahead, I would think that consideration would be given to 
them in the same way that it would be to any other company in 
the province. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Well, Mr. Minister, that’s precisely my 
concern, is that this company has had preferential consideration 
in the past  consideration that other companies rarely get 
from your department. You talk about monitoring the situation 
out of interest or concern for the company, Joytec. I’m talking 
about monitoring the situation out of interest or concern for the 
Saskatchewan taxpayer. 
 
  



 
April 22, 1988 

 

785 
 

I want to know whether Joytec . . . you’re still prepared to 
recommend that Joytec get money from the industrial incentives 
program, even though it’s been cancelled; whether you would 
still advocate them because they have their application in, that 
still a year or two down the road they could still qualify for 
money and receive the kind of advantage that other 
Saskatchewan firms can’t receive under that program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, I would point out to 
the member opposite, there is absolutely no basis for saying that 
Joytec has received any kind of preferential treatment in this 
province. There are many, many different venture capital 
corporation funds that have been developed over the last 
number of years. some of them certainly have invested into the 
high-tech industry. There have been many other companies in 
this province that have received funds, not only from Science 
and Tech, but from other channels, other government 
departments, So for him to stand up and say that there is all 
kinds of preferential treatment being given to Joytec is just 
absolute nonsense. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Mr. Minister, on July 14 last year you told 
this Assembly, quote: “I have no doubt that many of these 
machines will be manufactured in Saskatoon in the very near 
future, and we have no reason to be concerned at this point.” 
 
Mr. Minister, Joytec says that it doesn’t plan to create any 
manufacturing jobs in Saskatoon, even though it’s received $1.5 
million from Saskatchewan taxpayers. Are you concerned now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well, Mr. Chairman, comments that 
I made last July were certainly based on information that we 
had at that time. Since that particular date the negotiations had 
been carried on and successfully completed as far as Japan is 
concerned, in that the products are going to be manufactured 
there. But they have continually stated that the remainder of the 
markets, the products would be manufactured in Saskatoon. 
And I don’t see anything in this article that would indicate 
other, and I don’t have any other information to say or indicate 
to me that they won’t be producing these machines in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Mr. Chairman, thank you. I just want to 
ask the minister a couple of questions. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ve been listening to the questions and your 
responses yesterday and today, and my concern continues to 
grow. One, because of what the facts are here; and two, because 
of either your inability or your refusal to provide direct answers. 
 
Now I don’t know, Mr. Minister, why you are leaving the 
impression that somehow, as has been the case in some other 
departments, there’s another cover-up taking place here. We 
have a situation of $1.5 million of taxpayers’ money which your 
government, for whom you are answering here today, $1.5 
million has shovelled it into a company, of taxpayer’s money, 
which is, to say the least, questionable in how it should be 
eligible for that money other than the criteria that its principal 
people involved are directly connected and linked to you 
personally and  

to the Conservative Party and to certain cabinet ministers who 
sit in this House  Mr. Minister, $1.5 million which you have 
blown so that this company could go and establish a plant in 
Japan. Now is that your example, is that your example of 
economic diversification in Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Minister, I say this reluctantly, but I’m telling you that 
there is a smell here of corruption, and by your attitude in the 
House, Mr. Minister, and your inability to provide the answers, 
you are being implicated in that corruption. Do yourself a 
favour and come clean and answer the questions directly as they 
are asked. 
 
An Hon. Member:  What’s the question? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Mr. Minister, I’ll get to my question. 
This reflects your overall policy of your government, where the 
taxpayers of this province, who are hard pressed already, are 
told to shell out every day, more in their service fees, more in 
their utility rates, while you take that money which they shell 
out and you give it away to these kinds of companies which use 
it to develop industries somewhere else. 
 
You did it with Saskoil, where many people were laid off, and 
Saskoil is now in Alberta instead of developing in 
Saskatchewan. That’s your example of diversification. You did 
it in SED Systems under the name of privatization. And in your 
own city, Mr. Minister, where you represent, SED Systems 
right after this privatisation laid off 70 people and has moved its 
management to Toronto instead of it being in Saskatoon, and is 
now holding you up to ransom and saying whenever they need 
9 or 10 or $12 million, give it to us or we’re pulling out. 
 
Now that’s the kind of thing that is under question here, Mr. 
Minister  your kind of policy which hands out money to your 
friends under questionable terms without any results. The least 
you could do here, Mr. Minister, is answer this fundamental, 
straightforward question. What kind of criteria do you have in 
place for companies like Joytec, so that when you give them 
money, they should be required to provide a certain minimum 
of jobs? Can you stand up in this House and tell us how many 
jobs are required for any amount of dollars in grant or funding 
otherwise provided to these kind of companies? What are your 
terms of reference in this respect? 
 
(1100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well, Mr. Chairman, our great orator 
is at it again, and I think that if he has a great deal of concern 
about cover-up or corruption, that maybe there are other 
channels that he should be going through  maybe through the 
legal system. 
 
I don’t think, Mr. Chairman, that I have hesitated on answering 
any of the questions that have been asked. You talk about a 
concern about cover-up here and political implications. I think 
that I have pointed out on several occasions in this House that 
Joytec has not received any funding from the Department of 
Science and Technology since I became the minister of it. 
 
And I know that you’ve had a fair bit of concern about one  
  



 
April 22, 1988 

 

786 
 

Carl Zanon, who works at Joytec  the fact that he is now the 
president of my constituency, but did not become president of 
my constituency until some six months after any money was 
given to Joytec. 
 
In so far as the VCC and the concern that you have there, I 
would suggest, again, that you discuss that with the minister in 
charge and talk about the criteria for the VCC, and I think the 
member opposite is probably well-informed as to how the 
VCCs operate. 
 
As far as the criteria that’s in place for a company providing a 
certain number of jobs, we don’t have any particular stipulation 
that they have to provide a certain or a given number of jobs. 
The main thing that my officials look at, and that we look at, is 
the level of the R&D that’s to be done in the province of 
Saskatchewan that is going to have benefits for the province. So 
that was the same case in Joytec, as it has been with any other 
company that we have provided funding for. 
 
As far as their being involved with the Japanese company 
concerned, our investors will still be benefiting from that 
because the software is going to be done in Saskatoon. There 
will still be royalties coming back to the company. So what’s 
wrong with that? The taxpayers are still going to be receiving 
benefit because there are still 25 people employed at Joytec, and 
we don’t know if there are going to be any other lay-offs. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Mr. Minister, there are 25 people 
employed in Joytec. Can you then tell us, what is the benefit to 
the Saskatchewan taxpayer from your $1.5 million of benefit 
that you have, or your government has, provided to Joytec, 
when in reality it’s going to establish its manufacturing in 
Japan? What is the return on the $1.5 million in terms of jobs in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well again, Mr. Chairman, I would 
direct the member opposite that if he has questions as they 
relate to the VCC, that he would ask the minister in charge of 
that particular program. 
 
Your concern about the benefits to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan  since that company was incorporated back in 
1983, which is nearly five years ago, there have been in the 
neighbourhood of $4 million paid out in wages, and money in 
excess of that that has been paid off for materials throughout 
Saskatoon and throughout Saskatchewan. So I would think that 
Saskatchewan has benefited, certainly, not only from the jobs 
that have been created but also from the moneys that have been 
spent here. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Mr. Minister, in light of the clear 
statement printed in the Star-Phoenix yesterday by a Mr. 
Touchie, in which he said, I quote, “The reality in high tech 
today is offshore manufacturing.” 
 
Now what does that tell you, Mr. Minister? That tells you that, 
in the opinion of people who are going to be making the 
decisions in this company, manufacturing is not going to take 
place in Saskatchewan. You’re supporting that, Mr. Minister, 
by simply providing the funding, as you have, to the tune  
your government has  of $1.5  

million without any requirement that certain developments take 
place in Saskatchewan. You are supporting that, Mr. Minister. 
How can you justify doing that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, I would point out to 
the member opposite that this well-quoted article is indicating 
that production for the Japanese market is going to take place in 
Japan. There is certainly no indication that any of those 
machines are going to be produced in Japan and then sold into 
the Canadian or American market. The understanding that we 
have is that that is only for the Japanese market. Products for 
the Canadian market will still be produced here. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Mr. Minister, I’m fascinated by your 
ability to provide excuses but no answers. You did not address 
the question at all, once again, and in my initial remarks I made 
it clear to you that you are not providing the answers. And I 
submit, once again for the record, you are not doing it because 
there is a process here of covering some corruption up. I say 
that categorically, and I say it to you today. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I’m sure that if you’re having trouble 
reading the article, one of your officials should be able to do it 
for you. But I’ll read it once again. The statement is, “The 
reality in high tech today is offshore manufacturing.” 
 
I don’t agree with that statement. If there was a government 
here that provided some requirement to companies like this one, 
that they have to perform in Saskatchewan in order to be able to 
use Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money to the tune of $1.5 million, 
then some of that development would be taking place here, but 
because you are not providing that kind of requirement  
you’re just simply saying, oh, privatization, they can do what 
we want: somehow it’s going to happen here. Your policy is a 
failure. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, how is this statement  how can you 
justify providing this kind of taxpayers’ money to such a 
company when they clearly say they don’t intend to establish 
high-tech manufacturing in Saskatchewan because the place to 
do it is offshore? How can you justify providing that kind of 
money when you know that that’s what the company’s position 
is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  In the first place, Mr. Chairman, I 
don’t agree with what the member opposite is saying, nor do I 
agree with what the individual who was being quoted here was 
saying. 
 
I think that if you consider some of the other companies, 
high-tech companies, that we find in this particular province  
not only in Saskatoon, but here in Regina  we’ve got 
companies that are selling products all over the world, not just 
hardware but all kinds of software. 
 
Now if in fact this individual is correct in what he’s saying, that 
that’s the way it has to be done, that it’s cheaper to do it 
offshore, how is it that we now have markets in Russia and in 
China and in other parts of south-east Asia, and all over the 
world, from companies that are here in Saskatchewan turning 
out these products?  
  



 
April 22, 1988 

 

787 
 

So, Mr. Chairman, I simply do not by that argument that the 
individual is putting forward. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Well, Mr. Minister, you may not buy the 
argument, but once again you have skirted the question. Note, 
Mr. Chairman, that the minister did not once refer to the 
question asked about Joytec, what Touchie envisions, and about 
his vision. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you don’t agree with what this gentleman said, 
do you not then agree with me that with that kind of policy of 
the company, that company should not be able to get taxpayers’ 
money, that the taxpayers are paying, if it’s not prepared to 
provide some of that manufacturing in Saskatchewan? And it 
clearly is stated here by this gentleman that it’s not. Now 
address the question. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 
is still making all kinds of assumptions in so far as Joytec is 
concerned . . . making a lot of assumptions. Joytec has a deal 
with two Japanese companies for production of these particular 
products in Japan. Joytec is still going to be receiving benefits 
from that particular venture, and they are also going to be 
providing all of the software for those particular products. 
 
So we are still going to be benefiting here. There’s no 
suggestion made here that the software is going to be produced 
in Japan. Why isn’t he saying that? They’re going to be 
producing it at Joytec because they have the expertise there that 
have developed the present material and will be doing more in 
the future. 
 
So as far as the benefits being better offshore, in some cases, 
possibly they are, and it certainly makes more sense for these 
particular products to be produced in Japan for the Japanese 
market than it would be to produce them here and ship them to 
Japan. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Mr. Minister, I’m amazed that as a 
responsible spokesman for a government of this province you 
would stand up in the house and throw up your arms and say 
you give up, because that’s what you’ve said here. That’s what 
you’ve displayed here today. You simply admitted in this house 
that your government has adopted the view that there is no way 
that we can provide the kinds of requirements and incentives to 
develop industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
And simply, you’re prepared to hand out money even though 
they take those industries and those ideas that may be 
developed here, and take them somewhere else and provide the 
job somewhere else  and in this case in Japan  and 
Saskatchewan people don’t count. Surely, Mr. Minister, with 
45,000 people unemployed you would have some small interest 
in creating those jobs that are now going to go to Japan so that 
those 45 unemployed could get a job  at least some of them. 
 
You stand up in this House and you say, that’s all right if the 
jobs aren’t here, because the company . . . these individuals who 
were business managers for one Conservative candidate, who 
were presidents of the minister opposite, they are going to 
benefit; that’s all  

right. The taxpayers have spent $1.5 million. These several 
individuals, close friends of the conservatives, are going to 
benefit, but it doesn’t matter that the working people in 
Saskatchewan, or people who would like to work, don’t get a 
job. What kind of an accomplishment, what kind of an 
economic strategy is that, Mr. Minister? 
 
That is a non-economic strategy, that is just another symptom of 
a government that is so preoccupied with its tendency to hand 
out patronage and reward its friends, and not give any 
consideration to the general public. that’s what you have been 
displaying here today, Mr. Minister, and I am disappointed  
no, I am worried and concerned about what that kind of 
government approach is doing for the future of this province. 
You’re not building this province, Mr. Minister; you’re 
destroying this province, and you’re tearing it down. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Now, Mr. Minister, in my one last 
question, will you assure this House that unless Joytec gives 
some assurance that it will provide these kinds of jobs in 
Saskatchewan and develop some manufacturing, which it is 
instead moving to Japan, that this government will at least not 
provide any further funding of taxpayers’ money to this 
company. Can you give us that assurance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 
opposite likes to ramble on and on with all of that rhetoric that 
we’ve heard many, many times before. We are not, certainly, 
providing money to a company such as Joytec to provide jobs in 
Japan. We are not doing that. We have not provided any money 
to Joytec since any of these other agreements were reached. 
 
He likes to talk about the fact that we’ve got a lot of 
unemployed in this province . . .  
 
An Hon. Member:  Don’t we? 
 
(1115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well I’ll tell you something, that it 
was this government on this side of the House that certainly was 
the one that went ahead and developed any kind of policy as far 
as science and technology was concerned in this province, 
because technology is the way of the future. 
 
I’d also point out  you always like to talk about . . . you 
always like to talk about the losers; that’s just a typical 
mentality over there. Why don’t you talk about some of the 
companies . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Why don’t you talk 
about some of the companies like Capa? Why don’t you talk 
about some of the companies like Capa? They have just . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, you’re the one that’s putting all 
the negatives into it. Capa has just hired, or advertised for 22 
technicians and managers in Saskatoon  22 different 
technicians and managers. This is a company, certainly, that is 
going ahead and doing very, very well. But this was after, this 
was after several years of struggling to finally get ahead in the 
game of high technology. These things don’t happen overnight. 
 
In regards to . . . You were wanting me to give you a  
  



 
April 22, 1988 

 

788 
 

commitment with regard to Joytec and what’s going to happen 
in the future. I’ve already indicated to you. You’re saying I’m 
not giving answers, but you’re obviously not listening. I 
indicated to your colleague, just a few minutes ago, that if a 
proposal comes in from Joytec in the future, and that it is going 
to have sound reasoning as far as research and development or 
technology in this province, and is going to have benefits for 
the taxpayers of this province, we will look at it in the same 
way as we will look at any proposals from any other companies. 
 
As it relates to manufacturing, we will certainly be wanting to 
ensure that those jobs remain in Saskatchewan and that the 
technology remains here. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have listened with 
considerable interest to the member from Saskatoon Mayfair, 
representing another constituency in the city of Saskatoon, 
where there is such a high level of unemployment and so much 
concern about what’s happening to our high-tech industries in 
the city. 
 
And I listen also with great concern to hear you say something 
like, you would consider Joytec for further grants in the future, 
because Joytec is now owned by a company which has been 
investigated for illegal activities on the Vancouver Stock 
Exchange. And that’s been documented in many articles which 
we’ve provided for you or have referred to, and you should be 
informed of these when you’re talking about the kinds of 
companies that you’re going to give money to. 
 
It’s really quite shocking to hear you say that you would 
consider a firm like this again in the future, with this kind of 
backing coming from this firm. And it’s one of the reasons why 
I and my colleagues on this side of the House are so very 
worried about your privatization schemes, because you seem to 
be willing to give this province away to just anybody from 
outside the province who wants to come in and buy it, or take 
over, or you give it away. 
 
These are serious charges from our side of the House, and they 
are questions that you should answer. Representing the 
constituents of Saskatoon, you should be prepared to address 
these questions seriously because you have been talking 
constantly about supporting these high-tech firms on blind faith. 
And I think you should have in place more criteria than that for 
judging what you’re going to give money to and what you’re 
not going to give money to. 
 
Now one of the companies that you’ve talked a lot about in the 
legislature, both in 1986 and in the estimates in 1987, is the 
company of SED Systems, one of the biggest high-tech 
companies, one of the most important high-tech companies in 
Saskatoon and in Saskatchewan, a company which started in 
1966, and flourished and thrived all through the New 
Democratic government in 1972 on . . . 1971 on. Now we have 
a company that you’ve given away or sold away at a great loss 
to the province of Saskatchewan to a company based in Ontario. 
And we’ve seen the situation just lately where that Ontario 
company has basically put a gun to your government’s head and 
said, pay up more money or we’ll leave, or we’ll lay off people. 
 
I want you to address the issue of SED Systems, Mr.  

Minister, as an MLA from Saskatoon, and I want to get into a 
serious discussion with you about what’s happening with that 
firm. I want to, at the same time, recognize that there are 
high-tech firms in Saskatoon that are doing very well. 
 
But I want to underline to you that the role of us in opposition, 
and my role as the critic, is to question you about the bad things 
that are happening in this province, and one of the worst things 
that’s happening is what’s happening with SED Systems. 
You’ve given a lot of money to SED Systems, to Fleet 
Aerospace. In February of ’88, 53 people were laid off; in 
March of ’88, another 18  over 70 people have been laid off 
in that company. And you assured us when we questioned you 
in the House, when we raised concerns in ’86, that jobs would 
be provided and you were sure that everything was going to 
stay just fine in Saskatchewan  blind faith again  and look 
where it’s got you. 
 
We raised concerns that when you were going to give away 
SED Systems to Fleet Aerospace, we raised these concerns; 
we’re raising them again. I want you to address the question of 
SED Systems, and justify what’s happened there with those job 
lay-offs, and with that large amount of public money that’s 
gone into Fleet Aerospace. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I 
appreciate the member opposite admitting the fact that we do 
have many successful firms in Saskatoon because certainly we 
do, not only in Saskatoon, I point out, but in Saskatchewan. 
 
In so far as SED Systems is concerned, there wasn’t any 
give-away there. The shares were on the market. Fleet 
Aerospace had already and interest in that company, and simply 
exercised their right to purchase more of those shares and take 
over control of it. There wasn’t anything given away. 
 
Your concern about the number of lay-offs that there have been 
of late, you are accurate in saying that there have been, I think, 
70-some people laid off in the last couple of months. And this 
certainly has nothing to do with the new ownership of the 
company, which I think took place about a year ago in January. 
The number of people that are employed at SED right now is 
fairly close, I believe, to what were there when Fleet took over. 
I would suggest to you that there is a much better financial 
position today in so far as this government is concerned because 
of the recent deal, than what we had before. 
 
We have now a 20-year agreement with Fleet Aerospace. As far 
as a lease on the building is concerned, they are committed to 
that. I would suggest to you that Fleet is committed to SED 
staying in the province of Saskatchewan, and certainly that’s 
one of the conditions of the agreement. They have the expertise 
there; they have the facilities there  one of the best probably 
in Canada. 
 
The main reason for the difficulties that SED has had of late, of 
course, was because of a cash flow problem; and certainly 
nothing, as was pointed out to the hon. Leader of the 
Opposition, to do with the whole privatization bit and the fact 
that this government had an inability to manage  
  



 
April 22, 1988 

 

789 
 

 absolutely nothing to do with that, just total nonsense. 
 
The fact of the matter is that SED Systems has in the 
neighbourhood of $30 million worth of contracts for the current 
year. Now that’s a lot of business and providing a lot of jobs. 
The fact is though that in some cases they have not been turning 
a profit on some of the contracts that they’ve had. Part of this 
was due to the fact that they have switched over from product 
development to more contracts with the federal government. 
One of the major ones, of course, is with the Frigate program. 
 
It’s just been announced in the last while that the Canadian 
government is going to be moving ahead and getting into the 
Canadian space program in partnership with the U.S. 
government. 
 
And it was announced some time ago that SED Systems was 
going to be the main contractor for the prairie basin. And that 
certainly is going to add, I think, to the stability of SED 
Systems and to the security in so far as the jobs that are located 
there. It’s also going to have spin-offs for other companies that 
are located in Saskatoon and in Saskatchewan. 
 
So I think that as far as SED is concerned, that they have had 
some difficulties, but there’s a lot of business being done there. 
And it isn’t the first time, certainly, that SED has had 
difficulties. 
 
I think this further points out the problem that we have because 
of the risk that’s involved in the high-tech industry. And I 
would just point out to you that in 1982, that SED had a net loss 
of over $4 million, but then in fiscal 1985 they recorded the 
largest profit in its history. I mean, it’s an up and down type of 
thing, but I think when we look at the programs that are being 
carried out there now, are some new initiatives that are being 
taken  and the Canadian space program is one of them. We 
also expect that before very long the new Radarsat program is 
going to be announced, and SED certainly will be involved with 
that. 
 
So I think that the future for SED is reasonably bright, but I 
certainly can’t stand here and ensure to you or to anyone else 
that there is any guarantee on that because of the nature of the 
business. But I think from all indications, their future certainly 
is going to be bright, and they will be able to carry on and 
possibly not have all of the problems that they have been 
undergoing of late. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Mr. Minister, if your government had kept the 
shares in SED Systems, you could stand up and guarantee that 
the province of Saskatchewan would benefit from the profits of 
SED Systems. But having given that control of the company to 
an out-of-province firm, you have no guarantee except the 
constant hot air and hype which your government has put into 
the promotion of high tech without any substantive guarantees. 
That is the major point that we are very concerned about. 
 
You put the shares on the market; that’s how fleet Aerospace 
got them. They paid, I think, 2.75 for a share. It could have 
been worth as much as $6. That’s when I talk about a 
give-away. You let them go at a low price. Now you’re saying 
that SED Systems has got lots of contracts  

and could make a profit, and we were saying that before. We 
said it is an up and down business, but we said that SED 
Systems has been good for a long time and that we should keep 
it in the province and we should keep control in the province. 
 
Now you’ve announced this deal with Sedco (Saskatchewan 
Economic Development Corporation) in paying back on the 
building  Sedco, which owned the building in the first place. 
Fleet Aerospace bought the company knowing that building 
cost $11 million, knowing the circumstances there. They paid 
you very little money for the business, and now they want you 
to pay back and continue to own the building. 
 
So the government is continuing to pay out at the same time as 
the profits, whatever they may be, will go out of the province. 
And we object very strongly to that king of release of control 
and the kind of promises and assumptions and hot air that you 
stand up and give us as assurances. 
 
Now we have not seen the contract that Sedco has signed with 
Fleet Aerospace, but there are two questions that I am going to 
ask you. The first question I want to ask you is about the job 
guarantees. 
 
You say 70 people were laid off and that was no fault of the 
employer which I find absolutely astonishing. You said it was 
no fault of the owner of the company that 70 people were laid 
off. What kind of a business philosophy is that? Don’t you 
understand how businesses operate with employers and 
employees. It was the responsibility of Fleet Aerospace. George 
Dragone laid off those people; 70 Saskatoon people were laid 
off. 
 
Now what’s happened to them with their jobs? Are they still 
laid off, or with the contract that you’ve signed with the 
company are they back in the work place? Is there any 
guarantee that jobs will be saved in the future? But what’s 
happened to those jobs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, I certainly was not 
happy to see any people laid off at SED System, but I’ve 
already indicated to the member opposite that the industry is 
very cyclical certainly, and that the number of people that are 
employed varies from one time to another. 
 
Some of the people, probably, that were laid off, were because 
of a contractual type of work that they were doing. They 
weren’t all in Saskatoon  I believe there were three or four 
that were in Ottawa, but we certainly have no provision within a 
contract that there are going to be a certain number of jobs 
maintained, because that is going to be dependent on the 
contracts that they have. 
 
If the Canadians . . . not if, but now when the Canadian space 
program is going to be moving ahead, there is no doubt about it 
that as time goes on and as the new contracts are generated from 
that particular program that SED will probably have to employ 
more people. But there’s no guarantee that they’re going to be 
employed for ever. I mean, the thing is up and down, and it’s 
been that way ever since SED came into existence. 
 
  



 
April 22, 1988 

 

790 
 

Now you point out about the fact that . . . you’re trying to say 
that if the province hadn’t sold the shares  and I might also 
add that the value of shares is determined by the market, so I 
don’t know why you’re saying that we’re giving away. 
 
You were also indicating that if the province still owned SED, 
that we would have many more benefits. Well I just pointed out 
to you here a few minutes ago that back in 1982, and this is 
when the arrangement was . . . as the province was partly 
involved with ownership, they had a net loss of over $4 million. 
And then in 1985 . . . they had a net loss in ’82 of $4 million; 
they had a profit of 1.6 million in ’85 under the very same 
system, so you haven’t got a valid argument there to say that if 
the province still owned it today that all of this wouldn’t have 
happened. In the future, any profits that are made at SED 
Systems . . . the province is certainly going to benefit because 
of our tax system. 
 
We’re also going to benefit, of course, and SED is going to 
benefit because of the fact that they now lease the building 
rather than owning part of it, and this is going to have long-term 
ramifications because now in any contracts that they have, 
particularly with the federal government, they can now build in 
the cost of the lease, whereas before they couldn’t build in any 
costs related to the fact they owned the building. So it’s going 
to benefit SED, certainly, in that regard. 
 
(1130) 
 
With a 20-year agreement, I would think that we are in a much 
better position, certainly any loans that have been provided to 
them  well in the buying out of the building  and any loans 
that are given there, certainly, are fully secured. So the 
province, as was indicated in press releases earlier, indicate that 
in so far as the Government of Saskatchewan or the people of 
Saskatchewan are concerned, that they’re in a much better 
position today because of this agreement than they were before. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Well I certainly don’t agree with you that 
they’re in a better position, Mr. Minister. I would like you to 
table or to let us know the terms of the lease. What is Fleet 
Aerospace paying per year, for 20 years, to lease that building? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, certainly I won’t be 
tabling that. If you want to ask the minister in charge of Sedco, 
and if it’s her wish to do that, then that’s up to her. 
 
Ms. Smart:  I think you have that information, and I think as 
the Minister of Science and Technology promoting these firms 
and these industries in Saskatoon that you should know that, 
and you should be able to share it here in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart:  Your department is a co-ordinating department. 
It’s a department that administers funds from a lot of different 
departments. And it’s quite legitimate for me to ask you that 
question here as the Minister of Science and Technology, 
because I’m concerned about the ongoing health for SED 
Systems, and I think the  

amount of money that’s being paid by Fleet Aerospace for rent 
of that building is a very important question. 
 
It’s very likely that they’re paying a low rent each year for 20 
years, a rent that they could very well walk away from and 
leave us with an empty building. And I raise that concern with 
you because that’s a very real possibility. 
 
We need to see the terms of that lease in order to judge the 
health of that high-tech company. Now, Mr. Minister, I ask you 
again: do you know the rent that is being paid per year, and will 
you share that with us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well I can appreciate the member’s 
question, and I’m not in a position to give you the terms of the 
particular agreement because I don’t have them. That agreement 
is between SED Systems or Fleet Aerospace and Sedco. 
 
I am sure, though, that I can inform the member opposite that 
the rates that are being charged are the going commercial rates. 
I’m sure that there’s no deal here where they’re paying a very, 
very low rate; that is not the case at all. And they are into that 
agreement for 20 years, and Fleet Aerospace is committed to 
paying that lease for 20 years. And they’re not in the business 
here, I’m sure, of giving that to Fleet at a very, very low rate. 
 
But again, as I pointed out, if in fact that information with 
regard to the terms of the agreement are to be given, you’ll have 
to ask the minister in charge because I don’t have them. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Mr. Minister, the terms of that lease is very 
important. It’s very important to your department to know and 
for you to know what the government is paying. And for you to 
say that you’re sure that it’s the going rate, but you don’t know 
the terms of it because it’s not your department, is just another 
example of the hot air and the hype that surrounds this whole 
advanced technology promotion in the province. 
 
And we are looking for substantive answers; we are looking for 
your policies and we are looking for the commitments. And we 
are particularly concerned about what is being committed on 
behalf of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now you may trust your colleagues, but I can assure you that 
those of us on this side of the House and the people of 
Saskatchewan have learned that you are not to be trusted; that 
the things that you have said you will do and the promises that 
you have made us, you have not kept. And you are not being 
honest and up front with the people of Saskatchewan about the 
moneys that you’re spending across the departments on this 
high-tech business. And I really, as a member from Saskatoon, 
want to underline that very strongly, that we need to know 
what’s going on with this industry. 
 
I find it unacceptable that 70 people have been laid off, 
unacceptable that we don’t know the terms of the lease. It 
seems very likely to me that those terms could be very low and 
that the company can pull off and leave us with an empty 
building and no jobs. 
 
  



 
April 22, 1988 

 

791 
 

Fleet Aerospace has a history, a reputation, of having done this 
in other places in the world. We draw that to your attention. It’s 
on the basis of this kind of evidence that we made our 
expressions of concern, and it’s this kind of information that 
you should be taking into account whenever you talk about the 
high-tech firms that you’re going to fund, and whenever you 
look at the health and the safety of one of the largest, if not the 
largest, high-tech firm in Saskatoon. 
 
SED Systems is important to all those other high-tech 
industries. The industrial development officer for the city of 
Saskatoon has made this point. The city is very worried about 
what will happen to SED Systems if it goes under, and what 
will happen to the rest of the high-tech industries because of the 
spin-offs. 
 
There’s been over the years a lot of taxpayers’ money invested 
in SED Systems. When you say that Fleet Aerospace can use 
the terms of the lease in applying for grants to the federal 
government, that’s just more of the taxpayers’ money going 
into this high-tech industry. And I think the people of 
Saskatchewan deserve more than hot air hype. They deserve a 
guarantee that the jobs will stay in place. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I find it particularly annoying that you can 
talk about letting people be laid off. Yes, this is cyclical nature 
in the high-tech industries; profits go up and profits go down. 
But people in Saskatchewan and people in Saskatoon deserve to 
have full-time employment on a regular basis. They can’t pay 
their rents, they can’t pay for food unless they have that kind of 
employment. And SED Systems is a company that could offer 
that kind of steady employment if we had kept our government 
control in that company and could have some say on how that 
was managed. But for you to justify hiring people one year and 
laying them off the next year is totally unacceptable to those of 
us on this side of the House. 
 
Your government is putting a lot of money into training people 
and upgrading and the promotion of high-tech industries as a 
place of employment. You have many people in Saskatoon who 
are unemployed, who are being streamed through training 
centres to get employment in the high-tech industry. You’re 
putting a lot of money into that, and people are putting a lot of 
their money into it. And many people are putting their life 
savings into it because they’ve been laid off in other industries. 
 
The hot air and the hype promotes high-tech industry as being 
the place of the future, right? It’s going to take us into the 21st 
century; we’ve heard that from you people over and over again. 
So what do you have here? You have 70 jobs in one of the 
biggest high-tech companies with people laid off. So where do 
they go? On unemployment insurance for one year, and then 
what? They go to the Minister of Human Resources and they 
pick rocks in the Meewasin Valley for the rest of the time, 
right? That’s what’s happening. That’s what’s happening to 
people in Saskatoon and in Saskatchewan, and that’s the kind of 
policies your government’s putting in place, and those are the 
kinds of programs you’re putting forward to the people. And to 
me, that’s completely unacceptable,  

people of Saskatchewan deserve much better treatment than 
that. 
 
And it’s on your department, it’s on the promotion of high tech 
that we see, in essence, the effects of those government policies. 
Those people that are taking these “work for welfare” programs, 
many of them are qualified to do other work. But with the kinds 
of employment opportunities that are being provided by people 
being employed with Joytec, laid off with Joytec; employed 
with SED Systems laid off with SED Systems; employed at 
Develcon and gone from Develcon, and all the other firms 
where this has happened, it’s just chaotic; it’s government by 
chaos, and it’s unacceptable. And I want to ask you once more 
about those jobs, those 70 jobs that have been laid off. There 
was nothing in the contract signed with Fleet Aerospace that 
would guarantee that those jobs would be put back and those 
people would be working again, or are they to go on the “work 
for welfare” and pick rocks in the Meewasin Valley? Is that 
what you want? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well it took you a long time to get to 
your question. But as far as I know, Mr. Chairman, there was no 
guarantee in so far as the deal with Fleet, the initial deal, about 
protection of jobs because of the fact that it is going to vary 
from one time to another. We look at companies, certainly, in 
the past that have been affected this way and it will be ever 
thus. There’s no guarantee. It’s all dependent on the contracts 
that they have, and SED is a prime example because, certainly, 
if you look back over the history of that company, the number 
of employees that they’ve had there have varied from one year 
to the next, depending on the companies that they’ve had and 
the particular needs. 
 
I think also you have to keep in mind that there are many 
companies, because of the changes that we have today in 
society, and not just talking about the high-tech industry, that 
many companies now are having to retrain employees as needs 
change. 
 
It might come as a bit of a shocker to you to know that the 
number or the types of work, the types of jobs that people are 
going to be doing 10 years from now, that 50 per cent of those 
jobs aren’t even there today, that type of work. That’s how our 
society is changing, and we have to be prepared to meet that 
challenge. We have to be prepared to meet that challenge and 
making sure that our students that are going into university are 
looking ahead to some of the jobs of the future, and certainly 
the high-tech field is one of those main areas. We’re going to 
need many, many more people in the advanced technology 
sector as time goes on. 
 
There’s an awful lot of talk today about increasing the amount 
of money that’s going into research and development, and as 
that amount of money is increased by the private sector or by 
governments, we are going to need many more people going 
into the field of computer science and engineering and research, 
and we are going to have to ensure that our students are aware 
of those particular opportunities that are going to exist. 
 
So we’re not just talking about the importance of the high tech 
industry today, because it is increased technology  
  



 
April 22, 1988 

 

792 
 

that is going to help to make our companies more competitive 
so that they are going to be able to survive in this very 
competitive world that we’re living in. 
 
Certainly I am proud now of what’s happening in the high-tech 
field in this province, and we’re going to encourage it and help 
it in any way that we can. And that not only is going to apply to 
the large companies like SED, but it’s also going to apply to the 
many, many companies that have 10 or 15 employees. And the 
majority of them do only have a very small number of 
employees. But we will help out in whatever way that we can. 
 
And I would think too that . . . It seemed to me you made a 
comment about the fact that this company might be getting 
more money. I’m sure that as time goes on they will be 
applying for other grants, not only from us, but certainly from 
the federal government, in the area of research and development 
or project proposals, whatever the case might be. And we 
simply have to examine each proposal on its merits and then 
determine whether or not that’s something that’s going to, or 
should be given support to. 
 
But there’s never any guarantee in all of these cases, as you 
well know, but we have to help out in whatever way that we 
can. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Mr. Minister, your comments really raise my 
concern because you have not . . . While you say that you will 
have jobs and you will have all sorts of good things from high 
tech, you have not been accountable to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You have said that you’re sure that SED Systems will get grants 
from the taxpayers in the future; all the more reason why you 
should table the document that confirms the lease, the terms of 
the lease for the building, and a document that guarantees that 
people will get jobs if the government . . . the taxpayers’ money 
is going into those companies. 
 
You should be accountable to the people of Saskatchewan, not 
just give them a lot of hot air an hype. Why won’t you be 
accountable to them by showing them the terms of the lease of 
the agreement and being sure that jobs will be guaranteed when 
the taxpayers’ money goes into these firms? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, I’ve already 
suggested to the member opposite that I do not have the terms 
of the agreement, but I have suggested to her where she may 
inquire about getting them. 
 
Mr. Prebble:  Mr. Minister, I want to cite for you a few 
things you said on December 18, 1986, when I and my 
colleague, the member for Saskatoon Sutherland, questioned 
you about the sale of SED Systems to Fleet Aerospace at this 
time. You said, and I quote: 
 

I don’t think that at this point in time that we would have 
any concerns in view of the fact that this particular 
company has a very sound record in this province, and they 
have something in the neighbourhood of 40 to $50 million 
worth of orders on the books, which they will be doing 
over  

the next four years. They will be moving into their new 
complex north of the university campus sometime in 
February or March, where in the neighbourhood of 350 
people will be employed, and that will be expanded to 400 
people in the very near future. So I don’t think at this point in 
time, when we consider diversification as being an answer in 
this province to overcoming some of the problems, that we 
should be overly concerned with what’s happening to SED. 

 
(1145) 

 
I want to also quote briefly from the Minister of Justice’s 
comments in question period that same day, December 18, 
1986. The Minister of Justice said at the time: 

 
We are interested in seeing SED Systems further expand 
. . . (and) I can further indicate to you that it is our 
intention to use this . . .  corporation (as a mechanism) by 
which we can expand employment in the city of Saskatoon 
. . .  

 
And the minister goes on to say that he has been assured that 
SED Systems will stay in Saskatoon and that the jobs of the 
employees at SED Systems will be assured. 

 
And my question to the minister is simply this. Mr. Minister, 
it’s obvious from your comments in December of 1986 that you 
didn’t have a handle on what was happening to the company. 
And my first question to you is: why did you not seek from the 
company, SED Systems, before you sold your shares in SED 
Systems, a guarantee that every single job in SED Systems will 
be protected by Fleet Aerospace before you approved the 
purchase and before you gave up your equity in the company? 
Why didn’t you guarantee the employees that their jobs would 
be protected, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, I’d simply point out 
to the member opposite, as he relates to comment that I 
supposedly made in December of 1986, I think if you consider 
the fact that there are  and as he had indicted, I believe  
that I had said there were 350 employees and that would be 
increasing. My figures are that there are 320 people employed 
there now and they’ve laid off 73, I believe, in the last couple of 
months; that that did in fact happen, that their numbers of 
employees did go up to near 400. 
 
But I think it’s totally unrealistic and unreasonable to suggest 
that the government would be wanting to tie the total number of 
employees because of a sale to Fleet, in this case, because of the 
nature of the business. I mean obviously there are going to be 
fluctuations, depending on the number of contracts that they 
have. 
 
Now obviously the reason for laying off people is because they 
don’t have the work coming in; they don’t have the revenues 
coming in. What kind of a position does it put any company if 
you’re carrying another 50 or 60 people and don’t have the 
justification for keeping them on the payroll? What justification 
is there for that? 
 
We know that SED is a company that has had profits on very 
few years. I mean, what kind of a . . . That certainly  
  



 
April 22, 1988 

 

793 
 

doesn’t help their position if they’re carrying a lot of extra 
people on their payroll if in fact it’s not warranted. So I think 
that you have to let the company operate then. 
 
They are trying to get all of the contracts that they can, and I 
have every hope that in the near future, with the Canadian space 
program and Radarsat, that they will be increasing the number 
of employees. But I don’t think you can expect to tie them to 
any given number at any particular time  just adds to their 
losses. 
 
Mr. Prebble:  Well, Mr. Minister, I want to . . . First of all, 
you acknowledge that you fail to guarantee to protect the jobs 
of the people who work at SED Systems, a company in which 
you had equity, Mr. Minister. 
 
This is not a question of a company in which . . . simply a 
private sector company. This is a company in which the 
government had equity and the government chose to give up its 
equity without protecting the jobs of the employees. And I say 
to you, Mr. Minister, that that was a very irresponsible thing to 
do. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, in addition to that, I want to ask you: why, 
in light of the fact at the time that your government had 
committed $6 million in term financing to SED Systems and 
had provided them with a $1.9 million interest-free loan, and at 
a time in 1986  when the sale took place, 1986  when you 
had a contract with them through your own Department of 
Science and Technology for $787,000 for a low-cost satellite 
system, and at a time, Mr. Minister, when there was a contract 
being negotiated worth over $20 million between Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation and SED System  why, when millions of 
dollars of taxpayers’ money were being invested in SED 
System, as I’ve just pointed out, why were you prepared to sell 
your equity in the company and give up your ability to control 
policy in the company or at least have some say in that policy 
for a mere $1.1 million? 
 
Why, Mr. Minister, when you had loans pending of almost $8 
million, when your own department had a contract worth 
three-quarters of a million dollars, when SPC was negotiating a 
contract with the company worth over $20 million, why, for 
only $1.1 million, were you prepared to sacrifice your ability to 
exercise some kind of control over the future of SED Systems? 
 
Some Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, a couple of things 
here. I think that if the member opposite looks back again at the 
history of the company, that the number of employees that they 
have had has varied from time to time, again depending on the 
number of contracts that they had. It certainly is not the policy 
of this government to be involved in the overall operation of a 
company such as SED Systems. That’s certainly not our 
philosophy. 
 
As it relates to the money that you’re talking about the 
$787,000 I believe, this was for new research and development 
activities that were being carried out in the company. And as it 
relates to any contracts with SaskPower, certainly I don’t have 
that information here.  

But as far as hours are concerned, the 700-and-some thousand 
dollars was related to research and development activities 
within SED. It certainly wasn’t something going into their cash 
reserves. 
 
Mr. Prebble:  Mr. Chairman, is the minister telling me that 
he is unaware, as Minister of Science and Technology, what 
other contracts the Government of Saskatchewan had with SED 
Systems? Is he telling us he’s unaware of that? I ask the 
minister at this point in time to table all contracts that the 
Government of Saskatchewan has entered into with SED 
Systems in the last three years in this legislature. Will you table 
them today, Mr. Minister? And if you can’t, it’s a 
demonstration of your incompetence. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the only 
comment I would make to the member with regard to contracts, 
the only knowledge that Science and Tech has with regard to 
SED are the contracts that Science and Tech have with them. 
We’re certainly not in a position to be giving you information 
on other contracts that other departments of government would 
have with SED. Maybe you’ll have to go and talk to SED about 
that. 
 
Mr. Prebble:  Well, Mr. Minister, it’s unbelievable that the 
Minister of Science and Technology isn’t aware of the contracts 
that the Government of Saskatchewan has with the leading 
high-technology company in Saskatoon  just unbelievable. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Inexcusable. 
 
Mr. Prebble:  And inexcusable, Mr. Minister. And I say, Mr. 
Minister, that it just demonstrates a lack of any planning on 
your part, and any planning by this government, in terms of 
developing science and technology in Saskatoon, that you’re 
not even aware of the contracts that your government has with 
the leading high-tech company in the city. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like you to give us a commitment today 
that you will in fact table all contracts that your government has 
entered into with SED Systems in this legislature since you 
came to office in 1982. Will you at least give us the 
commitment to provide that information to us in the House? 
That’s surely in the public interest that that information should 
be laid on the Table, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, I’m sure that the 
member well knows that contracts between parties, whether it’s 
government departments and SED in this particular case, for the 
most part are confidential. We are certainly not going to be 
tabling any of that information with the member opposite. 
 
And as it relates to SaskPower and any dealings that they have 
with SED, SaskPower is a Crown corporation, so why you 
would be asking the Department of Science and Technology to 
provide that type of information is certainly hard to explain. 
 
Mr. Prebble:  Well, Mr. Minister, I think that that’s simply 
. . . you’ve simply demonstrated, Mr. Minister, an example of 
the secretive nature of your government in a  
  



 
April 22, 1988 

 

794 
 

matter that simply is not in the public interest. 
 
Clearly, there’s a lot of government money. As I’ve indicated, 
there’s $8 million of public money in the form of loans to SED. 
You’ve got a three-quarters-of-a-million-dollar contract with 
your own department, Saskatchewan Power Corporation has 
large contracts with SED Systems, and there may be many other 
departments of government which also have contracts with SED 
Systems. 
 
And the public, given the amount of money that they have 
invested in the firm, has a right to know what your government 
has invested in SED Systems, especially given the fact that you 
have forfeited all your control to an eastern Canadian, 
Ontario-based company for a mere $1.1 million and put at risk, 
as a result of doing that, millions of dollars of Saskatchewan 
taxpayers’ money which you, as a result of your incompetence, 
may not even be able to collect on. 
 
Now Mr. Minister, I want to ask you a question with respect to 
the purchase arrangement you had, to give up your equity in 
SED Systems, with Mr. Dragone of Fleet Aerospace. Will you 
acknowledge, Mr. Minister, that you exchanged four voting 
shares of SED Systems for one non-voting share of Fleet 
Aerospace stock? Will you acknowledge, Mr. Minister, that 
that’s the arrangement that you entered into with Fleet 
Aerospace? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, I must admit that I’m 
a little amazed with the questions of the member opposite. He 
was one that I thought had a reasonable level of intelligence, 
but he certainly is demonstrating a lack of understanding of the 
high-tech industry as such. 
 
He’s asking the government to table documents that would 
indicate money that’s going towards research and development 
 something that is of a very sensitive nature and has to 
maintain a very strict confidentiality. I don’t think that you 
would find that any government would be willing to table that 
kind of information, because of the sensitivity of it. 
 
In so far as the terms as they relate to the shares that were 
purchased by Fleet Aerospace, I would suggest to the member 
opposite that those types of questions would have to be directed 
to the Minister of the Crown Management Board because those 
shares were handled by that particular department, not by 
Science and Technology. 
 
Mr. Prebble:  Mr. Minister, your lack of knowledge on the 
subject is a appalling, but several newspaper reports indicate 
that you did indeed, Mr. Minister, exchange voting shares in 
SED Systems for non-voting shares in Fleet Aerospace. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, you gave up any ability of your government 
to exercise any control over what Fleet Aerospace does with 
SED Systems in Saskatoon, because you’ve got no vote in the 
say of Fleet Aerospace holdings and you have no control any 
more over the operation of SED Systems in Saskatoon, and 
therefore, Mr. Minister, you have sacrificed your ability to 
ensure that this very important company stays in Saskatoon. 
 

I thought, Mr. Minister, that it may be five or six years before 
we saw a trend in which Fleet Aerospace began to lay off 
Saskatoon employees. Unbelievably, we only had to wait 12 
months before you gave up your equity in SED Systems, before 
those lay-offs have begun. 
 
(1200) 
 
My fear, Mr. Minister, is that we will see many more lay-offs at 
SED Systems because you have sacrificed a fundamental 
principle that the members of this side of the House established 
when we were in government in the 1970s, and that is that 
having some government equity in a company that is a highly 
fluctuating company  in terms of the high-tech industry by 
nature is cyclical. Having some government equity in a 
company like that is a way of ensuring that that company will 
always operate, not in the interests of Ontario Shareholders, but 
in the interests of Saskatchewan residents, by having that 
company stay in Saskatchewan. 
 
And you, Mr. Minister, for a mere $1.1 million have sacrificed 
the ability of Saskatchewan people to have some say in the 
leading high-tech company in Saskatoon. I say, Mr. Minister, 
that that is a sell-out by your government to Ontario interests. 
 
Some Hon. Member: —Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, I would simply point 
out to the member opposite that he indicates that It didn’t take 
long after Fleet took over before the number of employees 
started to decrease. It seems to me we discussed this just a few 
minutes ago, and I pointed out to you that in fact after Fleet 
took over, the number of employees went up. And it’s only with 
the last lay-offs that they are now back down about where they 
were before. 
 
You talk about control and you talk about guarantees of SED 
staying in Saskatchewan. It’s my understanding with the lease 
agreement that we have now, we’re in a much better position 
than we were before, and it’s only now that we do have some 
say as to whether or not SED is going to remain in this 
province. 
 
So this new deal is much better, as far as the province of 
Saskatchewan and for the employees of SED were, or is, than it 
was before because we now have the control over that. They are 
committed to a 20-year lease; they are committed to remaining 
in Saskatchewan. So why you’re trying to suggest that we’re in 
a worse position now than we were before is just absolutely 
false. 
 
Mr. Prebble:  Mr. Minister, I want to raise another point 
with respect to your sell-out of Saskatchewan interests to . . . on 
this issue. And that is, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you: did you 
not look, Mr. Minister, at the record of Mr. Dragone in terms of 
his track record of buying up high-tech companies in various 
parts of North America, and then, within a matter of a few 
years, selling off parts of those high-tech companies, in some 
cases shutting down large portions of them and laying off large 
numbers of employees. 
 
  



 
April 22, 1988 

 

795 
 

And I’m going to give you a couple of examples in a minute, 
Mr. Minister, but I want you and your officials to consider 
whether or not you in fact investigated fully the record of Mr. 
Dragone and Fleet Aerospace in purchasing companies in other 
parts of North America, and selling off the parts that they didn’t 
want and keeping the parts that they did, and sacrificing local 
employment opportunities wherever they bought high-tech 
companies. 
 
I want to give you a couple of examples, Mr. Minister, In 1984, 
for instance, Mr. Dragone undertook a bitter fight to win control 
of Fathom Oceanology Ltd., a maker of sonar equipment. And 
Mr. Dragone then closed down Fathom’s United States 
subsidiary, and then sent Fathom on its own trail of 
acquisitions. 
 
In June, 1986, Mr. Minister, Mr. Dragone engineered an $18.6 
million take-over of the defence contractor, Aronica Inc., of 
Charlotte, North Dakota, as a means of being able to secure a 
new line of U.S. military contracts. Now Aronica operates a 
broad manufacturing subsidiary in a high-tech electronics 
division, and Dragone has indicated that both are going to be 
candidates for the auction block, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now these two acquisitions by Dragone, and his subsequent 
lay-offs, Mr. Minister, came directly before Fleet Aerospace 
approached you to purchase your shares in SED Systems. 
 
And my question to you, Mr. Minister, is: in light of the record 
of Mr. Dragone and Fleet Aerospace, just before you sold your 
shares in SED Systems, in light of the record of Mr. Dragone in 
buying up other high-tech companies and then laying off the 
employees at those high-tech companies and selling off portions 
of them, why were you prepared to sell your shares to this 
eastern Ontario company that obviously had no intention, Mr. 
Minister, of ensuring that employment of Saskatoon people 
would be protected? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well, Mr. Chairman, there’s 
absolutely no basis for the member opposite to make those 
allegations. Fleet Aerospace is a very sound company. There 
are many advantages to smaller companies such as SED having 
a very close and direct affiliation with strategic partners because 
of the nature of the business that they’re in, in the aerospace 
industry. 
 
We have certainly every indication to believe that there are 
contracts that SED is now getting, and able to get in the future, 
because of the fact that they are involved with Fleet Aerospace. 
I think that the fact that . . . the Canadian space program now 
coming up is going to be one good example. So there are many 
advantages. 
 
I indicated just a few minutes ago that because of the lease 
arrangement that we now have with Fleet Aerospace, that the 
company will be remaining in Saskatchewan and those jobs will 
stay here. And as far as the number of jobs are concerned, I 
would think that that’s probably going to increase as some of 
these other programs come into stream. But by how many or 
when, I can’t give you that information. But as far as the 
advantages are concerned, I’m sure that the affiliation with 
Fleet has many advantages. 
 

Mr. Prebble:  Well, Mr. Minister, your will to believe is 
unending, and your ability to deliver is non-existent. 
 
Mr. Minister, what you’re telling us today is that you were 
prepared to sacrifice the future of jobs in Saskatoon and the 
most important company in the high-tech industry in Saskatoon 
for a mere $1.1 million, with no assurance of job guarantees. 
You were prepared to sell out to a company whose record in the 
high-tech industry, in terms of protected that industry in the 
local community where it was based, is a scandalous record, a 
record that shows no concern at all for the local industry and the 
local community where the take-over is taking place. You were 
prepared to make those sales, Mr. Minister, and I think that 
that’s an example of the incompetence and the lack of 
commitment to Saskatoon that you’ve demonstrated in terms of 
your policy development. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to close with one final question, and that 
relates to the contract operations of SED System. You’ve told 
us, Mr. Minister, that you’re not prepared to reveal the 
government contracts at SED Systems, and your government 
have agreed too. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you can tell us, if at 
this point in time, you know if SED Systems is bidding on any 
nuclear weapons contracts with the U.S. government? 
 
Are you aware, Mr. Minister, if SED Systems has any nuclear 
weapons contracts, or is bidding on any nuclear weapons 
contracts with the U.S. Department of Defence? And, Mr. 
Minister, can you tell us if your government has a policy with 
respect to permitting, or not permitting, Saskatoon companies to 
bid on U.S. nuclear weapons contracts, or nuclear weapons 
contracts for that matter, with any other country? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, the understanding 
that we have right now is that they’re not involved with any, nor 
are they looking at them. But that’s not to say that they won’t 
be in the future. We don’t have any knowledge of that at the 
present time, sir. 
 
Mr. Prebble:  Mr. Minister, this is a question of fundamental 
policy. One of the great advantages of SED System, under its 
former ownership, was a commitment by that company that it 
would not become involved in bidding on nuclear weapons 
contracts. That was a public commitment. Given Mr. Dragone’s 
record and his interest, in terms of bidding on military contracts 
 you’ve acknowledged, yourself, just now, that you’re not 
ruling out at all the possibility that Fleet Aerospace in the future 
may bid on U.S. nuclear weapons contracts, or in some other 
way become involved in the nuclear weapons industry. And you 
have not ruled out, Mr. Minister, that your government would in 
fact permit this; in fact, you’ve indicated an openness to this 
possibility. 
 
I’m asking you today, Mr. Minister, and this is my final 
question to you: will you give this Assembly your assurance 
that your government will not permit SED System, now owned 
by Fleet Aerospace, or any other company in this province, to 
bid on U.S. nuclear weapons contracts? 
 
Will you give, Mr. Minister, this House your assurance  
  



 
April 22, 1988 

 

796 
 

that you won’t allow Saskatchewan industry to become 
involved in the nuclear weapons complicity that now hangs 
over our world and threatens every person in this province and 
every person in the world community, Mr. Minister? We should 
have no part in the nuclear weapons industry, and I’m asking 
you to give us your assurance that you, as Minister of Science 
and Technology, will not allow high-tech companies to bid on 
nuclear weapons contracts. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well, Mr. Chairman, this is a purely 
hypothetical question the member is asking. I can certainly 
appreciate his concern. As far as I know, we don’t have any 
high-tech companies in the province that are presently engaged 
in contracts with regard to nuclear weapons. 
 
It’s my understanding that it was the government that was . . . 
the administration that was in power in this province prior to the 
PC government coming in, that they felt that it was all right for 
cruise missile testing to take place in part of Saskatchewan. So I 
don’t think that there’s any reason for us, at this point, to telling 
the high-tech companies that they can’t be involved with these 
contracts. 
 
Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, subvote 5 of your vote contains a 26 per cent increase 
 by far the largest  and that is a payment to the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. 
 
This is the corporation which has engendered such favourable 
publicity by renting eight floors of a hotel, which it has no use 
for and which it does not fill up  costs them $180,000 a 
month. This is the corporation, Mr. Minister, which is the . . . 
which contains largest single increase in expenditure of any 
department, that space  this, Mr. Minister, at a time when you 
claim to be reducing the number of public servants. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like an explanation for the 26 per cent 
increase in the vote to the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the reason for 
the increase is the fact that when Science and Technology, the 
department, was moved to Saskatoon, that it moved into an area 
which was really designed for incubator malls 
 
I think around May 15 we will be moving into our new facility. 
It’s a new wing that was built onto innovation Place with the 
understanding that Science and Technology would be relocating 
there. And some $40,000 of this particular increase is being 
spent on the leasehold improvements to that particular property. 
so that gobbles up the biggest chunk of it. 
 
Mr. Shillington:  Would the minister give me a breakdown 
of the 273,000, what it’s being spent on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  At the present time we are renting 
space in the T.C. Douglas Building, where we maintain the 
Regina Office, and also in the Innovation Place up in 
Saskatoon, where our offices are presently located. But we will 
be relocating into the SEDCO Centre, and those offices where 
we are now, then, will be opened  

up once again for smaller companies to come in and set up their 
operations. 
 
Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Minister, let me give you just a bid of 
background as to why I want the breakdown. Mr. Minister, if 
you add up the expenditures which each department makes to 
the property management corporation, for this year the total has 
gone up by 12, $13 million. That’s an 11 per cent increase this 
year in the expenditures by the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation. If you add those figures up, that is a 
$13 million increase  this, at a time when the number of 
public servants is supposedly decreasing. 
 
(1215) 
 
Mr. Minister, if you compare the expenditures by the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, about which 
we can get no information except the name, with supply and 
services in its last year of operation, which was ’85-86, three 
years ago, Mr. Minister, there’s a 33 per cent increase in 
expenditures by the property management corporation over 
supply and services. That’s a $30 million increase  that at a 
time, Mr. Minister, when the total growth in budget has been 8 
per cent. So there’s 30 million bucks that I’d like to know 
where it went to, and I think the public of Saskatchewan would 
like to know where that $30 million went to. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the results of the property management 
corporation is it’s no longer very accountable. If you look at the 
property management corporation you see a figure of $7 
million. Mr. Minister, all that exists in property management 
corporation is $7 million, so I want to know why it’s costing us 
30 million bucks more for the property management 
corporation than it used to cost us in supply and services. 
 
I’ve got to ask each department. I’m not going to get the 
information by asking the minister in charge of the property 
management corporation. In addition to his usual reticence to 
give me the time of day  and he wouldn’t if he thought there 
wasn’t a clock in the room; he wouldn’t if he thought there 
wasn’t a clock in the room; he wouldn’t tell you the time of day 
 in addition, this year you’ve provided him with something of 
an excuse because it’s not in his, it’s in your. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, this Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation which was introduced, all banners unfurled, all 
bugles blowing, you blew the end off the bugles when you 
introduced this thing, telling us how much it was going to save. 
We complained at the time that we weren’t going to get any 
information. Well now we got two problems: we’re not getting 
any information and the growth in expenditures has been 
explosive. 
 
That is why, Mr. Minister, I think you and other ministers owe 
us a breakdown in the expenditures to the property management 
corporation. That’s what I’m asking you for, Mr. Minister. I am 
not particularly trying to elicit information about your various 
moving around the province. You say you’ve gone from T.C. 
Douglas to Innovation Place. Mr. Minister, I would like a 
breakdown of the expenditures, and, I think, given the 
enormous  
  



 
April 22, 1988 

 

797 
 

growth in they cost of leased space, you owe us that. I think, 
Mr. Minister, it’s because you’re leasing space in hotels. If 
there’s a different story, I want it. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, to give me a breakdown. It’ll go a 
lot faster if you can do it in writing, but if you want to give it to 
me orally, I will copy it down with a pen. But I ask you to give 
me a breakdown of this expenditure in your estimates, of 
$273,900. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, certainly I’m not 
going to be making comments on behalf of the minister in 
charge of property management. I’ve already indicated to you 
the properties that we are involved with in Science and 
Technology. I can tell you that of the moneys that are listed 
there on page 81, that $15,800 is for the photo services and mail 
and postage and that the balance is for accommodation charges 
and the capital expenditures, which I’ve just suggested to you is 
in the neighbourhood of $40,000 for the leasehold 
improvements. 
 
Mr. Shillington:  Okay. You say $40,000 is for the leasehold 
improvements, a one-time-only expenditure. That’s the thrust of 
the minister’s comments. We’re still missing another . . . Mr. 
Minister, what I want is, I want to be able to break down the 
273,900; I think I’m entitled to do that. It’s the only way I can 
get the information. I will not get it from the minister of supply 
and services unless he voluntarily agrees to supply it. What I 
want is your breakdown. 
 
Now slowly but surely, painfully, inch by inch, figure by figure, 
I’m getting the information. We now have a figure of $15,800 
for photo services. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t want to digress into other departments, but 
I do want to remind you that you have been cutting costs in this 
government. The treasury benches have been cutting costs at 
very considerable expense to the Saskatchewan public. 
 
You cut a drug plan which was badly needed, the subject of a 
fairly spirited discussion in question period today. You cut that 
because you didn’t have the money. Mr. Minister, the increased 
costs in this area would cover the cost of that drug plan many 
times over. 
 
Mr. Minister, you cut a dental plan  Canada’s best dental 
plan; studies showed that dental health in Saskatchewan was 
superior to other provinces. You cut that because you didn’t 
have the money. Mr. Minister, the increase in expenditures in 
the property management corporation, which we were told was 
going to save us money, would pay for that program  I was 
going to say a dozen times over; it’s a couple of dozen times 
over. 
 
Mr. Minister, where you’re spending $30 million more, you’ve 
been embarrassed, and rightly so, at renting a hotel to put public 
servants in. I know they’re competent, Mr. Minister, but you 
don’t need to rent a luxury hotel for them. They don’t require 
that, nor is the Saskatchewan public, quite frankly, prepared to 
tolerate that sort of expenditure. 
 
I say, Mr. Minister, the additional $30 million that you’re 
spending over what the supply and services spent is  

political patronage. You’re enriching your friends at a very 
swift pace at the expense of the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Nag, nag, nag. 
 
Mr. Shillington:  There’s a very simple . . . well, the member 
from Weyburn once again, has nothing to do with his splendid 
talents but to come here and interrupt the estimates. I would 
have thought, with his renown ability, he could have found 
some use for his talents but to sit here and chirp, but apparently 
there’s no better use for the member’s talents, and that 
genuinely surprises me. 
 
Mr. Minister, I say the $30 million, which is so critically 
needed . . . I say, Mr. Minister, that that’s patronage  good, 
old-fashioned patronage for Tory friends. Now there’s an easy 
way to prove me wrong. All you and your colleagues have to do 
is give me the breakdown in the figures. But so far all I have got 
. . . all I got from the Minister of Rural Development last night 
was an angry retort that he didn’t patronize bars in hotels. I’m 
delighted that he’s of such exemplary character, but that wasn’t 
what I asked him. 
 
All I got from the Minister of Justice when I asked him of 
where was the missing $3 million that he’s spending while he’s 
renovating a court-house . . . all I can say is, if you renovated 
the Assiniboia Court House with $3 million, I could see the 
thing from my back yard in Regina, it would be so tall. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, you say . . . And when I say, where has the 
money gone, you say, we’re renovating  a one-time-only 
expenditure. I say to you, give me a breakdown in the 
expenditures. I think you owe us that, and if you don’t, I think a 
goodly number of taxpayers are going to conclude that the extra 
$30 million which you people are spending over what supply 
and services used to spend, is just simply patronage. And the 
public of Saskatchewan are going to find a better use for $30 
million, and I tell you, in the 1990 election they’re going to find 
a better use for your talents than sitting on that side of 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m not really 
sure if there was a question in all of that or not. I would just 
correct the member opposite again, though, that the $15,800 
that I indicated to you was not just photo services; it was mail 
and postage services as well. 
 
I’ve already indicated to you what the capital expenditure is as 
we estimate them to be. I’m not sure whether you want a 
breakdown of that as to how much was electrical and 
wall-board and plumbing and all the rest of it. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Yes, I would. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  I don’t have that particular 
breakdown here for you, so I’ve given you all of the 
information that we have here. We’ve broken it down as to 
what we are paying for accommodation charges, the amount 
that we’re paying for the on-time leasehold improvements, and 
the balance there is for photo services and mail and postage. So 
I don’t know what further breakdown you want, other than if 
you want a specific  
  



 
April 22, 1988 

 

798 
 

breakdown of the $40,000. 
 
Mr. Shillington:  Yes, I’d like the figures, Mr. Minister  if 
you’ll just read the figures which you have into the record. 
Okay. 
 
Do I understand that you’re spending 15,800 this year on photo 
services? You’re spending $40,000 on renovations. The rest 
you put in one lump sum called accommodation. Okay. Now 
we’re making progress. Inch by painful inch, we’re making 
progress, and we might just make it by one. 
 
Now give me the same figures for 1987-88; give me the 
comparable figures, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, last year’s 
expenditures of $218,000, or what was estimated for last year, 
you have a total of about $16,300 that was for this photo 
services and mail and postage. There were no renovation or 
leasehold improvement charges there, and the balance then was 
for accommodation charges. 
 
Mr. Shillington:  Well then, Mr. Minister, you have an 
increase in your accommodation charges which is very 
considerable. You have an increase of approximately 10, 15 per 
cent in those accommodation charges. Mr. Minister, give me 
the accommodation charges, in absolute figures, for ’88-89 and 
’87-88. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, the information that I 
would have here is that there is about an 8 per cent increase as 
far as the accommodation charges are concerned. 
 
Mr. Shillington:  For the moment let’s assume your figure is 
right. Mr. Minister, that roughly parallels . . . it’s a little less 
than the increase from . . . the overall increase in the property 
management expenditures are 11 per cent. Mr. Minister, how do 
you manage to be paying 8 per cent more for precisely the same 
employee? 
 
Just in case the minister is going to provide the answer . . . 
provide and answer that the inflation has gone up, let me tell 
you it hasn’t. The consumer price index for rents in Saskatoon 
is almost static. Why are we paying 8 per cent more for exactly 
the same number of people? 
 
(1230) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, the information that I 
would have that the 8 per cent increase would simply be . . . this 
is the increase that’s been charged by the property management 
corporation, which I presume would be to closer compare to 
what the realistic price of that accommodation would be and the 
services that are being provided. 
 
Mr. Shillington:  Well that’s an astounding answer. I am just 
overburdened by that additional information. I assumed, Mr. 
Minister, that this 8 per cent was increased costs in 
accommodation. That’s all you said when you stood up. 
 
Mr. Minister, with the same number of employees and no 
increase in costs in owned or leased space overall in the city of 
Saskatoon, why are we paying 8 per cent more  

here than we did last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t really 
see that I can give the member opposite any more information. I 
think that I’ve given him the breakdown that he asked for. 
 
The charges that are being made to us this year are dictated by 
the property management corporation, and as I’ve indicated, I 
would assume that that’s probably a more realistic cost as to 
how the price of these types of accommodations would be 
today, so I’m not sure what more that he wants. 
 
Mr. Shillington:  Well the theory, Mr. Minister, was when 
we set up the property management corporation, was that you 
would have a . . . you would introduce some of the much 
ballyhooed efficiency of the private market into the system, 
because then the departments’ cost would be separated out and 
departments could make the decision as to whether or not they 
wanted another employee or another 10,000 square feet in 
space. That was the theory behind the property management 
corporation. It would introduce a level of efficiency because 
departments could then . . . would then know what their space is 
costing them, and your very able deputy minister would know 
whether or not he wants another 10,000 square feet, or another 
1,000 square feet, I guess would be a better example, or one 
more employee. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is happening is, ministers are coming in and 
they’re saying, I have no idea why we’re spending more; why 
are we spending more; don’t ask me, ask somebody else. 
 
Mr. Minister, the whole point of the property management 
corporation was it was going to reduce cost. As I have pointed 
out, costs are increasing at an explosive rate  11 per cent last 
year, 30 per cent in the three years  this, at a time when the 
overall increase in government expenditures have been almost 
static. 
 
What I think the Saskatchewan taxpayer hoped, Mr. Minister, 
when you introduced a period of restrain, is that you would 
keep a lid on costs such as . . . well I guess I’ve offended the 
member from Canora. That’s heartbreaking; it’s ruined my 
whole weekend. 
 
Mr. Minister, what was hoped, when the property management 
corporation was introduced, was that you would keep a lid on 
costs, such as property costs, and we would be able to continue 
the programs which we need, such as health costs. That was the 
theory  was that we would reduce costs, such as 
accommodation costs, and, where possible, the number of 
employees  we would keep those costs at a minimum  but 
that we would be able to continue and expand programs that 
were needed, such as health care costs. I have mentioned drug 
and dental programs. What we got is the opposite. What we got 
Mr. Minister, is that our health programs are being slashed, and 
our property costs are running away with us. 
 
It isn’t just a minor issue, Mr. Minister. It goes to the very basis 
of why you guys are going to get creamed in the two 
by-elections, which are going to be held the week after  
  



 
April 22, 1988 

 

799 
 

next. The reason why you’re down in the cellar in the polls, 
why you’re going to get creamed on May 4, has to do with this 
very item. 
 
What people had hoped was that restraint would mean that 
costs, such as accommodation and employee costs, would be 
kept to a minimum, and that essential programs would be 
retained. They never voted to cut essential programs; nobody in 
Saskatchewan did. If you can find them, I want to talk to them 
because they are very, very rare. They voted to cut non-essential 
costs. You have elected to cut essential programs and let these 
expenditures run away with themselves. So, Mr. Minister, it’s 
not just a minor item, it goes to the very heart and soul of why 
you people are in as much trouble as you are. 
 
Now I ask you again: why the 8 per cent increase in costs? 
What was the mental process that you went through when you 
decided you’d accept that 8 per cent increase in costs rather 
than spend the money somewhere else? So I ask you, Mr. 
Minister, to tell me why you bit, why you took the extra costs? 
I’m going to asking every other minister the same thing. I don’t 
think there’s charitable explanation for it. 
 
I think what you’re doing, you are going from low-cost space to 
high-cost space, and you’re doing that right across the 
government. I think you’re moving out of the relatively 
efficient buildings such as the T.C. Douglas building, a 
low-cost building, and I think you’re moving into high-cost 
buildings, the Renaissance hotel. I think that’s the problem. 
 
Now if I’m wrong, and if the cost of floor cleaner accounts for 
the entire increase, I retire, but I don’t think it does. I think the 
problem is that the property management corporation has gone 
bananas. They’re moving people out; they’re moving your 
employees out of low-cost space, which is the existing space 
that we own  in the admin building, in the health building, in 
the T.C. Douglas Building, and some long-term leases  
you’re taking them out of that low-cost space; you’re putting 
them in hotels. 
 
And when I asked the Minister of Rural Development if he 
really needed to be that close to a bar, he took offence at the 
comment, so I won’t ask you the same question. Mr. Minister, 
why do you have to be moved out of low-cost space into hotels? 
 
An Hon. Member:  Sit down and let me answer you. 
 
Mr. Shillington:  All right, I’ll sit down. The minister’s 
finally got an answer; I’ll let you go. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Thank you. Mr. Chairman, in so far 
as the 8 per cent increase, I would point out to the member 
opposite  and I would certainly hope that when we have our 
grand opening up there that he will be able to attend and see 
exactly what we are moving into, and also maybe where we’re 
moving from  the facilities that we’re in right now were not 
designed to house the Department of Science and Technology 
particularly. They were designed as incubator malls for small 
companies that wanted to come in and do research and 
development. Certainly with the increase in activity in the  

high-tech industry, and there are more and more companies 
coming in, this space is required for them. 
 
The space that we’re going to be moving into then in the 
SEDCO Centre is a higher quality type facility, and also that, of 
course, is going to mean higher rental rates over the years. It’s 
much more accessible. We do a lot of work with the 
Saskatchewan Research Council; we will be housed in the same 
building. But it’s also going to enable us to share certain 
services in that particular building. 
 
So there are several advantages, not only of Science and Tech 
moving in there, but in fact it is a higher quality facility and it 
certainly is going to cost a little bit more. But at the same time, 
the advantages are there. It’s going to free up that other space in 
the malls that more of our high-tech companies  new 
high-tech companies, I might add  can be moving in there. So 
that certainly is going to account for a portion of the 8 per cent 
increase that you’re concerned about. 
 
Mr. Shillington:  Well, Mr. Minister, I rest my case and I 
thank you. You have been the most forthright of the ministers I 
have dealt with. 
 
What we have is you admitting that you’re moving . . . Oh, no, I 
don’t believe that you spent $3 million on the Assiniboia Court 
House. I don’t believe that. As I say, I could see the thing from 
my back yard if you’d actually spent that much. 
 
Mr. Minister . . . That’s right, I could. If you spent that much 
money on the Assiniboia Court House, I could stand in may 
back yard in Regina and I could see it and I could appreciate it. 
You didn’t spend three million bucks out there. 
 
Mr. Minister . . . He nods his head, he did. Well I just . . . I do 
not believe that. 
 
Mr. Minister, what you admit is that you are moving public 
servants out of low-cost space into high-cost space, and you are 
. . .  
 
An Hon. Member:  No, we’re not. 
 
Mr. Shillington:  Yes, you are. You say it’s better quality 
space. I say to you, it’s more expensive, but it isn’t any better. I 
don’t believe those able and dedicated public servants who sit 
around you are going to get any more work done in Saskatoon 
than they did in that low-cost space in the T.C. Douglas 
Building. I don’t believe that for a moment. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’re doing this across the board. This property 
management corporation has gone berserk in moving people out 
of low-cost space into high-cost space. We asked the Premier 
why. He says, we’re building, we’re building, we’re building. 
Mr. Minister, you are building a slush fund and you are building 
the odd building, but in the meantime you can’t afford programs 
which are absolutely essential, such as health and drug care 
plans. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to just conclude for a moment on funding 
for research. I think in Canada as a whole we  
  



 
April 22, 1988 

 

800 
 

seriously under fund research. Mr. Minister . . . And it has 
meant that we don’t have the kind of industry, the kind of 
technology which it would take to make Canadian industry the 
most productive in the world. It means that we tend to be 
hewers of wood and drawers of water, and the main reason for 
that is that we don’t spend enough on research. 
 
Mr. Minister, your department is indicative of the problem  
not the whole reason for the problem, but it is indicative of it. 
Your expenditures are virtually static. They go up by a little less 
than 1 per cent. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would much, much rather you had taken the 
additional money that you’re spending on the high-cost space, 
and I wished you’d put it into a . . . in some fashion enhancing a 
program, because I don’t think those public servant, as able and 
dedicated as they are, are going to get one lick more work done 
in that expensive space than they got in the cheap space. And I 
think this province would have been a lot better off had you 
spent the money on programs rather than on fancy digs. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I’ve 
heard you say here in the House today things like: you don’t 
know anything about the guarantees on the contracts going to 
support some of the high-tech industries; that you don’t know 
much about what’s happening in your area. And just in response 
to questions from colleague, the member form Saskatoon 
University, who asked you whether there were any contracts for 
SED Systems to do with nuclear development of weapons, I 
heard you describe that question as a hypothetical question. 
 
And for a minister of the Crown to describe a question like that 
as hypothetical was quite a surprise to me, and quite a shock, 
because I would call that question a question of policy, not a 
hypothetical question. It’s a question of the policies of your 
department. 
 
Now you are a small department; Science and Technology in 
itself doesn’t get a lot of money. There’s been an order in 
council last March, just last month, for over three and one-half 
million dollars to go to Develcon over the next few years. That 
was signed by you as the Minister of Science and Technology. 
That’s a lot more money than the Estimates in your department 
would indicate that you have control over. 
 
And the problem for science and Technology, for us on the 
opposition, is similar to the problem that my colleague from 
Regina Centre has indicated in terms of the property 
management corporation  the money is spread out over the 
estimates in every direction, the money for Science and 
Technology for firms who can persuade you that in some way 
they have something to do with research and development or 
high tech, or whatever, can get money from this government. 
 
And you indicate that you have very little knowledge 
sometimes of what’s happening with that money or where it’s 
going, and very little concerns about accountability to the 
taxpayers; very little concern about the need to ensure that there 
are jobs provided; very little concern about  

the fact that people can get laid off, and that ends up being a 
brain drain out of Saskatchewan because we can lose people 
who are skilled, who will go to another province where they 
may get guarantee for longer-term work. 
 
You’ve indicated a lack of concern about people who get laid 
off from these jobs being told they have to retrain and retrain 
and retrain. And while it’s absolutely something that I’m very 
well aware of the fact that people have to change jobs along the 
course of their lifetime, I find it unacceptable on behalf of the 
people of Saskatoon who have to go through these hoops of 
getting trained for high tech and then getting laid off. 
 
(1245) 
 
And my question to you is, Mr. Minister: where are your policy 
statements for your department? Do you understand the term 
“policy?” Do you have any policies? And what policies are you 
operating under in giving away all this money from the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan to these industries? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s interesting 
for the member opposite to make the statements that she does, I 
mean, just flying off in all directions and based on absolutely no 
intelligent thought whatsoever. 
 
Certainly I’m aware of the contracts that Science and 
Technology have put forward. I am certainly surprised at the 
comments you just make about the fact we need to do more . . . 
or we don’t know whether we’re spending the money on 
research and development or what we’re doing with it. The 
member from Regina Centre has just said we need to do more 
in research and development. That, in fact, is what we’re doing. 
 
We have some very specific policies within the Department of 
Science and Technology. We understand the importance of 
technology to increasing the economic situation in this 
province, and we are committed to helping firms in whatever 
way that we can if they have proposals that certainly qualify 
under the terms of research and development  and this could 
be to do with products or processes. 
 
You talk about the amount of money that we give to certain 
companies, and you don’t understand totally what it goes for. 
You’ve been invited, as colleagues of yours have on more than 
on occasion, to visit a company like Joytec, and you still, to this 
point, have never, ever gone there to find out exactly what 
they’re doing. That’s probably the best way for you to find out 
what any of these high-tech companies are doing is to go and 
visit them. An you’ve got a good number of them, certainly, in 
Saskatoon, and I would invite you to go and do that. I’d be 
happy to go along with you as well because there are very 
interesting activities going on in those places. 
 
As far as the general policies, we have a policy statement. If 
you don’t have a copy of it, we’ll be certainly be very  
  



 
April 22, 1988 

 

801 
 

happy to provide you with one that clearly identifies where 
grants from Science and Technology can be utilized and who is 
eligible for them. Whether we’re talking about people that are 
doing research within the universities; whether we’re talking 
about the research councils; whether we’re talking about 
companies that are involved in developing new products, all of 
that information is readily available and I’d be very surprised if 
you don’t have it. But I would certainly be very pleased to 
provide that information for you. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Thank you, I would appreciate getting a copy of 
that. But I understand from our discussion this morning that 
your policies don’t include any kind of investigation of the 
kinds of companies or the connections that they might have in 
terms of their stability or their ability to provide good 
investment here in the province of Saskatchewan; that you are 
willing to go along with just about any kind of a company as 
long as it applies for money and is one of the ones that you 
want to patronize. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you  also connected with policy 
 if you’re familiar with the science policy and the national 
advisory council on science and technology. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Well certainly I’m familiar with the 
national policy because a lot of it is based on the Saskatchewan 
model, and I was one of the signators of that particular policy. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Well I understand that part of that was that the 
Prime Minister had an advisory body on science policy which 
has put together a report which has not been made public, but it 
was leaked to The Toronto Star. And this policy has to do with 
the . . . Canada’s policy on high tech. It talks about Canada’s 
weak industrial position that will deteriorate further without a 
massive increase in spending on science and technology to 
improve competitiveness. And the study points out that the high 
levels of foreign ownership in Canada contribute to this 
situation, and that Canadian-owned firms spend 60 per cent 
more on research and development as a percentage of sale than 
foreign-owned firms. 
 
And the reason I want to raise this with you, Mr. Chairman, and 
Mr. Minister, is because it has to do with the concern about free 
trade. And I’ve had a lot of examples here in the House that 
suggest to me that the members opposite are not familiar with 
the free trade agreement, the details in the free trade agreement, 
and are not concerned about what’s going to be happening to 
our high-tech industries and our science and technology if we 
go forward with this free trade program. 
 
The Prime Ministers advisory body on science policy has put 
together a report which indicates and recommends a number of 
initiatives which could come into conflict with the terms of the 
free trade agreement, and some of the initiatives are the use of 
government procurement to support emerging Canadian 
industry. 
 
Now you’ve already talked about the fact that you see the need 
from time to time of governments having input into the firms 
that we’ve talked about. You’re prepared to give more money to 
Joytec if they meet your criteria, whatever  

they are. You’ve talked about SED Systems getting more 
money from time to time. you have accepted as part of your 
policy, I understand then, of government intervention in the 
market-place; that government grants, that taxpayers’ money 
can go on into these firms on an ongoing basis; but that 
government procurement is going to be threatened by the free 
trade agreement, according to this report which the federal 
government will not release. 
 
Targeting government funds to firms which create new 
technology for world markets will be threatened, accelerating 
the purchase of Canadian-developed high-tech products for us 
in Canadian industry through low-cost financing. And that’s 
been one of the programs that your government announced they 
were going to do was to help our firms in Saskatchewan 
purchase high-tech equipment. 
 
Now I want to know if you know about this report, Mr. 
Minister. It was apparently not released, but it was reported in 
The Toronto Star. Are you at all familiar with that report from 
the national advisory council on science policy to the Prime 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Chairman, the only comment I 
can make with regard to the report  we have not seen the 
report. We met with the Prime Minister in Saskatoon last week 
and had a good discussion on the biotechnology sector in that 
particular city and in this province. He is very involved, as 
you’re well aware, with the science and tech movement within 
the country, and we are going to be having the regional 
conference here in Regina on May 2 and 3. Maybe we’ll hear 
much more about the report at that time. 
 
But I can simply point out to the member that the high-tech 
firms in Saskatchewan have very strongly endorsed the free 
trade agreement with the United States. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:54 p.m. 
 


	ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
	READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS
	ORAL QUESTIONS
	Mr. Speaker: ( Order, order. Once more the Premier is being interrupted and before being given a chance to answer the question. I ask you to give him the opportunity to answer.

	Prescription Drug Plan ( Special Cases
	Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: ( Well, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite likes to exaggerate and mislead. He’s talking about the Saskatchewan taxpayers having millions of dollars in this particular company.



