


















































June 7, 1988 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 7, 1988 
 

1909 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 5 — Effects of Changes in Prescription Drug 
Plan (continued) 

 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the opportunity to continue in this debate and in 
seconding this very important motion from my hon. colleague 
from Saskatoon Centre. This motion is as follows, and I read: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan 
to reverse its decision to ruin the Saskatchewan 
prescription drug plan, thereby immediately increasing the 
cost of prescription drugs and placing an unfair and severe 
financial burden on Saskatchewan residents least able to 
afford these increases: Saskatchewan seniors, the 
chronically ill, low income and single parent families. 

 
As I indicated before supper, Mr. Speaker, I am honoured to 
have the opportunity to second such an important motion. 
Possibly no other issue is placing such hardship on 
Saskatchewan individuals and families as this PC government’s 
cuts to the prescription drug program. Having said that, Mr. 
Speaker, I am fully aware of the devastation of job lay-offs, 
starving children, and cuts to the dental plan and so on. 
However, I see the cuts to the prescription drug program related 
to starving children and malnourished seniors because of the 
added cost to them under the cuts. 
 
To summarize my comments before supper, Mr. Speaker, I 
talked about this government’s lack of credibility in the field of 
health care; about the need for the prescription drug program to 
be restored to its previous form; I talked about this 
government’s dismantling of the health care system in general, 
piece by piece; about this government’s arrogance and 
insensitivity to the plight of victims of their policies. I talked 
about the evolving two-tier health care system in Saskatchewan. 
I talked about how all of the other tax increases by this 
government have exacerbated the financial hardships created by 
additional drug costs, and about the degree to which, as an 
example, four specific drugs have increased for one of my 
constituents over the past seven months, anywhere from 25 per 
cent to indeed tripling, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I talked about how hand-outs to the Pocklingtons, the Remais, 
the Hills and the Schoenhals, and other government friends, 
have taken priority over the health care needs of all 
Saskatchewan residents. It’s not people first with this PC 
government. Money for vacant office space, unnecessary 
government advertising, and flying off to family weddings at 
taxpayers’ expense, but no money for prescription drugs, Mr. 
Speaker, or necessary surgery or dental care, for that matter. In 
fact, I heard the Minister of Health, at Holy Cross in Saskatoon, 
say that the dental care program was a fringe health care 
program, Mr. Speaker, and we don’t accept that. 
 

Mr. Speaker, before supper I cited seven specific examples 
from Saskatoon Eastview where hardships were being created 
by the attitude and cold-hearted policies in the prescription drug 
program of this current government. I talked about the 
arrogance, the arrogance of the Premier of this province, to 
criticize ordinary Saskatchewan residents as drug pushers and 
drug abusers. It’s because of this kind of poor leadership that 
we in Saskatchewan are in such a poor financial and economic 
position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Our Premier could take a few lessons on 
governing from ward aldermen from our cities. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I talked about concerns expressed by 
seniors — pioneers who this government likes to talk about as 
pioneers — and how they are just sick of what they see 
happening in the dismantling of the health care system, 
especially cuts, in their case, to the prescription drug program, 
and last year cuts to home care. 
 
Saskatchewan residents are used to a government in previous 
years that says one thing, Mr. Speaker, and does it, and did it. 
This government has no mandate to cut the prescription drug 
program. They have no mandate to cut the dental care program, 
as well. They didn’t talk about that a year and a half ago during 
the election. They dismantle the health care system, piece by 
piece, then they respond to public pressure to setting up a health 
care task force. It’s basically a response to political pressure — 
very little thought and planning going into it. By saying that, I 
don’t mean to be critical of the members of the task force but 
it’s just another opportunity to buy 18 months, two years, by 
this government. 
 
During Saskatoon Eastview, Regina Elphinstone by-elections, 
all parties heard concerns at the doorstep about the prescription 
drug program and the hardships created, so we had the last 
minute idea of a plastic card system. As of this day we still do 
not know any more about this plastic card. And plastic cards are 
not going to solve the problems in health care and the 
prescription drug program for people of Saskatchewan. 
 
As I indicated earlier, this government has a lack of credibility 
in its rhetoric about protecting the health care system in this 
province. I know that, having gone door to door, to thousands 
of doors, let alone being trusted to build and prepare the health 
care system for the ’90s and beyond. The credibility of this 
government in the health care field is at rock bottom, Mr. 
Speaker, and I think proof of that was in the by-elections. 
 
Some of my first impressions about being a new member — 
and it’s often thrown up to me that I’m a new member and 
members opposite were hoping for better things and new ideas 
— it struck me, Mr. Speaker, it’s . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well I hope you join the debate. I hope the member from 
Regina Wascana joins the debate. I’m sure he will. 
 
At any rate, it struck me, Mr. Speaker, that this government 
continues, in the face of two by-election losses, to be very, very 
arrogant and I’m concerned about  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1910 
 

that because I do want some opposition in 1990 to be opposite 
us. So I hope that they be a little bit humble over the next 
couple of years. They may get some support. 
 
I’ve also realized since I’ve come here, Mr. Speaker, the 
incredible incompetence that we see across the floor. And it’s 
no wonder, I can see clearly now, why this province is in 
financial economic trouble. I also have been able to see, Mr. 
Speaker, the lengths at which this PC government goes to hold 
politic expediency as the rule of the day. They do not plan in 
any comprehensive or futuristic way. And I think that was 
evidenced by last week, when the minister of privatization, or 
piratization, talked about this government being right there in 
the 1890s. And I agree, that’s where he is, in the 1890s. 
 
We also concur with the minister of privatization: not only is he 
back in the 1890s but his health care policies are archaic and 
back there as well. And somehow I fail to understand the PC 
rhetoric that to build a health care system by dismantling it 
piece by piece . . . Mr. Speaker, the question . . . I’ve heard 
members opposite say, that we cannot afford this growing 
health care system. I would suggest first of all, Mr. Speaker, 
that the amount of new money going into health care is very, 
very misleading by this government. I would say further, Mr. 
Speaker, that we cannot afford not to pay for health care for the 
citizens of Saskatchewan. We’re talking about the health of our 
citizens, after all. 
 
Saskatchewan led the way in the development of universal 
medicare systems, because people of this province, Mr. 
Speaker, believed that access to quality health care should be 
dependent on need, not on wealth. The work of Tommy 
Douglas and many other women and men in this province 
addressed this issue many years ago and established this 
principle. I thought it was an accepted principle in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, but I see now, from the attitudes and 
policies of this government, that that’s not the case. We’re still 
fighting for fundamental principles, fundamental access to 
health care. 
 
Is the pioneer work of people of the Douglas era in vain under 
this government, Mr. Speaker? I say it may be, if the 
government continues to dismantle our health care system as 
they have done in the last year and one-half. The Progressive 
Conservatives have never been committed to health care, Mr. 
Speaker. They have not been philosophically committed to it. 
These are the same people who opposed it vigorously 26 years 
ago. They believe in a double standard of health care — one 
standard for those who are well-to-do and another standard for 
those who aren’t. The rest can do with what’s left. 
 
That’s not good enough, Mr. Speaker, for the people of this 
province. Certainly there is room to reassess our spending 
priorities. New challenges emerge, new realities emerge, and 
we need to reassess our techniques and strategies. What we do 
not need to reassess, though, is that the system should be based 
on equity, accessibility, compassion, and affordability. And I 
think those are the principles that this government has thrown 
out the window, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Certainly we were well aware that there’s a balance required 
between preventive health care and acute health care, and that’s 
always a delicate balance and always will be. But if the PC 
government really believed in preventive health care, Mr. 
Speaker, they would not have cut preventive programs like the 
prescription drug program, the children’s dental program, 
cutting back on home care last year. I find an inconsistency in 
an approach that cuts preventive programs and then tries to 
respond to public pressure by saying, well we’re going to set up 
a health care task force. It seems to be the cart before the horse, 
which is the usual practice of this government. 
 
Health care, like taxes, Mr. Speaker, is an area where this 
government has broken every promise that it ever made. And as 
I said, this government has lost the trust of the people of this 
province to preserve and protect and build a health care system. 
That is no more evident than in the prescription drug cuts. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, it’s with the greatest pride that I 
speak to this motion put forward by the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. I was elected to deliver a message to this 
government about high taxes, poor job creation, financial and 
economic mismanagement, and health care cuts — specifically 
cuts to the prescription drug program. And I’ll have more to say 
on this later, Mr. Minister, but . . . or Mr. Speaker, as I said, I 
take great pride in seconding this motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The previous 
speakers spoke of this government maligning the people of 
Saskatchewan, and I can only say that in so far as attempting to 
malign the members opposite, it would be impossible because 
anything I could say could only be a compliment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have heard nothing but dull and boring NDP 
scare tactics and rhetoric for the last three hours, wasting the 
time of this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, we have heard them talk 
about how they care about the seniors of this province, about 
the poor people of this province, and, Mr. Speaker, when they 
were in government they did absolutely nothing for the seniors. 
Oh, I forgot. They gave them a $5 increase on their supplement 
— $5, Mr. Speaker. I almost forgot about that. That’s their 
claim to fame. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. Before the 
member gets too carried away, I wonder if he could be 
reminded of what the motion is that is being debated. 
 
Mr. Petersen: — With regards to that, Mr. Speaker, I think you 
yourself have heard members opposite talk about seniors, the 
poor, and how the drug plan, and changes to it and the health 
care system, has affected them. And I wanted to start out 
exactly where they left off, Mr. Speaker. I bow to your ruling. 
 
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1911 
 

Thank you. Let’s check the facts on the drug plan, for example. 
Let’s check the facts. Health care, Mr. Speaker, in this province, 
has increased 68 per cent since 1982. They talk about cuts in 
health care, they equate changes to the drug plan as cuts in 
health care. Well, Mr. Speaker, the drug plan that we have in 
Saskatchewan is very, very similar to that which was in effect 
in Manitoba, and is still in effect in Manitoba under an NDP 
administration. I can’t see what they find so terrible about the 
way it works today. 
 
And they try to prey upon the fears of the seniors that we have. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in 1988, 105,000 senior citizens will receive 
benefits through the senior citizens’ heritage program — $40 
million, Mr. Speaker, from this government, this uncaring Tory 
government you’ve just heard about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $40 million is a lot of money. And it’s a lot more 
than the $5 that the members opposite and the party opposite 
provided. 
 
Let’s take a look at something else, Mr. Speaker. Let’s take a 
look at nursing homes. These seniors, they talk about who are 
having to pay for their drug plan costs, part of their drug plan 
costs . . . Nursing homes, Mr. Speaker, were unheard of. 
Building of nursing homes were unheard of under the previous 
administration. They had a moratorium. It’s well-known; it’s a 
fact; they’ve admitted it readily. 
 
Instead of building nursing homes in 1978, ’79, and ’80 when 
my grandfather needed a nursing home bed, do you know what 
happened in my riding? I had liquor board stores, million dollar 
monoliths built in my riding — three of them — to sell liquor 
when my grandfather didn’t have a nursing home bed. And they 
talk about caring for people. Come on, Mr. Speaker, let’s not be 
ridiculous. 
 
They built the T.C. Douglas building, they had their family of 
Crown corporations, but they did not care about the average 
senior citizen and the average person in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . I think, Mr. Speaker, that the members 
opposite have demonstrated very clearly that all they have to 
offer is rhetoric and only rhetoric. They have had no new ideas. 
We have introduced program after program to assist farmers, to 
assist home-makers, the pension plan, the Saskatchewan 
Pension Plan. 
 
You talk about us being uncaring as part of the reason why we 
changed the drug plan. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not so. Mr. 
Speaker, there were people out on the streets who were victims 
of drug abuse, and it’s true, it’s true, they were. We had people 
who were ripping off the system and going out on the street, 
selling drugs that they had gotten through devious means, and, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s wrong, and we’ve been attempting to put a 
stop to it. And when we try to do that, we are maligned by the 
members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what else one can say except to look 
at the number of dollars that we’ve put into our health care 
system, over a billion dollars go into that system. And it’s in the 
building of hospitals. We have just  

opened new wings. The Wascana Rehab Centre is being 
refurbished and added on to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In small town Saskatchewan, we have taken some of our 
smaller hospitals and turned them into integrated care facilities. 
And that’s something that meets two needs: it meets the 
medical emergency needs of the people who perhaps get injured 
while they’re engaged in agriculture or what have you; and it 
also meets the needs of providing a care facility for our seniors 
in those small towns instead of having them drive 100 or 200 
miles to a centralized storage centre that the members opposite 
envisaged as the epitome of health care for our seniors, of 
nursing home care for our seniors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to dwell on a personal experience. I 
mentioned my grandfather. Well, Mr. Speaker, you talk about 
members opposite — and I know they have relatives, and I 
know they care about them, and I’m sure that they understand 
my feelings towards my grandparents — but in 1978, Mr. 
Speaker, my grandfather became unable to look after himself, 
and my grandmother was 88 years of age. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
that little old lady was forced to drive or to ask someone to 
drive her 85 miles to the town of Melfort where the only 
nursing home bed was available for my grandfather — 85 
miles. They’d been married for 65 years. 
 
Can you image how it feels, Mr. Speaker, to have spent 65 
years with another person, living under the same roof, and then 
have to beg to ask one of your children or a neighbour or 
someone to once a week drive you 85 or 90 miles to visit that 
person — at 88 years of age? Can you understand that? Can 
members opposite understand that? I doubt it, I doubt it. If they 
would have cared, Mr. Speaker, they would have built nursing 
homes instead of liquor board stores; they would have provided 
money for health care instead of buying potash mines. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons I got into politics was 
because of the very personal family experience. And it hurts, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now members opposite make a great hue and cry and a 
wonderful presentation of being sanctimonious and saying, well 
if it was one of your people who were sick, you wouldn’t have 
done this. Well, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of us on this 
side who have relatives and friends who are afflicted in various 
ways, and we take no particular pride or pleasure or joy in 
saying, aha, you have to pay. We don’t, Mr. Speaker. We take 
the responsible attitude of saying, you should pay for part of 
your drug costs. It’s good enough for Manitoba that had an 
NDP government. Why isn’t it good enough here? 
 
We have got to get those costs under control, Mr. Speaker. We 
have to get some of the abuses out of the system. And I’m not 
saying that what we did was perfect by any matter of means; it 
was a step, and we have to continue. We have to look at 
changes to the health care system, Mr. Speaker, to improve it, to 
provide efficiencies. 
 
The members opposite, when you say the word “efficiencies,” 
they all shudder and cringe because their  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1912 
 

only idea of efficiency is where you come in and you cut or 
slash, and they’re very fond of using the words “cut and slash.” 
Well, Mr. Speaker, efficiencies come in many forms — many 
forms. If you can provide 24 hour a day usage of equipment that 
we have bought as taxpayers, you will have the most efficient 
use of that equipment. And we’ve been working towards that; 
we’ve been attempting to have that. We saw the cancer clinic 
having some problems in that regard. Very expensive 
equipment sitting idle 14, 16 hours a day, Mr. Speaker, and that 
doesn’t make any sense to me. And those are the types of things 
that we mean when we talk about efficiencies. 
 
And so we put in place a task force, a health care task force. 
And the members opposite, as usual, have yelled too little, too 
late, not enough. It’s a cover-up. You name it, I think I’ve heard 
just about every piece of rhetoric and every cliché ever invented 
dumped on us this afternoon and evening. But, Mr. Speaker, we 
are dealing with a billion dollar industry — over a billion 
dollars — with people’s lives, Mr. Speaker. We are attempting 
to provide the best care we can and get the best bang for our 
buck. 
 
Their solution is just to throw dollars at it, never mind where it 
comes from or how it’s spent. And the NDP in Manitoba were a 
good example of that. Look at their deficit. Look at what 
happened to them. They didn’t care how they spent it; they just 
borrowed her and spent her, boy, fast and loose. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I understand, Mr. Speaker, that the members 
opposite feel that we are treading on their ground when we deal 
in the health care field. Health care has always been the sacred 
lamb or the sacred cow or what would you of the NDP. Well, 
MR. Speaker, they forfeited that claim in 1978 when they 
started slapping moratoriums on nursing homes. They forfeited 
that claim, Mr. Speaker, when they said that waiting lists were 
efficient. That’s their idea of efficiency. They forfeited those 
claims, and the member sitting opposite, from Saskatoon South, 
said that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when you take a look at the task force that 
we have put in place to deal with health care, it will include the 
drug plan, it will include nursing homes, it will include waiting 
lists. And, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the calibre of the people 
that were sitting in that gallery today — your gallery — to 
listen to the members opposite deride and run them down and 
stand up and accuse them of being puppets and all the rest of it, 
I can only reiterate the words of the minister today, the Minister 
of Health, when he asked the Leader of the Opposition to 
apologize to those people, especially to Mr. Walter Podiluk, a 
man who has served this province long and well, much longer 
and . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. The member for Kelvington-Wadena, I 
know, has a great deal he would like to share with the House. 
However I ask him to relate his remarks to the topic. I’m afraid 
he’s a little bit off. He’s not relating it to the resolution. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Tell us everything you know; we’ve got 
another 30 seconds. 
 
Mr. Petersen: — I doubt that you’d be able to absorb it. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I apologize if I have strayed from the specific 
topic of prescription drugs. And I will direct my remarks 
towards the prescription drug plan as it affects seniors and 
low-income people, and people who are forced to live in 
low-income situations, and people who are on welfare, and 
people who are receiving benefits that this government has 
provided. Mr. Speaker, members opposite seemed to allude to 
that on a number of occasions, but I thank you for bringing me 
back to the topic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at drugs in our society today . . . 
And members opposite disagree that there’s a problem with 
legal drugs and abuse of legal drugs. Well I ask you to go and 
check some of the constituents that you are so concerned about, 
some of the many names that you claim to have hidden in your 
desk drawers for a month or two or three before you 
sanctimoniously haul them out and say, aha, here’s another 
person but I haven’t done anything for three months, but here’s 
another person who is having problems with the drug plan or 
what have you. Mr. Speaker, they use those people for political 
purposes, which is wrong, Mr. Speaker — wrong, wrong, 
wrong. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, members opposite have sanctimoniously sat 
there, stood there, and spoke on and on and on about the 
prescription drug plan and how it will affect the standard of 
living of a number of people. Well, Mr. Speaker, I said, and I 
don’t back down from it, that the changes that were made are 
not perfect and they require some fine tuning. And we have 
introduced some changes; we have introduced some changes. 
 
And we have heard the term, “fantastic plastic.” The plastic 
card we’re talking about, Mr. Speaker, will streamline a number 
of problems that the members opposite have talked about. 
They’ve talked about having too long a turn-around time on the 
rebates. Well that may be so, Mr. Speaker. We’ve attempted to 
do our best, but it may be so. And the plastic card may be able 
to have some benefit in that regard, and therefore I don’t think 
the members opposite should deride it or call it down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the interests of work that this House has to do 
and in view of the fact that I think I’ve made a few very 
pertinent comments, I would beg leave to adjourn this debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1930) 
 

Resolution No. 8 — Meeting the Needs of Saskatchewan 
Families 

 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the close of my 
remarks this evening, I will be moving this motion: 
 
That this Assembly condemn the Government of Saskatchewan 
for failing to make the needs of Saskatchewan families a 
priority, as is evident in cut-backs to Saskatchewan health, 
education, and social services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion that I bring to this House tonight  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1913 
 

speaks of priorities and the priorities particularly of this 
government. And it condemns this government, Mr. Speaker, 
for its lack of priority in terms of Saskatchewan families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have learned that governing is essentially a 
matter of setting and choosing priorities — priorities in 
spending, priorities in legislation. Tonight I want to look at, 
with members present, the priorities undertaken by this 
government in their term of office, particularly since re-election 
in 1986, and to indicate to this House that, in my judgement, 
those priorities have been all wrong; that, in fact, they have 
taken many wrong directions in choosing priorities, and that 
Saskatchewan families are the worse because of it. Because of 
priorities taken by this government, Saskatchewan families 
have suffered. The priorities, Mr. Speaker, of this government, 
in my judgement, are all wrong, and I wanted to spend some 
time tonight on that subject. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just run through a list of examples of the 
priorities that this government has undertaken which I see are 
wrong. Let’s talk about one of their big spending priorities, Mr. 
Speaker. One of their big spending priorities is to install 
Jacuzzis, swimming pools in the backyards of those who can 
afford such luxuries. Major spending priority of this 
government — interestingly introduced just before an election. 
 
This government believes in subsidizing luxuries for the rich, 
Mr. Speaker. Meanwhile it’s widely known that we have 11,000 
people waiting for hospital beds in Saskatoon. We’re spending 
on providing luxuries for the rich while 11,000 people are on 
hospital waiting lists in Saskatoon. That’s the wrong priority, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been told — I’ve no reason to doubt it and no 
government member opposite has stood in his place to deny it 
— I have been told that this government spend somewhere in 
the neighbourhood of $200,000 to turn the sod for the 
Shand-Rafferty project — Mr. Speaker, $200,000 for public 
relations to turn the sod on the project that we don’t need, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Meanwhile, in this province women and children, 
Saskatchewan families, Mr. Speaker, are being turned away 
from transition houses, turned away because of underfunding. 
Mr. Speaker, that’s just the wrong kind of priority in spending 
and we’ve seen too much of it with this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not so many weeks ago, at my office in Moose 
Jaw, arrived two box fulls, two box fulls of a free trade 
document — glossy pages. Mr. Speaker, I did not order this 
document; it just arrived in our office — two box fulls of them, 
Mr. Speaker, from the minister from Kindersley, two boxes for 
each MLA. 
 
The document, Mr. Speaker, was nothing but self-serving 
propaganda for the free trade deal. Mr. Speaker, that kind of 
expenditure of public funds, that kind of self-serving 
advertising by this government while self-help groups in this 
province are closing their doors because of lack of funding. 
Welfare advocacy groups are closing their doors in this 
province because of lack of funding, and this government must 
be spending millions of dollars on  

self-serving advertising. It’s just, in my judgement, Mr. 
Speaker, the wrong kind of priority. It’s not a priority that puts 
Saskatchewan families first. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve many times in this House described and 
discussed the level of patronage that we have seen as a priority 
of this government. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Top priority. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — It seems seems to have been a top priority, as 
my colleague says — top priority to employ every defeated 
MLA from the 1986 election. We could go through the lists, 
Mr. Speaker. Meanwhile, Saskatchewan young people are 
leaving this province in record numbers. They are fleeing this 
province, looking for employment and education elsewhere. It’s 
a wrong priority, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re spending well over $1 billion at the direction of this 
government for the Shand-Rafferty plant in the Premier’s own 
constituency — a plant we do not need, Mr. Speaker, with dams 
that are going to destroy the environment of that part of our 
province. We’re spending a billion . . . well over a billion 
dollars on that project. At the same time in our province we’ve 
got quotas on universities, we’ve got hikes in tuition fees, 
we’ve got the loss of technical school spaces, and we’ve got 
hungry kids. I say it, Mr. Speaker, these are examples of the 
wrong priorities being chosen by this government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it has become obvious, it has become 
obvious that family concerns, real family concerns in this 
province, the real concerns of Saskatchewan families are not a 
priority, not a priority of this government. Clearly their 
priorities are megaprojects. Their priorities are looking after 
their family of corporate friends. Their real priorities are into 
the business of privatization and the sell-off of Saskatchewan. 
Their priorities, Mr. Speaker, are not the concerns of 
Saskatchewan families. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I do want to say tonight that there is one 
thing that this government does very well, one thing that they 
seem to accomplish very well — they are exceptionally good 
with rhetoric. They are exceptionally good with public 
relations. They are, in many ways, the masters of phraseology 
and the masters of doublespeak, and they can create the slogans, 
and they can create the images. The are the masters of rhetoric. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, rhetoric only lasts so long. And after a while 
the rhetoric starts to get destroyed by the reality, and 
Saskatchewan people are seeing the reality that destroys the 
rhetoric. Their rhetoric would have us believe they are the 
friend of the Saskatchewan family. Mr. Speaker, well reality is 
quickly destroying that myth and even their best rhetoric, even 
their best rhetoric isn’t about to repair it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan families do have priorities for their 
government, and as I see them they are threefold. The first 
priority of Saskatchewan families and the priority they wish 
their government to uphold is the priority of health care — 
number one. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I believe Saskatchewan 
families’ priority for their government is education. And 
thirdly, Mr. Speaker, I  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1914 
 

believe that Saskatchewan people want their government to put 
priority into economic security and to the care of those who are 
least fortunate in our society. Those are the real priorities, Mr. 
Speaker, of Saskatchewan families. 
 
What have we seen? Particularly since 1986, we’ve seen this 
government systematically attack in each of those areas — 
systematically attack health care, education, and the broad field 
of social services. And I do tonight, Mr. Speaker, want to 
discuss illustrations of each of those, if I may. 
 
But before I move to those illustrations regarding health care 
and education and social services, let’s discuss some other 
attacks. I can only describe them as attacks on Saskatchewan 
families that are coming out of this government — recent 
attacks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In this past two weeks, the government has announced the 
closure of the Cory potash mine, throwing literally hundreds of 
families, hundreds of people and families out of work. A secret 
decision was taken last fall, approved this spring by the board 
of directors, and the Cory potash mine in closing. Those are 
Saskatchewan families that are being affected, Mr. Speaker, and 
I submit the only reason for the closure of this mine is for their 
friends across the American border. 
 
The decision was made last fall. The president of the potash 
corporation has admitted so much. He could have; the potash 
corporation could have; this government could have, if it cared 
about Saskatchewan families, it could have let those workers 
and their families know to give them time for planning. But no, 
they gave them nothing more than the required notice. 
 
Now when one of those families wanted to speak with the 
president of the potash corporation, with the chairman of the 
board, she was denied, and so she wrote this letter, which we’ve 
discussed in this House before. And I want to read again, Mr. 
Speaker, this letter, because it’s so indicative of this 
government’s approach to Saskatchewan families and the way 
they treat ordinary working people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This letter was written from the wife of one of the potash 
workers. She wrote it to the minister responsible for the potash 
corporation, and she says in her letter, Mr. Speaker: — 
 

I am writing (to) you to express my shock and dismay at 
Mr. Schoenhals’ comments and personal attack on me. 
 
Specifically, he accused me of being an irrational woman 
involved in a political exercise. I was also accused by Mr. 
Schoenhals of being involved in the protest stages by the 
Cory miners at Christmas, 1987 when our husbands were 
laid off. All of these statements are untrue, and I told Mr. 
Schoenhals that. He also accused me of acting on behalf of 
the Union and the NDP. When I denied this, he accused 
me of “lying.” 
 
I hope (that) you can appreciate (she says to the minister 
responsible for the potash corporation, I  

hope that you can appreciate) that the last few days have 
been very stressful and I am bewildered and uncertain 
about my husband’s and (my) family’s future. I don’t 
know where to turn. It is all so sudden. I was 
dumbfounded when Mr. Schoenhals advised me that “the 
decision to shut down Cory was made last fall!” 

 
Many families could have avoided much of the hardship if 
we had been notified last fall. Perhaps my husband could 
have found alternate employment and minimized the 
trauma of suddenly being unemployed. 
 
When I asked Mr. Schoenhals why he didn’t give us more 
notice when he knew of the closure, he replied “We only 
have to give five weeks notice.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, that is how Saskatchewan people and 
Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan families are treated at 
the hands of this government, and I think that’s a shame, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think that tells you a great deal about their 
so-called priority for the Saskatchewan family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in recent days we’ve had legislation introduced to 
this House regarding shopping hours across our province. Mr. 
Speaker, groups interested and involved in family life in this 
province, small family-owned businesses, churches, many other 
community groups have all said, please give us a common day 
of rest for the sake of our families and the sake of our children. 
This government refuses. This government abdicates its 
responsibility to govern in this province. This government bows 
down to the super stores and the large corporate chains and 
says, we have neither the ability nor the power to regulate store 
hours, and so we’ll just wash our hands of the entire issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thought there were members in this government 
who believe in a common day of rest. I thought there were 
members in this government who would stand up for a common 
day of rest in this province and ensure that a common day of 
rest could occur in this province for the sake of Saskatchewan 
families, for the sake of Saskatchewan people, for parents and 
their children. We will be watching very closely, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ll be watching very closely to see how members opposite 
vote on this issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the government who indicates that one of 
the greatest threats to family life in our province is the use and 
abuse of alcohol. This is the government that rightly so 
indicates the problem that faces Saskatchewan families in the 
abuse of drugs and alcohol. 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government that purports to support the 
family and purports to wish to deal with this crisis, this is the 
government that legalized the advertising of alcoholic 
beverages on television. This is the government that put the 
beer ads into our homes. This is the government that’s 
influencing our young people. You and I both know, Mr. 
Speaker, that those particular ads are directed at young people. 
And you and I both know they are powerful and have their 
effect. This is the government that legalized the  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1915 
 

advertising of alcoholic beverages on television, and they say 
that they are the great friends of Saskatchewan families. 
 
This past week, Mr. Speaker, the very day, the very day that 
we’re at the opening of the Whitespruce Centre, we are 
introducing legislation into this House to change The Liquor 
Act, to franchise out liquor sales all over this province so that 
there’s some likelihood, perhaps every likelihood, we’re going 
to see a liquor outlet on every street corner in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is the government that claims to be the 
friend of Saskatchewan young people, that claims to be 
concerned about drug and alcohol abuse in our province. Mr. 
Speaker, the reality, the reality of what they do is destroying the 
rhetoric. Mr. Speaker, they are known, not for what they say, 
but for what they do — for what they do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a government, Mr. Speaker, who claims to be the great 
friend of Saskatchewan families. Well I ask you, Mr. Speaker, 
to review the taxation record of this government, review their 
taxation record and see how much of a friend they are to 
Saskatchewan families. 
 
We have today, Mr. Speaker, the second highest income tax 
level on families in all of Canada — the second highest. At the 
same time we have the very highest rate of inflation. Second 
highest income tax level and the highest rate of inflation. 
 
This is the government that promised to do away with the sales 
tax, a tax that is particularly, particularly applied to 
Saskatchewan families as they buy consumer goods. They 
promised to eliminate the sales tax in this province. What have 
they done? They’ve raised the sales tax, they’ve raised sales 
taxes in this province, increased them to 7 per cent. 
 
This is the government that was elected on the promise to 
remove a gas tax. And they gave commitment to the people of 
this province that as long as this government was in office we’d 
never see a gas tax in Saskatchewan again. Not only did they 
reintroduce the gas tax, they raised it, and they instituted the 
most ludicrous scheme of tax rebate that could be imagined, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
This was the government, Mr. Speaker, that said they were 
going to cut our personal income taxes, again taxes that affect 
Saskatchewan families. They said they were going to cut our 
personal income taxes to 10 per cent — that was their promise. 
What did they do, Mr. Speaker? What did they do? They 
imposed a flat tax in 1985, and every year since that flat tax . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’m sure the hon. member for Moose Jaw 
South, as well, has a great deal of information he’d like to share 
with the House. However, the resolution relates, the topic under 
the discussion, to cut-backs in Saskatchewan health, education, 
and social services as it relates to Saskatchewan families. If you 
can relate your remarks to that, well you’re quite permitted to 
go ahead and carry on. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The motion as . . .  

As you understand, Mr. Speaker, my motion and the intent of 
my motion tonight is to condemn this government for its lack of 
priority in terms of dealing with Saskatchewan families and 
their real needs and their real priorities, and the examples 
included in the motion include health care, education, and social 
services. 
 
My point, Mr. Speaker, at present is that rather than assisting 
Saskatchewan families and indicating that Saskatchewan 
families are a priority through their tax measures, rather than 
offering a helping hand to Saskatchewan families, this 
government has its hand deep into the pocket-books and the 
bank accounts of those same families. 
 
I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that in this province for every 
dollar, for every dollar paid in income tax by Saskatchewan 
families, 16 cents is paid by the corporate sector. For every 
dollar that you and I and Saskatchewan families are paying in 
income tax, the corporate sector pays 16 cents. Now that tells 
you who, that tells you who indeed merits the priorities of this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk just a little bit about those 
Saskatchewan families that have been affected by cuts to health 
care and education and social services. Mr. Speaker, one in four 
Saskatchewan families, one of out every four Saskatchewan 
families now lives in poverty — one out of every four. 
 
Many Saskatchewan families are single parents. In our own 
local newspaper just the other night, in the Moose Jaw 
Times-Herald, the headline read that the divorce rate in this 
country had reached an all-time high. Many Saskatchewan 
families consist of single parents, men and women raising 
children on their own. Many families, Mr. Speaker, many 
households consist of a single adult, perhaps a senior. Many 
families in our province are senior couples. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a wide variety of families in our province 
and they’ve all been affected by this government. I think of 
families tonight, Mr. Speaker, I think of families tonight who 
must be looking out their kitchen window and watching their 
fields blow away. I think of the families that must be looking 
out their kitchen window and watching that bit of crop that did 
come up wither and dry in this heat. I think of those families 
who have perhaps a mountain of debt, just a mountain of debt, 
and I wonder, Mr. Speaker, how do they stand the pressure. 
How do they stand the pressure? And they just don’t need the 
attacks by this government. They just don’t need the cuts to 
health care; they just don’t need the cuts to education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you’re in a crisis situation, when you’re in 
hard times, you need good managers. And what we’ve had are 
hard times and poor managers, and it’s left us in a tragic 
situation in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think tonight of the families, hundreds of 
families in this province who are trying to live on 
unemployment. I think of the hundreds of parents who are out 
seeking work. Those families ought to be a priority for this 
government. Those are the families that feel the cuts in health 
and education and social services. Mr.  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1916 
 

Speaker, I think of the hundreds of families that have turned to 
food banks in this province. Are they a priority of government? 
No, they are forgotten by this government. And when they’re 
not forgotten, they’re attacked by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has a priority and its priority is its 
family of corporate friends — that’s its first priority. And 
Saskatchewan families, ordinary people in this province, come 
a very distant second. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to spend some time looking at some very 
specific illustrations from cuts to health care and education and 
social services and how they have affected family life in our 
province, because those three areas, Mr. Speaker, are the 
priorities of Saskatchewan people and they are priorities which 
this government has either simply forgotten or have chosen to 
walk away from. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me begin with social services. When we’re 
talking about social services, we’re talking about the very 
poorest of the poor in our province. Let me describe to you, Mr. 
Speaker, the extent of the problem in Saskatchewan tonight — 
the extent of the problem of poverty in Saskatchewan. And 
these figures, Mr. Speaker, are not from some NDP research 
production. 
 
The figures I bring to this House tonight are from the Poverty 
Profile 1988, report by the National Council of Welfare, 
Government of Canada. Mr. Speaker, the figures contained in 
this report are tragic. They describe the year 1986, the most 
recent figures. In Saskatchewan the number of persons 
classified as falling under the category of poverty, 189,700 — 
almost 190,000 people in this province classified as living in 
poverty. That’s 19.8 per cent of the population. Almost 20 per 
cent of the population of Saskatchewan are described as living 
in poverty. Mr. Speaker, that’s the second highest rate in the 
country. We’ [re second only to Newfoundland with a 
percentage of 22.8 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we look at how many individuals are described 
as living in poverty in our province in 1986, it’s 40,300. How 
many families, Mr. Speaker, are described as living in poverty 
in the province of Saskatchewan in the year 1986? Forty-two 
thousand, six hundred families — 42,600 families or 16.4 per 
cent of Saskatchewan families live in poverty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we break those figures down and look at 
children living in poverty in this province, we find that in 
families in Saskatchewan there are 64,600 children living in 
poverty — 64,600 children or 25.7 per cent of all children in 
Saskatchewan live in poverty. One-quarter of all children living 
in Saskatchewan live in poverty — one out of four. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is this government’s reaction to the crisis of 
poverty in Saskatchewan? Well let’s just take one illustration, 
one illustration. Let’s talk about the cut of the transportation 
allowance to Saskatchewan families living in poverty. That’s 
one of this government’s responses to the crisis: cut the 
transportation allowance. This is the government that says to 
poorest of our poor, get out and get a job; pay your own way. 
Then this same government cuts the means by which 
individuals can get  

to a job interview. They’ve cut the transportation allowance, 
which in essence is a bus pass, Mr. Speaker. This is the 
government that says, you’ve got to go to school, you need 
education. Then this same government cuts the transportation 
allowance that enables people to get from their homes to a 
school. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not soon forget one cold winter morning last 
year when my colleague and I were leaving Moose Jaw to come 
to Regina early in the morning. At 7:30 in the morning we see 
standing on a bus stop a young mother holding a 18-year-old 
child. I happen to know . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Eighteen-month-old. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — An 18-month-old child, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I happen to know that that woman was involved in 
adult upgrading. I happen to know that she was receiving social 
service. I though to myself, as we sat in our warm car, here is a 
woman determined to make her life better and to make the life 
for her child better. And she was standing on a but stop at 7:30 
in the morning so that she could drop her child off at a relative 
so that she could get to school by 9 o’clock. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
that woman doesn’t even have a bus pass, doesn’t even have a 
bus pass so that she can go to school, Mr. Speaker. Is this 
helping Saskatchewan families? Is this helping a Saskatchewan 
young mother and her young child, I ask you? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote at some length from an 
article which appeared just a matter of days ago in the 
Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. It’s dated Wednesday, May 25, 1988. 
And it talks about the effect that this cutting of this 
transportation allowance is having on the health care of 
Saskatchewan’s poorest. And the quotes I take from this article, 
Mr. Speaker, are from doctors who are on staff at the Westside 
Community Clinic in Saskatoon. They have no political axe to 
grind. They know the reality of pain and suffering that’s 
happening in their city. Let me quote: 
 

Dr. Steven Hellier said pre-natal patients, who should be 
visiting the clinic regularly, now delay coming in. 
 
People are simply missing appointments. They either have 
young kids and no money for child care or they have to 
walk eight blocks in freezing cold weather. 
 
(And) I’d like to see Schmidt and his staff walk eight 
blocks . . . to see a doctor (in the cold). 
 
Dr. Philip Loftus, another physician at the clinic, said 
many patients who are referred to specialists for further 
investigation of a medical problem don’t go. 
 
He said the travel allowance cut compounded a problem 
that already existed and that people needed an increase in 
benefits, not a decrease. 
 
Travel allowance cuts impose undue hardships on an 
already deprived segment of our society. 

 
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1917 
 

Dr. Mel Langer, another of the clinic physicians, recently 
retired, said, referring to the cut in the transportation allowance: 
 

It causes a qualitative and a quantitative increase in mental 
health problems. It will cause a feeling of entrapment, 
isolation and hopelessness. 
 
Private violence is bound to increase, nutrition is bound to 
be affected, and children will suffer the most. 

 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the cost of a bus pass per month for the poorest of 
our poor to enable them to get medical help, to enable them to 
get the educational opportunities they need and want in many 
cases, to enable them to get the job interviews — and if they’re 
lucky enough to get some work, to enable them to get to those 
part-time jobs and those jobs . . . And this government has cut 
the transportation allowance, this government who purports to 
be the great friend of Saskatchewan families. Mr. Speaker, I 
find this to be disgraceful and I find that the reality is quickly 
destroying the rhetoric that we’ve heard so much of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to the young people of our province. 
It’s been said so often, but it remains true, that they are the 
future of our province. And when we’re talking about family 
life in our province, we are talking about young people, and 
they are leaving this province in record numbers, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re leaving this province because they see little hope in 
staying in Saskatchewan. They are fleeing Saskatchewan 
looking for education and looking for employment elsewhere. 
 
Again, let me describe for you the extent of the problem, Mr. 
Speaker. In June of 1987, June of last year, the policy 
secretariat of the Premier’s own Executive Council, the policy 
secretariat prepared a very confidential economic forecast for 
the period beginning 1987 to 1995. This document — the 
government’s own document — Mr. Speaker, forecasts a very 
significant out-migration of Saskatchewan people because of 
the poor economic conditions here. And I quote from the 
document, page 5 of the document: “Economic prospects in 
Saskatchewan are worse than in central Canada, encouraging 
people to leave the province.” This forecast indicates that about 
85,000 people, 85,000 people could migrate from the province 
between now and 1985. This government itself is predicting an 
out-migration from Saskatchewan by 1995 of 85,000 people. 
That’s well over twice the size of the city that I represent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at the figures broken down by age 
group, by far the vast majority of those who will be leaving are 
peoples between the ages of 15 and 29. The young people of 
Saskatchewan are being forced to flee Saskatchewan both for 
employment and for education. 
 
Under the stewardship of this government, Mr. Speaker, we 
have seen, for the very first time in Saskatchewan’s history, 
quotas put on enrolments in our universities. Mr. Speaker, 
under the stewardship of this government, we have seen over 
1,000 training spaces in our technical  

institutes cut. Under the stewardship of this government, we’ve 
seen dramatic increases in tuition fees. Under the cuts to our 
education in this government, we’ve seen tax increases on a 
local level; we’ve seen school boards cut back in their funding. 
Mr. Speaker, under the stewardship of this government, we see 
unrealistic, totally unrealistic student job programs for the 
summer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you attack Saskatchewan’s education, when 
you attack Saskatchewan’s youth, you are attacking 
Saskatchewan families and indeed the very future of our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not so long ago I spoke to a couple who have three 
children. All three of their children have left the province, left 
the province in search of either education or employment, and 
that couple are broken-hearted, because to quote them, they 
said, we hoped that we could watch our grandchildren grow up. 
And they will not be able to do that, Mr. Speaker, not be able to 
do that. 
 
This is the government that claims to be the great friend of 
Saskatchewan families. Mr. Speaker, the rhetoric is being 
destroyed by the reality. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, let me turn to health care. This is the 
government that destroyed the school-based children’s dental 
plan. And a perfect example of the way they treat Saskatchewan 
families is the very way they went about ending that plan. 
 
Do you remember, Mr. Speaker, do you remember the way this 
government called in the 3 to 400 workers, many of them 
women, many of them mothers, many of them home-makers as 
well as working? They hauled them in, Mr. Speaker, like lambs 
to the slaughter, brought them into a room and told them, your 
careers are finished; pack up your bags; you’re gone in a few 
weeks. Mr. Minister, that’s the kind of approach this 
government takes to Saskatchewan families, and it’s a sad 
commentary on this government. 
 
This is the government that has stood by while physicians and 
specialists have left our province. This is the government that 
stands by while Saskatchewan hospitals have to go out and beg 
for funding, have to get out there and compete for that 
charitable dollar so that we can equip our hospitals. And this is 
the government that stands by while we have these horrendous 
waiting lists — 11,000 people on the waiting lists in the city of 
Saskatoon alone. Mr. Speaker, this is the government that it’s 
widely recognized by the people of Saskatchewan have 
betrayed Saskatchewan health care, and they stand condemned 
whether this motion passes or not, Mr. Speaker. This 
government already stands condemned in the public eye, 
particularly for their attacks on health care in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this very night, this very night a woman from the 
Saskatchewan city of Prince Albert lies in a Calgary motel 
room dying, Mr. Speaker. She couldn’t get care in this province 
for her terminal illness; she found that that care was available in 
Calgary. Tonight she’s in a motel room in Calgary, away from 
her community, away from her friends, away from many of her 
family, away from the support of her church. She lies in a motel 
room in Calgary,  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1918 
 

Alberta, Mr. Speaker, because health care for her was not 
available in Saskatchewan. 
 
Her family, Mr. Speaker, her loved ones, some of whom live in 
my constituency, have called me this week. They have written 
the Minister of Health. They are lobbying this government to at 
least provide the funding for this woman and her care in 
Calgary. Mr. Speaker, I just think it’s a sad day in 
Saskatchewan, it’s a sad day for a Saskatchewan family when a 
loved one must flee this province to find the care she needs. It’s 
a sad day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has set its priorities, and they are 
obvious to all the people in Saskatchewan. They have priorities 
that include money for office space, not used. They have money 
for lots of travel. They have money for conferences that go on 
on yachts. They have money for patronage. They have money 
to promote free trade. They have money for their whole family 
of corporate friends. They’ve got money for a billion dollar 
project in the Premier’s own constituency, but you see, we 
don’t have money, they say, for a mother on welfare and her 
year and a half old child for a bus pass; we don’t have money 
for a family who would like to see their young people stay at 
home. We don’t have money, they say, even for a woman who 
so desperately needs care and her family must watch a loved 
one suffer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has set its priorities. I believe its 
priorities are all wrong. The priority does not include 
Saskatchewan families. So therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, 
seconded by the member from Saskatoon South: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the Government of 
Saskatchewan for failing to make the needs of 
Saskatchewan families a priority, as is evident in cut-backs 
to Saskatchewan health, education, and social services. 

 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, it is indeed my pleasure to 
participate in the debate this evening. And I have a number of 
things that I want to say, Mr. Speaker, on the three areas of 
health, education, and social services as they relate to the 
families in Saskatchewan and particularly, Mr. Speaker, as our 
families have been affected by the policies of this government 
in the last six or seven years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as it has been amply demonstrated this afternoon 
and this evening by my colleagues, when it comes the 
individual person in this province, particularly individuals who 
have no connection to this government from a political point of 
view or political sense, they do not fare very well. And should 
you, Mr. Speaker, in any way, shape, or form be critical of this 
government on their policies, then, Mr. Speaker, you better 
watch out, because then the big hammer comes down. 
 
I want to demonstrate this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, not by what I 
have said, but what others have said and how they have been 
affected by this government. 
 
An Hon. Member: — This evening. 
 

Mr. Rolfes: — This afternoon and this evening and I thank the 
. . . Well I was anticipating that I will still be going tomorrow 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker, on this particular debate because it is a 
very important debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look back at the policies of this 
government — and this government and the Premier claim that 
social services and health and education are their priorities — 
Mr. Speaker, when you look, as the member from Moose Jaw 
South has indicated, when you look at their actions, their 
actions don’t run in parallel to the words that they use. They say 
one thing before an election; they do an entirely different thing 
after the election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I were not in this House, I would use another 
phraseology, but I have to, in this House, say that that simply 
means that they are dishonest with the people of this province. 
They are not being truthful, they are not being truthful. 
 
We find, Mr. Speaker, that in the budgets presented by their 
various ministers of Finance since these people have been the 
government, there is less and less emphasis on health and 
education and social services for the individual family. Now 
they can portray it all they want, and they can take the budget 
and move one item from Social Services over to Health, and 
from Education over to Health, and say therefore we spend over 
a billion dollars. Mr. Speaker, that does not for any moment 
whatsoever fool the ordinary person out there. You can’t fool a 
person out there that can’t get into a hospital. And you say that 
. . . but we’re spending $1.2 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, then the individual must either say no, you’re not 
being honest with me, or hey, look at, if that is the case, then 
you are a very poor manager because if that’s the way you’re 
wasting my money, I want no part of it. But, Mr. Speaker, we 
know that both cases are probably true. 
 
There is a lot of waste in this government. There’s a lot 
patronage in this government, but there’s also a lot mistruths or 
untruths in this government. And therefore when it comes to the 
ordinary family that is adversely affected by the policies of this 
government, they have a right, Mr. Speaker, to be very angry 
and frustrated and disappointed with this government, with this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will run through each as I go through my 
particular delivery this evening, and I have a lot that I want to 
make other members aware of again, in case some of them 
weren’t in the House when I spoke some weeks ago on the 
wrong priorities. And I know the member from Rosthern is very 
anxious to know how they set one policy of universality for 
certain groups of people, but when it comes to families and 
senior citizens, then we have to have a cap put on and therefore 
they are not eligible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what am I referring to? Well I’m referring, of 
course, to the production loan program, for example. Lots of 
money, Mr. Speaker, for the production loan program for 
cabinet ministers so they don’t have money for  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1919 
 

families now, for education, social services and health — 
hundreds of millions of dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . I took note in the Public Accounts, Mr. 
Speaker, I took not of the Public Accounts of 1986-87 — 
1986-87 — this province paid to the Premier of this province, 
$100,000 — just a few dollars less than $100,000. And yet, Mr. 
Speaker, policies have been developed which say that the 
Premier should be subsidized, through the production loan 
program, by our senior citizens, that the Premier should be 
subsidized by those families who can’t afford drugs, that the 
Premier should be subsidized by the students of this province 
whose bursaries have been cut by this government. 
 
(2015) 
 
But we’re saying that the Premier can get a production loan 
program at 6 per cent, and these people are supposed to 
subsidize the Premier. Not only the Premier, but cabinet 
ministers are eligible also — cabinet ministers, who have been 
receiving well over $90,000, have been paying . . . the people of 
this province have been paying to them well over $90,000. 
They, Mr. Speaker, if they are farmers, are also eligible for the 
production loan program. 
 
And the people of this province, the poor people who can’t 
afford drugs, who now have to pay part of their drugs; the 
people, Mr. Speaker, who can’t receive an education because 
there aren’t sufficient spaces available in our technical schools 
the people, Mr. Speaker, who have been cut back very 
dramatically on social services — those very people, Mr. 
Speaker, many of them earning less than 5 or $6,000 a year, 
those are the people who are being asked to subsidize the 
Premier of this province, who are being asked to subsidize 
cabinet ministers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of these cabinet ministers, who I’ve said are 
receiving over $100,000, as the Public Accounts show, but they, 
Mr. Speaker, are being subsidized through the production loan 
program. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Same as you got. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — And the member opposite says, same as I got. 
Now I think in the last year that I was a cabinet minister, as the 
member from Rosthern pointed out the other day, the total 
amount that was paid to me was $82,000. But there was no 
production loan program; there was no production loan 
program, so that people didn’t have to subsidize me. 
 
We though, Mr. Speaker, that there should be universal 
programs for health care. We didn’t think that the people should 
have to pay for their drug program. But the member opposite 
says, well he agrees with . . . he thinks that the ordinary citizen 
should subsidize him on his production loan program if he took 
it out. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that that is wrong. The minister from 
Urban Affairs has indicated that, well we have the home 
improvement program, well . . . and many people took 
advantage of that. And I will admit that I took advantage of it. 
The members opposite said, well they wanted to create jobs. 
Well I was going to save some of the people  

from having to leave this province, so I did take out the 
production . . . I took out the home improvement program and 
did benefit from it. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let me say this to the members opposite: there 
would be lots of money in this province if you straightened out 
your priorities. As the member from Moose Jaw South 
indicated, your priorities are all wrong. Hundreds of millions of 
dollars, hundreds of millions of dollars are going to the people 
who you give patronage jobs to — hundreds of millions of 
dollars. 
 
Remai, for example — I’ll give you a good example here — 
when he built his hotel here in Regina, you people had all the 
people already in T.C. Douglas building. So what you did is 
you moved the people out of T.C. Douglas building and moved 
them into the Renaissance, and paid and signed a contract, 
signed a contract with John Remai for $12 million — $12 
million. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we have no money for our senior citizens so 
that they can get their drugs. We have no money for the social 
recipients. We’ve go to cut back for those people. But, Mr. 
Speaker, we have no money for bursaries for our students. I say 
to the member opposite, look, you’ve got to get your priorities 
straightened out. You’ve got to straighten out your priorities. 
 
Mr. Minister, or Mr. Member, I want to say to you that when I 
was the minister of Health, when I was the minister of Health, 
we had very few people on the waiting list — very few people 
on the waiting list. And I want to . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — And I want to point out that I can’t take credit, I 
can’t take credit for a waiting list. Here is Dr. Doig — Dr. J.N. 
Doig said a hospital the size of City Hospital should have a 
waiting list of between 600 and 700 people. That is Dr. Doig; 
wasn’t me. Dr. Doig said that there should be waiting list of 6 
or 700 people. But, Mr. Speaker, in no way could anybody ever 
have imagined, could anybody ever have imagined that a 
government would allow the waiting list to get to 11,000 in the 
city of Saskatoon — 11,000 people, 11,000 people, Mr. 
Speaker, who can’t get into the hospitals. Every day, Mr. 
Speaker, we have people phoning us, asking us, when can we 
get into the hospitals, when can we get in. And we have an 
uncaring Minister of Health, Minister of Health who says, but 
our budget has expanded. He’s not being fair, he’s not being 
honest. He’s simply not being honest with the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I refer the members opposite to the estimates of 1988-89. 
Had they, Mr. Speaker, moved some of this money over to . . . 
in the right priorities, we would have money for our families. 
But, Mr. Speaker, what did they do? They were deceitful with 
the people of Saskatchewan. They were dishonest. 
 
In 1981-82, when we put forward our last budget, Mr. Speaker, 
continuing care was under Social Services, $2.8 million. 
Northern health services, $4.7 million, was under DNS 
(department of northern Saskatchewan). Payments to 
Saskatchewan Property Management  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1920 
 

Corporation was under supply and services, $12 million. Grants 
and allowances for ambulance services was under Urban 
Affairs, $8.4 million. Grants and allowances for home care, 
$24.4 million. Grants and allowances for special care, $196 
million, Mr. Speaker, Grants for special . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. There are several 
debates going on. And this, of course, occurs from time to time, 
but now I ask the hon. members to allow the member from 
Saskatoon South to continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the former minister of 
Health, the Minister of Public Participation, or privatization, or 
piratization — whatever you call him, Mr. Speaker — I know 
that he was the author, he was the author of some of these 
things; moving things over from other departments into the 
Department of Health to fool the people out there, to be 
deceitful with the people, to tell the people now we’re spending 
$1.2 billion when they have moved $253 million from other 
departments — $253 million of programs that were in other 
departments, they now put in the Department of Health, and 
then they say, now we’re spending $1.2 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if they had moved all of the Department of Social 
Services into Health, couldn’t they really have bragged to the 
people? Now they could have said, well we’re spending $2 
billion in health by putting all of those programs under Health. 
What a foolish way of trying to deceive the people of this 
province. What a foolish way of doing it. Is it any wonder that 
this government doesn’t have any credibility at all? I don’t 
think it has any credibility left. 
 
If the members opposite, if the members opposite were 
concerned about our families in Saskatchewan, they would see 
to it that education and social services and health received the 
priorities that it deserves. But no, Mr. Speaker, they are an 
insensitive government. They are a government . . . they are 
really what somebody calls a “wrecking crew.” They are a 
wrecking crew which wrecks things, and then they want to get 
the patchworks back together and say, now we’re going to patch 
it up again. We saw that, Mr. Speaker, in the drug program. 
They destroyed virtually the drug program, and then the 
Minister of Health says, well now we have to patch this thing 
up again, so we’re going to have a committee set up that will 
listen to the urgent needs of people out there. They wouldn’t 
have had to do that, they wouldn’t have had to do that if they 
had left a good program alone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we saw the same thing with the dental program. 
What they did with the dental program affected children of 
many families in this province. They destroyed the best dental 
program in all of North America, maybe in all of the world, 
Those aren’t my comments; those are the comments of Dr. 
Ambrose who took a survey, or did a survey of the dental 
program and made that particular statement that it was an 
excellent program. 
 
Why then, Mr. Speaker, do we have this government attack the 
basic programs of medicare and  

hospitalization? Mr. Speaker, we can only come to the 
conclusion that they are opposed to the principles of medicare 
and hospitalization. They’ve never accepted them and they 
never will. And they want to replace this health care program 
with a privatization program where we have a two-tiered 
system: one for the wealthy and one for the poor. We don’t 
accept that, Mr. Speaker, we never have and we never will. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was the minister of Health in 1979 to 
1982, and when the Clark government was the federal 
government in Ottawa, Emmett Hall was commissioned to do a 
study of medicare and hospitalization. I remember well, Mr. 
Speaker, in one of our meetings, and I had to fight — I had to 
fight the other ministers of Health who refused, who refused to 
accept the document brought forward by Emmett Hall. Emmett 
Hall reiterated again that the four principles of medicare are 
sacrosanct; they are not to be touched. I remember well the 
other ministers attacking — attacking — attacking Emmett Hall 
on his stand on the four principles of medicare. 
 
For the former minister of Health I want to reiterate: 
accessibility is one of those principles. We don’t need — we 
don’t need — we don’t need a task force set up to again 
examine the principle of accessibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see where the Minister of Public Participation is 
jabbering again from his seat. That’s about the only time . . . 
that’s the only time we hear him speak, unless he gets up in the 
House and is defending privatization and the big corporations. 
It’s the only time he gets up in the House nowadays. That 
because, Mr. Speaker, he can’t, in his own conscience, he can’t 
in his own conscience defend the principles of medicare which 
are a protection of the families in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any government, any government that attacks the 
principles of medicare as this government has done over the last 
six or seven years — the principle of accessibility, the principle 
of comprehensibility, and the principle of publicly funded 
health care — does it at its own peril. And I want to say to the 
minister opposite . . . I want to say to the minister opposite that 
you have not supported either when you were the minister of 
Health because you let the waiting lists in the province climb up 
and up and up so that people didn’t have accessibility. You 
didn’t support the principles of medicare. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that member opposite can say all he wants 
from his desk, but the people in the province know, the people 
in the province know that he does not support those principles. 
He doesn’t support them because his actions spoke much louder 
than his words when he was the minister of Health. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, they are taking away from the 
families of this province a right to medicare and hospitalization. 
And if you look at the statement made by the Premier of the 
province today, when he announced the task force, one of the 
things that the task force is going to look into is accessibility — 
accessibility. Mr. Speaker, why? Why must a task force even 
look into accessibility unless the members opposite realize that 
there isn’t equal accessibility for all individuals in this province, 
if they must now believe that people don’t have equal access to  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1921 
 

hospitals? 
 
Now we’re going to look at that principle. I say to the members 
opposite, this country has accepted that principle; no one needs 
to look at it. Everyone, no matter whether you’re rich or 
whether you’re poor, whether you come from a poor family or a 
rich family, the principle of accessibility is equal for all people. 
And if you start questioning that particular principle of 
accessibility, you are attacking the very foundation of medicare, 
which we accepted in this country in 1962; we accepted it again 
in the early ’80s; and we don’t need to have a task force to look 
at that accessibility. That principle has been enshrined and we 
don’t need to look at that. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Speaker, many families in this province simply haven’t got 
access to hospitals. They don’t have access to hospitals because 
of underfunding of hospitals in our major cities, which are our 
base hospitals where much of the more complicated surgery is 
being done. We have, in the city of Saskatoon now, I think 
9,000, close to 10,000 people on the waiting list. It was close to 
12,000 a few months ago. And to the credit of this government, 
they have reduced it. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly the same thing as . . . Let me 
use the parallel of a husband beating his wife, and when he 
stops, the wife is supposed to be thankful. How can we praise 
this government for creating a waiting list of over 12,000 
people in Saskatoon, and now having reduced it to little more 
over 9,000? 
 
And they expect us to praise them for that effort. That is 
ludicrous. It simply means that you people have not given 
hospitals and medicare and health the top priority that it always 
has had in this province — not just under our government, but 
under all other governments. 
 
I say to the members opposite that you can’t attack. You can’t 
attack programs of health — the drug program, the dental 
program, our hospitals and our doctors — as the present 
Minister of Health has done, and say that you are committed to 
the principles of medicare, which are paramount to the welfare 
of the ordinary families in this province. When you start 
attacking those, and then you want to amend it — or then you 
want to mend it, by the way — by setting up a task force, don’t 
expect that people should pat you on the back. 
 
You have taken medicare and hospitalization to the point where 
people are questioning whether or not public hospitalization and 
medicare is the best way of delivering health care service. And I 
think that has been you goal, that has been your objective — to 
have people question the very principles of medicare and 
hospitalization. That’s what you’ve done. 
 
I say to the members opposite, for that, you stand condemned. 
And the people in this province have spoken in the two 
by-elections in Elphinstone and in Saskatchewan East, and they 
will speak again at the first opportunity they have. They will let 
you know that your priorities are wrong, that you can’t spend 
all that money on patronage and on the big, multinational 
corporations and forsake  

the ordinary families in this province. 
 
You’ve done that in health; now you’re trying to redeem 
yourself by setting up a task force. That task force would not be 
necessary had you given the emphasis on health care the way 
you should have given it. 
 
But now, as I said, you’re trying to redeem yourself. And it’s 
very convenient. I read the Premier’s notes on it, that they will 
report in the fall of 1989, the fall of 1989, just before the next 
general election so that they can make some more promises 
about the task force, and that they are committed to the 
principles of health care, and that they will make sure that the 
families are protected. But I don’t believe that the people will 
be conned again. 
 
I think you’ve had your fair turn at proving that you support the 
principles of medicare. You haven’t; you’ve shown your true 
colours. And I say to the members opposite: you have made 
your commitment, not to medicare but to individuals who really 
don’t need your support — the rich, the well off, the people 
who really don’t even make their residence in this province. 
 
You’ve committed large sums of money to individuals and 
corporations outside this province. I say to the members 
opposite that if you had straightened out your priorities from 
1982 on there would have been lots of money today in health, in 
education, and in social services for the ordinary families in this 
province. There would have been lots of money. You gave 
away $1.7 billion to the oil companies. That money today and 
over the years could have been used for the individuals or our 
families in Saskatchewan. But no, you didn’t. 
 
What you have done is, Mr. Speaker, not only have they 
reduced the programs of health and social services and 
education, but they’ve reduced the income that ordinary citizens 
have, would have had if they had not increased taxes. But they 
increase the taxes and in that avenue have taken money away 
from individual families. They have taken away money through 
their increase in income tax so that the people don’t have 
money for drugs. They’ve taken money away by increasing the 
flat tax so that our senior citizens can’t pay for their drugs. They 
have increased, Mr. Speaker, almost any tax there is on the 
ordinary citizen, in so that these people who are already so hard 
done by because of the devastation of the drug program and the 
elimination of the dental program. Even when it comes to the 
take-home pay, this government had their hands in the other 
pocket by increasing taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that that is an insensitive government. That 
is an uncaring government. That is a government that shows 
absolutely no compassion — no compassion for the ordinary 
citizens in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the members opposite, and again 
these are not my — these are not my works; these are words 
that others have spoken. Mr. Speaker, not only did they do 
away with those programs, but in a way they dealt with the 
members who were working for this government at that time. 
There was not even a caring attitude at that time. And here’s the 
headline: “Assistants herded in to get news.” They were simply 
taken out of their offices, herded into the room, and told them 
they  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1922 
 

were dismissed — absolutely no compassion for the individual. 
Not only did they destroy the program that served these 
individuals and their families, but there was no sensitivity of 
how they went about taking away those jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the present Minister of Health claims — and I 
think I have disproved this government’s contention — that 
they’ve substantially increased the health budget since 1982. 
All they’ve done is simply shifted 253 millions of programs 
from other departments into the Department of Health, and then 
they say they’ve increased the Department of Health. 
 
But the present Minister of Health believes that the health care 
programs are too exorbitant, and he says . . . and he claims that 
people are abusing the system. I say to the present Minister of 
Health, that was exactly the same thing that the Thatcher 
government had in mind — that they were abusing the system. 
The ordinary family is abusing the system. And I couldn’t 
believe it when the member from Kelvington, earlier this 
evening, was accusing the senior citizens because they were 
going to the doctors for their drugs — that they were drug 
abusers — that they were drug dealers. He didn’t distinguish. 
He said that because there were free drugs. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — What is the point of order? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — The member from Saskatoon South knows 
well . . . if you would research Hansard to note that my 
colleague, the member from Kelvington, did not indicate for 
one moment that the senior citizens were drug pushers or they 
misused drugs or anything like that. He was referring to the 
articles that have been appearing in the newspapers that were 
definitely proven by RCMP investigation and charges that there 
were from the streets on this drug abuse. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’ve listened to the issue raised by the hon. 
member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster. It seems to me that his 
point of order revolves around a dispute of the facts between 
members, therefore it is not a point of order well taken. The 
debate continues. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, this is not a common occurrence 
from the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster, but we can 
excuse him. This is only his second term in the House. He 
doesn’t understand the rules, and so I would excuse him from 
not knowing that that is simply a debatable point. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I heard very clearly the member from Kelvington 
stating that people were abusing the drug program. He did not 
distinguish between the young and the old; he simply said 
people were abusing the drug program. I have to surmise, Mr. 
Speaker, that because senior citizens were also getting their 
drugs free, that he is saying that the senior citizens became drug 
abusers. Therefore, this government, this government had to 
take steps to stop the senior citizens from abusing the drugs that 
they were getting under prescription drugs. Now what a 
foolhardish argument. What a stupid argument by this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to say that senior citizens who need their  

drugs and who are prescribed drugs by their doctors are drug 
abusers is an insult to seniors who built this province — simply 
an insult to the seniors. And I say to the members opposite that, 
look at, you aren’t the originators who feel that health care is 
being abused. Ross Thatcher though that health care was being 
abused and he was accusing ordinary families, also, that they 
were abusing hospitalization and medicare, and therefore felt 
that there should be a user fee, a deterrent fee. But look back at 
the philosophy and ideology of Ross Thatcher. There was no 
more conservative individual than Ross Thatcher. He would 
have fitted in very well with the members opposite. And the 
members opposite felt that there was an abuse of the dental 
program, that there was an abuse of the drug program, by our 
ordinary families and therefore they took away a very valuable 
service from those ordinary members in this province. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, shame on you! Shame on 
you when you don’t care if there is abuse by others in this 
province. You gave $21 million to Pocklington to set up a plant 
in North Battleford. But what do you do when Pocklington 
shuts down a plant her in Regina and eliminates 13 people of 
their jobs? Not one word is said. But Mr. Pocklington, who, 
when he ran for the leadership of the Conservative Party, said it 
was time that we got away from the public trough, was the first 
one at the public trough when you people offered him grants to 
build a meat packing plant in North Battleford — the first one 
at the public trough. And yet, Mr. Speaker, there is no money 
for the ordinary family. Money for Pocklington, money for 
Weyerhaeuser, but no money for education, social services, and 
health for the ordinary citizen of this province. 
 
We in this province are the second highest taxed province in all 
of Canada. That has come about since these people opposite 
have been the government. They are taking money, they are 
taking away programs, Mr. Speaker, on the one hand, and 
they’re taking away the income from people through taxation 
on the other. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me turn for a moment now to education. And 
here again, Mr. Speaker, these aren’t my words. These are 
words by people who are the practitioners out in the education 
field, who are very concerned about the quality of education, 
the type of education that we can offer our children, so that they 
can adequately go into the 21st century. But what has 
happened? What has happened under this government in 
education? 
 
Mr. Speaker, in education we find that under the Tories since 
1982, under the Tories since 1982 education grants, operating 
grants, simply have not kept up with inflation. From 1984-85 on 
inflation, Mr. Speaker, has gone up by 35 per cent. Inflation has 
gone up by 35 per cent and yet operation grants have gone up 
by about 23 per cent — a 10, 11, or 12 per cent decrease when 
it comes to operating grants as opposed to inflation rate. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Oh, I see the Minister of Environment wants to get into this. 
He’s got a tough enough time, I think, explaining as to why he 
allows the Rafferty-Alameda dam to go ahead without a 
blessing from the federal government and abusing his own rules 
and laws. And now he wants to  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1923 
 

chirp from his seat. If he wants to get into the debate, Mr. 
Speaker, he can do so later on. 
 
(2045) 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, education has suffered. In the 
1970s, when you take the property improvement grant into 
consideration, which was around $80 million — which by the 
way these people took away from the ordinary families and our 
senior citizens — $80 million of property improvement grants 
which were paid out to the ordinary citizen and the small 
business person. These people when they came into power 
cancelled it — $80 million. When you take that into 
consideration, Mr. Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan, 
under the Blakeney government, was paying over 70 per cent of 
all education costs — over 70 per cent. 
 
What have we got today? The province is paying less than 50 
per cent. In fact, Mr. Speaker, in the city of Saskatoon this 
government is only paying 33.9 per cent of the cost of 
education for the public school system. Is it any wonder, Mr. 
Speaker, that property taxes for the ordinary citizens have gone 
up so dramatically? Again another burden on the ordinary 
family — no support from this government for those people, 
Mr. Speaker, who already in many instances have to go to the 
food banks in order to get their food. Many senior citizens who 
simply can’t afford to get their drugs or food have to make a 
choice. 
 
But what does this government do? They decrease operating 
grants so that the school systems have to increase property taxes 
if they wish to offer the same quality of education that we’ve 
become accustomed to. And what does the Minister of Urban 
Affairs do? He criticizes the school boards. He criticizes the 
school boards for being wasteful, for being inefficient, for not 
keeping within, not keeping taxes down. But you criticized . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
The Minister of Urban Affairs can get into this debate. He, in 
Moose Jaw, criticized the school boards also, in addition to the 
alderpeople . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh yes, you did. The 
Minister of Urban Affairs can stand up whenever he wishes, if 
he’s not already standing, and get into this debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government, when it comes to the ordinary 
citizens, the ordinary families, has no caring, has no sensitivity. 
Their priorities are all wrong. As I indicated before, lots of 
money for those who are well off — lots of money for the 
Pocklingtons, lots of money for the Schoenhals, lots of money 
for the George Hills, lots of money for cabinet ministers 
through the productive loan program. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker . . . lots of money through the home 
improvement program, too, of which I want to say to the urban 
minister, I took advantage of. I took advantage of that . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, you don’t have to lead me off to 
it. In fact you sent me my cheque before I even had any work 
done, which cheque I had to return to you — which cheque I 
returned to you, Mr. Minister, because I hadn’t even started the 
work. How could you possibly send me the cheque? 
 

An Hon. Member: — You were in a hurry. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — I was in no hurry. You show, simply, 
mismanagement. And, Mr. Speaker, that brings me to my other 
point. There probably would be lots of money for ordinary 
citizens, ordinary families, if we could simply run the 
government a little more efficient — if we could cut out some 
of the waste, if we could cut out some of the mismanagement. 
 
I haven’t got the auditor’s report with me tonight but, Mr. 
Speaker, the auditor mentioned numerous, simply numerous 
occasions where money was spent which was not legally 
authorized by this Legislative Assembly — simply hundreds of 
thousands of dollars, hundreds of thousands of dollars. And 
when the auditor asks for further information, he’s denied that 
information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t know just how much waste there is in 
this government, money which is now going on waste, could be 
spent in social services, in health, in education for the ordinary 
family. If this government simply became more accountable to 
this legislature, became more accountable to the ordinary 
citizens in this province. 
 
There is too much waste. Not only do you have your priorities 
mixed up by hiring all those people on patronage appointments 
— the 200,000 to the George Hills, the 100,000s to Schoenhals, 
Dirks another 38,000, and we can go on and on and on. 
Hundreds of thousands of dollars — millions that would be 
available to the ordinary citizens in this province, where we 
could provide quality education programs. 
 
Members opposite, members opposite say, oh well, the member 
is simply exaggerating, there have been no cut-backs in 
education. But, Mr. Speaker, that simply is not true. I have 
ample evidence, Mr. Speaker, of programs being cut back over 
and over and over. But before I get to those, Mr. Speaker, I 
want to just simply show that there is not adequate funding for 
school boards, and school boards then have to transfer that onto 
ordinary citizens, ordinary families by increasing their property 
tax. 
 
You can’t get away from saying, oh that’s tough, as the 
Minister of Urban Affairs tries to do. The school boards aren’t 
responsible. Well we have to, he says, but we as government 
have to cut back, we’ve got to pull in the purse strings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve given amply evidence that simply is not true. 
And had they not received a transfer of payment of about $180 
million, I believe, last year from the federal government . . . 
Federal government bailed them out through transfer payment, 
but there isn’t such a transfer payment for school boards and 
local governments. They have to count on the generosity of this 
government, and if that generosity isn’t there to keep up with 
inflation or exceeds inflation, then the ordinary, the school 
boards and local governments, have no choice. They have no 
choice but to raise property taxes and that, Mr. Speaker, hurts 
the ordinary family. That means that there is less money for 
food, there is less money for education, there is less money for 
clothing, there is less money for entertainment. 
 
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1924 
 

The ordinary family is hit twice. They are hit by the increase in 
taxes by this government, and they are hit by the property tax 
increases by local government because this government simply 
doesn’t supply sufficient money to school boards and city 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I had indicated, this government simply has 
not, has not provided sufficient funds. And, Mr. Speaker, I have 
before me here the foundation operating grants, and there are 
numerous, numerous school divisions who received substantial 
decreases — substantial decreases. Here, for example, I have 
Lanigan, 17.29 per cent decrease. Here’s another one, 
Moosomin, 13 per cent decrease; another one, Maple Creek, 11 
point-some per cent decrease, and so on; Big Butte, 15 per cent 
decrease. Yes, there were some increases but, Mr. Speaker, 
there were a log of decreases. Here is one — Yorkton public, 
23.39 per cent decrease. Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on and 
on. 
 
I want to make the point, Mr. Speaker, that there were 41 per 
cent, 47 of 116 school divisions, who received decreases this 
year; and there were 71 out of that 116 who received less than 
inflation. How, Mr. Speaker, can we expect school boards to 
continue to provide quality education, to expand the school 
program, to provide for those children who have special needs 
so that families can be assisted? How can we expect school 
boards to provide all of those programs if this government, if 
this government doesn’t at least provide operation grants which 
are at least as high as inflation? But, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve 
indicated, there are lots of people who do very well by this 
government — do very well. Here is a headline. It says, “Tory 
minister’s air travel cost 1.5 million in 1986-87.” 
 
That, I believe, Mr. Speaker, comes from public accounts. That 
1.5 . . . Or let’s be generous and give them at least $500,000 for 
coverage. There would have been $1 million, $1 million that 
could have gone to the ordinary family. It could have gone for 
special programs, special education programs for those children 
who need it, for the emotionally disturbed, the mentally 
retarded, the physically handicapped. Many of those programs, 
Mr. Speaker, have been cut because this government has simply 
not provided sufficient money. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in a survey that we did last year, we asked 
school boards how they were affected by the cuts in education. 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to go through all of those because 
there are hundreds of them, but there were substantial cut-backs 
in programs — programs, for example, for special education 
children; programs in computer program; programs in library, 
expansion of library so that children have sufficient books in 
order to expand the knowledge that they are to acquire. Fewer 
teachers were hired, class-rooms were doubled up. Classes, in 
some instances, Mr. Speaker . . . They taught grade 11 algebra, 
and you have some experience in this. How would you like to 
teach grade 11 algebra and grade 12 computer science 
combined — it would be a pretty hard task — and do a good 
job? Pretty tough to do. 
 
And that is not uncommon, Mr. Speaker. That has happened 
time and time again because the school boards out there want to 
safeguard their schools, they want to  

keep the school at the local level, and the only way that they 
can do it is to combine classes, decrease the number of teachers, 
increase the teacher-pupil ratio. And, Mr. Speaker, that does not 
speak well for the quality of education in this province. 
 
The member from Yorkton . . . I’m surprised that the member 
from Yorkton hasn’t got up in this House and asked some 
questions about the Minister of Education, as to why in his own 
city the public school grants, operating grants, went down over 
23 per cent. Because the people from Yorkton have talked to 
me about it, and they want to know. They want to know why it 
has gone down to that extent, but not one word from the 
member from Yorkton, not one word. 
 
And when I speak to them and I say, well why don’t you meet 
with your member, they simply say, well we can meet with him 
because he doesn’t come around any more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, lots of money for certain people. 
And as I indicated in the estimates in Education again, money 
that could have gone for programs, could have gone for 
families, was spent on the Minister of Education’s own office, 
his own office. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when I was the minister of Health in 1982, 
about $9,000 was spent a month on my personal staff. Today in 
the minister’s office over $19,000 is spent per month — Mr. 
Speaker, almost 100 per cent increase. Did the ordinary citizen 
out there get a 100 per cent increase? Did school boards get a 
100 per cent increase? Did local governments get a 100 per cent 
increase? Did senior citizens get a 100 per cent increase? No, 
Mr. Speaker — no money for those people, not enough money 
for school boards, not enough money for senior citizens, and in 
effect, Mr. Speaker, we cut programs. We add additional 
burdens to our senior citizens by increasing . . . or decreasing 
the availability of drugs for senior citizens and asking them that 
they must pay a certain amount. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, for cabinet ministers, as I indicated before, 
lots of money. Lots of money in travel — $1.5 million. Minister 
of Education, office increased over 100 per cent over what they 
were when I was the minister. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Speaker, production loan program, universal program so 
that cabinet ministers and the Premier can be subsidized by 
senior citizens and by students whose bursary programs have 
been cut. Mr. Speaker, in 1982, when we left the government, a 
student took about $2,600 in loan and the rest was bursary. 
Today, you’ve got to take out close to $6,000 in loans before 
any bursary will apply, so that a student who goes to university 
for five or six years is going to have an accumulated debt of 25 
to $30,000, thanks to the generosity of this government. Thanks 
to the generosity of this government, they are going to be stuck 
with huge debt. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Speaker, but no opportunities for jobs. As the 
member from Moose Jaw South indicated earlier this evening, 
about 9,000 people, net, left this province  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1925 
 

last year. The cream of our crop is leaving this province because 
there are no jobs available here. They’ve got to go to Alberta or 
Ontario or some other place, Mr. Speaker, in order to find a job. 
We will educate them here, but they will have to work 
somewhere else because no jobs are provided. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated, this government is insensitive; 
this government is uncaring; this government has its priorities 
all mixed up. If it would straighten out those priorities, if it 
would tax those companies that make their money here in this 
province, if they would tax those companies who have made 
record profits, there would be ample money available. We 
wouldn’t have to have that task force on health care, because 
people would have access to hospitals. We wouldn’t have over 
9,000 or 10,000 people on the waiting list in Saskatoon. They 
would have ample access to hospitals. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t make any difference how many 
people voice their opposition to this government. They are set 
on a course on which they will not turn back. They want to 
privatize almost everything that is profitable in this province, 
profits which we could use for health and education and social 
services. And they want to privatize those and give them to the 
multinationals like Weyerhaeuser. There again, Mr. Speaker, if 
the pulp mill was in our possession today, this year alone, we 
would have over $88 million in profits going to the coffers of 
this province. But instead, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
brag about how Weyerhaeuser gave us $30 million this year. 
But Weyerhaeuser walked away, all the way to the bank in the 
United States with $58 million of our money. 
 
These are the financial wizards, the members opposite. They are 
the business people — so they say they are. I hear quite often 
the member from or the Urban Affairs minister saying, you 
know nothing about business, but I do. I have been in business, 
he says. He is the kind of guy, he is the kind of guy that would 
say to you hey, look at, I know how you can make a quick buck. 
I’ll sell you this pulp mill. And, you know, if I kept it, I could 
make 88 million, but if I give it to you I’ll make 30 million — 
that’s a good deal for me. That’s the kind of deal that he would 
make, because he was part of cabinet that made that deal. He 
was part of that cabinet that gave away, gave away profits of 
$88 million and got 30 million and then says we’ve got to be 
thankful. Fifty-eight million dollars, Mr. Speaker, that would 
have been here for health, for education and social services for 
our families, for our kids. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is where this government is heartless, this 
government is uncaring, and it’s insensitive. I say to the 
members opposite that this will come back to haunt you. It 
already has, as is shown, for example, in the Saskatoon 
Eastview by-election and in Elphinstone. And I say to the 
member from Bengough-Milestone, you’re next, you’re next. 
Just put your seat on the line and we’ll see what happens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think I have shown amply why I support the 
motion that was put forward by the member from Moose Jaw 
Sough, which clearly indicates that when it comes to the 
ordinary family in this province, particularly as it  

relates to health, to education, and social services, this 
government has failed miserably. They simply have not 
provided adequate funds. They have forced people to go to food 
banks. They have forced people to leave this province. They 
have forced people to go begging. They have forced people to 
go without their drugs. And they have the audacity, Mr. 
Speaker, the audacity to say that people who go for prescription 
drugs are drug abusers, including senior citizens. 
 
And they say to the people . . . They say to local governments 
and school boards, because we don’t provide you with 
operating grants that are at least in keeping with inflation, you 
are inefficient . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, there come 
the . . . Oh, I knew the member from Mayfair . . . You know the 
member from Mayfair, the only time, Mr. Speaker, the only 
time the member from Mayfair speaks is when he chirps from 
his desk. But he never once, Mr. Speaker, he never once has 
defended, never once has he defended the city of Saskatoon and 
the people of Mayfair. Not once has he defended them, not 
once. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Not once, Mr. Speaker, has he defended the 
people of Saskatoon. Every time the government cuts money 
for school boards, every time the government cuts money for 
school boards the member from Mayfair praises and cheers the 
government. Every time the government cuts a grant to the city 
of Saskatoon, there is the member chirping from his seat, 
supporting the government — every time. When they changed 
the drug plan, where was the member from Mayfair? Cheering 
on the government. When they’re changing the ward system, 
where’s the member from Mayfair? Cheering on the 
government. 
 
I say to the member opposite, the member from Mayfair, 
support the families of Saskatoon. Do your bit to decrease those 
waiting lists in Saskatoon. You should be ashamed of yourself, 
as a cabinet minister, to say that you support about 10,000 
people on the waiting list. Where are you? Where are you in 
cabinet? Does your voice mean nothing? Or do you also, from 
your chair in the cabinet, do a little bit of chirping here and 
there but not put forward, put forward any logical arguments 
and cogent arguments so that your cabinet ministers would 
accept some of your arguments and defend the people of 
Saskatoon? 
 
Maybe, Mr. Minister, if you came out supporting families, we 
wouldn’t have to have motions like this put forward. But I’m 
saying to the member opposite, you can support your colleagues 
all you want, but I’m going to see to it that the people in 
Mayfair know exactly how you don’t defend the people of 
Saskatoon or the welfare of the citizens in Mayfair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I do want to say that I’ve been 
very pleased to be able to participate in this debate, to show 
very clearly how over the last six years the priorities of this 
government have been all wrong. It is not for a lack of funds 
that the ordinary families do not get adequate remuneration 
from this government. The reason the  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1926 
 

ordinary family is suffering is because it is a deliberate attempt 
of this government, deliberate policies to take away programs 
that benefit ordinary citizens. The dental program, the drug 
program, the beds for our city hospitals in Saskatoon so we 
have huge waiting lists, increased taxes, not enough money for 
school boards so programs have to be cut — all of those, Mr. 
Speaker, are deliberate decisions and for that, Mr. Speaker, this 
government stands condemned. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
been some hour and a half now that we’ve been listening to the 
NDP rhetoric in regards to families. Mr. Speaker, the rhetoric 
that we’ve heard here tonight could probably choke an elephant 
and that’s not from the peanut he’s eaten either. 
 
I’d like to indicate, Mr. Speaker, that the member from Moose 
Jaw South started this debate by making some accusations 
about this government and about their spending priorities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I stand here today as a member of the Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster constituency, and I stand proud to represent 
those people, and I stand proud to be part of this government. 
When I look at the spending priorities of this government, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to give you some of the history and some 
of the facts that this government has done towards health care in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I go back into 1982, 1981, when I was first 
running to become a member of this legislature. The member 
from Saskatoon South was then the minister of Health. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, I remember well that every time there was an 
election near in our riding, there was a promise in the city of 
Lloydminster that there would be a magnificent hospital built 
for the city of Lloydminster and surrounding area. Mr. Speaker, 
for 18 years they’d been promised that hospital in 
Lloydminster, and for 18 years it was never built under an NDP 
government. Mr. Speaker, that hospital has been announced, 
delivered, and is now being used under the present PC Premier 
Grant Devine’s government. Mr. Speaker, my constituency . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. I realize that hon. members in their 
enthusiasm sometimes forget themselves a member and 
mention hon. members’ names, and I will give the hon. member 
the benefit of the doubt. However I do remind him it’s not 
acceptable. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — I understand that, Mr. Minister, but I was 
trying to get the NDP’s attention so that they’d listen to this — 
I’m glad they’re listening. Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I abide by 
your ruling. But I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that the 
then minister of Health under the NDP never delivered, never 
delivered that hospital in Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for years — I want to go a list with you, Mr. 
Speaker — for years the community of Maidstone was after a 
new hospital, and for years that hospital had been promised for 
Maidstone under the NDP administration — for years, around 
elections. And, Mr. Speaker, after the  

election was over, like Lloydminster, it was never delivered — 
never delivered. We delivered that hospital, a new facility. Mr. 
Speaker, the same goes for Cut Knife, Saskatchewan. I want to 
indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that when I’m looking at hospitals 
for a particular region, the north-west region, when it was 
neglected under an administration under the NDP 
administration, I want to indicate my thanks to this government 
for its health support for my area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they talk about the dental program. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to indicate to you that I, as one member, have 
now got dental services in a rural community of Cut Knife, 
dental services, dental rural services in Cut Knife, dental rural 
services . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. I believe 
the hon. member has the floor. I know this particular motion is 
generating a great deal of debate; there are many members 
wanting to speak; however, the member for Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster now has the floor, and I ask the hon. 
members to allow him to speak. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I notice that, you 
know, they just don’t want to listen. You know, we sat here 
listening to their rhetoric for an hour and a half, as I indicated, 
and they do not pay us the courtesy of being able to debate their 
resolution. Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you that the dental 
services now are not only for school children but they’re for 
middle-aged, they’re for everyone from children right on 
through to senior citizens, and that dental services are in these 
communities; it’s just not for the few school children. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, it was not nullifying 
dental services for rural Saskatchewan, it was enhancing it, it 
was expanding. That is what our government did. It expanded 
the dental services for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can go on about the aspect of the members 
opposite having their moratorium on the hospitals and nursing 
homes while our area was particularly hit hard by that. And 
when we lifted that moratorium that the then minister from 
Saskatoon South had, as he was Minister of Health, had on this 
province — as we were elected in 1982 and that moratorium 
was lifted, I can now announce to you, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve 
announced some time ago, that we’ve got our two nursing 
homes in Lloydminster and in Cut Knife-Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I look at health care services I look at home 
care services. I look at . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, the 
dental program, the drug program. I look at the all-round health 
care services for my particular area and, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
indicate to you that our constituency has been serviced very 
well by this government’s actions as far as health care is 
related. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when members have to stand in this Assembly and 
holler and yell, like the member from Saskatoon South, I just 
want to take this opportunity to warn the people of this province 
that those who yell and yell continually and yell, they want 
attention — attention,  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1927 
 

Mr. Speaker, for only one purpose, to sell something that they 
themselves know is not, is untrue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened to those untruths here tonight and I want 
to indicate to you that if . . . a warning to the people out there in 
the province that if they’re . . . it’s like a wolf looking at this 
wounded little rabbit and they’re going out and they’re trying to 
use these . . . and I’ll put it in the scenario of using the scare 
tactics on the people, on the seniors of this province, the 
children of this province and, Mr. Speaker, I would like those 
people to sit back and really think this out. 
 
They try to scare seniors. They try to scare children in making 
them believe that our government is trying to dismantle the 
medicare in the province of Saskatchewan. I want to indicated 
to you, Mr. Speaker, that my grandfather homesteaded in this 
province. And the member from Saskatoon South should well 
know; he’s in some sort of way related to me, but I want to 
indicate to you that a lot of his close relations don’t’ even 
support what he says in this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to you also that he’s about to get 
a little upset and stand on a point of order, so I probably . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, a point of personal privilege. I 
deny that I am related to the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster. And I just want to make it clear to him that 
I am not related to him, unless he goes back by blood to Adam 
and Eve. I suppose we’re all related that way. And I’d really 
like him to withdraw it because I’m not related to him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The hon. member’s 
point of privilege is not in fact a point of privilege, and the 
debate continues. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I didn’t say I was a 
direct relative, an in-about-round relative of his, and that is he’s 
married to a relative of mine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want indicate to you that that’s just a typical 
reaction we get in this legislature. You know, he’s simply trying 
to always, always twist, you know, the truth. I wish I could 
twist the truth, you know. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ignorance of the member from Saskatoon 
South is beginning to really become more apparent in this 
Assembly, and I want to indicate to you that that does have a 
problem on the welfare and the social well-being of the people 
in the province of Saskatchewan. I hope that they never re-elect 
this individual. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to you, on this particular 
resolution that has been brought to this Assembly, they’ve 
attacked this government for lack of health care initiatives. I 
indicated to you all the initiatives, or just a portion of the 
initiatives, but a whole lot of all the programs that we have 
contributed out here in this  

province and what we’ve . . . a few of them we’ve received in 
our riding. And I want to indicate to you that we suffered none. 
And I was just trying to get to the point where my riding does 
appreciate those particular services when I was so rudely 
interrupted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about spending, spending priorities, 
let’s talk about the spending priorities then. Mr. Speaker, we 
ware, and when we came to power in 1982, we were deciding 
we were going to be an open government, and an open 
government we are. We decided we were going to be open for 
business, and open for business we are. Mr. Speaker, we 
decided we were going to diversify this economy, and 
diversifying we are. Mr. Speaker, when I talk about open for 
business, open government, diversifying, I’m talking about one 
thing, Mr. Speaker, I’m talking about creating, creating a 
healthy, a healthy atmosphere. 
 
Yes, the members opposite don’t like what they’re hearing, but 
the people of Saskatchewan will judge that. They’ll judge that 
in the next election again, as they have in 1986. But, Mr. 
Speaker, when it comes to jobs, job creations, this government 
has . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. I realize that hon. members rise to 
speak on resolutions, and certainly it’s happened before tonight 
with a couple of other speakers, they do have a great deal of 
information they would like to impart to the House; however, 
I’d just like to draw it to their attention that their remarks must 
relate to the resolution under discussion. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — I agree with your ruling, Mr. Speaker. I was 
just going to wrap it in to saying how this job creation ties into 
the well-being and helps pay for the costs of the health care and 
education and the social programs that we received in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has never, in the entirety of this province, 
ever been as many people in the employment area employed in 
the province of Saskatchewan as there is today. And, Mr. 
Speaker, those taxes collected, those taxes collected go for 
health, education, and social services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite say I’m off the topic. Well I 
don’t agree. I agree with this, Mr. Speaker: — I agree that we 
must create an atmosphere in this province that allows people to 
be educated in our schools and our universities. Mr. Speaker, 
they must have jobs to go to. The education is nothing if we 
can’t deliver on jobs, and there’s where the two tie in. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I just want to indicate to you that I apologize to no one 
in this province for the fact that we have failed or not 
continually going in that particular direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Moose Jaw South indicated 
while he was speaking that what you need in hard times is good 
managers. Well, Mr. Speaker, the NDP were in government in 
the good times. Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you that I would 
have had, as a government member here today, I would have 
had about $600 million in my pocket here, as a government, to 
be able to spend on health care facilities and schools and social 
programs. But no, Mr. Speaker, in the good times they decided 
to go  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1928 
 

out and buy a uranium mine. Mr. Speaker, those kind of dollars 
were not left in the government coffers for us to be able to 
spend on those particular types of service. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I talk about the fact of the potash mine, the 
potash industry. That NDP administration in those days went 
out and bought a whole bunch of potash mines, and they are 
saying how good that was going to be for Saskatchewan, and 
how it was going to build schools and hospitals and services 
social programs. And, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 
now know today that that is not fact. In fact, Mr. Speaker, after 
the NPD spending $600 million on uranium mines instead of 
building hospitals and nursing homes and schools, Mr. Speaker, 
tomorrow, if they ever become government at some day 
tomorrow, there’s going to be a closure of that uranium mine — 
600 million investment and a closure, so we’re out that kind of 
money, plus the interest where they went out of the country to 
borrow the money. The same with the potash industry, the 
interest, the high interest rates that we were paying out of 
country, borrowed from the New York exchange for all these 
various purchases, building their family of Crown corporations 
that were not servicing anybody in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
And there was a lack of education and hospital facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you that when they talk about lack 
of priorities for families, Mr. Speaker, I ask you where . . . I ask 
you, Mr. Speaker, where were the NDP when the interest rates 
sky-rocketed, where the pressures were put on the families in 
this province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was not any particular type of need for the 
way our families in the province of Saskatchewan were treated 
when the NDP were . . . in the last two years of the NDP 
administration. They put unnecessary hardships on the people 
of this province. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to you 
that if those people had that money in their back pocket, they’d 
be only more than willing to be able to help look after maybe a 
neighbour of theirs or part of their own family or something like 
that. Mr. Speaker, they don’t particularly have that kind of 
thing. 
 
The NDP taxed . . . estate taxes, had an estate tax put on, taxing 
the dead, Mr. Speaker, that’s what that was. That’s what they 
did for family people — taxed widows. Mr. Speaker . . . and 
they laugh. They sit there and they laugh. They’re laughing so 
hard; they say, well that’s dumb, you know; that’s absolutely 
. . . and the member from Quill Lakes, the member from Quill 
Lakes is . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Would the 
member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster please . . . I’d just like to 
ask the hon. members to allow the member to proceed with his 
remarks, regardless of whether they agree or disagree, but I do 
think he has the floor. He does have the floor, and he does have 
the right to speak. Order, order. Order. Order, order. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, they chirp from their seats 
and say what if he doesn’t make sense or something like that. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s fine, that’s fine. But I’ll tell you, I’ll 
tell you something, Mr. Speaker, that when it comes time for a 
judgement, the NDP will find out. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that unnecessary burden on the people when 
interest rates sky-rocketed, that put quite a drain on the family 
and the closeness of the family and the burden that it put on 
them. And when those people asked the NDP, when those 
people asked the NDP for help, the NDP turned their back on 
them. We didn’t, Mr. Speaker. We have come out, and we have 
come out with programs for the farmers, we’ve come out with 
programs to help the farmers so they could send their children, 
so they wouldn’t have to move out of the province and send 
their . . . 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. I just once more would like to 
remind the hon. member to relate his remarks to the topic. And 
I know he has a great deal he wishes to share but . . . and he 
may do that if he can relate them to the resolution being 
discussed. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to argue 
with your ruling. The thing is, is it does relate to it on the aspect 
of . . . I was just trying to say is that the farm family, the 
individual couldn’t afford to send their children to school any 
longer because of these high interest burden on them and the 
NDP had turned their back on them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate just a few things that we’ve 
done as a government for the families and towards the welfare 
and benefit towards the family in Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that we have this 
mortgage interest protection for all citizens in the province of 
Saskatchewan. If interest rates sky-rocket, their homes are 
protected through this mortgage interest protection program that 
we have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to indicate to you that we have a 
first-time Saskatchewan pension plan that allows everyone in 
this program that security . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, 
it’s family welfare. It’s a family looking after the family 
welfare, and the NDP don’t agree, but it is a family welfare. It’s 
for the welfare of all families in the province of Saskatchewan. I 
mean, you’re totally ridiculous, the member from Quill Lakes. 
If you want to speak, you get up and speak after I’m finished. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to you that the farm protection 
that we’ve brought about as a government is for the welfare of 
the Saskatchewan families here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that 
we’ve identified the freedom of language rights in this 
province. And, Mr. Speaker, that is for the welfare of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to just touch on other things such as 
the provision for our young people and for the caring attitude 
our government has been trying to show to them by putting this 
drug and alcohol abuse centre near Yorkton, Saskatchewan, at 
Whitespruce. Mr. Speaker, that is the first, and I understand that 
this has been highly regarded right across this country, as of 
today, and there are a lot of provinces looking at being able to 
make use also of that facility, asking if they could possibly 
make use  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1929 
 

of that facility as well as along with the Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to you that we’ve all heard the 
announcement today of our task force on health care. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, when I look at an individual such as Bishop Morand, I 
want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that when the NDP were 
standing in this, and the Leader of the Opposition was speaking 
in this House earlier today belittling this committee, well, Mr. 
Speaker, to me it’s a . . . when I look at a man such as Bishop 
Morand, I kind of have to . . . well, I’ll let the people judge out 
there as to who they would actually like to see on a task force, 
the Leader of the Opposition or Bishop Morand. 
 
An Hon. Member: — An easy choice. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Speaker, I agree, from my colleague here, 
it would be an easy choice, and I’m sure we all know who that 
is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard about the one point the member from 
Saskatoon South, saying we as a government had given $1.7 
billion to the oil companies, and we didn’t build hospitals or 
nursing homes or anything like this. Well, Mr. Speaker, I mean, 
the truth is in the pudding. Any person that is questioning that at 
all can come and read the public documents and study them or 
ask questions of them. And it can be pointed out to them that 
that was a direct untruth that was stated in this Assembly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to you that when those 
people go out into my riding, where the oil industry is very 
much active and alive, that that’s not what they’re saying. 
They’re trying to tell them, how can we give you more so you’ll 
support us instead of them. That’s what they’re saying out 
there. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when I hear that rhetoric, you know, and they 
say that we gave that kind of dollars away and didn’t do . . . and 
are cutting back on this and that and everything else. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s again . . . I ask the people to be open-minded, and 
if they are questioning it, to ask for the information. And they 
don’t have to get it from members of the opposition or 
government members. They can . . . it’s all public documented, 
and they can go to the library and do their . . . ask their 
questions, research, or whatever it is, you know. And the 
members laugh. Sure they laugh, you know. But I’m indicating 
to . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? Point 
of order? What is your point of order? 
 
Mr. Solomon: The point of order, Mr. Member, is that . . . or, 
Mr. Speaker, is that the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster 
is way off the topic, and I was wondering if you could just 
examine the record and ask him to get back on the topic, please. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’ve listened to the hon. member’s point of 
order, and as I indicated earlier, members should attempt to 
relate their remarks to the resolution under discussion. And I 
simply reiterate that. And I believe he’s trying to do that and 
will do so again. 
 

Mr. Hopfner: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure that 
the members opposite just don’t want to hear truths, and it 
upsets them. They know full well that they’ve been way out in 
left field on this particular topic. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to go back to again part of the 
particular conversation they were using with this resolution, and 
saying where they . . . instead of this government going on 
patronage, instead of spending it on health care. I want to 
indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that I have this book and it’s just 
full of pages, pages, pages, and names of past MLAs, NDP 
MLAs and candidates that the members opposite have done 
when they were government. And I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that 
any administration would sooner have their own people in 
particular places than having opposition people in particular 
places. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say to the member 
opposite that they ought to not sweep the dirt under their rug, 
because there is a lot of it there already, and there will be quite 
a lot more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has diversified in this province, 
and we’ve created an atmosphere in this province where it is 
generated and there was a spin-off within many service sectors 
throughout this province. And through that, Mr. Speaker, a 
great deal of income tax has been created. And that tax, Mr. 
Speaker, has built us a strong base, and it’s building a stronger 
base every day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t quarrel with the fact that no one would like 
to see a lot more happening. But, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to 
you that I know of a lot more families in this province that have 
stayed together and are living together in a closer community. 
They’re not spread out throughout the U.S. or the rest of 
Canada or wherever. Mr. Speaker, these people are able to stay 
home and find this employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now we don’t close the borders for anybody; 
people get educated here, and they want to go and work 
somewhere else, in some other province, we wish them well. 
We’d like to welcome them back to Saskatchewan whenever 
they so please. 
 
But I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, when I hear about the 
member from Saskatoon South talking about all these huge 
waiting lists, I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that there 
are waiting lists, and there’s no doubt about it, and we all like to 
see less. But, Mr. Speaker, you know as well as I do it’s just not 
government. 
 
I want to indicate to the people out there that the medical 
doctors, the specialists, they all gather in larger centres, and 
these are the people that perform the operations. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we all know in rural Saskatchewan that you have to 
have this speciality, and you have to be able to have the 
facilities to perform certain types of operations. And basically, 
Mr. Speaker, if you can’t . . . if the people don’t want to go to 
the rural part of the province that are allowed to perform these 
types of services by the medical association, well, Mr. Speaker, 
my hands as an elected member are tied. I have absolutely no 
control over a particular doctor in going to force him to go to 
Cut Knife, Saskatchewan or Maidstone,  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1930 
 

Saskatchewan if he’s not going to want to go. 
 
I do however, and I would appreciate the medical association’s 
attention to this particular issue. I don’t particularly think that it 
is pleasing to me or to any of my constituents that they have to 
travel miles and miles and miles, and then spend days and days 
and days in a hospital bed in a strange community. It’s nice to 
be able to have those services in rural Saskatchewan. And I 
think with the co-operation of our Minister of Health and all 
people here, I think those services will eventually take place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it does take a lot of time to get people interested 
maybe, if that’s the word, to get them out into the rural 
community. Some people may figure it’s a little isolated or 
something like that, and definitely I would believe it’s harder on 
either the husband or the wife opposite of whoever the doctor is 
in that particular gender. But I would like . . . It would probably 
be harder on them because of the fact that the hours are 
basically spread out over a longer period, and there’s only 
limited doctors able to service the particular population to make 
it worth while. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, these are kinds of things that people in rural 
Saskatchewan do understand. Rural Saskatchewan people are 
unique to — are what I feel — are unique to that situation. They 
understand that we are trying; they understand that the 
government costs cannot go on. 
 
The member opposite, he talked about the costs of Health 
minister’s office and staff, and he says, well it was $9,000 when 
he was minister. Well, Mr. Speaker, probably if he had done 
anything, it would have been double; but if he’s just sitting 
there doing nothing, he’s paying nobody, and so I think he 
probably was overbudgeted at $9,000. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you that it’s the same if you 
go back 10 years ago, if you look at a farm in relation to health 
care, and it’s services and stuff like that. And you being a 
farmer as well, Mr. Speaker, you can relate to the costs of 
farming 10 years ago as to the cost of . . . and the administration 
of that farming 10 years ago as you can to the cost of 
administration of health today. 
 
I think probably when you look at the fact of health care, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to remind the member from Saskatoon South 
that when he was the minister of Health, and it was I his 
intellectual experience to have had to order the nurses back to 
work, he thought that was the best way and the only way, and it 
was really going to make hi a popular, hard-nosed minister. 
 
(2145) 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the medical people, the nurses’ association, 
they taught the minister a lesson. They ousted him. He says . . . 
well, I don’t know too much about the rules here in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, but I want to indicate to him that 
because I’ve only been here two terms, Mr. Speaker, at least I 
haven’t been turfed like that individual had been from a 
ministerial position, the minister of Health’s position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those were the people, those were the  

people that undermined these types of services in this province. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to you when we have . . . 
when we talk about medicare in this province, I want to indicate 
to you that it wasn’t the NDP that brought medicare to the 
Province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, if they want to learn 
about the word “medicare,” medicare was talked about probably 
back in the ’30s by John Diefenbaker, if I remember well. And 
I’ll tell you something, Mr. Speaker. It was John Diefenbaker 
that really put the kick on medicare in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you never saw or heard of John Diefenbaker 
running around trying to play some heroic individual, or 
become some heroic individual over this. Mr. Speaker, he did it 
for the well-being and the good of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, medicare belongs to no one. My grandfather 
helped, his grandfather helped, his grandfather helped, and, Mr. 
Speaker, they were not NDP at that time. They were not NDP at 
that time because there wasn’t NDP at that time. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to indicate to you that it was a mixture of all political 
parties that put medicare in this province, and, Mr. Speaker, as a 
private member, as an individual and as a Tory-thinking 
member, I want to indicate . . . and I promise this to the people 
of this province, that it would be over my dead body that there 
would be any real, other than any improvements to medicare, 
that there would be any destruction to the medicare system or 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to you that we can only build 
on, and we’re only wanting to build on our strengths, and I say 
this is one of our strengths. This is one of the great provinces to 
live in as far as medicare is concerned, and medical services are 
second to none right across this country or North America. 
 
I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, I’ve sat in this Assembly and 
I’ve listened to the NDP trying to make a joke out of the types 
of services that are available to the people of this province, 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t find it a joke. I find them a joke. I 
find them a joke when they can sit in their chairs . . . and it’s too 
bad the cameras can’t be on them, Mr. Speaker, so the people, 
the real people out there in Saskatchewan can see them, see 
them clowning around. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to you that when the . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I want to indicate to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that I am not at all in favour of this resolution. And I 
think, Mr. Speaker, that we could be spending the money, we 
could be spending the money that we’re wasting on debating 
this resolution in doing something proper in the health care or 
education facilities or for some program for the well-being of 
the Saskatchewan families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I realize that I’ve probably bored a lot of people 
because of having to throw out a lot of this. I know a lot of the 
people out there realize what this government has done . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — I realize a lot of the people know what this 
government has done and are in appreciation of it.  
  



 
June 7, 1988 

1931 
 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would say that I will not be in 
support of any type of resolution. And I would like to now 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:50 p.m. 
 


