


















































April 27, 1988 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 27, 1988 
 

871 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to members of 
this House, 60 grade 7 students from the Fairhaven School in 
Saskatoon in my constituency. They’re accompanied by Mrs. 
Nora Sutherland and Mr. Howard Sproat who are the teachers 
with the tour, and the chaperon is Mr. Neil Pechey. So I’d ask 
you to join me in welcoming these students to this house, and 
I’ll see them later for refreshments and pictures. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn:  Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal 
of pleasure this afternoon to introduce to you, and through you, 
on behalf of my colleague, the member for Arm river, a group 
of special friends of mine and students from the Hillcrest 
Hutterite Colony School  16 students from grades 4 to 9. 
They’re accompanied today by their teacher, Mrs. Laura 
Kroeger, and one of the parents and bus driver, Mr. Mike 
Wollman. I look forward to meeting with this group after 
question period for refreshments, and I hope that you and all 
members of the legislature will join me in bidding this group a 
very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great deal 
of pleasure today to introduce to you, and through you to 
members of the Legislative Assembly, a group of 25 students 
from St. Timothy School in Argyle Park. They’re seated up in 
the east gallery, Mr. Speaker, accompanied by their teacher, 
Devin Anderson. This group has a little special interest for me 
in that one of the students, Rebecca Wytrykush is my 
constituency person’s eldest daughter, so please join me in 
welcoming this group from St. Timothy School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Saunder:  Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to 
you, and through you to the other colleagues of the Assembly, a 
delegation of people from my constituency from the towns of 
Carrot River and Nipawin. They are seated in the west gallery. 
There’s the mayor of the town of Carrot River, John Comer; 
alderman, Doug Wells, David Stanger; alderwoman, Emily 
Grimes; the town administrator, Duril Touet, and board of trade 
president, Glen McIntyre. 
 
And from Nipawin, the mayor, Mr. Jim Taylor; alderman, 
Harry Moore and the economic development officer, Wayne 
Tebbutt. They’re in town to meet with several ministers and 
other people here this afternoon. I hope they enjoy the afternoon 
here and the proceedings in the House. I’d ask everybody to 
welcome them, please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
introduce to you, and to this assembly today, a group of 7,8, and 
9 students from Colonsay in my constituency, 35 in number. 
They are with their teacher, Barry Peters and Kim Lee-Knight, 
and accompanied by a chaperon, Brian Lumsden. 
 
I will be pleased to meet with them later this day for pictures 
and refreshments, and I would ask the members to give them a 
warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Waiting Lists at Saskatchewan Hospitals 
 

Ms. Simard:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the absence of the 
Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker, my question is directed to the 
Premier. And it relates to one of the many thousands of 
problems being caused by the unacceptably high waiting lists at 
Saskatchewan’s base hospital. I am referring, Mr. Minister . . . 
Mr. Premier, rather, to the case of a 76-year-old woman who 
requires a total hip replacement. She was advised of the need 
for this surgery more than nine months ago, and she was 
initially told that her surgery would be scheduled in February of 
this year, but is now being told she’ll have to wait until June or 
July. 
 
My question to the Premier is: do you agree that this lengthy 
delay is unacceptable, Mr. Premier, and will you please advise 
the House what you will do to ensure that this woman receives 
her surgery as soon as possible? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, I can say to the hon. 
member that we are aware of the fact that people do wait to 
have hips transplanted. In fact, one of the things that we notice 
most of the time is that the waiting category is in three or four 
specific areas, and it’s in terms of cataract operations and in 
terms of hips. In fact, Mr. Speaker, most of the line-ups are in 
three or four specialty areas. 
 
We do many of those operations on a weekly basis. In fact, the 
turn around time is faster than it’s ever been, and I can assure 
the hon. member that we’re doing as much as possible with 
respect to providing that ongoing efficiency and effectiveness 
so that in fact patients in the province of Saskatchewan can 
have their operations as quickly as possible. 
 
I will say to the hon. member that I will take her information 
and I will review it with respect to finding out if there’s 
anything particularly unique about this situation. I can 
understand, certainly, that there are line-ups to have hip 
replacements because there are literally thousands of people 
who are now into the new technology of hip replacements, and 
they are something that is very prominent in society today, 
particularly among senior citizens. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Premier, the Minister of Health already 
has the details of this woman’s particular case. Her name is 
Mrs. Klotz, and she lives in Unity. Last week  
  



 
April 27, 1988 

 

872 
 

her daughter wrote to the local PC MLA and sent a copy to you 
and to the Minister of Health, and has not received a reply from 
the government, not even a telephone call, I’m advised, Mr. 
Premier. 
 
This woman is 76 years old and she’s been rendered immobile 
as a result of her problem. She is rapidly deteriorating. Her 
condition is rapidly deteriorating because she can’t move, Mr. 
Premier. So my question is: will you agree that these delays are 
causing unacceptable pain and hardship to people? Will you 
agree to make it a priority to do away with the long, 
unacceptable hospital waiting list, and will you agree to 
personally contact this woman and look into her personal 
situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, I will agree with the hon. 
member that it is a priority, and that’s precisely why the number 
of operations on any time period that we’re looking at are 
increased at a very significant rate. I would also say that I 
would be glad if she would give me the name of the physician 
so that I can review with the physician as well why and how she 
would rank in terms of the priorities of having her hip replaced 
and the various procedures. 
 
So I would certainly say to the hon. member, with the thousands 
of people that are asking to have their hip replaced, the medical 
profession decides whose hip will be replaced first. And it isn’t 
the Premier that decides, and it isn’t the members of the 
legislature that should decide; it is a medical question. 
 
If she’s asking whether we’re allocating a great deal of money, 
literally millions of dollars to reduce the waiting lines, we are, 
and clearly we are. Are we doing more operations? We are. So 
the combination of money and dedication is there. 
 
And the medical staff, I would submit, Mr. Speaker, are the 
people who should decide where the individuals rank in terms 
of their operational procedure. So I would be glad to talk to the 
physician about that particular case. 
 

Kickbacks from Companies to PC Party 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
question I want to direct to the Premier. Mr. Premier, my 
question to you today is straightforward, and it’s particularly 
important in light of the fact that this is day 27 of this session 
and you have yet to table the Public Accounts for 1986-1987. 
 
My question to you, therefore, Mr. Premier, is this: is it the 
policy of your government that companies which do 
government business or receive government contracts should 
make kickbacks to the Progressive Conservative Party? Will 
you say in this House whether that is your policy, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Mr. Speaker, the hon. member raises a 
question with regard to Public Accounts, and I assume it’s 
arising out of the member from Regina  

Victoria now attempting to use the courts, quite frankly Mr. 
Speaker, to do, quite frankly, the work of this Assembly and of 
the Speaker, and I find that somewhat improper and misguided. 
 
With regard to the hon. member’s questions with regards to  I 
though it was kickbacks, I can assure you that there is no 
kickbacks on this side of the House since we have been 
government. Perhaps if the hon. member wishes to wallow in 
kickbacks, he might look back six years ago. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Mr. Premier, Mr. Speaker, I have a new 
question to Premier who speaks for government policy. Mr. 
Premier, I have here a letter in my hands which I am going to 
send over to you in a moment. It’s from a Mr. Bruce Cameron, 
one of the organizers of the Conservative Party convention last 
November. The letter is addressed to Dr. Peter Matthews, 
president of the PC Party of Saskatchewan. 
 
And this letter discusses financial matters from the PC 
convention, and it names two firms that received government 
contracts and do work for your political party. I want to quote, 
from the letter, a small section for your edification. Here’s how 
the quote goes: 
 

I should observe that Smail Communications gave us a 
$15,000 dog and pony show for nothing, and perhaps 
Dome Advertising with its far greater share of the 
provincial advertising budget should be expected to donate 
the cost of this particular bill to the Party. 

 
Now I ask you, Mr. Premier: do you condone that suggestion 
that there should be a kickback to the PC Party, and is that the 
policy of your government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, I will take the letter, and I 
don’t condone anything of the sort. And I will be glad to look at 
the letter and respond to the individual with respect to the 
details that he alleges. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Mr. Premier, you may not want to admit 
that this letter proposes a kickback  and you have it on your 
desk  is a kickback to the Conservative Party. My question, 
Mr. Speaker, is a supplementary question. I’m asking the 
Premier to read that letter carefully, and having read it, he will 
know that Dome Advertising does hundreds of thousands of 
dollars of business with this government every year. 
 
And in view of the fact, this fact, Mr. Premier  in view of the 
fact that a PC Party official is writing to the president of your 
political party of Saskatchewan, the PC Party of Saskatchewan, 
proposing that a kickback be made to your government, to your 
party, and in view of the fact that you’re the leader of the PC 
Party and your government has a solemn obligation to protect 
the interest of all Saskatchewan taxpayers, how do you condone 
that sort of political kickback which is taking place? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
  



 
April 27, 1988 

 

873 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well I . . . You’re drawing a pretty long 
bow, from me reading the letter here. It . . . He suggests here 
that there could be expected to have a donation made to the 
party as a result of this. It doesn’t say that the party did it or the 
government did it or anything else. Here’s an executive director 
of the regional library who is telling the PC Party of 
Saskatchewan it'd be a good idea if this group made a 
contribution. I didn’t say that anybody gave anything to 
anybody. So he wrote a letter and said it’d be a good idea if you 
did this. 
 
So again, I will take this and I will examine it in some detail, 
but on the surface what you have here is somebody who’s 
requesting a donation  requesting a donation. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Question. A new question to the Premier, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, the letter is very clear in its intent. It 
clearly states that not only has one of the advertising firms 
which you do business done a pay-off to your party, but that 
another one, Dome Advertising, should do likewise. 
 
I ask you; how can you justify giving hundreds of thousands of 
dollars of taxpayers’ dollars to the PC Party advertising 
company when your own PC Party officials are putting in 
writing  in writing  their proposal that there should be a 
kickback to your party. I call that immoral, and I ask you; how 
can you condone that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, all the hon. member is 
saying . . . If I can give him what happens in party business  
he never talks about his, and we don’t here in the legislature  
but it’s no secret we had about 1,400 people out to a 
fund-raising dinner the other night. And we have small 
businesses and supporters across the province, and in fact many 
of them compete for contracts that you will find in government. 
And they did previous to our administration and they do across 
the country. 
 
Now you’re saying that an individual requests a donation to the 
PC Party of Saskatchewan because they do business with the 
government. Well, Mr. Speaker, I am sure that when canvassers 
go out and talk to businesses, they will ask them for donations. 
And there are literally thousands of businesses in Saskatchewan 
that donate to political parties and, I might say, mostly to the 
free enterprise party which is the PC Party. 
 
So I mean you can’t deny that businesses don’t donate to the 
NDP; some might even do that. And certainly they do to the 
PCs. What you’re saying here is that they’re asked for a 
donation, and you say that’s immoral in a democratic 
mechanism. Well, Mr. Speaker, I say to the hon. member that 
he’s drawing along bow to say that you can’t make 
contributions to a political party in a democratic system. 
 
Mr. Koskie:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to also direct a 
question to the Premier. And the Premier has a copy of the 
letter, and I would ask him to note that it’s written by a public 
servant in a government institution, a regional library, financed 
by taxpayers’ money. It’s signed in the capacity of the public 
servant and executive director. It’s written on the letter-head of 
this government  

institution. 
 
But you know what, Mr. Premier? The content is not public 
business. It’s about the PC Party’s business, about political 
kickbacks. That’s what’s the content of the letter. 
 
And so I ask you, Mr. Premier: in light of that, will you agree 
with this statement that this government has deteriorated and 
become so corrupted to such an extent that you’re now running 
the PC Party financial affairs out of provincial libraries? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, this letter says two things. 
This letter says, one, that we had a very successful party 
convention and made over $30,000; and secondly, the person 
who works for the public office, Mr. Speaker, wrote the letter to 
the president of the PC Party on government letter-head. Now I 
would not recommend he do that, and I will acknowledge to the 
hon. member that when I write letters with respect to the PC 
Party, I do it on PC Party letter-head; when I write on behalf of 
the government, I do it on the government’s. And the individual 
. . . I mean, I would recommend to the individuals and anybody 
involved in the public service, when they’re doing their party 
work, that in fact they do it on appropriate letter-head; when 
they do government work, they do it on appropriate letter-head. 
 
But the letter says: we had a very good convention, made over 
$30,000 at a convention, and he’s asking for donations. I mean, 
that’s quite understandable. 
 
Mr. Koskie:  A new question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier. 
Mr. Premier, I want to make it perfectly clear that I’m not 
attacking the civil servant here, in the capacity of civil servant. 
This is not a case of a public servant undertaking political 
activity as a private citizen  get that clear  that I encourage, 
that I respect. This, sir, is a public official, paid by taxpayers’ 
dollars, writing a letter about a PC Party finances and political 
kickbacks on taxpayers’ expense. 
 
So I ask you: does that unacceptable conduct by your PC Party 
official  which he indicates he is  represent your ideal of 
the public service of Saskatchewan, or does it simply 
demonstrate the kickbacks and the corruption of the PC Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, as I have said probably to 
the hon. member before, I’ve spent most of my professional life 
in the public service, either in government or the universities, 
and there are very clear rules. And the clear rules are that when 
you’re at work, you operate under the professional guise of 
providing the best professional input that you can, and when 
you’re on your own time, that you can do all the political 
activity that you’d like to do. 
 
And I’ve been afforded that luxury; I did at the university, and I 
would recommend others do that. So I would say to the hon. 
member, I would recommend to this individual, as all public 
employees, that when they’re at work, they  
  



 
April 27, 1988 

 

874 
 

deal with work, and when they’re on their own time, then they 
can deal with the democratic system and they can be as active 
as they like. And that’s a free democratic process. 
 
An Hon. Member:  How do you know? 
 
Mr. Koskie:  Well look where he’s writing it from . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, sure he did. 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Order, order. Order. I don’t think that 
the debate should be between two members. 
 
Mr. Koskie:  I have a supplement, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
let’s get serious. This is a very serious matter, and you can’t 
deny it. And what I’m asking you as a supplement: will you 
establish a judicial inquiry into this matter to see, to determine 
whether there are any criminal charges can in fact be brought; 
and secondly, to review the unprecedented conduct of a senior 
civil servant, a Tory organizer? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, I will examine whether the 
executive director of the Wheatland Regional Library has . . . 
reports to a local board and has any degree of independence 
with respect to local government. And if he does, I will be glad 
to extend my recommendations to local government as well as 
to the provincial government and anybody else involved in the 
public service. 
 
So if they have used government letter-head at the local level to 
write a letter with respect to a PC convention, I would say: I 
don’t recommend that you do this; keep your professional work 
at the office, and if you want to go do some party work, do it at 
home. And I’ve said that before and I would continue to say it 
in the future. 
 
So I will find out what the rules are with respect to regional 
libraries, because this individual works for the regional library, 
and I will report back. 
 
Mr. Koskie:  Mr. Premier, I think you have an obligation 
here because this, as I said, is a very serious matter, because 
within the content of the letter itself it indicates I ask you either 
to establish a judicial inquiry, or I ask you to refer the matter to 
the Department of Justice, the criminal prosecution division, in 
order to have a further investigation into any criminal charges 
can be laid. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, I already said to the hon. 
member I will review with the Wheatland Regional Library 
how much independence they have, and if in fact they are at 
arm’s length from government, and if they are, I would make 
the similar recommendations to them that their employees 
practise their politics outside the office hours and not inside. 
And I will recommend to all levels of government that they 
don’t use government letter-head when they’re working on 
party activities, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Elimination of Travel Allowance To Social Assistance 
Recipients 

 

Mr. Prebble:  My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Minister 
of Social Services, and it concerns your government’s unfair 
decision to eliminate the travel allowance for the vast majority 
of social assistance recipients in this province. 
 
The travel allowance, Mr. Minister, used to be the equivalent of 
a monthly bus pass, and its elimination is making it very 
difficult for social assistance recipients to travel to training 
courses or to do a job search or to travel to and from part-time 
jobs. To emphasize this concern, the group Equal Justice For 
All has submitted over 500 appeals to you, Mr. Minister, asking 
for the reinstatement of the travel allowance. 
 
And my question to you is this: will you reconsider your unfair 
policy to eliminate that allowance, and will you now admit that 
the elimination of the travel allowance is in fact preventing 
people from finding work and from taking training courses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Well, Mr. Speaker, this change in policy 
was made last October, and those questions were raised in this 
House at that time. And I answered them at that time, and since 
then nothing much has changed. 
 
I will indicate to the member opposite that at that time the 
reason we made the change was that there was no uniform 
policy and it was at the discretion of the offices in different 
parts of Saskatchewan. So we found that in rural Saskatchewan 
people were not getting travel money, and in cities, where they 
were closer to services, they were getting travel money. 
 
We have now set a policy that will pay travel money in specific 
cases: to go to school  that includes, if necessary, to training 
courses; for medical travel; and for special needs where, if 
somebody has to go to the funeral of a relative, or special needs, 
we pay the costs. 
 
In addition, we instituted welfare cheque pick-up for single 
employables under the age of 50 in Regina, Moose Jaw, and 
Prince Albert last month, and we gave them travel, a bus ticket, 
if they lived more than two kilometres from the cheque pick-up 
office. We will be doing the same in Saskatoon this month. 
 
The reason I drew the two-kilometre line, I drew it there, was 
because that is the school-board’s busing policy that children 
within the two kilometres have to get to school on their own; 
they’re bused if they’re more than two kilometres away. I’m 
paying travel for welfare cheque pick-up if you live more than 
two kilometres away from the pick-up office. 
 
And we find that at least half  and I’ll get you the exact 
figures  half of welfare recipients who are single employables 
have cars. 
 
Mr. Prebble:  Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
instead of virtually abolishing the travel allowance in urban 
Saskatchewan, you should have extended it in rural 
Saskatchewan so that both rural and urban people had access to 
travel. we’re only talking  
  



 
April 27, 1988 

 

875 
 

about some $20 a month, Mr. Minister. 
 
And my question to you is, since you are supposed to be the 
government that is encouraging people on social assistance to 
find work, when you are in fact the government that is putting 
obstacles in their way to getting work, my question to you, Mr. 
Minister, is: how is someone on social assistance supposed to 
do a job search, or get a job interview, get to a job interview 
without travel assistance, Mr. Minister? How is someone 
supposed to keep a part-time job, Mr. Minister, if they can’t get 
travel assistance to get to that job? Your government is creating 
an obstacle for social assistance recipients, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  As I indicated earlier, Mr. Speaker, for 
special needs we give special travel money. I know the instance 
of a woman who thought she could get a job in Edmonton; we 
paid her bus fare to Edmonton, and back, because she didn’t get 
the job. But we did that because we thought she had an honest 
chance of getting a job at that interview. We do that in special 
cases, but we don’t give out travel money for things other than 
those necessary things  school, medical, special needs. 
 
Now the NDP, the negative democratic party, is simply opposed 
to welfare reform, and that’s the crux of the matter here. They 
are opposed to welfare reform. They don’t like it because they 
want to create dependency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble:  Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister. 
Mr. Minister, you talk about supporting families, but your 
policies are designed to hurt families. You refuse, Mr. Minister, 
to let children take the bus to school even in winter months. 
You force a grade 1 child, Mr. Minister, to walk a kilometre on 
a cold winter day before you’ll cover any bus money to get to 
school. A single-parent mother and her children can’t even get 
bus transportation for grocery shopping, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, you should be ashamed of yourself for denying 
women and children access to bus service. And my question to 
you is this: will you now, Mr. Minister, reinstate the travel 
allowance for all social assistance recipients, recognizing that 
access to transportation should be a basic right for every 
Saskatchewan resident. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  Well, Mr. Speaker, the member 
opposite, in his emotional frenzy, forgot to recall that we also 
raised the rates for adults by $17 per month, for children by $13 
per month. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt:  And that the school boards set the 
policies on where you go to school, and that we provide special 
travel, and that we spend in excess of $270,000 a year just on 
taxis to help people, to help in a lot of cases single mothers take 
their children to a babysitter’s and day care so that they can get 
on with their education. We  

are doing a lot, but we are targeting this to the people that need 
it the most and can benefit most form it. 
 
And we’re saying to the single employables who have time on 
their hands, that they can spend that time looking for jobs or 
else getting further training or on the job experience. So you are 
opposed to welfare reform; we are in favour of welfare reform. 
Your motion will not change my mind. We will do what is 
proper. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 
 

Tabling of Public Accounts 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise, pursuant 
to rule 17 of this Assembly, to seek leave to move a motion that 
a matter of urgent public importance now be given priority of 
debate. 
 
In accordance with this rule, Mr. Speaker, I provided written 
notice to the Clerk of the Assembly this morning, and I also 
provided a copy of that notice to you. And I will just take a 
moment to state the issue as we are presenting it to you today. 
 
It is the failure of the government to table in this legislature the 
Public Accounts for the years 1986-1987, despite the clear 
statutory obligation to do so. The legal obligation is explicit, as 
you will know, and is contained in section 65(3) of the 
Department of Finance Act. 
 
The matter is urgent, for we are now at day 27 of this session, 
more than a year after the completion of the 1986-87 fiscal year, 
and the Assembly’s Public Accounts Committee has already 
begun to meet. 
 
The issue is clearly of public importance, since the Public 
Accounts detail for the members of this Assembly and the 
public exactly how the government has handled and spent the 
taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
I therefore, Mr. Speaker, seek leave to move a motion along the 
following lines: 
 

That the government’s failure to table the 1986-87 Public 
Accounts in the Legislative Assembly now be given 
priority of debate. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker:  The notice regarding this matter proposed for 
priority of debate was received in the Clerk’s office at 11:47 
a.m. today, for which I thank the hon. member. I refer all 
members to rule 17(6) which states that the matter proposed for 
an urgent debate must be in order and of urgent public 
importance. 
 
The proposed matter does not violate any of the conditions set 
out in rule 17(10), nor does it at this point in time conflict with 
the sub judice convention which restricts debate on matters 
which are before the courts. 
 
I would also agree that the issue raised is for much public 
importance. The question remaining to be answered is  



 
April 27, 1988 

 

876 
 

whether it is urgent for the Assembly to set aside its regular 
business to discuss this matter now. 
 
It has been frequently ruled in this Assembly that (and I quote): 
 

The fundamental principle underlying rule 17 was to 
provide an opportunity within a proper framework of 
parliamentary procedure, where none otherwise existed, 
for the immediate discussion of any matter deemed to be 
of such urgency and importance that all of the normal or 
special business of the Assembly should be put to one side 
in order to provide complete right of way to a discussion 
of one specific particular subject. 

 
I refer all members to similar rulings in the Journals of the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan of March 6, 1974; 
January 13, 1976; April 13, 1977; March 13, 1978; April 8, 
1980; and December 12, 1980. 
 
As noted above, rulings on priority of debate requests have 
hinged on whether, in ordinary parliamentary opportunity, to 
debate the matter will occur shortly or in time. The failure to 
table the Public Accounts has been raised on several occasions 
in the past week or two, and there has been sufficient 
opportunity for notice to have been given and the matter to have 
gone on to the order paper for debate in the usual way. 
 
In addition, the notice has failed to demonstrate the urgency of 
having this matter debated today as opposed to putting the 
matter on the order paper now for debate after the usual two 
days notice. 
 
I therefore rule that while this matter is of substantial public 
importance, there are adequate opportunities within the normal 
framework of parliamentary procedure to debate the issue, and 
this a request to set aside all the other business of the Assembly 
today is denied. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Economic Development and Tourism 

Ordinary Expenditure  Vote 45 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. Ms. Minister, 
the first point I want to make is that this is almost reduced to an 
exercise in futility by virtue of not having the Public Accounts 
before us, and I think that stands as an indictment of your 
government that the information that is necessary for the 
opposition to do its job is withheld and denied, in addition to 
your own personal stonewalling. This opposition is owed the 
Public Accounts. Without it, it cannot hold you accountable, 
and that is precisely the reason why they aren’t forthcoming  
because you don’t want to be held accountable. 
 

None the less, even if it be an exercise in futility, I intend to ask 
you a number of questions with respect to your venture capital 
program. And I would like to know how much you intend on 
spending on venture capital during this next year. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  I can tell the member that the operating 
and administration for the program in 1988-89, we have 
budgeted $302,900, and we have also budgeted 416,000 for 
grants under the venture capital. 
 
I have to say that that is an arbitrary figure because we don’t 
know how many applications we may have in this year. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  I’m sorry, due to a background noise I didn’t 
catch . . . the $416,000 is for what? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  The 416,000 would be for grants that 
would go to pension funds who may invest in a venture capital 
corporation. And as I said, that is an arbitrary figure because we 
don’t know how many pension funds may invest. But that’s our 
best calculation. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  What was that figure for pension fund 
investment and the grants that were given to cover that for last 
year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Last year we had budgeted 750,000 for 
grants to pension funds. However, none of that 750,000 was 
taken up. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  If I understand the figures correctly from two 
years ago, the corresponding figure for pension fund investment 
with grants given under the venture capital program would have 
been in the vicinity of some $3 million. And correct me if I’m 
mistaken in that, but I’d like to know how you can explain that 
two years ago it would have been in the neighbourhood of $3 
million, last year nothing was paid out, and why it is do you 
expect to pay nothing out this year? 
 
(1445) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  In 1986-87 the total grants paid to 
pension fund investors was $1,260,000, and in 1987-88 grants 
paid to pension fund investors was a million and a half dollars. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  If I understand correctly then, I thought I had 
heard you say earlier that last year you had allocated 750,000, 
but that nothing was paid out. And now I understand . . . Do 
you want to clarify? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Yes. Okay, in ’85-86, grants paid to 
pension fund investors was 1.26 million, and in ’86-87, grants 
paid to pension fund investors was one and a half million. And 
last year we had budgeted $750,000 and there was no take up 
on that, meaning that pension funds didn’t invest in VCCs 
(venture capital corporations) last year. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  And that, I presume, is why you’ve reduced 
the figure for this year to 416,000. And where does that figure 
of 416,000 appear in the Estimates book? 
 
  



 
April 27, 1988 

 

877 
 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  It’s business and development grants, 
vote 66. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Okay, can you tell me why it is then that 
under the venture capital branch, operating and administration 
expenditures, you’re increasing spending by some $76,000 over 
last year for the administration of this venture capital plan at a 
time when last year you had no grants given to pension fund 
investments, and this year you’re reducing you’re expectations 
in terms of the tax credits that will be issued under the venture 
capital by more than half? In other words, the program seems to 
be winding down, if any thing, by far more than half over the 
previous year, and yet expenditure continues to climb. How can 
you explain that? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  To the hon. member, the funds are 
required to have independent audits performed on the selected 
venture capital corporations and eligible small businesses. And 
though the program may be winding down or not, from the 
pension investment point of view there were 36 new venture 
capital corporations established in 1987-88, bringing that total 
to 150. So we do selective audits on those. So the work-load 
actually hasn’t gone down just because the pension funds 
haven’t invested. There are other VCCs being established. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Is it safe to assume then that you are doing 
more auditing than you have done in the past? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Yes. Well we’re doing more auditing 
because there are more venture capital corporations out there. 
Take, say, the example in the first year, there would have just 
been, say, 12 created. So that year we would have had 12 
audits, six audits, whatever. So the next year following, you add 
another 12, so you’ve got 24 firms to deal with. So it just keeps 
going up. 
 
And as I said last year, there were 36 new corporations formed 
for a total of 151 which still have to be audited. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Could you give me the total number of 
venture capital firms that were created for each of the years 
since the program has begun? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  To the member, in the first year of the 
program, ’84-85, there was six venture capital corporations 
established; ’85-86, there was 46 established; ’86-87, there 
were 60 new venture capital corporations established, and last 
year, as I stated, there was 36 new corporations established 
under that program. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  How many audits were conducted last year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Last year 12 of the large venture capital 
corporations were audited by outside independent firms, and the 
department monitored all the others. 
 
I should point out that one of the requirements under the 
venture capital program is that 40 per cent of their moneys be 
invested within the first 18 month, and an addition 30 per cent 
be invested in the next 30 months, or up to the 30 months. So 
these are the type of things we’re auditing for. 
 

Mr. Koenker:  How is it that you anticipate reduced tax 
expenditures this year, down to $5 million under the venture 
capital tax credit, as opposed to last year when you anticipated 
tax expenditure of $12 million? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  That was put in by Finance as a limit on 
the program, meaning that if we reach that $5 million we’ll 
have to go back to Finance. And it’s a way of keeping track of 
costs to government. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  It may be a way of keeping track of costs to 
government, but it also would seem to reflect a commitment to 
this particular program on the part of the government. Would 
you not agree? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  The $5 million is by no way meant to 
limit the activity within the venture capital program, because 
it’s been a very good vehicle, particularly in smaller centres, to 
raise the type of equity capital needed to establish new 
businesses. But as I’ve said, it’s just a constraint put on us by 
Finance so that it’s monitored for the whole year. As I said, this 
no way means that if we get to the 5 million that that’s cut off 
right there. It just means it’s an easier way for government to 
assess costs to the department. We would have to go back to 
Finance after that for more funds. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  What is the figure for the tax expenditures 
that were credited against the venture capital program for last 
year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Two point eight million, approximately 
30 per cent  2.8 million. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Just so that I understand, let me clarify 
things. Last year 12 million . . . it was estimated that 12 million 
in tax credits would be required as expenditures . . . the tax 
expenditures of 12 million, I should say, and in fact only 2.8 
million was spent. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  No. Last year in ’87-88 with the 36 
venture capital corporations that were set up, it had an 
investment pool of approximately 9 million, of which about 2.8 
of that was for tax credits. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  And yet the Department of Finance had 
estimated that the tax exemptions, or expenditures rather, that 
the tax expenditures would be 12 million. Is that not correct? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  That 12 million refers to other 
programs besides the venture capital corporation. There’s the 
livestock tax credit plan, the stock savings plan, there’s other 
plans. I think the 12 million is the total tax credits given . . . or 
non-budgetary expenditures. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Well looking at the budget address for last 
year, that’s not what it appears to say. It appears to say that the 
total for the venture capital tax credit is 12 million; that the 
livestock investment tax credit is 6 million; that the livestock 
facilities tax credit is 2 million; that the stock savings tax credit 
is 3 million, and that the labour-sponsored venture capital tax 
credit is half a million.  
  



 
April 27, 1988 

 

878 
 

So what I’m asking is whether or not the Department of Finance 
did in fact estimate that they would have tax expenditures of 
$12 million for your venture capital tax program and in fact 
only issued tax expenditures to the tune of 2.8 million? Is that 
not the case? 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  I don’t have last year’s budget address 
here. Now I’m going to go off the top of my head. The 12 
million that they’re referring to may be a projection of the 
investment in the venture capital corporation. I’ve asked for last 
year’s budget speech to see if that is in fact correct. 
 
If it is correct that Finance was forecasting that there would be 
approximately $12 million invested in venture capital 
corporation program . . . Last year approximately 9 million was 
invested in the program, resulting in about 2.8 million in tax 
credits. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Madam Minister, we are talking about the tax 
expenditures, not the amount of investment in the venture 
capital tax program. We’re talking about the tax expenditures 
estimated by the Department of Finance on page 59 of last 
year’s budget address, and surely to heaven your officials must 
have that. And it seems to indicate very clearly that there is a 
tax expenditure calculated by the Department of Finance for 
venture capital tax credit of $12 million. Will you not agree? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  No, I’m not going to agree until I see it, 
and if you are quoting from the budget speech on the tax side, 
you should be directing the question to the Minister of Finance. 
 
I’m telling you that last year, under the venture capital program, 
there was 36 new venture capital corporations created with a 
capital equity of approximately $9 million, which resulted in 
tax credits of approximately 2.8 million. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Are you telling me, Madam Minister, that 
your officials do not have the figure for the Department of 
Finance tax expenditures last year, with them at the present 
time? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Don’t be so insulting. We are dealing 
with this year’s budget, not last year’s budget . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  You are being insulting. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  . . . and I am attempting to answer your 
questions, if you don’t mind. 
 
Mr. Shillington:  Madam Minister, I want to respond to that 
comment about being insulting. You are being insulting, 
coming here for your estimates ill-prepared. I just cannot 
believe that your officials do not have this information with 
them; and if they don’t, then, Madam Minister, you ought to 
adjourn these estimates and we’ll come back another day when 
you’re prepared. It is you who is insulting the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Okay. On page 59 of the budget 
address of June 1987, the Saskatchewan tax incentives  

programs, the VCC tax credit, $12 million  that is a forecast. 
That’s a forecast, and they forecast to the best of their ability. 
And probably, based on the growth of the program over the 
previous two years or since its inception, perhaps Finance was 
expecting in an investment pool of approximately $36 million. 
However, if you recall, there was a downturn, or there was a 
crash in the stock market which perhaps scared off some 
potential investors. 
 
But I’m saying that for ’87-88 the actual investment in the 
program amounted to $9 million, resulting in a $2.8 million tax 
credit. But I would say that the 12 million is based on previous 
year’s results of the program where you had almost 34 million 
invested in one year, 33 million in another year, and these are 
our forecast. And I would imagine they expected the investment 
last year to be in the area of 36, but it didn’t happen. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Well, Madam Minister, what we have just 
seen is an example, and a very good one, of how your Minister 
of Finance plays with the public’s figures and the budgetary 
process to artificially inflate his estimates, or maybe we shall 
say “guesstimates,” as to what the deficit is going to be. So that 
at the end of the year he can very handily come back and say, 
look at how well we’ve done to estimate the $12 million in tax 
expenditures are going to be issued under the venture capital 
program, and then to be out by some 9 or $10 million is really 
plain reckless  either that or being very incompetent, on the 
part of the Minister of Finance. 
 
And we see here very clearly how it is that he can stand in this 
Assembly, not more than a month ago, and crow about how 
much he’s reduced the anticipated deficit. Well sure he can 
reduce it if he plays with numbers like he has here. Will you not 
agree that that is the case? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  No, I won’t agree that that is the case, 
because if you look at the program since its inception, I would 
say that, based on the performance of the program that the 
projection of raising 36 to $40 million last year was not an 
unreasonable figure. Because of circumstances  a bit of a 
downturn in the economy, the crash of the stock market  the 
venture capital corporation program did not achieve that level 
of investment last year. But given the performance of the 
program since its inception, it could have. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Well since we’re into this now, perhaps we 
ought to go a little bit further. And I’d ask you to provide the 
figures for each of the years since the inception of this program 
for the investment pool raised and the venture capital tax 
expenditures for each of the years, and then we’ll see whether 
or not the minister is playing with figures. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  In the first year of the program there 
was, 1984-85, approximately 1.2 million was invested initially 
in the program; 1985-86, there were 46 venture capital 
corporations established. There was 33.9 million invested, 11.3 
million was tax credit, less the 1.2 million which went to the 
pension fund . . . grants to pension fund investors; ’86-87, there 
were 60 venture capital corporations established for a net pool 
of $32.9 million raised. Of that, approximately 11 was for tax  
  



 
April 27, 1988 

 

879 
 

credits, less the one and a half million which would have went 
to a grant to the pension fund investors. This year we have 9 
million . . . or ‘87-88 is 9 million raised; approximately 3 
million  2.8 for tax credits  and there was no grants to 
pension funds in that fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  And based on your experience with the 
department, what do you project then for this coming year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Okay. This year we expect a slight 
improvement maybe in the 11  eleven and a half  $12 
million range of investments. Probably an improvement over 
last year. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  What is the mortality rate for investment for 
venture capital firms? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Since the program was brought in, eight 
venture capital corporations have been deregistered. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Can you get . . . could the minister give me 
the names of those venture capital companies that have been 
deregistered? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Of the eight venture capital 
corporations that have been deregistered, three were 
deregistered voluntarily and five were deregistered because of 
bankruptcy, and we will send you a list of the names of the 
eight venture capital corporations. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  When might I expect to receive the names of 
those eight venture capital corporations that have been 
deregistered? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Within a few days. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  It appears obvious that the minister has those 
names in front of her right now. Would the minister read them 
to us now, rather than just go through the unnecessary trouble 
of supplying them down the road? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Yes, I’ll read them. The three that 
voluntarily were deregistered was the Meadow Lake and 
District Venture Capital Corporation, HDSZPFB Investments 
Ltd . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  What number? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  No number. Venture 2000 Corp.  
now those three were voluntarily deregistered. The five 
companies that suffered financial bankruptcy were StrataFrac 
Venture Fund Inc., Agro Equities Limited, Tyner Valley 
Venture Capital Corporation, Balcarres Community 
Development Corporation, and Valley Venture Capital 
Corporation. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Is the Ambrosia Venture Fund still operative? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  With regards to the company named, 
based on affidavits filed with the department, it initially was 
registered as a venture capital corporation.  

However, subsequent investigations by our department and a 
hearing by the Securities Commission indicated that the 
requirements of the program had not been met, and therefore it 
really was not a venture capital corporation. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  So you’re telling me that Ambrosia Foods . . . 
the Ambrosia venture fund was not in fact a venture capital 
corporation. Is that what you’re telling me? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  The venture capital corporation had 
never had a closing, therefore they could not invest into 
Ambrosia Foods. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Run that by me again. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  The venture capital corporation never 
had a closing of their share issue, therefore they could not 
invest into Ambrosia Foods. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  I want to make sure I understand what you’re 
saying. You’re saying that the venture capital corporation never 
had a closing of the share issue  therefore, what? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  I could tell the member that the moneys 
that were raised by the venture capital corporation, because the 
Securities Commission ruled  and that money has to be held 
in trust and must be held in trust until the closing date of the 
offering  the Securities Commission ruled that there had in 
fact not been a closing date, therefore the money could not go 
into the venture capital investment. 
 
I would say, as I’m sure the member is aware, there is an 
investigation going on at this time into this matter, so I would 
prefer not to say any more on this matter. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  I’m not sure that I understand. Maybe just to 
clarify again: were there venture capital tax credits issued with 
respect to Ambrosia venture fund? Did the Government of 
Saskatchewan issue venture . . . tax expenditures  the 30 per 
cent tax credit  to those people who invested in the Ambrosia 
venture fund? 
 
My question is, Madam Minister, did the Government of 
Saskatchewan issue tax expenditures, or in other words the 30 
per cent tax credit, to people who had invested in Ambrosia 
venture fund? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Yes, there was approximately 200,000 
issued in tax credits. All the individuals have been notified that 
it was an ineligible program and that the tax credits will have to 
be paid back. However  well, it would be 30 per cent of the 
200,000 would have been issued as tax credits  however, no 
action will be taken pending the outcome of the investigation 
that’s going on at this time. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Well, you indicated that the money that was 
raised was held  is being held in trust, is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  The moneys that are raised by any 
venture capital are to be held in trust for a certain period  
  



 
April 27, 1988 

 

880 
 

of time until they reach the amount that they are targeting for, 
okay, whether it’s this one or any other venture capital, when 
you’re soliciting money from the public. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  So those people who invested in the 
Ambrosia venture fund and received the tax credit which 
they’re now required to pay back, have they  are they able to 
recoup their investment from the trust fund that was 
established? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  That’s what the investigation is trying 
to determine. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  And why wouldn’t they be able to recoup 
that investment if the funds are being held in trust? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  I can’t say anything more about it 
except that that is an essential part of the investigation by the 
RCMP as to the use of those trust funds. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Who is holding the funds in trust, Madam 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  I can just tell you that the disposition of 
the funds held in trust is at the centre of this investigation, and 
that’s all the information I can give on this matter. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Well surely you must know, Madam 
Minister, who is holding the funds in trust. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  As I stated, that’s what the 
investigation is about, and until the investigation is complete, I 
can’t say any more. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  What is the role of your department, Madam 
Minister, with respect to the protection of investors and how 
funds are in fact held in trust on their behalf? What is your 
responsibility as the minister responsible for the administration 
of the venture capital fund in a matter like this? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  I can tell the member that the venture 
capital corporation regulations are under my department  the 
implementation of the program, helping people set these up  
but the actual raising of public moneys through share offerings 
are under the regulations of the Securities Commission. And 
once it’s vetted there and approved, then the portion that we are 
concerned about is whether or not the regulations as to the 
disposition of those funds are correct  such as the 40 per cent 
in the first 18 months, and another 30 per cent invested within 
the 30-month period. So the investigation is the result of 
concerns raised by us and the Securities Commission. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  You indicated earlier that you anticipate 
doing more auditing this year than you have in the past. Does 
your auditing of the venture capital programs include an audit 
of those funds that are being held in trust? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Yes, we audit, firstly, to see whether 
the 30 per cent requirement of holding 30 per cent of the fund in 
trust, is one of the things we look at. We also look to see 
whether or not the 40 and 30 per cent have been invested in the 
proper categories. 
 

(1530) 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Well if your department is responsible for 
those 30 per cent of the funds that are being held in trust, and if 
your department issued the 30 per cent tax credit with respect to 
Ambrosia venture fund, how is it that they now find the 
investors, who in invested in that fund, now find themselves 
holding an empty bag. How can that possibly be? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  It was an audit done by personnel in the 
department that uncovered potential irregularities which were 
than reported to the Securities Commission for further 
investigation. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you. Madam Minister, I just have 
a couple of questions which come from the discussion that I 
have just been listening to. Can you clarify for the House what 
the nature and the purpose of this investigation is? Can you, 
with some precision, tell the House about this investigation? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  It’s a fraud investigation by the RCMP. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Madam Minister, am I correct that I 
heard you say earlier, moments ago, that your department is 
responsible for assuring that the funds are held in trust? Do you 
oversee it? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  The venture capital program works on 
this basis: 30 per cent of the total funds raised must be held in 
trust. Okay? And this 30 per cent is released on a pro rata basis 
on investment in eligible small businesses, so that once the 70 
per cent investment in eligible small businesses has been met, 
then that 30 per cent that’s to be held in trust is released. 
 
But initially when the corporation is set up, 30 per cent of a 
hundred thousand or a million  whatever they’re raising  
must be held in trust. And as the venture capital corporation 
invests in these eligible businesses, this 30 per cent is released 
on a pro rata basis. And once 70 per cent of all the funds are 
invested, then this 30 per cent in trust is released. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you, Madam Minister. So you are 
saying, therefore, that your department is responsible for 
overseeing this trust to make sure that it is in fact being looked 
after and that it is put wherever it ought to be put  it is a 
responsibility of your department. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  That’s correct. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Madam Minister, then why are you not 
able, if that’s correct  your department is responsible; you 
oversee it  why are you not able to tell the House who is 
holding the funds in trust? If you are not able to tell the House 
that, then somebody has been irresponsible. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Okay, with regards to this particular 
corporation, the department received sworn affidavits that the 
money was there and had been raised.  
  



 
April 27, 1988 

 

881 
 

We also received legal confirmation that the 30 per cent that 
was to be held in trust was held in trust, and so that when the 
department received the investment documents which indicated 
investment in an eligible small business, that 30 per cent of the 
trust fund was released. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  I hear what you’re saying. Now will you 
finish the rest of the answer and tell us where it was being held 
in trust? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  It has been held in a solicitor’s trust. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Well it may have been, according to the 
way this thing had developed, member from Regina South; it 
may well have been held in a shoe box somewhere. Either that 
or somebody who was supposed to be overseeing it didn’t quite 
oversee it adequately. 
 
Now you’re saying, Madam Minister, that there were sworn 
affidavits saying that the money indeed was there, and you took 
it at face value without any checking. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  As I said, the documents received by 
the department were sworn affidavits, sworn in front of a 
commissioner of oath. We received legal confirmation that the 
30 per cent was being held in trust. We also received the 
necessary investment documents which indicated that the 
investment had been made to the allowable limit, and the trust 
fund was released. 
 
It was after this that some irregularities occurred and that an 
investigation was asked for. And the crux of the matter is the 
sworn affidavits and the holding of the trust moneys in the 
solicitor’s account. This is what the investigation is all about. 
And as I said, it’s being conducted by the RCMP fraud squad. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Madam Minister, in other words you are 
 if I am correct in hearing what you’re saying  is that 
you’re investigating whether in fact the sworn affidavits 
involved fraudulent statements. Am I correct? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  That’s what I’ve been saying all along. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  When did this investigation begin? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  This VCC was registered December 31, 
1986. In February of 1987 we did an internal VCC audit which 
prompted the city police of Saskatoon to conduct an 
investigation of their own, and upon completion of their 
investigation they turned it over to the RCMP for further 
investigation. 
 
Mr. Rolfes:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, I 
stand to be corrected, but the date you gave me was December 
6. Was that the date you started your investigation? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  February, it was during February. 
 
Mr. Rolfes:  Okay. On what was December 6, 1986? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  31st, ’86, they were registered. 
 

Mr. Rolfes:  All right, Madam, that’s what I thought you had 
said. They were registered on December 31, 1986. My 
understanding is that Gerry Halischuk, who is a lawyer with the 
commission  is that correct? Or was? All right. My 
understanding is . . . let me just read to you from the 
Leader-Post, Friday, September 25: 
 

Gerry Halischuk told a commission at a hearing Thursday, 
Ambrosia Venture Corporation didn’t raise the minimum 
amount of investments required before it closed its share 
offering last November 30. 

 
They were registered on December 6, and they closed their 
share offering on November 30, before they were even 
registered? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Did you quote the Leader-Post from 
December of ’87 or ’86? 
 
Mr. Koenker:  ’87. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  ’87. Well as I say, the venture capital 
was registered in December 31, ’86, okay? And it was an 
investigation done by the department in February of ’87, also an 
investigation done by the Saskatoon City Police. Well there’s 
still hearings held. There were security hearings held as a result 
of all of this. So don’t . . . In the fall of ’87 the RCMP were 
referred the file by the Saskatoon City Police. 
 
Mr. Rolfes:  Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, look, this was 
September 25, 1987. They are referring to November, all right? 
 
An Hon. Member:  ’87. 
 
Mr. Rolfes:  How can they? It’s September. Goodness 
gracious! 
 
Look, November of ’86 they closed the share offerings. You 
said they were registered on December 6, 1986, which was after 
they closed their share offering. How can they have a share 
offering closed, and then you register them after? 
 
Do you mean to tell me that they weren’t registered? Is that 
why you said before it was an illegal venture? You said before 
that it was an illegal venture. Why was it an illegal venture? 
Would you mind explaining why you said before it was an 
illegal venture? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Okay. Any company, before they are 
registered, must raise the funds that they say they’re going to 
raise. Those funds have to be held in trust, okay. So this 
particular company went out and supposedly raised funds and 
were to hold those funds in trust before they were registered. 
The department received sworn affidavits that the amount of 
money had been raised. We had legal confirmation that the 30 
per cent that was to be held in trust was held in trust. It was at 
this time that they were registered when we got the sworn 
affidavits that they had raised the amount that they had set out 
to raise. 
 
  



 
April 27, 1988 

 

882 
 

A subsequent investigation in February of ’87 indicated some 
irregularities. In September of ’87 a hearing was held by the 
Securities Commission to in fact establish whether or not a 
share offering had been closed prior to registration of this 
company. 
 
The RCMP fraud squad have been brought into the situation by 
the city of Saskatoon police. So I hope you understand the 
sequence of events. 
 
An Hon. Member:  He understands. The question is, do 
you? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Yes, I understand it fully. We don’t 
know whether there is anything illegal or not. I said it was not 
an eligible . . . I said it was deemed to be not an eligible VCC. 
There’s a big difference. 
 
Mr. Rolfes:  Mr. Chairman, I know there’s a big difference, 
and I think if you check the records, maybe you meant 
ineligible, but you said illegal, because I wrote it down as soon 
as you said it. And if you meant ineligible, okay, fine, I can 
understand that. That’s why I asked the question, if it was 
illegal, why did you find it illegal? But you meant ineligible, 
and ineligible because the minimum amount of moneys were 
not raised. I can understand that. If that’s what you meant, okay, 
fine. 
 
Madam Minister, there are a lot of people who are going to 
suffer because of the failure of the Ambrosia venture, 
particularly some young construction people who put in about 
120 or $130,000. And I really think that it’s incumbent upon the 
Securities Commission to be a little more forceful in its 
investigation before it registers companies for venture capital. 
 
I don’t expect a response because some other members want to 
ask some questions, and I know we’re running out of time. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Madam Minister, when do you expect this 
investigation to be concluded? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Really that’s up to the RCMP. I 
wouldn’t have any idea. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  How many investigators do you presently 
have doing audits? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  We have a staff of two, plus the 
contracting out of the larger VCCs to be audited by outside 
firms. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  When did you begin contracting out of the 
audits of the larger firms? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  The second year of the program, 
’85-86. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Could you give me the figures for the amount 
of venture capital tax credits that were expended for those eight 
venture capital corporations that were deregistered? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  It amounted to $726,000. 
 

Mr. Koenker:  That is the total of the venture capital tax 
credits issued for all eight deregistered companies? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  We recovered $86,000 of that 726,000. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  But that 726,000 represents the total public 
investment in the eight deregistered companies minus the 
86,000 that you received; is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  That’s correct. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Is Ambrosia ventures still allowed to issue  
it hasn’t been deregistered, I note  is it still allowed to have 
share issues and to raise capital at the present time? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  No, it isn’t. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  I note, Madam Minister, that Supercart 
venture capital corporation has not been deregistered. Why is 
that the case? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Well even though its investment has 
gone, the corporation is still in existence. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Is the corporation active? Are you . . . and 
secondly, are you actively monitoring that corporation? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  The department is currently in 
discussions with the corporation to deregister it. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Would the minister endeavour to provide me 
with a list of the 150 or so venture capital corporations that are 
presently in existence, along with the amount of share capital 
that was associated with that corporation; also the 
corresponding 30 per cent tax credit that was issued. Is that a 
possibility, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Yes, yes we will, and we’ll get it to you 
within a few days with the other information you’d requested. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Okay. Just for the record, I’m asking for a list 
of the venture capital corporations, the registration number, the 
amount of capital raised under that venture, the amount of tax 
credit issued under that venture. 
 
Does the minister also have figures for the number of jobs that 
were created by these venture capital corporations? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Jobs aren’t tracked with the registration 
of the corporation. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Can the minister give us an idea of how many 
jobs have been created, in her estimation, under the venture 
capital program? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  That would be difficult because the 
venture capital corporation may invest in an existing business or 
in a new venture. You know, one fund may invest in four or 
five different types of businesses. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Well it may be difficult for you to provide 
that figure, but your government talks an awful lot about how 
many jobs it’s creating with its economic activity  
and programs like venture capital. The public has made an 



 
April 27, 1988 

 

883 
 

investment of some . . . well probably $30 million in venture 
capital tax credits, and we really have no figures to substantiate 
your claim that it’s creating jobs. 
 
I think the question still remains, and you obviously can’t give 
us an answer. Does this venture capital tax program really in 
fact significantly stimulate economic activity and create real 
meaningful employment for Saskatchewan people? And I 
would appreciate any figures that you could provide in that 
respect. 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  I can tell the member that since the 
inception of the program the net equity capitalization of the 151 
VCCs have been $73 million, which means that over $58 
million of that has been invested in the eligible small 
businesses, a lot of them in the rural areas. 
 
It would be nice to track that job creation component of it; 
however, a lot of the investments may take three years to get up 
and running. Some of the investment is put into existing 
businesses to protect existing jobs, some of it is just put into a 
business for expansion, some into a brand-new business. 
 
But I agree, it would be a good statistic to try and track. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Madam Minister, I’ll just conclude by saying, 
the public again has made an investment of some $30 million, 
approaching $30 million in this program, and you can’t tell us 
what we have to show for it. 
 
I can point to companies like Joytec who have received 1.125 
million in venture capital tax expenditures by the people of 
Saskatchewan with nothing to show for it but jobs going to 
Japan. We all know about Supercart, that received venture 
capital tax credits, and again there were no jobs associated with 
that. The Ambrosia food venture we just spent half an hour 
talking about  no jobs associated with that. 
 
I think it behooves you, as minister, to provide some sort of 
statistics with respect to the job creation, when the public is 
investing this kind of money in these kinds of corporations. And 
I’m just curious to know how many other corporations, venture 
capital corporations, are being looked at with a view toward 
deregistration at the present time. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  We can’t say how many would be 
deregistered upon an audit; all we can say is that the audits and 
the monitoring of the remaining 151 are in place, and hopefully 
none of them will show up any irregularities. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank:  Mr. Chairman, Madam Chairman, I want 
to ask a question about a company  and this is just a general 
question  about a company that may want to start up a 
venture capital corporation, and it begins to collect funds. and 
when it has collected the funds and applies and is registered as a 
venture capital corporation, then I believe you said earlier they 
have to invest 40 per cent within a certain number of months 
and another 30 per cent within 30 months, I believe, and then 
they can, at  

that point, they’re free to release the 30 per cent that’s in trust 
for further investment in venture capital. Have I portrayed that 
correctly, and what are the figures? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Okay. Normally how a VCC would be 
set up: if you and I wanted to raise some capital, we would go 
talk to the department, tell them our intentions, and say we were 
going to raise $50,000. Then we would go out, and once we met 
Security Commission regulations and stipulations, we would 
raise that  say we were raising 50,000  we would go out 
and raise 50,000. That money that we collect prior to 
registration must be held in trust. 
 
Once we have reached the amount that we want, the company is 
registered, at which time another trust account is set up and 30 
per cent of that 50,000 would have to be held in trust. Then we 
would make decisions as to what we would invest that in. And 
we have 18 months to invest 40 per cent, and we have 30 
months to invest the other 30 per cent, and once we reach that 
investment level of 70 per cent of our VCC, the trust provisions 
are taken off of the 30 per cent  the remaining 30 per cent. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank:  Thirty months, is that an aggregate of the 
18 months, plus an additional number of months  12 months, 
or is it another additional 30 months on top of the 18 months. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  It’s 30 in total. In the first 12 months 
we invest the 40 per cent, and then we have up to, what? 18 
months to invest the remaining 30. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank:  Twelve months, right? 
 
All right, Madam Chairman. And once the venture capital 
corporation is beginning to invest the funds and it has the 18 
months on the first 40 per cent in which to invest it, at that point 
they’re eligible to give the tax credit, is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Once the VCC is registered and the 30 
per cent trust account is established, then the tax credits are 
issued to the investors of the VCC. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank:  Right, and they would be issued as the 
time is passed and as the money is invested? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  They are issued upon registration and 
the setting up of the trust account. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank:  Okay. I think I have it now, Madam 
Chairman, or Mr. Chairman. Once the 40 per cent is approved 
and invested, the tax credits are issued for that 40 per cent? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  No; all the tax credits are issued to the 
investors at the time of registration and the setting up of the 
trust account. Like if you and I went out and started a VCC and 
we go 10 people here, these 10 people would receive their tax 
credit once we registered our company and set up the 30 per 
cent trust account. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank:  Your department polices that, is that 
correct, to make sure those conditions are maintained? 
 
  



 
April 27, 1988 

 

884 
 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Yes, we’re there to place it. That’s one 
of the reasons the 30 per cent trust is put into place until the 
eligible investments are made. If we don’t meet the criteria, that 
30 per cent is there. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank:  And what if the tax credits are issued, 
but the company, the venture capital corporation, fails to make 
the investments, the necessary investments, what happens to the 
tax credits? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Yes, if a company is deregistered 
because they don’t meet the investment requirements of 40 and 
30, the department, or the government, can attach that 30 per 
cent that’s in the trust fund. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank:  I wonder, Madam Minister, if I was to 
give you a name of a company, could you take me through it? I 
don’t have to have the information now; just give me a written 
explanation of it and whether they’ve conformed with all the 
regulations that are related to the venture capital corporation. 
Could you do that for me . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, at 
a later time. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Yes, we can. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank:  I’ll just pick one out of the top here. I 
have a list here. Take a Saskatoon one  take First Merchant 
Equities Incorporated. And I want to know if they’ve 
conformed with all the rules and regulations, and if I could have 
the figures attached that would serve to satisfy me. Thank you, 
Madam Minister. 
 
Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, I 
want to turn these estimates to co-operation and co-operative 
development. I want to start by illustrating your government’s 
lack of understanding and your lack of commitment to the 
co-operative sector of our economy. 
 
In 1982, you took over a government that included a department 
of co-operation and co-operative development that provided 89 
person-years of employment, that was dedicated to promoting 
co-operative principles and supporting co-ops at all levels. 
 
Since then, we on this side of the Assembly have been 
chastising your government year after year after year for your 
repeated reductions in service there. You, simply put, fail to 
recognize the importance of this third and distinct and important 
engine of growth in our Saskatchewan economy. 
 
I want to point out that the Leader of the Opposition, in major 
addresses and in smaller gatherings clear across the province, 
mentions and talks about  discusses the issues involved  
talks about people of Saskatchewan co-operating with each 
other for the betterment of all. 
 
The member for Saskatoon Riversdale truly understands that 
what the co-operative ideal requires is simply some confidence 
 a firm confidence by our own people in their own abilities; 
investment of our own money; and a requirement that we can 
work things out amongst ourselves, a sort of a “we can do it 
together” attitude. 
 

And this working together attitude and action is what built our 
Saskatchewan into the province that we have today. Our 
pioneers came to a land that was prairie; there was bush. There 
was promise of a future, but there was many, many hardships to 
overcome. But they very quickly realized that to make their 
dreams and their visions and their ideas a reality, that they had 
to work together, get together and work co-operatively. And 
that was the one critical area that . . . the thing that they could 
do together to improve their economic and social lot in life. 
 
Saskatchewan has been well endowed with natural resources, 
but we’re particularly blessed with people that truly understand 
that we have to share dreams and vision, and work together 
co-operatively to meet those dreams and those visions. 
 
Saskatchewan, Madam Minister, does have some economic 
disadvantages in relation to, say, New York or Toronto. The 
disadvantages, economically speaking, are we do not have a 
mass population gathered in one location, so truly, things that 
work in New York or in Toronto may not be the best thing for 
us here in Saskatchewan. We genuinely rely on our friends and 
our neighbours in a manner that people in the larger urban 
centres such as Toronto and new York, don’t have to. 
 
I mentioned earlier that the department of co-ops and of 
co-operation and co-operative development employed 89 
person-years of employment in 1980 and ’81, but let’s observe 
what’s happened since then. 
 
In 1982-83, the first full year you were in office, you reduced 
10 person-years, leaving 79 person-years of employment; then 
the following year, ’85-86, you cut it to 71 person-years; the 
following year you again cut it to 62.3 person-year. After four 
years, you had roughly two-thirds the number of people 
working in the department of co-operation and co-operative 
development that were there and working and promoting and 
supporting co-ops when your government came into office. 
Clearly, that illustrates that you just have no feeling for 
co-operatives, no understanding of the importance that 
co-operative have had in the development of our province. 
 
And then, taking you a little further, in 1987-88, the department 
of co-operation and co-operative development simply ceased to 
exist. You put it into a new department of tourism, small 
business and co-operatives, co-operatives being the third and 
minority group in that new department. That was formed, again 
the person-years declined. Certainly the person-years in the 
co-operative area did. We went through that in last year’s 
estimates and very clearly there was a major reduction there. 
 
Then in 1988-89 you again reorganized. Only this time, Madam 
Minister, I defy you to find co-operatives mentioned anywhere 
under any government department. It simply does not even get 
mentioned. We have now a Department of Economic 
Development and Tourism. Small business and co-operative are 
somewhere . . . you’re responsible for them in that department, 
but co-operatives is not mentioned in the title, even. How in the 
world can anybody that has any interest in finding  
  



 
April 27, 1988 

 

885 
 

something out about co-operatives, how can they find out who 
to go to, even? You’ve got a major problem there and one that I 
sincerely hope you address. 
 
Madam Minister, I ask you: how can you justify to the people 
of Saskatchewan, and particularly to the non-aligned co-ops, 
how do you justify these continuing cuts in services and 
promotion of co-operatives, and how can you justify that lack of 
vision for the co-operative sector? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  It’s obvious, Mr. Chairman, that the 
member is giving the same speech that he did last year in 
estimates, and once again, the member is not dealing in fact but 
he is dealing in fiction and typical rhetoric. 
 
I might point out to the member that this government views the 
co-operative movement as a very important and integral part of 
the economic development and diversification of this province. 
 
We are now dealing with the estimates of Economic 
Development and Tourism, not Economic Development, 
Tourism and small business as he stated. We view the 
co-operative movement as an economic development 
movement, the same way small businesses or large businesses 
are part of the economic development and diversification of our 
provinces. He knows full well the impact that the four or five 
very large co-operatives have on the economic stability of our 
province. 
 
I might point out to him that last year we had a record number 
of new co-operative formed and registered in the province. And 
since 1982, on an annual basis, we have exceeded yearly, the 
largest number of co-operatives that were ever registered in a 
single year under the NDP. 
 
This year we have 60 new co-operatives registered. Last year 
we had 77 new co-operatives registered. In 1985-86 there was 
45 new co-operatives registered. In 1984-85 there was 55, and I 
think that’s more than double, if I recall, what the former 
deputy minister of co-ops had told me. I think he told me a 
number of years ago that each year that we have been in, we’ve 
more than doubled the largest year of registrations under the 
NDP. This month alone we’ve had four new co-ops registered, 
with seven pending  alone, just for this month. 
 
I might point out the accomplishments of the co-operatives 
branch of the department. We’ve had 19 new feeder 
co-operatives incorporated to allow members to participate in 
the feeder associations loan guarantee program, and total 
membership will exceed 500, and they will be eligible for loans 
of more than $12 million to purchase cattle for feeding. That’s 
one co-operative program introduced by this government. 
 
Twelve co-operatives were established in other 
agriculture-related areas, including forage, soil conservation, 
and marketing. Three rural development co-operative were 
established with government assistance, and municipalities will 
join together to promote economic development in their area. 
And one community development co-operative was also 
established with similar goals. 

We had 17 co-operatives established to provide non-profit 
services to their services to their communities, and they include 
play schools, a day care centre, a swimming pool, a restaurant, 
and a variety of other services. 
 
Last year we had three new housing co-operatives established, 
and the value of these three projects alone to the provincial 
economy is $10 million. 
 
So for you to stand there and weep and wail and gnash your 
teeth and wring your hands and say that the co-operative 
movement is dead in the province, is sheer balderdash. I can’t 
believe that you would say that. You are not looking at what’s 
going on in our province. 
 
The Co-op upgrader here in Regina, I think right on the back 
doorstep of your seat, the largest project ever in the history of 
Saskatchewan and western Canada, done co-operatively with a 
Progressive Conservative government and the federal 
government and the co-operative movement. That was 
something that was never accomplished, never ever suggested 
under a New Democratic government for 11 year. You weren’t 
interested in becoming co-partners with the co-operative 
movement. You wanted to do things yourself. It took our 
Premier Devine to talk to the . . . oh, sorry. 
 
Mr. Chairman:  I’d ask the member not to mention 
member’s names, please. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  I apologize. 
 
It took an astute, forward-thinking Premier like the Premier of 
our province, the member from Estevan, to approach Federated 
to enhance that facility out there  the biggest single project in 
the history of our province. 
 
Now you say that the co-operative effort of the department is 
dead. Well I’m going to read into the record so that next year 
when you get up with the same tirade, please change your 
speech from the year before and the year before that and the 
year before that. 
 
I will give you the branch activity summary for 1987-88. This is 
meetings attended by representatives of my department. Public 
relations meetings  they attended 934 meetings throughout 
the province; meetings attended on co-operative development 
 404 meetings attended by the astute people of my 
department; general membership meetings  230 meetings 
attended by officials of my department; board or committee 
meetings attended by representatives of the Department of 
Economic Development and Tourism  736; other meetings, 
whether it was with two or three, or five or six people  1656. 
Total attendance at these meetings  13,859 meetings attended 
last year by representatives from here in Regina and the people 
that have scattered . . . the co-op accounts are scattered 
throughout the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  A very, very good record, and they 
have the audacity to stand there and say, oh, you don’t  
  



 
April 27, 1988 

 

886 
 

care about co-ops. That’s balderdash. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Oh, she’s using that word again, the 
b-word again. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Not only do we, and officials from my 
. . . It’s better word than boondoggle, by the way. 
 
Not only do officials in my department attend meetings but they 
also provide services to the co-operative movement. Last year, 
1987-88, these were the services that were provided by people 
in the department: training workshops held, 105; periodic 
reviews doing follow-up 268 workshops were reviewed; 
training for members with regard to their legislative programs 
or requirements, 1,077 meetings were held . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  We’d need to have a 25 hour day if they 
were to do any more. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  They do; they literally do. They have 
dedicated their like to the co-operative movement. Meetings 
held to provide services of accounting and of a financial nature, 
706 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . see, now the member form 
Regina North East doesn’t want to hear the truth, doesn’t want 
to hear the truth . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Well you hit a nerve. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Now he’s saying we’ll never get 
through your estimates. I should re-read those: 13,859 meetings 
held with co-operatives throughout the province. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Tell him how many feeder association 
co-operatives we’ve got across the province. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Feeder association co-operatives, I 
think I have that  all over the province  52 feeder 
co-operatives established since this government came to power. 
 
Other agricultural programs  2, 4, 13, 27, 34  other 
agricultural-type-based co-operatives formed; 12  19 
marketing co-operatives formed since 1983-84; native 
handicraft co-operatives formed, 10; consumer co-operatives 
formed, 13 since 1983. 
 
How many housing co-operatives formed since 1983? Two, 
five, six, nine  14; rural development co-operatives, three; 
community service co-operatives, well over 100; and various 
others. So we can be proud of the record in the area of 
co-operatives. 
 
And I will tell the member, because he probably doesn’t know 
the statistics, but the importance to the economy of 
Saskatchewan in the area of doing things in a co-operative way, 
we have nearly 1,400 co-operative and credit unions. They 
employ . . . The co-operatives throughout the province employ 
15,000 people, with total salaries of 322 million; 600 . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Take it as read. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Now he’s saying, take it as read. 
 

Over 600,000 residents are members of a least one co-operative. 
The co-operative movement in Saskatchewan has assets of in 
excess of 7 billion, and annual revenues in the whole area of 
co-operatives exceed 4.8 billion. 
 
Twenty-five of Saskatchewan’s hundred top businesses are 
co-operatives or credit unions, and three of these are in the top 
10, and two top are the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and 
Federated Co-operative Ltd. 
 
More than 50 types of co-operative can be found in 
Saskatchewan. Six hundred Saskatchewan fishermen in 21 
co-operatives in northern Saskatchewan market three and a half 
million dollars worth of fish each year. We have 198 retail 
co-operatives in 280 locations throughout Saskatchewan, with 
combined sales of 725 million. We have 46 child care 
co-operatives and 78 pre-schools which provide services for 
over 5,000 children. 
 
(1630) 
 
So I can say that new developments in the area of co-operatives 
range from small, locally owned and controlled community 
service co-operatives to the $650 million NewGrade upgrader 
here in Regina. 
 
So I just don’t buy the rhetoric spewing from your mouth, 
because our record matches and exceeds the record of 
co-operatives and the co-operative way of any other 
administration in the history of our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Trew:  It’s been a while since I say a minister 
gerrymander her own estimates. 
 
Madam Minister, I want to match understanding of co-ops, 
yours and mine. And I’ll tell you that you come out a far distant 
second. I don’t care how you count it. I’ve been a member of 
the co-operative sector of our economy since I was eight or nine 
years old, when I first joined a credit union. I’ve been part of 
co-ops ever since. I’ve worked for 13 years for the biggest 
co-operative in this province. I grew up on a co-operative farm. 
Let me tell you, you know about as much about co-ops as my 
dog. 
 
I said, when you were reading out your rhetoric, I said, take it 
as read, because I came to these estimates prepared. I looked at 
that information before I even came here. You don’t need to 
waste our time in this Assembly with things that you should 
know and I certainly do know. 
 
Madam Minister, 27 out of the top 88 companies in 
Saskatchewan are co-operatives. Why didn’t you say that? 
Maybe next time you can. You talked about me giving you the 
same speech as last year. I’d be happy to provide you with a 
copy of last year’s speech and a copy of this year’s speech, and 
you’ll see that there are some very significant differences in 
those speeches in those opening remarks that I made. 
 
You spoke of fiction, and you also spoke of some weeping and 
wailing and thrashing about here. I want to remind you, we’re 
MLAs, not actors and actresses. we’re here  
  



 
April 27, 1988 

 

887 
 

doing some serious estimates in a once-proud department, what 
used to be the department of co-operation and co-operative 
development, and now doesn’t even rate a mention in any 
government department. You’re big on rhetoric, but the fact 
speak volumes. 
 
I pointed out earlier that in ’82-83 the department of 
co-operatives and co-operative development had a budget of 
$3.3 million and it had employed 89 person-years in 1981-82 
dedicated to supporting co-ops. In 1988-89 the co-operative 
branch within the Department of Economic Development and 
Tourism has a budget, as near as I can see, of about $681,300 
and a staff of 15 person. 
 
Over the past six years we’ve witnessed the dismantling of the 
once proud department of co-operation and co-operative 
development. We’ve seen a huge reduction in the moneys 
allocated to co-operative development. Would the minister try 
again to explain to the people of Saskatchewan how this mere 
skeleton of a once important department demonstrates the 
commitment of this government to the promotion of 
co-operatives in this department. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Well I would like to refer to the 89 
people who were employed in a separate department in 1982. 
This government views the co-operative way as an integral part 
of the economic development of this province. And today we 
have 160 people in the Department of Economic Development 
and Tourism working with all types of businesses. We have 
tourism; we have venture capital; we have business 
development. All those sectors involve the co-operative 
movement. 
 
So we’ve gone from 89 people to 160 offering information on 
the co-operative movement. We have people throughout the 
province, highly qualified people, that can give advice to groups 
of people or individuals wanting to start a business, whether it 
be a co-operative or a partnership or a new corporation, or 
whatever. 
 
I do not by what the member says because, yes, the record does 
speak for itself. And since 1982 each year we have had record 
number of co-operatives formed in the province. This 
government has introduced a number of new, innovative, 
co-operative type ventures, including the feeder co-operative. 
So for the member to say that the emphasis is not on 
co-operatives, that’s just not true. 
 
Mr. Trew:  Madam Minister, I point out to you that last year 
in the department of tourism, small business and co-operatives 
as well as in the department of economic development, there 
was some 264 person-years of employment. When you 
reorganized it and put it all into one super department, you 
reduced a hundred person-years from 264 to 163. Now I may be 
missing by a couple or three person-years, but no more than 
that. Now again I ask you: how can you so drastically reduce 
staff and still maintain any facade, any illusion that you’re 
providing the support in all of these important areas? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Well some of those people were 
transferred to the Department of Trade and investment. But I 
would point out, just in the department under vote 8,  

the person-years have gone from 13 to 15 for this year, people 
that will deal along with other people in the department. 
 
You take tourism marketing, the co-operative movement has a 
large part to play in that; tourism and business development, the 
co-operative movement has a large part to play in that, so your 
statement is not correct. 
 
Mr. Trew:  Madam Minister, I’m going to leave that and 
move a little off of that. And I’m asking you: are there any 
co-operative development officers remaining in the employ of 
your new department? By background, the advice and and 
supervision of the co-op development officers, the level of this 
service that used to be provided in this province is what made 
Saskatchewan into a banner co-operative province. 
 
There has been some detrimental impact for the smaller 
non-aligned co-ops; for example, day car, employment, 
community service co-operatives. And how are these 
non-aligned co-ops going to be serviced? So it’s a two-part 
question. Just to sum it up, are there any co-op development 
officers remaining? Please tell us where they are and how many 
they are, and how are the non-aligned co-ops going to be 
serviced? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  There are 12 co-op specialists 
throughout the province offering services and advice. But I 
want to point out a few of the things that the department does in 
the area of co-ops. 
 
We hold workshops and seminars on accounting, on 
bookkeeping; we counsel day-care setups; we have feeder 
associations; we provide board of director training; we hold the 
co-op merit awards on an annual basis; we take part in co-op 
week festivities; we attend trade show and provide displays; we 
have the co-op junior achievement program; the youth 
employment co-ops are under our department; we also have soil 
conservation co-ops; we have specialists that specialize in 
emphasis on employment co-ops; we sponsor women and 
employment co-op workshops; we are dealing with grazing 
co-op workshops; now we’re dealing with the rural 
development co-ops. 
 
But I must say, I can tell you where these co-op specialists are: 
we have two in Regina, we are located in Estevan, North 
Battleford, Prince Albert, Tisdale, Swift Current, Yorkton, La 
Ronge, Saskatoon. 
 
With the reorganization of the department, we envision having 
all department people very well-versed in the area of co-op 
development, whatever sector they . . . whatever branch they 
might be working in, because the co-operative way can be 
utilized virtually in every branch of my department and this is 
our long-term goal. 
 
We want to improve our business resource centres which are 
found throughout the provinces so that these people are really 
specialists and we would be housing our specialists here, along 
with other people. And really, we look at our mandate as 
service-oriented to the needs of people from all walks of life. 
 
Mr. Trew:  So what you’re telling me, Madam Minister,  
  



 
April 27, 1988 

 

888 
 

is that two years ago there was 18 district representatives when 
the department of co-operation and co-operative development 
still existed  18 regional district reps. Last year that was 
reduced to 14. From the tally you gave me now, it’s reduced 
again to 10. 
 
And you point out so ably that . . . but their duties have 
expanded. Now they’re responsible for all other economic 
development. They’re responsible for areas of tourism and all 
of the other things that your new super-ministry does. You’re 
saying they should be well-versed in co-operatives, but the hard 
reality is that you have reduced the numbers to 10 and given 
them much, much expanded duties. 
 
I want to know, Madam Minister, if you can explain why there 
is a major decrease in funding under personnel services, and yet 
an increase in the staff. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  I’d like to point out to the member that 
the co-operative movement has grown and become very 
sophisticated in the last 50-or-so years. Some of our most astute 
business people are in the co-operative sector. And as they 
become more sophisticated they don’t need hands-on guidance. 
 
Many of the co-operatives in Saskatchewan, whether it’s in the 
day-care area or the feeder area or the retail area or the energy 
area, are leaders in those field  absolute leaders in those fields 
 and they don’t need the hands-on support, say, of the ’20’s 
and the ’30’s. People are much more informed today, much 
more sophisticated, and I would say, much more capable. 
 
Mr. Trew:  Well that’s an amazing non-answer. I’ll ask it 
again. Can you please explain why there is a major decrease in 
funding under personnel services, yet an increase in staff? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Okay, in 1987-88, as compared to 
’88-89, with the increase in manpower, we are sharing services 
with the business centres  clerical, that type of thing  
because those people are now housed in the business centres 
throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Trew:  So again, we have an example of people doing 
work throughout your whole new super-ministry and not 
directly with co-ops. I would appreciate, Madam Minister, if 
you will undertake to provide me a detailed account of the 
allocation of staff resources, how many staff deal specifically 
with program and service development; how many positions are 
administrative and how may positions are in communication, 
that sort of information. 
 
If you will agree to provide it in writing, because of the time, 
I’ll be prepared to accept that, given a reasonably short time 
period for you to get that to me. 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Yes, we’ll provide that to you. 
 
Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I want to switch to 
co-op education in Saskatchewan and imply want to ask: what 
is the state of the minister’s  

commitment to co-op education, education preparation for 
co-operative careers, the promotion and extension of the 
co-operative philosophy? Does your department currently have 
any co-op education programs similar to those provided by the 
co-operative education unit in the previous department of 
co-operation and co-operative development? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  We have the co-op junior achievement 
program, the youth employment co-op program, but we work 
very closely with the Canadian co-operative association and 
provide them with resource material and training techniques for 
the educational component. 
 
I think one example would be using our model for health care 
co-operatives, to go out and teach people how to do that. But 
we work very closely with the Canadian co-operative 
association. As I say, they draw on our department as a resource 
base. 
 
Mr. Trew:  I wish to turn to the co-operative youth program, 
Madam Minister. I have here an interdepartmental memo, and it 
states: 
 

Among the various programs currently being reviewed and 
examined is our involvement in co-operative youth 
seminars. (this is from last year) A decision has been made 
that the department will, for this year, take a leave of 
absence from any active participation. The impact of this 
is that we will no longer be requiring field staff to act as 
resource people. 

 
Is your department actively participating in the co-op youth 
seminars, Madam Minister, this year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Yes, we have a department person on 
the board. We also have one resource person allocated to the 
program, and two other people dedicated to that program on an 
as-need basis. 
 
Mr. Trew:  Good. Glad to hear that you’re actively back in 
that program. 
 
With respect to business development grants and the economic 
diversification and investment, are there any grant programs for 
co-operatives, and how much money is involved in those 
programs? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  There is no direct grant funding 
available. 
 
Mr. Trew:  Right. I’m going to move to different are. What 
I’m interested in, Madam Minister, is the names and the salary 
of each of your ministerial assistants at December 31, 1987; and 
names and salaries for each ministerial assistant at March 31, 
1988. 
 
If you will provide that in writing to me, I’m prepared to accept 
that at a later, you know, reasonably later date. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  That’s December 31, ’87 and March 
31, ’88. 
 
Mr. Trew:  Yes. 
 



 
April 27, 1988 

 

889 
 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Right, we’ll provide that. 
 
Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Madam Minister. We’ve also got 
some other questions. There’s actually a few of them here. I’ll 
just take it if you nod or shake your head, then we can discuss 
it. Again, I’m looking for the details coming in writing, but I’d 
appreciate an itemized list of the facilities such as offices, camp 
ground, parking lost, that sort of thing, provided to your 
department by Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation. Okay. I see you nodding in the affirmative. 
 
Secondly, the number of square feet or, in the case of parking 
lots, the number of stalls that are provided, outlined in the . . . 
Good. You’re nodding, yes, thank you. And in the instances 
where the facility is not leased, would you indicate the amount 
which the department is paying to Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation for its use today, and how much was 
paid in fiscal ’87-88? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  We’ll provide that information, but I’ll 
indicate right now, we lease all our facilities. We don’t have 
any . . . You mean, do we own any ourselves? No, we don’t. It’s 
all leased. 
 
Mr. Trew:  Thank you. And would you indicate the use that 
you’re putting the facilities to, if its office space or if its storage 
space, that sort of thing. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Parking lot. 
 
Mr. Trew:  Parking lot. And could you provide an itemized 
list of the services being provided by the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation and the amount being 
charged to the department for those services today, and how 
much was paid in fiscal ’87-99? 
 
I’m asking specifically about mail services, the dollar amount 
of mail services; government automobiles, again the dollar 
amount; furnishings, dollar amount; that sort of thing that is 
supplied to you by Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation. 
 
Yes, okay, thank you. Thank you for the affirmative answer to 
those. 
 
What I’d appreciate also is a detailed list of advertising and 
printing-related expenses incurred by the co-ops branch in the 
last fiscal year  that’s ’87-88; and a list of names of the 
advertising companies with which you had contacts in the last 
fiscal year, and a total amount paid to those company or 
companies, and a brief description of the service provided. Yes? 
Thank you. 
 
The final area for this sort of questioning, Madam Minister, is 
regarding travel. Would the minister also provide information 
related to travel expenses incurred by personnel of the 
co-operatives branch in the last fiscal year? What I’m 
specifically wanting: if you could indicate the person incurring 
the expense and the total amount in each case, the destination, 
and purpose of that travel. Seeing you nodding in the 
affirmative, I thank you for that. 
 
This question will require a response, Madam Minister,  

today, and it’s in light of what we have gone through. Will you 
take a hard look at the potential for co-operation in 
Saskatchewan, and will you urge the Premier to reinstate a 
department of co-operation and co-operative development so 
you can help people of Saskatchewan to help themselves? Will 
you that? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Well I can indicate to the member that 
we’re restructuring the department around the co-operative 
sector. And I do truly believe that the co-op sector is being 
better served now than before. 
 
Mr. Trew:  Madam Minister, you government’s economic 
development strategy has shown that you have a 
misunderstanding of the particular economic circumstances and 
the traditions here in Saskatchewan. 
 
We have a very unique and a healthy mix of private and public 
and a co-operative sector of our economy  three engines of 
growth that we have had traditionally here. You are essentially 
ignoring the co-operative sector, that engine of growth. Your 
government’s economic development strategy places a great 
deal of emphasis on incentives for capital investment, trying  
always trying to attract large scale investors. The member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland and a few other of my colleagues have 
pointed out some of the pitfalls in that. You’re really walking a 
land-mind with your ideas, yet you paid little or no attention to 
community-based opportunities and the development of human 
resources. 
 
The qualities, Madam Minister, required for successful 
long-term economic transformation are very much similar to 
those of a strong co-operative society. Co-ops enable local 
people to be part of the developmental process, to understand 
and agree what needs to be done, and to work together to 
achieve the desired change. 
 
People become directly and deliberately responsible for the 
developmental outcomes, and therefore they’re devoted to 
seeing that it’s a success. Successful long-term economic 
change calls for a high degree of intelligence, a very great level 
of community organization, and the ability to compromise when 
one’s self-interest is at stake. Madam Minister, self-interest is 
clearly something this government has not been able to get past. 
 
I have been honoured to speak out for Saskatchewan people and 
for the co-operative sector and those of us who proudly 
proclaim that we are co-operators here in Saskatchewan. I have 
been appalled by your obvious lack of understanding of 
co-operation and co-operative development, by your lack of 
putting some emphasis into that very important area of our 
economy. 
 
I very much look forward to the day when we have a 
government that truly understands, as the member for 
Riversdale, the Leader of the Opposition, that truly understands 
what the third engine of growth, the co-operative sector, is in 
Saskatchewan. I very much look forward to the day when we 
have a government with a vision for the future, with some ideas, 
and the intelligence to see that that happens. 
 
Just before closing, I want to thank you and your officials for 
your time, and I plead with you, get serious about  
  



 
April 27, 1988 

 

890 
 

co-operative, get serious about development. Please take these 
estimates seriously, and please take the cry for more emphasis 
seriously. 
 
Thank you, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Thank you. Well in closing, I would 
just say to the member that we are going to agree to disagree, 
because I feel that our record in the area of new co-operatives 
being formed since 1982 speaks for itself. The building of the 
Co-op upgrader on the north side of town is the epitome, I 
believe, of how we feel this government can work with the 
co-operative sector to stimulate economic activity and 
diversification in our province. 
 
We are very proud of the number of co-operatives that have 
been formed since 1982  as I said, a record set every year. So 
you may think we’re not interested, but we are interested. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 10 
 
Mr. Koenker Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. Madam Minister, 
earlier you had agreed to give me a description of the venture 
capital corporation. I neglected to ask if you could include in 
the description or the profile of the corporations, a brief 
thumb-nail description of their purpose. What business ventures 
have they funded? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  The venture capital corporations, their 
registration is public, but what they invest in is not public, you 
know, it’s commercial confidentiality. We will send you a list 
of the types of businesses that are eligible for an investment by 
a venture capital corporation. It’s very specific on the types of 
businesses that they can invest in. But I wouldn’t want to say 
that venture capital C has invested $100,000 in the ABC store, a 
specific business. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Madam Minister, I’m not asking particularly 
for a specific business, but simply that, for example, you could 
tell me what the general arena of activity each corporation is 
incorporated for. That venture cap equities tell me nothing 
about the corporation. Are they involved in agriculture or 
tourism, or whatever? 
 
Item 10 agreed to. 
 
Item 11 agreed to. 
 
Item 12 
 
Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much, Madam Minister 
. . . Thank you very much, Madam Chairman  such an easy 
mistake to make  Mr. Chairman, as I think you’re correctly 
referred to. Madam Minister, your estimates for the payments to 
the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation have 
increased by 35 per cent.  

To what do you attribute this? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  I answered that in detail  the figures, 
the increase, the one-time payment for the North Portal 
reception centre, which is a cost-shared program with the 
federal government, however, we pay the up-front costs and 
then we’re reimbursed by the federal government. That was 
answered in detail the first day we were up. 
 
Item 12 agreed to. 
 
Items 13 and 14 agreed to. 
 
Vote 45 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Economic Diversification and Investment Fund 

Vote 66 
 

Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund 
Loans, Advances and Investments 

Economic Development and Tourism 
Vote 167 

 
Mr. Chairman:  Item 1. Any questions? 
 

Consolidated Fund 
Loans, Advances and Investments 

Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation 
Vote 148 

 
Mr. Chairman:  Questions? 
 

Supplementary Estimates (No. 2) 
consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Economic Development and Tourism 
Ordinary Expenditure  vote 45 

 
Items 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 45 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman:  I’d like to thank the minister and her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too would 
like to thank my officials for attending the House today and 
thank them for their help in answering the questions of the 
opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker:  I too would like to thank the officials for their 
assistance this afternoon and on previous occasions. It’s really a 
pleasure to see a public service that is ready to help provide for 
accountability, and on behalf of the critic in the opposition, I 
thank you very much. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:09 p.m. 
 


