


















































May 5, 1988 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 May 5, 1988 
 
 

1109 
 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Environment and Public Safety 
Ordinary Expenditure  Vote 9 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, prior to the supper break we 
were talking about the introduction of aluminum cans into the 
province and the effect that will have on jobs in our province 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, we’ve not finished that quite 
yet, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, by your remarks before supper I take it that you 
agree there will be a job loss in the brewing and bottling 
industries. I wonder if you have some figures, some predictions 
about exactly what that loss will be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  No, I don’t have any figures like that. A lot 
will depend on market share that cans may take, and it depends 
on whether or not the people in the industry put can lines in. 
And it’s my understanding that we now have one can line 
operating or ready to operate in Regina, so that would make a 
difference. It depends on a number of things. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, just for our information, would 
you be willing to tell us where that can line is proposed to be in 
Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I’m advised that the Coca-Cola company 
in Regina will have its own can line, and I believe it’s in place 
now. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, you indicated before supper that 
in fact you expected there, with the new legislation that you’re 
going to bring into this House some time, that there will be new 
jobs created. You indicated that there may even be more jobs in 
the long run, and yet tonight you tell me you don’t have any 
idea how many jobs will be lost. I don’t understand how your 
government can introduce this kind of legislation, this kind of 
new program that will indeed affect jobs, and not have at least 
an estimate of the effect on working people in this province. 
And I think that they deserve an answer to that. You must have 
some idea how many jobs will be affected. Could you give us 
that estimate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  There are so many variables that can be 
looked at. The companies in the province could expand and 
create more jobs. They could contract and bring product in from 
other provinces or other areas. I can’t really give you a figure. I 
think to make wild guesses in our business is not fair. I would 
anticipate when the complete change-over is made that likely 
you will see an increase in jobs as near as we can estimate. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, will your legislation ensure that 
the canned  and I’m talking about beer now  that canned 
beer will not sell for less than bottled beer in our province? 

Hon. Mr. Swan:  That would not come under our 
department, that would be under the Liquor Licensing 
Commission or the Liquor Board. We wouldn’t have prices on 
beer. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, then is it your opinion that 
canned beer should not sell for less than bottled beer? Would 
that be your position or opinion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I won’t offer opinions on that. I don’t 
believe that it’s part of my department’s mandate. That comes 
under the Liquor Licensing Commission and I would leave that 
information for them to give to the House. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, you are a member of the cabinet, 
I take it. I would assume you have a position on this issue and, 
as Minister of the Environment, I’m sure your cabinet 
colleagues would want to know your position. We who sit in 
this House with you would like to know your position. There 
are a large number of people in our province whose lives are 
going to be affected by this change. They would like to know 
your position. Mr. Minister, is it your position that canned beer 
should not sell for less than bottled beer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Well I think I gave the hon. member my 
answer. I don’t believe that it’s my job here to be giving you 
opinions, it’s rather to give information from our department of 
the things that are happening under our department. 
 
Though I sit in cabinet, I don’t speak for every department of 
government. I do understand, and I know a lot more than I’m 
expected to answer for here. The questions here have to deal 
with the issues that are under the Department of Environment 
and Public Safety, and that is not one of them. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, in the legislation that we are 
waiting for, will this legislation contain a broad recycling policy 
for your government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I think the hon. member will have to wait 
until he sees the legislation. I won’t go into that kind of 
answers. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Then, Mr. Minister, do you, as the minister 
responsible for the environment in Saskatchewan, believe that 
this province should have a recycling policy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  As a department we have shown that we 
have an interest in recycling and that we did go into the scrap 
vehicle recycling program and also the chemical can recycling. 
As a department we’ve always had an interest and continue to 
have. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, I accept the fact that you’ve had 
an interest in this. I clearly recognize that and recognize it in 
your department, but your interest has not provided for 
Saskatchewan a comprehensive recycling program as of yet, 
and there are a goodly number of people in our province who 
are hopeful, hopeful that soon we will see such a 
comprehensive program. 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1110 
 

Indeed, Mr. Minister, I note that as a jurisdiction, Saskatchewan 
is considerably behind other jurisdictions in this country in 
terms of recycling. To date in this province, we do not have a 
curb-side recycling program, nor a depot recycling program. I 
think beyond the recycling being done by Cosmos Industries in 
Saskatoon with newspapers, we’ve really had no long-term 
plan. 
 
We do not have in this province a recycling council as do the 
provinces of British Columbia, Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario. We 
do not have in this province a recycling co-ordinator as do the 
provinces I just mentioned. 
 
So I’m asking you then tonight, Mr. Minister, is it your plan, 
either related to the issue of the aluminum cans, or at least in 
this session, to bring to this House and to the people a broader 
and long-range recycling program for Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I believe that I have answered your 
question several times on that issue and advised you that I 
won’t second guess the legislation. When the legislation comes, 
you’ll be able to read it yourself. I told you it should be here 
soon and you’ll have to wait for that for that kind of answer. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, as my colleague from Saskatoon 
indicates, you have a responsibility to this House, but I think 
even a greater responsibility to the people of Saskatchewan. A 
number of people  a goodly number of people  are anxious 
to know if you at least are going to propose a recycling program 
for Saskatchewan, an expanded recycling program. Surely you 
can tell us tonight if it’s in your upcoming agenda. Will you tell 
us that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  No, I’ll be bringing the legislation forward 
and we’ll deal with it at that time. I can’t second guess the 
legislation here. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, are you not writing the 
legislation? Are you not responsible for the environment in this 
province? Would you not be the minister responsible for a 
recycling program? You don’t need to second guess the 
legislation, just tell me what you’re thinking. Is it in your plans 
to establish a recycling program in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Policy issues, like the one the member is 
talking about, are not any one person’s purview, but rather they 
are the purview of cabinet. That decision will be made by 
cabinet and brought here to this House in due time. And when it 
comes to the House, you’ll have every opportunity to read it, to 
debate it, to have answers to your questions. We will be . . . 
When the legislation goes through in Committee of the Whole 
you’ll have ample opportunity to ask questions about anything 
that you don’t understand in the Bill when it comes. And so I 
would ask you to be patient for a few more days until that Bill 
comes in. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chairman, to the minister, I read your 
government’s throne speech at the beginning of this session 
with some care, looking for an indication in that throne speech 
that we might expect a recycling initiative 

in this session. I could find no mention of it in the throne 
speech. Am I to take if from that that we’re not to get one; or 
secondly, that it’s really not a priority for your government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Well I think the throne speech debate was 
held and the things that were mentioned that would happen in 
the throne speech, you can look forward to. But everything that 
government does is not mentioned in the throne speech, so you 
can make your own deductions on that. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Well frankly my deduction is, Mr. Minister, 
that it’s not a priority for your government. And if it were a 
priority for you or your government, I’m sure you’d be willing 
to discuss the issue here in the House. That’s what we’re here 
for, is to discuss issues of concern to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and in this regard of particular concern to the 
environment of Saskatchewan. And so I’m frankly disappointed 
that you’re unwilling to at least discuss the issue there in the 
House tonight. 
 
Mr. Minister, we will be waiting for this legislation. The people 
of Saskatchewan are waiting for this legislation. Business 
people in this province are waiting for the legislation. For 
goodness sakes, the Saskatchewan Roughriders are waiting for 
this legislation, and so I encourage you to bring it into this 
House at the earliest possible date. 
 
Mr. Minister, I will want to pursue a variety of other issues with 
you tonight, but I would like now to defer to my colleague from 
Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I’m going 
to address several issues that are of concern to not only 
members of this House but to all citizens of Saskatchewan, an 
issue which has become more and more an item for topic of 
conversation throughout the province  and that’s the 
government’s wasteful and mismanaged and mishandled and 
ill-thought-out, ill-conceived Rafferty-Alameda and Shand 
projects and the role played in those projects by the Minister of 
Environment. 
 
I first of all would like to ask the minister: Mr. Minister, in your 
granting of approval for this project there were many concerns 
raised by people throughout Saskatchewan. At the public 
hearings, which were held only for the Rafferty and Alameda 
portions of the project, not for Shand, but held for the 
Rafferty-Alameda projects, many of those concerns raised 
centred around a number of issues. 
 
First and foremost was the issue of the quantity of water which 
would be available in the south-eastern part of the province, 
which would be trapped by the proposed structures and which 
would be available for use by residents in Saskatchewan, and 
also by the impact of those structures on the use in North 
Dakota, water use in North Dakota, and further on in the 
province of Manitoba. Many of those concerns were raised; 
very, very few were answered. 
 
So my first question to you, Mr. Minister, is in regard to the 
quantity of water that’s available. Opponents of the project have 
said that there will not be water available to 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1111 
 

cool the Shand power plant, to provide the irrigation as 
originally proposed and approved by yourself, and to undertake 
all those multi-uses. In reviewing the environmental impact 
statement, Mr. Minister, were you totally satisfied that all 
necessary work had been completed to ensure that, in fact, there 
would be the water there to provide for the purposes as 
outlined? 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Mr. Chairman, the quantity of water that 
will come into the Rafferty or Alameda reservoirs would 
depend to a great extent on the amount of rain and snow, and 
naturally, the department or the water corporation would have 
no control over that. But over the long term, as we have looked 
at flows over the longer period, I believe that, yes, the quantity 
would be enough. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Mr. Minister, my question  I’ll repeat it again 
 are you satisfied and were you, when you, as the Minister of 
Environment, gave approval to this project, that all necessary 
work had been done and completed which would guarantee the 
supply of water for the project? Are you satisfied that all 
necessary work had been done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: Mr. Chairman, I would like to advise the 
hon. member that as far as the environmental impact statement 
was concerned and the work that my department did with that 
impact statement, yes, we believe there was enough. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  If that being the case, Mr. Minister, and you 
were satisfied and you were the minister who gave approval, 
why was it that on March 3  a great length of time after you 
gave approval to the project and a great deal of time after the 
objections have been raised throughout the province  that the 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation issued a document, issued a 
document which showed, and I quote: 
 

. . . that the minimum flows in the rivers leading up to 
Rafferty and Alameda can only be met about 85 per cent 
of this time because the reservoirs are forced to go 
completely dry in a number of years. 

 
This was a document which was presented to water corporation 
March 3, long after you gave approval. You say in this House 
that you did all the homework necessary to prove that there 
would be water, yet here is a document, here is a document 
from Sask Water Corporation which says that 85 per cent of the 
time, 85 per cent of the time we’re looking at minimum flows 
and that the reservoirs will be completely dry in a number of 
years. How can you make the statement that you, in fact, did the 
necessary homework when the Sask Water Corporation doesn’t 
agree with you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I don’t know what document the hon. 
member is quoting from. I haven’t read any document like that. 
My department, in its review of the environmental impact 
study, would take a look at all of the long-term flows that were 
predicted in that environmental study, and from that 
information we’re satisfied. 

Mr. Lyons:  Well, Mr. Minister, the document I have here 
from the Sask Water Corporation, document number 694-3952, 
entitled Instream Flow Requirements in the Souris River, as 
requested . . . I want to read this into the record, Mr. Minister. It 
says: 
 

As requested, we have made the water balance computer 
runs that test the viability of the monthly minimum 
instream flows suggested by you for the three locations 
shown in Table 1. This is to support the work you are 
undertaking under contract to the Souris Basin 
Development Authority to develop estimates of instream 
flow requirements for fish. 

 
Now here you have approved a major megaproject in this 
province, and says you’re still doing your homework. That’s 
what the first paragraph of this says. 
 
It then goes on to talk about the results of that, and I’ve already 
quoted the fact that it says in black and white that the reservoirs 
will be going dry over a number of years. But not only that  
not only that; it goes on to talk about how much water will be 
available with and without the dams in place and the minimum 
flow requirements thereto. 
 
And the table 2 of this document, saying, per cent of time 
equalling or exceeding minimum desired flows  that’s the per 
cent of time meeting or exceeding minimum required flows  
it says that without the project, in the months of January, 
minimum required and desired flows will be met 55 per cent of 
the time without the project. But in the month of January, with 
the project, it would only be met 50 per cent of the time. 
 
In February, the minimum required flows will be met 55 per 
cent of the time without the project, and with the dam only 50 
per cent of the time. In March  and here we’re getting near 
seeding and here we’re getting near high demand periods for 
water as irrigation pumps up  without the project, the 
minimum required flows in the Souris River will be met or 
exceeded 70 per cent of the time. With the project, under the 
environmental impact statement, 55 per cent of the time, which 
means 45 per cent of the time it won’t even meet the minimum 
flows. And we get to April, and we’re getting near seeding  
60 per cent of the time without the project; 50 per cent of the 
time with the project. Here we’re getting into May  May, well 
farmers are on the land  without the project, 50 per cent of 
the time the minimum flows will be met in the Souris River; 
with the project, 35 per cent of the time, 35 per cent of the time. 
June, and we’re on the land and the seed is in  what have we 
got for water? What have we got for water? Without the project, 
55 per cent of the flows will be met; with the project, 45 per 
cent. July, 55, 40 per cent. 
 
August  and here’s where things change a bit  in August, 
15 per cent without the project; 30 per cent with the project. 
Now August will be real good months to start seeding and start 
irrigation on the land for most farmers in that area, let me tell 
you, Mr. Minister. Right? September, 15-55. We’re going to do 
lots of irrigation in September down in that valley. October, 15 
per cent and 60 per cent  much, much, much greater need for 
water in October. 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1112 
 

November, 50-50. December, 50-50. 
 
Now what’s interesting is not only that the desired flows will be 
met earlier on in the spring and in the early summer without the 
project, is the fact that throughout this whole project the 
minimum flows are going to be met 50 and 55 or 45 per cent of 
the time, which means the rest of the time you’re not going to 
even reach the minimum flows. That’s what this document from 
your own water corporation says. That’s what the opponents of 
this project say. 
 
This document says that those reservoirs will go completely dry 
 and that’s the words of the document, completely dry  
over several years. The opponents have been saying that. But 
you, you and the rest of the people who in this politically 
motivated project have been saying, no, no, don’t worry  no, 
no, don’t worry, there will be lots of water available. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, we have here a document which proves 
March 3, after you gave approval, that the water isn’t going to 
be there. But what do we find? What do we find, Mr. Minister? 
We find all of a sudden that the Department of the Environment 
had been engaged in a project since 1986 to divert water from 
the South Saskatchewan River and from the Qu’Appelle River 
system down South. That was the diversion. When I asked you 
about that diversion last year, Mr. Minister, you denied your 
department was involved in any kind of discussions about 
diversions, any planning about diversions. You denied time 
after time in this House, and you can look back to pages 1215 
and there on, when those questions were raised in last year’s 
estimates. You denied that that diversion was there. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is simply this: given the fact 
that your own water corporation says that there’s not going to 
be water here; given the fact that the federal Department of the 
Environment says that the only way you’ll ever get enough 
water for to cool the Shand or to do the irrigation or to 
half-ways fill those dams, the Rafferty-Alameda dam, will be 
diverting the South Saskatchewan River; won’t you now admit 
that what you did in approving the project was nothing more 
than a politically motivated and crafted decision, that it was 
forced upon you by the Premier of this province, and that it has 
absolutely no basis in reality, has absolutely no basis in the real 
facts and the real needs for water management in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  To begin with, I haven’t read the article 
that the member is reading, so I don’t take all that he’s saying 
as fact. If he’d like to send me a copy, I’d appreciate that. We 
would probably be better advised to be discussing this when the 
water corporation is in  and the staff are in the hallway and 
will be next in line. 
 
I made the decision based on the facts that were there, through 
the environmental impact study and the board of inquiry study 
and the public hearings that were held. We made what we 
consider is a very valid decision, and I can assure you now that 
there has been no decision by any department of government to 
divert water from the South Saskatchewan River system to the 
Souris. There had been a statement made by a university 
professor, but that’s as 

far as it goes. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Mr. Minister, are you denying before this House 
that the provincial Department of the Environment and the 
federal Department of the Environment have been involved in a 
four-year study of water diversions of the South Saskatchewan 
River? Are you denying that now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  The studies that have been done are not 
water diversion studies. They’re studies of the South 
Saskatchewan River system. They’re ongoing studies. One of 
the people that was involved in that study made a very wild 
statement the other day, from the University of Saskatchewan. I 
can advise you that we will be challenging that statement with 
the member who is in the employ of the university, and I 
believe that the member will likely retract some of his thoughts 
there. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Mr. Minister, we have been saying for two years 
in this House that there’s no water for Rafferty-Alameda; that 
the only way there’s going to be water for Rafferty-Alameda is 
if you divert the South Saskatchewan and the Qu’Appelle and 
take it down into the south-east area of the province. Your own 
water corporation says that’s true, and you still stand here in 
this House and try to deny the fact that your department is 
involved in studies, including water diversion in the province of 
Saskatchewan and inter-basinal transfers of water in the 
province of Saskatchewan. I would ask you, sir, if you’re so 
sure of your position, why don’t you make those comments 
with Professor Henry outside the House and let’s see who 
challenges whom? 
 
However, Mr. Minister, I make the allegation here  I’ll make 
it outside the House  you people are involved in diverting 
inter-basinal transfers of water and diverting the South 
Saskatchewan River. I will repeat that outside, and if you want 
to challenge me in the court, you go right ahead. 
 
But I want to get back to the point about the political motivation 
of this project and how it was a politically crafted exercise. Mr. 
Minister, and you have a copy of this because it was sent to Mr. 
Bob Walker  and you know who Bob Walker is in the 
Department of the Environment  and it’s from Mr. R.L. 
Kellow. Mr. R.L Kellow is the chief of the planning branch of 
resource management for the Saskatchewan Water Corporation, 
and he sent a copy of this letter, a letter to George Hood, he sent 
a copy to your department. It’s called The Environmental 
Impact Statement for Rafferty and Alameda Projects. And I 
want to read this, Mr. Chairman, if I may, read this into the 
record. It will take some time; it will take a few minutes, but I 
think it’s worth it for all the people in this province to hear the 
kind of political conniving and political craftsmanship that went 
into this project. 
 

I have reviewed the draft antedated outline for 
environmental impact statements (says Mr. Kellow), as 
requested in your letter of September 26, 1986. In general, 
I find the outline satisfactory. My specific comments are 
as follows. 

 
(1) The first part of Volume 2 is entitled “Environmental 

Setting.” The purpose of this 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1113 
 

section should be to provide the reader with a broad 
understanding of the socio-economic, as well as 
physical and biological characteristics of the area which 
could be impacted by the project. I assume the subpoints 
under this heading are just examples and not a definitive 
listing of topics. Because the project is a multi-use water 
storage proposal, a separate section describing the water 
surface system should be considered. 

 
(1930) 
 
And that’s what happened. That’s the way that the EIS 
(environmental impact statement) was developed by the 
department and by the Souris Basin Development Authority 
and approved by your department. And listen to this: 
 

(2) I would prefer not having a section entitled 
“Alternatives” for this particular project. 

 
Despite every known and every accepted environmental 
assessment method in which alternatives are demanded as part 
of the environmental assessment process, here is the chief for 
the water corporation writing to the Environment, saying: 
 

I would prefer not having this section entitled 
“Alternative” for this particular project. Instead I would 
recommended a section entitled “Project Need.” 

 
So, instead of saying that there are alternatives to be chosen 
among, what we’ll do is we’ll write the environmental impact 
statement to prove environmental need. Project need. 
 

It is critical that the project be presented as a 
multi-purpose undertaking where individual components 
are not justified on their own. 

 
Did you get that. Individual components of the project are not 
justified on their own. That’s what this Mr. Kellow says, that 
they’re not justified on their own because you know, and I 
know, that they can’t be justified on their own. 
 

But, as part of an overall project, the main focus of any 
discussion about alternative should be with the alternative 
of no project. (Should be with the alternative, no project). 
However, if necessary, a limited discussion of 
accomplishing each project function could also be 
presented. 

 
Why, Mr. Minister, why did the chief of operations write to 
your department and say: don’t present alternatives, say it’s 
either this project or no project? Why did he do that? Won’t you 
now stand here and admit that the only reason that he’s crafting 
the environmental impact statement the way he did is because 
he had to sell it? Because you told him, because Grant . . . 
excuse me, the Premier told you to make sure that this project 
went through and that’s why, that’s why you’re involved in this 
kind of crafting, not presenting alternatives to the people of this 
province. 

Hon. Mr. Swan:  I don’t know the date of the document that 
the hon. member is reading from, if there is a date on it. To say 
that Mr. Kellow was a chief in the water corporation would be 
stretching the imagination a ways. He’s no longer with the 
corporation. He’s working for a different organization entirely. 
He left us about a year and a bit ago. And what you’re using is 
inflating what is written on paper into your own magical 
language and I don’t buy a lot of it. 
 
If you would like to raise that when the water corporation staff 
are here they may be more familiar with it than I am. I haven’t 
seen that particular piece of paper but I don’t put a lot of weight 
in what you’re saying. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Well excuse me, Mr. Minister. Mr. R.L. Kellow, 
the chief planning branch resource management, at the time the 
letter was written to Mr. George Hood, October 7, 1986, in the 
preparation of the Rafferty-Alameda project. 
 
And it’s no wonder, Mr. Minister, that you would prefer this be 
discussed somewhere else because you know very well that the 
water corporation has to deal within . . . and corporation 
estimates has to deal with things in a very limited terms of 
reference, and it’s no wonder you don’t want to deal with it 
here. You are the Minister of the Environment, sir. You, sir, are 
the Minister of the Environment and you gave your stamp of 
approval on this despite the fact that I know, deep in your heart, 
you didn’t want to do it and the Premier made you do it. I know 
that. I know that, sir, and I’ll take that. 
 
But let’s go on. Let’s go on to see some more political 
craftsmanship of this operation. Point number four in the letter: 
 

The key to the last chapter, cost benefit summary . . . 
 
And this should interest everybody in Saskatchewan because 
it’s going to cost them $1,200 for every man, woman, and child 
in this province, your shafferty boondoggle. 
 

The key to the last chapter, cost benefit summary, is 
allowing the reader to see what trade-offs are being made if 
the project proceeds. I would avoid the use (and I want, 
Mr. Chairman, I want the people of the province to hear 
what kind of political craftsmanship went into this) of 
cost-benefit in the title as it may allow the reader to expect 
a traditional cost-benefit analysis (a traditional  one 
which is correct, one which lays out the facts) which I do 
not believe is part of the environmental impact assessment 
process. 

 
So here we have the chief of planning resource management for 
the water corporation writing to the Department of the 
Environment of which he’s the minister, saying we can’t do a 
traditional cost-benefit analysis because it would allow the 
people of Saskatchewan to see what a total political boondoggle 
this is and what a total economical nightmare it is. What does 
he say? We can’t use traditional cost-benefit 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1114 
 

analysis. My, my. 
 
He goes on to say, Mr. Minister: 
 

I would minimize reference to the United States aspect of 
the project. The purpose of the EIS should be to discuss 
implications in Saskatchewan. There should be mention of 
the flood control benefits to the United States, but the 
degree of those benefits and alternatives (and the 
alternatives) to achieving those benefits, are not a concern 
to the environment approval process in Saskatchewan. 

 
That goes again to the nub of it. 
 
Why is it, Mr. Minister, why is it that when you politically 
crafted this project, when you tried to hide from the people of 
Saskatchewan the true costs and the true benefits, of which 
there are none, and the true cost, of which there are many, why 
was it that you tried to, as Minister of the Environment, try to 
hide this kind of thing? 
 
Why is it, Mr. Minister, that you, as the Minister of the 
Environment, rolled over and played dead for the Premier when 
he wanted this politically motivated project to go ahead? Why 
didn’t you do the honourable thing: stand up to him and say, no, 
we’re going to a traditional cost-benefit analysis; no, we’re not 
going to do this thing on the basis of political boondoggle, 
we’re going to do it on the basis of its merits and its benefits for 
the people of Saskatchewan, which there are none? Why didn’t 
you have the courage, sir, to stand up and say, I won’t proceed 
with this approval; I won’t give my approval to this project; I 
won’t go ahead and try to deceive the people of the, as is so 
clearly outlined by this letter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Well the member makes an awful lot of 
wild statements. Number one, I can assure you that I made my 
own decisions on this particular one with the help of the 
department and the public hearings and the board of inquiry 
hearings. And if you look at what the board of inquiry 
recommended and what was put in the final approval, you will 
find they are almost identically the same thing. For you to say 
then that it was politically motivated, has very little substance 
or fact. 
 
You talk about the cost of the project and you say that it’s 
$1,200 for every man, woman, and child. Well check your 
mathematics, my friend. This project is to cost 126 million and 
with a million people that is no $1,200 per person. It ends up 
something like $126, and if you back away from that figure 
again and take the amount of money that the Americans will put 
into the project, it will back it down by another 51 million. So it 
doesn’t become such a big dollar figure for every man, woman, 
and child. It’s only $126 million  total project  and that’s 
the figure that you should be using. 
 
You talk about factual. You haven’t been factual once when 
you’ve given figures of what that project would cost. You have 
been throwing out something like 1.2 billion for a long time, 
though you knew far different than that. But figures don’t seem 
to have any meaning in your line of speech. You like to get up 
and just throw out some 

wild ideas and expect the world to believe. Well the world has 
seen through you long ago and they don’t believe it. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Mr. Chairman, if there is a lack of credibility on 
this project, in this province, the lack of credibility is not here. 
The lack of credibility rests over there. 
 
Let the minister do his little bit of arithmetic  very simple. 
Rafferty-Alameda and Shand, all three are tied together. As 
your initial environmental impact assessment process and 
proposal laid out, all three were an integrated project. Total cost 
is $1.2 billion  1.64 billion, including the transmission lines 
for Shand; $146 million now, given the raise in the mitigation 
figures for oil and for wildlife. You’d better go back and do 
your own homework, Mr. Minister, because if you’re allowing 
your officials to do it for you, you’re getting in deeper and 
deeper. You’re getting so deep in the mud that we’ll find behind 
the Rafferty dam that they’ll never be able to pull you out. So 
I’d advise, if you’re going to talk about homework and go doing 
your homework, I think I’ve done some homework, and I think 
the people of this province realize that I’ve done that kind of 
homework. 
 
But I’m glad you raised the question of the public hearings and 
the report of the public hearings, the Souris basin board of 
inquiry, because, Mr. Minister, as you know, as you very well 
know, one of the central  the, in fact, central  prediction of 
the board was that this project should not go ahead unless there 
was . . . This project, including Rafferty and Alameda, should 
not go ahead until the funding had come through from the 
Americans and that the only  the only  cover, economic 
cover, you would have for this project was based on the fact 
that you were going to get American money. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, given that your own board of inquiry 
said that this project should not proceed until the money was 
forthcoming and that it was predicated on that money being 
forthcoming from the Americans, I wonder if you would tell us 
now how much money has come in, and if none has come, 
when can you expect it so that the conditions laid down by the 
board, or the outline by the board, will be met. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  The actual ongoing negotiations and 
construction and the money that would come in, you would 
have to deal with the Souris Basin Development Authority, not 
with me. The approval that was given by my department was 
very much the same as the board of inquiry had put down, and 
that was that the Alameda project should not go through until 
the money was available, and that’s exactly the way the 
approval was given. Alameda has no approval until the 
American funding comes. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  That is a little bit of sleight of tongue, if I may 
use that expression. Mr. Minister, the board of inquiry . . . 
Okay, let’s put it in this way: are you saying that the board of 
inquiry did not require the U.S. funding for the Rafferty dam? Is 
that what you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  The recommendation by the board was that 
the Alameda dam not be built unless the 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1115 
 

American funding was in place, and that is exactly the way the 
approval was put. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Well I beg to differ, Mr. Minister. I suggest you 
go back and read that because it said that the project as a whole, 
the two dams, was predicated on the fact that there would be 
American funding, which is a very interesting proposition, Mr. 
Minister, because I’m sure that the farmers downstream of 
Rafferty will be really pleasantly surprised at the fact, when 
they lose all their water because there’ll be no downstream 
water from Rafferty, but it’ll be dependent upon the Moose 
Mountain Creek and its limited and brief duration in the 
springtime for its water supplies and all the communities 
downstream of that, I’m sure they’re going to be surprised. 
 
But I want to read to you, Mr. Minister, since we’re talking 
about the question of funding, another letter, a letter which was 
written to Cochrane Lavalin, the project engineer, to a Mr. R.D. 
Farrell, regarding the Rafferty dam, file no. A435-1M-100. Mr. 
Farrell goes on to say, or starts: 
 

In view of the uncertainty regarding the availability of U.S. 
funding, there is some doubt as to how much work, if any, 
would be done on the Rafferty dam during the 1988 
construction season. 

 
Now that’s very interesting. It’s in direct contradiction to what 
you said, Mr. Minister. It’s in direct contradiction to what you 
said. This letter, by the way, is from Mr. G. Phillips, the project 
manager from SaskPower. You have a copy of this letter on file. 
This person understands that unless there’s American money 
available, that the Rafferty shouldn’t go ahead. And he talks 
about the uncertainty and the availability of American funding. 
 
Now, as the minister who gave an approval to a project which 
was dependent upon American funding, will you tell this House 
how much American funding has come through, if any? If it 
hasn’t, when do you expect it? And why was it that a Mr. G. 
Phillips from SaskPower would talk about the uncertainty of 
American funding for the Rafferty dam? 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I think the member is almost answering his 
own question. You read from a letter; it’s written from 
SaskPower. And SaskPower and the Souris Basin Development 
Authority are the ones that will deliver the project, not the 
Department of Environment. The approvals that we gave were 
very firm approvals that they could build the Rafferty but they 
couldn’t build the Alameda until they had the American money. 
And we’re still waiting for that part before that final approval is 
given. And until the money is available, we will not give 
approval for the construction of the Alameda dam. That’s the 
way it stands. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Well, Mr. Minister, once again, once again as 
part of the conditions as laid out by the board of inquiry and as 
part of your own conditions, it’s your responsibility of Minister 
of Environment to monitor the progress of funding from the 
U.S., particularly in the light of the fact 

that the Governor of North Dakota, at a recent meeting in 
Minot, which is a well-attended meeting and was attended and 
included by officials of your department as well as from the 
Sask Water Corporation, the Souris Basin Development 
Authority, and others; in light of the fact that the Governor of 
North Dakota says, well, if we can’t buy this project as a flood 
control project, maybe we can buy it as water storage, as a 
water storage project, and that we’ll take the money and buy it 
as a water storage project. 
 
In light of the fact that your department is involved in a water 
diversion study which would take the South Saskatchewan 
River and empty it into the south-east part of the province, in 
light of the fact that you, as the Minister of the Environment 
said, there shouldn’t be any work and your board of inquiry said 
there shouldn’t be any work and your board of inquiry said 
there shouldn’t be any work on Rafferty, and in light of the fact 
that SaskPower recognizes that the Rafferty project should not 
probably go ahead without the availability of American 
funding, are you, as the Minister of Environment in charge, are 
you watching the progress of American money? How are you 
monitoring the situation? And if you are in fact monitoring the 
situation, which by your own admission is a prerequisite for this 
project, will you tell this House how much money has come 
from the United States for this project, if any? And if none has 
been forthcoming, when can you, as the Minister of the 
Environment, expect that money so that you can go ahead and 
give your rubber stamp to Alameda? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I guess the hon. member and I are getting 
the same kind of information, and that is what we read in the 
news media of the American negotiations on this project. 
 
The approval that was given gave approval for the Rafferty dam 
and denied approval for the Alameda dam until the American 
money is in place. Rafferty can go ahead whether or not the 
American money comes as far as our approval is concerned. 
And until somebody from Souris Basin Development Authority, 
or SaskPower, or other sources, can advise us that they have the 
American money, the approval for Alameda will not be 
forthcoming and it’s that simple and it’s going to stay that way. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Mr. Minister, I appreciate your honesty on this 
point. Now the people of Saskatchewan know that you’re going 
to go ahead, and your government’s going to go ahead, and the 
Premier of the province is going to push through this project in 
his constituency whether or not American money comes, the 
Rafferty dam will be built with or without American money. 
 
And I appreciate and I thank you very much for your honesty 
on that point because it’s something, Mr. Minister, in light of 
that though, in light of that statement, what this does is throw 
the economics of the project out the window. And it throws out 
the window, your approval, which you gave to the initial 
proposal contained in the environmental impact statement 
which developed an economic cost-benefit scenario, not a 
traditional one, as we’ve heard, but some kind of scenario to try 
to justify this project in voodoo economic terms. Even within 
the voodoo economic terms that was used to draw up the 
environmental impact statement, that’s gone out the window 
because you said now that there is no 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1116 
 

American money forthcoming or that a Rafferty will be built 
with or without American money. 
 
I appreciate your honesty on that point, Mr. Minister, but 
doesn’t it appear to you that perhaps the Department of the 
Environment of the province of Saskatchewan now call for a 
review of the environmental impact statement, put forward to 
your department, on the basis that American money may not be 
forthcoming and that the cost-benefit scenario, as laid out in 
that process, are totally gone out the window. Doesn’t it seem 
sense to you that if they throw out the cost-benefit scenario that 
you are under a certain obligation to now go ahead and to 
review the project and the economics of the project and perhaps 
to modify the approval given to this project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  The member is putting words in my mouth 
and many of the things that you’re saying that I said were not 
said, and if you read Hansard tomorrow, you’ll see that. So I’m 
going to simply say to you that the approval was given for the 
Rafferty dam, but the approval was denied for the Alameda dam 
until the American money was made available. Whether or not 
SaskPower goes ahead or the Souris Basin Development 
Authority goes ahead to build the Rafferty project, that’s a 
different matter, and that’s a choice they make. 
 
We don’t build dams from the Department of Environment; we 
simply have given an approval based on the best information 
that we could gather through the environmental impact 
assessment stage, the public hearings and the board of enquiry 
hearings. And those are the three areas that we used to make our 
decision. I believe we made the right decision; history is the one 
that will prove whether or not that decision was right. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Well you know, Mr. Minister, part of the 
problems, I guess, of being a politician and being in the position 
of having to make judgements is whether or not you’re going to 
be second-guessed and whether or not you’re going to have to 
make the wrong judgement and have to pay for it. Well in your 
particular case, Mr. Minister, it’s not a question of 
second-guessing. 
 
The issues that I’m raising here tonight are the issues that 
people throughout this province have been raising with you and 
your department for the last two years, ever since this lunatic 
idea was floated  right?  ever since this idea was floated. 
And what is interesting, what is interesting is that each and 
every independent study of this project  studies not done by 
one or another of your departments, but independent studies  
each of those studies says this thing does not work. 
Environment Canada says it does not work, and that the water 
flows for the Rafferty-Alameda project are not correct, have not 
proven to be correct, and will not be proven to be correct. 
 
And it’s not just me talking. I’m not an engineer; I don’t claim 
to be, but I can read and I can listen, and I hear what people 
around the province  people who are technical experts as well 
as people who are not but who have other concerns  are 
raising. Why is it that you don’t listen? Why is it that you don’t 
recognize that there are legitimate concerns being raised by 
highly qualified technical experts, and that your department has 
time and time again been shown to be wrong in terms of dealing 
with 

environmental assessments on this project. One can only be led 
to the conclusion that, over a period of time, you’re not dealing 
with facts as they are, you’re not dealing with the reality, but 
that you’re dealing from another agenda, from a hidden agenda 
which is not so well hidden because it’s in the hip pocket of the 
Premier, because it represents a $1.2 billion investment in his 
constituency. 
 
Mr. Minister, I beg to differ with your last statement regarding 
the Rafferty-Alameda and the question of funding from the 
United States. And I beg to differ based on a document I have 
here, a letter to Mr. George N. Hood, director of planning 
operations, Souris Basin Development Authority, dated March 
3, 1988  not very long ago, well after you gave approval to 
this boondoggle  regarding the draft Canada-United States 
agreement for the Rafferty-Alameda project. 
 
Point number four of this letter, on page 2, says: 
 

The amount of any such contribution by the United States 
at any time shall be determined by an allocation of the 
41.1 million U.S. based on the proportion of construction 
costs incurred to that time to the projected total cost of 
construction of the Canada works. 

 
Not a Rafferty, not Alameda, but all the works done, and based 
on a proportional basis, that when you complete the Rafferty 
project, you will get a certain amount of American funding; 
when you complete the Alameda project, you’ll get a certain 
amount of American funding; when you complete the diversion, 
you’ll get a certain amount of American funding  the 
diversion canal which is contained in the EIS (environmental 
impact statement), not the other water diversion project which 
you’re studying. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, on the basis of the inaccuracies of your 
statements here tonight, on the inaccuracies of the statements 
that your department and that those of the minister in charge of 
SaskPower have been making  inaccuracies on the one hand 
which say, we have a little disagreement here, because the 
minister to the Deputy Premier says that there is no such 
agreement in place, that there is no Canada-U.S. draft 
agreement. And it’s a matter of record in Hansard, and he has 
said it time and time again that there is nothing reduced to 
paper, contrary to what it says here. 
 
But be that as it may, will you, sir, table  from your 
department, because I know you have a copy of it  a copy of 
the draft U.S.-Canada agreement dealing with the 
Rafferty-Alameda project so that the people of the province will 
know the true costs of Rafferty and what you’ve given away to 
the Americans in order to sell them long-term water supply? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  The Department of Environment would not 
be involved in the drafting of agreements. The Souris Basin 
Development Authority and SaskPower have been very closely 
working together on that project. When and if they wish to table 
documents, they would be the ones that you should ask to table. 
It would not be this department. 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1117 
 

The member is making statements about Environment Canada 
and them not being in agreement. I think the only way we’ll 
know whether Environment Canada is in agreement or not is 
when they issue approval. And the Deputy Premier stood in this 
House not long ago and said that he expected that that approval 
would be here sooner rather than later and I think we just have 
to wait and see. That’s sort of the proof of the pudding is if they 
believe in the project after all of their studies of the EIS and 
other things, then they will grant an approval. And we’ll watch 
with interest to see when that approval is forthcoming and I 
expect it soon. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  What’s interesting, Mr. Minister, is that you fail 
to answer the question. Do you have a copy of the draft 
U.S.-Canada agreement, or the final U.S.-Canada agreement, 
regarding Rafferty-Alameda  either one  and will you 
provide that to me and to the House tonight? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I advised the hon. member that the 
negotiations would be done by the Souris Basin Development 
Authority and SaskPower, and if anyone has that agreement it 
would likely be them, not us. We have not been involved in the 
negotiations. We do not have copies of any agreements and I 
don’t expect that we should have. So the member should ask the 
proper authority when they come before the House here in their 
estimates. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Mr. Minister, I’m not asking you who drafted 
the agreement. I’m not asking you who’s involved in the 
discussions of the agreement. I’m asking you as a minister 
responsible for approving this project, an important component 
of which was a 41.1 million commitment or expected 
commitment from the United States, which would be signed 
and contained in an agreement of one sort or another  reduced 
to paper and signed by various parties. And I know because of 
the past history that you, as the minister, have to put your 
signature to it. I’m asking you, sir, whether or not you have in 
your possession, as the minister, a draft agreement with the 
United States or a final agreement. Do you have it? Not whether 
you negotiated, not whether officials of your department 
negotiated, not whether somebody else negotiated it, but do you 
have that? Stop trying to slippery and slide around the question. 
Answer yes or no. Do you have it and will you provide it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I have advised you on a couple of 
occasions now that, no, I don’t have a copy of the agreement, 
and even if I did, I wouldn’t table it. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Well, Mr. Minister, I’m not surprised at that 
answer, particularly the second part. I’m surprised at the first, 
because quite frankly, sir, you may not have it in your 
possession here, but it’s in a filing cabinet in your department 
somewhere. 
 
(2000) 
 
I’m not surprised at the second part. I’m not surprised at the 
second part, that you wouldn’t table the agreement, because this 
agreement would not want to see the light of day in 
Saskatchewan by your government because of what it contains, 
because of the long-term commitments it makes to the 
Americans to provide them with a 

guaranteed flow of water. You are guaranteeing to the 
Americans a certain amount of water over the life of the 
Rafferty-Alameda project  you are guaranteeing them, despite 
what happens to the environment and the ecology of 
Saskatchewan. And as part of that guarantee and in order to 
meet that guarantee you are involved in a water diversion 
project, something we have been saying for the last two years, 
something which you have denied, and now something which 
has been affirmed by people even within your own department. 
So let’s not play footsy. 
 
Why won’t you show the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Minister? Why won’t you show them what you are doing to our 
water resources in this province by committing them for an 
extended period of time to the Americans? What is it that 
you’ve got to be afraid of in that document and why are you 
trying to hide this project which will affect the whole use of 
water throughout southern Saskatchewan? And I may say, if 
we’re now to understand the implications it has or communities 
like Saskatoon and up river of Lake Diefenbaker, why are you 
choking off the water to the North through the South 
Saskatchewan River, potentially choking if off, in order to try to 
make viable this politically motivated project in south-eastern 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I’ve advised the member a number of times 
that we are not in the dam building business, but rather we were 
here only to approve or disapprove an environmental impact 
study for a project. It’s the same with any project that goes 
through the department. We simply review the pros and cons of 
environmental impact study, make recommendations where 
necessary, and provide an approval or a disapproval, and we’ve 
done that. We do not get into the negotiations of a contract or 
water flows or any of those things. That’s not part of the 
mandate of this department. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Well, Mr. Minister, we have heard time and 
time again tonight, and actually since the 1986 election and 
your appointment as Minister of the Environment, that it’s not 
your fault, that it’s not your responsibility, that it’s not your 
duty, that it’s not your department. It’s always somebody else, 
and there’s always another appropriate time to ask. Well I tell 
you, sir, we’re sick and tired of that approach. You’re the 
minister responsible for the water in this province and for 
looking after the environment in this province and for looking 
after public safety to a great extent in this province and you’ve 
got a responsibility to the people of this province  and we’re 
going to question you on that responsibility. And no amount of 
trying to shoot the messenger, no amount of trying to slip and 
slide out of answering questions will do you, because the time 
of reckoning for this project and for your role in this project and 
for the role of your government in this kind of project is at 
hand, as it is for your federal counterpart. 
 
And I want to read to you a letter, Mr. Minister, written to Mr. 
Tom McMillan, the federal Minister of the Environment. Now 
you stood here a little while ago . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Who wrote it? 
 
Mr. Lyons:  I’ll tell you who wrote it in a minute. It’s the 
head of the Canadian Wildlife Federation, Mr. Ken 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1118 
 

Brynaert, and I’ll tell you about the letter. But I want to tell you, 
just remind the people of this province that you stood here a 
few minutes ago, saying that the federal Minister of the 
Environment is going to grant sooner rather than later, I believe 
were the words you used, approval . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . I’m sorry, sir, I don’t attribute the words to you; that you 
attributed them to the Deputy Premier, and I heard them myself 
 that the Deputy Premier stood in this House and said that 
Tom McMillan, the federal Minister of the Environment, will 
sooner, rather than later, grant federal approval. 
 
Well, I want to read, first of all, a little excerpt from the 
Commons debates at the House of Commons in Ottawa. In 
regards to the question of  it’s entitled, “Environmental 
Affairs, Saskatchewan Construction of Dam on Souris River.” 
The question was asked by Mr. Simon De Jong, member for 
Regina East, and he said, “Mr. Speaker, my question is directed 
to the Minister of the Environment.” It goes on to talk about 
how he is aware of this project and so on and so forth. The 
minister said that he’s been following it with a keen interest and 
so on. 
 
But the interesting part, the part that interests us in relation to 
whether or not it’s going to get federal approval sooner or later, 
is the following. The Hon. Tom McMillan says: 
 

Mr. Speaker, I said in my first answer that an application 
had been made. The permit is yet to be issued. I will not 
pronounce now, since it would be premature to do so, 
whether a permit will be issued. The building of the 
coffer-dams is not in contravention of the relevant Act, 
because it does not yet have an effect on the inner basin 
flows as far as international and national jurisdictions are 
concerned. I can tell the hon. member, in response to his 
question, that the federal environmental assessment and 
review process is now being followed. 

 
Is now being followed. Now, Mr. Minister, as part of the federal 
assessment and review project or process, public hearings will 
need to be held. Are you supporting, sir, the position held by 
Mr. McMillan, that public hearings on Rafferty-Alameda are 
necessary, should be held? And will you support, will you 
support by way of granting or demanding a temporary halt to 
the construction of the project until those public hearings are 
held and more relevant material is presented, so in order to 
complete the requirements as laid out by federal law? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  From the point of view of our department, 
we have done our review of the environmental impact study and 
have given our decision. The federal government will have to 
do its review and give its decision, and how it does that is 
entirely their decision, it isn’t ours, and we have not contracted 
or pressured or done anything of that nature. We’ve let the 
federal government do its own review process, and when 
they’re ready to give approval, they’ll give it. 
 
So I can’t give the member any other answer about whether or 
not they’ll hold hearings. That’s entirely their choice. And if 
they choose, then the hearings will be held; if they decide that 
the hearings that we have held are sufficient, then that’s the way 
it will go. 

Mr. Lyons:  Mr. Minister, have you had recent contact with 
the Department of Environment, you or any of your officials, to 
discuss the question of granting, the federal government 
granting, a short-term interim licence for the project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  No, we have not. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Have any federal government officials contacted 
you or any other official in your department regarding the 
questions of Rafferty-Alameda and the need for either a federal 
environmental review process, the need for public hearings, 
and/or the question of a licence which is  and the wording of 
a licence  which is temporary in nature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I’m advised that the federal government 
has not made contact with our department on this issue. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Mr. Minister, have any of the other departments 
such as the Souris Basin Development Authority or Sask Water 
made contact, and have you had discussions with other agencies 
of the Saskatchewan government regarding representations 
made to them by the federal government on this issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I’m sorry, but I can’t speak for other 
departments of government. I have to stay with the Department 
of Environment when I’m here tonight, and the department and 
the officials here advise me that they’ve had no contact. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Well now, Mr. Minister, the officials advised 
you that you, as the Minister of Environment, or the 
Department of Environment, has had no direct contact with the 
federal government on this matter. What I’m asking you is  
and it is your responsibility  you, as the Minister of 
Environment, should know whether or not your officials have 
had contact by any agency of the Government of Saskatchewan 
in regards to conversations or approaches or discussions that 
they’ve had with the federal government regarding a short-term 
licence to be granted to the Rafferty-Alameda project. Are you 
saying that there has been no discussions either from Sask 
Water or SBDA (Souris Basin Development Authority) or 
SaskPower or any other government agency? Is that your 
position, sir? Because I hope it’s not. I hope you won’t say that 
publicly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  To the best information that we have 
tonight, we are not aware of any contacts by any of the other 
Saskatchewan agencies with our department that would deal 
with that kind of a licence. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Mr. Minister, from that answer I take it you’re 
not denying it. However I’ll leave that alone. I’m pretty 
confident of the answer myself. 
 
I want to deal with one more issue before I turn it back to my 
colleague from Moose jaw South. That’s the question of the 
Shand power plant, the question of acid rain, the position of the 
Saskatchewan government, vis-a-vis the federal government’s 
attempt to develop a limit to acid rain through an agreement 
with the United States. 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1119 
 

It’s my understanding, Mr. Minister, from a document I’ve 
received from Environment Canada, that your department was 
advised, prior to your approval of the Shand power plant 
project, by way of letter to Mr. H. Epp, from the environmental 
protection branch, conservation and protection, on September 
28, ’87, that Environment Canada said that your environmental 
impact statement, and the studies done, were wrong, that there 
would be a much higher sulphur content released into the 
atmosphere than the numbers used. And I just want to quote, 
and you’ll please excuse me because of the technical nature of 
the language. I’ll try to interpret it into regular English. 
 
It goes on, on page 1 of this general introductory comments: 
that the Grawnhood U.S. Bureau of Mines equation for sulphur 
retention on lignite ash, which was remarkably accurate in 
predicting Poplar River’s coals ash retention of sulphur in 
extremely meticulous testing, that combustion and 
carbonization research laboratories, in 1977, predicts a sulphur 
retention of 7.1 using the data above for Shand coal ash. 
 
The EIS evidently claims 35 per cent capture for alkali ash. 
That’s a fair difference  7 per cent to 35 per cent capture rate 
by the experimental method that you’re attempting to use at 
Shand. This sounds, and, Mr. Minister, I want to, so that 
everybody understands that this is not a partisan shot, because 
the letter goes on to say  this sounds familiar  35 per cent, 
plus, was being claimed for Poplar River in 1976 against a 
Grawnhood prediction of less than 10 per cent. Many years later 
it was agreed by SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation) that 
less than 10 per cent of initial SO2 (sulphur dioxide) was being 
retained at Poplar. Right? And that’s nothing to be proud of. 
That is certainly nothing to be proud of. 
 
But here you are, Mr. Minister, accused by Environment 
Canada of using unsound methodology, unscientific research, in 
an unproven method of trying to cut down the emissions from 
the Shand power plant that will lead to the pouring out of acid 
rain on our neighbours to the South. 
 
Tell me, Mr. Minister, is one of the reasons why you wouldn’t 
hold public hearings on the construction of the Shand power 
plant due to the fact that you knew people across Saskatchewan, 
as well as in North Dakota and Montana and Minnesota and 
Manitoba, would raise objections because of the experimental 
nature of your pollution control measures and because of the 
inaccuracy and total scientific unsoundness of the methods that 
you’re using to predict acid rain? 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Now the member is kind of shooting broad 
and wide at everything that SaskPower has done. I might inform 
the hon. member that the project that was built in 1976 was 
built when the New Democratic Party were in government, and 
if they made mistakes, then perhaps he should criticize a few of 
his cohorts on that side of the House. 
 
The letter that you’re reading from as it deals with Shand, 

that particular letter was withdrawn about a month after it was 
written because the federal government writer of that particular 
paper found that he had used wrong information and he 
apologized to SaskPower for the letter that he had written. So I 
believe that you can rest a bit more comfortable tonight 
knowing that that letter didn’t have as much fact in it and has 
been withdrawn. 
 
The assurance that we have from SaskPower that when the 
Shand station is completed that its emissions will meet the 
federal requirements, that’s the best information that we could 
give you tonight. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  The final question, Mr. Minister: you’ve said 
several times that things put forward by Environment Canada 
have been modified or have been withdrawn in regards to 
Shand and Rafferty and Alameda; each time that hasn’t proven 
to be the case. I wonder, will you table for the House tonight the 
letter of apology supposedly written by the people from 
Environment Canada. Will you table then the real comments, 
since you’re saying that these aren’t the real comments  
would you table then the real comments put forward by 
Environment Canada, and would you also supply us with the 
data that was wrong or that part of this data that was wrong? It’s 
my understanding from Environment Canada that in fact they 
will stand by every word which is written here that the 
laboratory testing done on Shand proves that the kind of 
experimental acid rain control that you’re engaged in down 
there doesn’t hold the sulphur ash that’s coming out that big, 
high smoke-stack to dump it on our southern neighbours, and 
that it doesn’t hold it. 
 
If you make any allegations against Environment Canada, why 
don’t you put the papers where those allegations are and table 
them before the House? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I don’t have the letter here tonight, but we 
will mail you that letter tomorrow, a copy of that letter, and I 
believe then that the hon. member will be able to look at it in a 
better light. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Take your time, Herb, you know you’ve 
got three weeks in these estimates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: : It could be three or four. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, when you’re providing us with 
that letter, would you also provide us with the new technical 
data that is somehow different than what is in this report? Will 
you also provide us that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  We can provide you with the letter and the 
data that is in their letter that shows that they are of a different 
opinion now. But I believe the report that we have from 
SaskPower that they will more than meet the federal 
guide-lines, are a very important part of that whole issue. 
 
If we’re going to get our acid rain down and within reason, we 
have to come under the federal guide-lines, and they’re very 
stringent guide-lines. SaskPower are prepared to more than 
meet those guide-lines, and I’m pleased to hear that. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, I’d like to turn our attention 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1120 
 

now to something that we mentioned in passing this afternoon, 
that’s the matter of hazardous waste disposal in our province. 
We mentioned that issue in regard to the dioxins and the sludge 
at Weyerhaeuser, and you indicated this afternoon that there 
really is not a long-term plan other than to hold the waste in 
landfill in our province. 
 
Mr. Minister, you will be aware of a resolution passed by 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), the 
urban municipalities association, at this year’s convention. I 
will read you that resolution, although . . . I hope you’re aware 
of it. 
 

Be it resolved that SUMA urge the Minister of the 
Environment and Public Safety to proceed immediately 
with the planning and development of a provincial 
hazardous waste disposal site; and if a hazardous waste 
disposal site is developed that it not be located in northern 
Saskatchewan. 

 
SUMA is calling upon yourself and your government to 
proceed immediately with the plans and developments for a 
hazardous waste facility in our province. In January of this year 
you will be aware that Regina city officials were calling upon 
you and your government to build . . . plan to build a hazardous 
waste facility in the province. You will be aware that right now 
the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon is planning to 
build its own incinerator for low-level, radio-active waste and 
other toxic wastes. They are going ahead with this project, I 
believe, out of a frustration that there is no hazardous waste 
facility in this province. 
 
Given the need, Mr. Minister, and given the requests and the 
urgings from a variety of people in our province: are you, at this 
time, in the process of planning a hazardous waste disposal 
facility for Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I was aware of the communications from 
the city and from the convention. Hazardous waste has been an 
issue in our province for a considerable period of time, and 
we’ve had a fairly major study done and will be continuing to 
work on plans to handle hazardous waste. But as far as the 
actual building of a facility in our province, a major hazardous 
waste facility, we really, as a small populated province, a small 
population base of a million people, it would be very hard to 
justify the kind of expenditures that would be required to build 
a major hazardous waste facility. 
 
The request that many have, to go ahead with a hazardous waste 
facility, is fine. But when you start looking for a place to put it, 
even if you had the 58 million or more that it would cost to 
build it, everybody comes up with the same idea  don’t put it 
in northern Saskatchewan and don’t put it in my back yard. So 
just to find a site for a hazardous waste disposal facility would 
be a major accomplishment. 
 
Governments have spent a lot of dollars in the past. I think just 
to look for an ordinary dump for garbage here in Regina, 
they’ve spent about $600,000 and still haven’t come up with a 
new garbage dump. So what are we going to find, and what 
kind of expenditure do you expect we would have to have in 
order to find a hazardous waste 

site? It’s something that we’re going to work on. I don’t expect 
it will happen overnight. 
 
At this point we are able to take some of our hazardous waste to 
dispose of in Ontario. There may be a possibility in the future of 
accessing Alberta’s, but we haven’t got that guarantee at this 
time. We did at one time try to work out an arrangement 
whereby Manitoba and Saskatchewan and Alberta might have 
built one disposal system jointly. That didn’t happen because 
the province of Alberta wanted to go it alone and Manitoba 
indicates that it wants to go it alone. But I haven’t seen any 
paper yet that says that Manitoba is going to be able to 
immediately go ahead and build a hazardous waste disposal 
system. 
 
So we are looking at it. We have been doing some work on 
regulations to control the handling of hazardous wastes. I don’t 
believe that we have a major problem. The things that we need 
to dispose of, we are able to move at this point and we hope to 
be able to continue to handle the waste in that manner. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Well, Mr. Minister, it seems that the 
Government of Alberta was able to overcome whatever 
problems there are in locating funding and building a hazardous 
waste facility. It seems that that government understood the 
need and the environmental protection that’s offered by such a 
facility. 
 
And I know it’s not an easy job, but not all jobs that 
governments have are easy. And the people of this province 
expect you to tackle some of these tough questions, not to just 
suggest that, well we’re going to study it, we’re going to look at 
it, we’re going to study it, and we’re going to look at it. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve indicated just a few moments ago that 
some of the chemical waste in this province is trucked to 
Ontario. Would you tell this House how much it costs each 
truck load to deliver that chemical to Ontario and have it 
disposed in Ontario. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  We haven’t broken out the exact 
transportation cost, but it would depend where the load 
originated; but the staff feel it would be in the neighbourhood of 
about $2,000 a truck load. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, I’m not clear  $2,000 a truck 
load, does that cover the transportation and whatever it costs in 
Ontario to have the waste disposed? What is the total cost to 
send a truck load of waste from Saskatchewan to Ontario and 
have it disposed  the total cost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  That’s a difficult figure to give because it 
would vary; the cost of disposal depends on the product that’s 
shipped. 
 
Just to give you an idea of cost for one type of material from 
our chemical collection system: a semi-load going to Ontario 
and being disposed of was about $40,000, but on other 
chemicals it would be different costs . . . other products. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Well the figure reported publicly through 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1121 
 

the press, Mr. Minister, was $40,000 a truck load. How many 
truck loads do you estimate leave Saskatchewan for Ontario in 
the course of a year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  From our own department there were only 
two truck loads, but companies that have hazardous goods to 
dispose of, they make their own arrangements under the 
hazardous goods Act, and they transport and dispose of at their 
own cost. So that’s the only ones that we pay for are those two. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  But if 10 trucks, Mr. Minister, if 10 trucks, 
let’s just say, left this province a year, that’s $400,000 a year 
leaving our province. That would go a long way, it seems to me, 
to funding the operation, perhaps not the construction, but the 
operation of hazardous waste facility in our own province. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you have some estimates on what it would cost 
to put a hazardous waste facility, disposal facility into place in 
Saskatchewan? Do you have some estimate of the cost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  About the best I could do for the hon. 
member is give him the costs that Alberta incurred to put theirs 
in place. They had a five-year search for a location at a cost of 
about $8 million  just to find a location. and then to build the 
plant itself, they spent an additional $58 million. I was at the 
opening of that particular plant. They estimate something like 
52 people working full time at that plant. So when you talk 
about 400,000 going a long ways, it would go nowhere. 
 
(2030) 
 
When you put 52 people to work at an average of say 40,000 or 
in that neighbourhood, or 30,000, you soon eat up $400,000 
 
So, no, the amount of money that we as a government are 
spending would be minimal compared to the cost of putting a 
plant in place and operating it. If you just looked at the interest 
on the investment, we could ship our goods out for a number of 
years and still have the original investment. So I think that what 
we’re doing at this point is probably best for the amount of 
hazardous waste we have and the numbers of people that we 
serve. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Well, I tell you, Mr. Minister, this afternoon 
you told us that we can’t dispose of some hazardous waste 
because it’s simply uneconomic to take it from the province. So 
we’re in one case piling up sludge full of dioxins that will stand 
there for years and years and years and years  in anybody’s 
books an environmental time bomb. You told us this afternoon 
we couldn’t afford to get rid of it, and we can’t get rid of it 
because we don’t have our own hazardous waste disposal. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m not sure you can put an economic figure on 
our environment and on public safety. Mr. Minister, I suggest 
you could take half, half of what you’re going for the Rafferty 
dam that we don’t need, put it into a hazardous waste facility 
that we do need, and we’d have a facility in our own province 
to meet our own needs. 

Hon. Mr. Swan:  I guess every government sets its priorities. 
If we were to spend something, 65 million or better, to establish 
a hazardous waste site, the hon. member would likely be one of 
the first ones to criticize us for running the deficit higher. You 
know, so you have to put your priorities straight sometimes and 
this is one that I don’t think you have straight. 
 
When you speak of the sludge at the Weyerhaeuser pulp mill, 
that sludge is on their property and it’s their responsibility to 
dispose of it. It’s not government responsibility. I would like to 
see them move it out regularly and have it burned or whatever. 
That’s part of their operation. As long as the product is not 
causing trouble in our environment, and it’s not at this point, 
then I don’t believe that we have a serious problem to deal with. 
But Weyerhaeuser eventually will have to do something with 
that sludge. And they’re a company that has been in the 
business for a long time; they likely have the contacts to find 
ways of handling it. And we will, over the long haul, work with 
them to have that happen, but it won’t likely happen in the near 
future. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  So, Mr. Minister, again, if we can move into 
just another area of what I would consider to be your 
responsibility. And it’s commonly said in environmental circles, 
and you’ll know this, that we, when dealing with the 
environment, we need to think globally, act locally. 
 
And there’s a responsibility, I think both you and I will agree, 
that we have a responsibility, not only for the environment that 
is determined by the borders of our province, but for the global 
environment that really isn’t affected by national or provincial 
boundaries or political differences  that environment which 
sustains all of us. 
 
So we do have a responsibility, I would submit, in the global 
context. And as you will know, perhaps the two largest crises 
facing the global environment are the combination of the 
deterioration of the ozone area and the greenhouse effect. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a simple question: do you have people in 
your department actively today giving thought to what we 
might be doing in Saskatchewan, first of all, in terms of the 
ozone layer and the deterioration of the ozone layer? Do you 
have people in the department at work right now suggesting 
possibilities of actions we may take locally to help restore and 
repair the ozone layer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I believe that this ozone layer problem has 
been around for a while and it’s been one that has been looked 
at by the community, the university community, the people that 
monitor that type of weather picture. 
 
What we have done within our government is to begin to move 
towards the unleaded gasoline to be used in Saskatchewan and 
have offered tax incentives to people who would produce 
ethanol as a gasoline additive to get away from leaded gasoline 
entirely. The CCREM, which is the Council of Resource and 
Environment Ministers, have done a considerable amount of 
work and are making recommendations that hopefully will be of 
some use. My deputy minister has been involved in a number of 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1122 
 

those meetings, so he is one of the people from our department 
that is very much involved. 
 
The policy and evaluation unit that is being established in our 
department will on an ongoing basis be keeping track and 
working on directions that we may use in this province to be of 
assistance. Now I imagine that the heavier populated provinces 
and countries have more contribution to that problem than we 
do, but each one of us has some need to be involved ourselves 
in things that we might do to be of assistance. Perhaps you as an 
individual when you shave tomorrow morning don’t use a 
pressurized can, use a bar of soap, and you’ll help the system 
quite a bit yourself. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, I am trying to do my bit and I’m 
hoping that you’re going to try and do your bit. And you have 
considerably more influence and power in this province than I 
do or many, many other citizens. You are the Minister of the 
Environment. You have some, I hope, authority and influence 
within your government. 
 
Mr. Minister, I couldn’t take from your remarks whether you 
have some very specific proposals coming out of your 
department just now. And I see you shaking your head  no, 
you’ve not. Then I would ask you to consider some very 
specific proposals. In terms of the ozone layer, it’s widely 
accepted that the damage to the ozone layer is occurring 
through the use of the chlorofluorocarbons, CFCs. It is widely 
known that this chemical is present in many of the products we 
see in our daily lives. 
 
It is my understanding that the McDonald’s chain of 
restaurants, now using the containers for their food and so on, 
have agreed, in Canada, by August, to be using a product that 
doesn’t contain the CFCs. 
 
Would you be willing, through your department, to encourage 
 perhaps first of all encourage and if that doesn’t work then to 
legislate  other retailers and businesses who are using 
products which contain CFCs to eliminate their use and to do so 
as quickly as possible? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  There are still many unknowns in the 
solution to the ozone problem. I don’t believe that any country 
in the world is really at the stage where they can make concrete 
proposals on remedies that would be effective. I believe that it’s 
going to take a wide variety of things changing in order to 
change the ozone problem. And I don’t know whether it ever 
rebuilds and I don’t believe most scientists know. They’re 
looking at it but they haven’t all of the answers at this point. 
 
So our department doesn’t have specific proposals. Our 
government has been monitoring the same as other 
governments across Canada. And I indicated to you the 
direction that we’re heading with gasoline, to get to the 
unleaded stage, and that is one of the major contributors from 
our province to the problem. 
 
Now there will be a number of other things coming down the 
pike, and I think there are new inventions each year and each 
month that will be of benefit. The change for McDonald’s is 
one of those benefits. probably the change away from plastic 
bags that Safeway is using to the ecolyte plastic is probably 
another one that will be of 

benefit. There are a number of things, but we don’t have any 
specific ones, and no, we’re not prepared to start to legislate 
until we have much more information so that we know that 
when we legislate we’re doing the right thing. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I tell you, I think this 
province is in trouble. When the McDonald’s chain of 
restaurants have a better understanding of the environment and 
the problems facing the environment and are more willing to 
take concrete steps to deal with those problems than is the PC 
Government of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, it is widely accepted that the 
CFCs used in a variety of commercial products are causing the 
problem in the ozone layer. I mean, you can find all sorts of 
technical studies that will show that; you can find all sorts of 
popular articles in publications like the Reader’s Digest, in 
publications like the Sports Illustrated, articles talking about the 
damage to the ozone layer and what drastic consequences we 
face if we do not take immediate action. 
 
We have a variety of products in use in our province, and I 
suggest . . . I’m not saying you need to legislate immediately, 
I’m suggesting that your government undertake first of all, at 
minimum, an educational campaign. Try and get our eggs back 
into cardboard cartons, biodegradable cartons. Try and get the 
food chains in this province to use packaging that doesn’t 
contain CFCs. Try to get other manufacturers to use materials 
other than the foam that contains CFCs. Mr. Minister, will you 
at least undertake that much, not just for the sake of 
Saskatchewan, but for the sake of the globe? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  It was interesting when the hon. member 
was speaking that he didn’t say that they were scientific articles, 
they were popular articles, and I believe that’s the right term. 
The articles that have been written, for the most part, are just 
popular articles and don’t have very much scientific base. There 
are some that are scientific. 
 
And we are looking at areas that we could advertise and assist 
but we haven’t really reached that stage as a department. The 
Council of Resource and Environment Ministers have been 
looking at this issue and as we develop a program that might be 
universal across Canada it would likely have more impact. 
That’s the direction that our department has been going, and I 
think will continue to go, because there is a lot more money to 
be spent to be sure that what we do is going to be beneficial. I 
don’t want to jump first and then think later; we want to think 
first and then jump, and that’s what we intend to do. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Well, Mr. Minister, I didn’t bring them 
because I didn’t think it was necessary  some of the technical 
studies by eminent and qualified people, not only in Canada, the 
United States and elsewhere, who have concluded that CFCs 
are creating the problem in the ozone layer. I did not come here 
expecting that this 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1123 
 

would be a matter of debate. I did not expect the Minister of the 
Environment in Saskatchewan to stand up and suggest, well, 
we’re not sure that there’s a problem; we’re not sure what’s 
causing the problem. 
 
(2045) 
 
This is just like, as I said this afternoon, a Ronald Reagan, who 
wants to excuse inaction by saying, well we need to study the 
issue. We don’t know what the problem is, we don’t know the 
damage is. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s my understanding there’s international 
agreements in place calling for a 50 per cent reduction of the 
CFCs. I would like to ask you, Mr. Minister, if . . . Now I’m not 
sure how you’re going to respond because I’m not sure you 
accept the fact that CFCs are a problem. But I came here 
wanting to ask you tonight, so I will. Would you be willing to 
lobby your federal counterparts to strive for an agreement that 
would call for an 85 per cent reduction in the use of CFCs in 
Canada? The scientific and technical communities say that with 
that kind of reduction then we can expect a regeneration of the 
ozone layer  but a 50 per cent reduction won’t do it. 
 
So I wanted to ask you tonight, and I will ask you: will you 
lobby your federal counterparts for an agreement which calls 
for an 85 per cent reduction rather than the agreement which 
calls for a 50 per cent reduction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  You know, the member now says he has 
scientific studies and that’s a different matter. But when you 
spoke first, you said “popular articles.” And that’s all I quoted, 
is what you said. 
 
I might advise the hon. member that there is an international 
meeting proposed for Canada on the June 26, and if the 
legislature isn’t in session, I fully to expect to attend that 
meeting and be involved in it. But the department likely will be 
represented whether or not I go. 
 
The decision to change the products that we use, if it were a 
great decision, they shouldn’t say 50 per cent, they should say 
that we should have a time frame and work right out of using 
that project. And I believe that’s the direction that environment 
ministers across Canada and across the world are looking at it. 
 
There are many products that are causing trouble  the ones 
that you quote are one product. They still tell me that the 
biggest polluter that we have is the combustion engine and the 
types of fuel that we have used; that it’s doing far more damage 
to the environment than any other one single factor. That’s the 
one that I believe Canada should move to adjust first because 
we are a very industrialized nation and we have many 
combustion engines. 
 
So we will be looking at the issue and I’m sure, in the very near 
future, you’ll see more action across Canada and across 
Saskatchewan on this issue. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Minister, last year during your 
estimates we spent some time discussing the fire commission’s 
office and its role. You will recall that last year you advised me 
that the fire commission’s office was 

spending approximately 1.024 million and that was taken from 
a series of premiums on fire insurance, home fire insurance that 
was collected at a total 1.8 million. I’d like to know how much 
you’re dedicating towards the fire commission this year, please, 
Mr. Minister. And also, in view of the fact that there aren’t any 
public accounts, could you advise me whether the amount 
collected in premiums are approximately the same as last year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  The budgeted figure you have, which is 
989 million, and the figure that you said that was collected out 
of insurance fees was estimated by Finance. It goes into general 
revenue, and I imagine that the estimate would be very much 
the same this year, although I haven’t seen that estimate. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky:  Could you give me the figure for the fire 
commission’s office again  989,000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Yes, 989,110. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky:  I thought perhaps you had decided to 
increase it a hundredfold there, and I was wondering what had 
happened. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, the concern remains the same, and that is 
that the people of Saskatchewan are really providing a sort of a 
hidden tax here, that is, to the Government of Saskatchewan. 
They’re taxed 1 per cent, and the money is said to be dedicated 
to the fire commission’s office by law, and of course only 1 
million out of the 1.8 approximated amount gets to the fire 
commission’s office. The volunteer fire-fighters still feel very 
strongly that the moneys . . . They need increased moneys to be 
dedicated towards some of the enterprises that they have 
suggested in their 1984 study. 
 
I want to know, Mr. Minister, whether you are developing any 
new training courses or models, and whether you’re intending 
to establish a fire college. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  The level 1 training college was 
implemented last year and has been working for a year. I am 
advised that a new principal from the fire training college will 
be employed very shortly to work with that program and with 
others. 
 
There’s no proposal right at this time to build a separate fire 
college, but what is being looked at in just the preliminary 
stages is a joint emergency response facility and if that goes 
ahead, then the fire college would likely be incorporated with it. 
But it’s in the very, very early stages and I couldn’t even give 
you any guide-line or time frame of when it might happen. It’s 
being discussed between the federal government and our 
department, but it’s in the very, very early stages and not very 
far down the road at this point. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky:  Let’s turn for a minute to the other topic that 
we discussed very briefly last year, and that is the one of 
environmental hypersensitivity, as it relates to your department. 
 
I want to know that whether as a result of any discussions you 
might have had or information, whether you’re 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1124 
 

planning to take any action, any proactive approach, in 
conjunction perhaps with the Department of Health, where you 
might set up an assignment to somebody in your department to 
document and establish a baseline of knowledge about people 
affected with hypersensitivity over . . . in the near future, 
because it’s a concern certainly in industrialized areas, and I 
believe it’s getting to be more of a concern of Saskatchewan 
people as we get to have more and more contact with chemicals 
and synthetic materials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I am advised that our department has had 
nothing further on that. It would be a health issue and the 
Health department may have something, but we haven’t. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky:  Have you had any delegations or any 
representations about causes of environmental hypersensitivity 
from any groups such as the Catholic family services or Dr. 
Gerrard or Dr. Montebriand who are working in this area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  No, my staff are not aware of any contact. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, just a short couple of questions 
concerning the environmental impact statement that was 
prepared for your department and approved by your department 
on the Uranium City-Rabbit Lake transmission line. 
 
I have read the executive summary of the EIS, and I don’t find 
in it any reference to something which I think ought to be of 
concern to you and to this House, and that is: what process will 
be used once the line is in place for the ongoing clearing of that 
line? Is it the plan, to your knowledge, that SPC will be using 
the spraying of herbicides along that line once it is completed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  No, that line was hand cleared and the 
intent is that it continues to be hand cleared. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, the intent is that it continue to be 
hand cleared. Are you insisting that it be hand cleared in the 
future as well as in the developmental stage, but in the future. 
Are you insisting that hand clearing be done rather than use of 
herbicide? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I’m advised that the environmental impact 
statement recommended that that was the method of clearance, 
would be hand clearing and that it continue to be hand clearing, 
and we approved the environmental impact statement as it’s 
stated. So we’re not intending to use chemicals. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, I understood that it was to be 
hand cleared during the construction phase. Now I’ve only dealt 
with the executive summary and so I have not read the entire 
environment impact, but I would really appreciate  and I’m 
sure a variety of other people, particularly in the North  
would appreciate your guarantee, your guarantee that from your 
point of view, as the Department of the Environment and as 
minister, that hand clearing will continue in the future and that 
herbicide spraying will not be used along this line. 

Hon. Mr. Swan:  That’s what the environmental impact 
study said, was that it would be hand cleared and continue to be 
hand cleared and that was what was approved by our 
department. So there is no authorization to go ahead with 
chemical clearing. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  If, Mr. Minister, there is a violation of that, 
how is that dealt with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I’m advised that before anyone could have 
approval to use chemical, they would have to come back for 
approval through the department. If they do as you say, they 
violate the approval, then through minister’s order you could 
challenge them and it could go to the court and they’d be fined 
in the regular legal process. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that information 
and for the assurance that you’ve given from your point of view 
 it shall be hand clearing, along that line. 
 
If I may just move back again to the more specifics of your 
department, would you provide for me or tonight just give it, 
the name, title, and the salary of each of your personal staff as 
minister  the name, title, and salary. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I’ll send that across to the member. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, you may also have this 
information with you. Do any of those particular employees of 
yours have access to a government vehicle or a car allowance, 
or is that information included here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  None of those people would have a car 
allowance or have access to a car unless I were to ask them to 
go somewhere and then they would draw a vehicle from the 
pool for a day and it would be put back. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Now not just in respect to your own personal 
staff as minister, but to the department, could you give me, first 
of all, the numbers and the names of any staff who have been 
terminated in the past . . . well, in the calendar years 1986-87 
and to this point in ’87-88. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I wonder if the member would be specific. 
You realize that we had a number of early retirements. Those 
would not, in our term, be classed as terminations. We had only 
one termination, and as far as the information on that, I would 
likely have to send it to you. We don’t have it here tonight. But 
we just had one. The position was abolished and the person’s 
job ended. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, then if you would 
provide me the name and if the severance package was 
involved. If you would provide that as well. 
 
Mr. Minister, from the introduction of your officials, I 
understand that Mr. Michael Hegan works in your department. I 
would like to ask if he has recently taken time away from his 
office to campaign for a PC nomination, and during that time, 
did he take a holiday or a leave of absence? 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1125 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan:  I’m advised that the member was away on 
holidays. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, could you provide for us then 
the period of time involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  We’ll provide you with the actual dates. I 
don’t have them here but I could get them. We have them on 
the application, so that’s the best way to give it to you. We’ll 
send it. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  We’d appreciate that information. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think that . . . No, I’m sorry, I do have one other 
short area that I would like us to look at before we can perhaps 
start moving through the subvotes, and that has to do with the 
environment and the economy task force recommendation. 
 
As you know . . . as you well know, the task force calls for the 
establishment of a round table on the environment and the 
economy. I would like to ask tonight: at what stage are you and 
the department in the formation of the round table in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  That plan is under development in our 
department. We expect to have round tables beginning this year 
but we aren’t at that stage quite. We are doing work on it. As I 
advised you earlier, the two new people that will come into the 
plannings area will be involved in part of that and we’re just in 
the hiring stages. So sometime this year we would hope to 
begin to put the round tables in place. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, the report, as you know, calls for 
the establishment of the round tables by September of this year 
 and that’s the recommendation. You certainly have been a 
part and your department has been a part of this report calling 
for the round tables to be in establishment by September. I 
realize from previous discussions we’ve had today you seem to 
find it a little difficult to get things prepared and ready on time. 
I’m hoping that this can be an exception. 
 
Have you appointed a chairperson for the round table in 
Saskatchewan, or have you named any other individuals yet to 
that round table? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  No, we haven’t at this point. As I advised 
you, we’re still in that process, and no, the people have not been 
named. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Are you confident, Mr. Minister, that this 
work can be done, that the round table can be in existence by 
September, as the report calls for, or are we going to be sort of 
the province again that’s behind the rest of Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I’m advised that there are only two 
provinces in Canada that have their action plan ready and that 
there are no round tables established in any province in Canada 
at this point. 
 
I did suggest to you that we expect that we would have a round 
table established this year; whether it will be September, I’m 
not certain. Those are guide-lines that are 

put out when the report was drafted, and whether we can meet 
that guide-line I’m not certain. And I don’t think that’s the 
beginning or the end, whether it’s the first of September or the 
first of October or the first of November, as long as when we do 
come in with a program that it’s done well and that the people 
that we put in place will be the qualified people that can do a 
good job of it. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Perhaps we could just move quickly to another 
recommendation, Mr. Minister. This is from that, the series of 
recommendations pertaining to government particularly, and 
recommendation 2.2, that environment ministers should be 
members of key economic development and priorities and 
planning committees of cabinet or be closely associated by 
appropriate mechanisms with those committees. And I’m not 
sure how your cabinet functions  if it functions at all  but 
may I ask first of all then, does your cabinet have an economic 
development and priority and planning committee? If it does, 
are you a part of that group? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  The cabinet does have a priority planning 
group, and I’m not a part of that group at this time. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Then to follow along with the 
recommendations of this, which I would describe as a very 
welcome document, does your government plan then to make 
yourself or the Minister of the Environment a part of that 
group? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  That’s an answer that I couldn’t give you. 
You’ll have to, perhaps, talk to the Premier who makes those 
choices. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Well, Mr. Minister, I will ask the Premier on 
your behalf if he is going to do that. Are you currently lobbying 
the Premier to find a place within that committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  The Premier was part of the first ministers’ 
conference that approved that task force report. He has read the 
report; he is aware of that recommendation; I have written a 
letter to him drawing his attention to it. When he makes a 
decision, I guess he will advise me. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Well I wish you well, Mr. Minister. I’m not 
particularly optimistic, knowing the Premier that you work 
under, but I wish you well. 
 
On to another section of the recommendations, this having to do 
with conservation strategies. The report calls for yourself, as 
Minister of the Environment, in consultation with industry and 
non-government organizations, to prepare a compendium of 
Canadian experiences in developing conservation strategies, 
and it is hoped that that can be done again by September of this 
year. How is the progress on that going, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  The task force itself was given an extra 
year’s extension to do some of that very work that you’re 
mentioning and the department, through the deputy minister, 
have been very much involved in that process and will continue 
to be. 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1126 
 

Mr. Calvert:  Again another recommendation, Mr. Minister 
 and I haven’t seen any evidence of this happening yet in our 
province and I hope to soon and I’d like to hear from you 
tonight when we might expect it  a recommendation that over 
the course of the next two years, that would begin this year and 
next year, that provincial governments should organize 
workshops and seminars on conservation strategies. Are you 
currently, or people in your department, organizing these 
workshops? And I sincerely hope the answer is yes. And I’d 
also like to know then, where in your budget is there some 
funding for this to happen. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  The action plan that we spoke of earlier is 
the first step. All of the recommendations will be dealt with in 
that action plan, then it has to go forward for funding through 
government, and it’s after that that we could implement. So we 
don’t have those meetings in place at this point. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Just 
several brief questions as matters of information to the minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder, as part of your operations of the 
Department of the Environment, are you engaged in a program, 
or have you developed a program to monitor ground water 
quality throughout the province in respect of potential 
contaminations by the use of agricultural herbicides or 
pesticides and, if so, has there been any reports prepared lately 
in that regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  In so far as the monitoring of ground water 
is concerned, where there are community wells in agricultural 
areas, we have them send in samples on a regular basis and that 
type of analysis is done. But we don’t have any formal reports 
written like we do an analysis of a sample and advise them 
whether the water is still safe for human consumption, that sort 
of things, but not a formal report. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Well, Mr. Minister, just as a — maybe it’s a 
practical suggestion in terms of monitoring what is becoming 
increasingly a problem, has been identified as a problem 
throughout not just Saskatchewan or Manitoba or Alberta or 
western Canada, but throughout all North America, and that is 
the increase in the number of pollutants from pesticide and 
herbicide use, both agriculturally and industrially as well as 
domestically. May I suggest that as a practical solution, or as a 
practical suggestion, that you, in fact, engage in some kind of 
monitoring process to see  given the extensive nature and the 
extensive use of agricultural chemicals in the province  that 
you develop some kind of ongoing monitoring situation in 
regards to ground water. 
 
Having said that, my second question has got nothing to do with 
this; the second question has to do with the upgrader in Regina. 
Was there environmental assessment done prior to the 
construction of the heavy oil upgrader in Regina? If no 
environmental assessment was done, were there environmental 
guide-lines laid down in regards to potential problems which 
could possibly arise, given some of the dangerous and 
hazardous substances that are produced at the upgrader, and if 
so, have those reports or that environmental assessment been 
made public? 

(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I’m advised that the answer to all of your 
questions is yes. Yes, to them all. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Just in terms of the guide-lines that are laid 
down for the upgrader, is it possible for every citizen of the 
province to get a copy of that? Are they at the libraries? I’m 
asking purely as a question of information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Yes, that information in is the library. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank:  Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I want to 
ask you a couple of very brief questions about the removal of 
PCBs (polychlorinated biphenyl) from transformer oil, for 
example. I want to know if you’re aware of any new or 
innovative and inexpensive method of removing PCBs of low 
concentration from transformer oil? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  When the members asks about “new”, I 
don’t know how new he’s looking for. We’ve had a company in 
Regina called PPM (Canada Inc.) that does that type of work on 
low levels of contamination on transformer oil. And they’ve 
been handling that type of work for Sask Power now for the last 
two years and, I think, are doing a commendable job of it. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank:  I don’t suppose, Mr. Minister, you’d be 
aware of the costs, the volume costs of doing that? Would you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I’m advised that the cost is relatively low 
but we don’t have exact figures. SaskPower would likely be 
able to give you that information but we certainly don’t have it. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank:  The reason I asked the question, Mr. 
Minister, is a constituent that I’m aware of claims that he has a 
process for removing low concentration of PCBs from 
transformer oil, and I was wondering, Mr. Minister, would it be 
possible to get his method evaluated by your department, if he 
so desired? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Our department indicates they would be 
glad to look at it if he has a proposal to make, at any time. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Item 3 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, just on item 3, I would like to 
reiterate a comment that I made earlier this day in regard to the 
environmental assessment branch. You have added two staff 
people to that branch and explained in the House this afternoon 
that those two people will become essentially the planning and 
policy division, particularly in response to the environment and 
the economy task force. 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1127 
 

Mr. Minister, I indicated this afternoon, and I want to indicate 
again, I think that the demand on the environmental assessment 
branch, which you indicated in your opening remarks, is 
growing, and we can expect it to grow. I was hopeful when I 
initially saw these figures in your budget that, in fact, you had 
found way clear to add two more people to that branch. 
 
I would ask you again tonight: would you consider leaving this 
budgeted amount alone just for environmental assessment 
purposes, and to add to your budget or to find somewhere else 
in your budget the $150,000 that you want to use for the 
planning and priority function? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Well, I believe that staff in environmental 
assessment have been able to do a good job of reviewing the 
environmental assessments, even through the work-load is 
fairly heavy. 
 
Putting two extra people in that department to do the work that 
we suggest that they will do should free up other people who 
had been doing that type of work for the department. And that 
way, in effect, it gives more time for people who are now in the 
department to work. So indirectly they have had more 
assistance at their disposal for the coming year than they had in 
the past. 
 
Item 3 agreed to. 
 
Item 4 agreed to. 
 
Item 5 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, this is the, of course, the division 
of your department that chose the reduction of the staff. And I 
understand from the notations here in the blue book that some 
of . . . it would appear to me that some of these folks are going 
over to SaskPower. Is that true? Is that assessment correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Yes, that’s the intent. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Is it your intent to move more of the public 
safety branch into SaskPower, or is this the extent of the move? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  It’s just the gas and electrical that will be 
moving, the inspection side of the gas and electrical. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  So you don’t anticipate any further functions 
of that branch being moved out of our department and into 
SaskPower  just the gas and the electrical? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Yes, that’s all to SaskPower. 
 
Item 5 agreed to. 
 
Items 6 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 9 
 
Mr. Calvert:  This is, I find, to be a rather peculiar item. I 
shouldn’t say peculiar, that the water appeal board is peculiar 
 I find your budgeting for the water appeal 

board to be very peculiar. 
 
As I checked back in preparation for these estimates, in 1986-87 
the budgeted figure for the water appeal board was $91,000. 
Last year the budgeted amount went to $41,000. This year it is 
up to 103,600. Now could you explain those wild variations in 
budgeted figures for the water appeal board, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I believe I did explain it to you last year. 
They had a surplus in their budget from the year before, and 
that surplus was used along with the 41,000 that showed in the 
budget; they utilized the surplus that they had on hand. This 
year the surplus is gone, and their work-load has increased to 
some extent, and they have one extra person on the board so 
their costs are a bit higher, and that’s the reason for the budget 
increase. 
 
Item 9 agreed to. 
 
Item 10 Statutory 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, just to respond a little bit to your 
last remark. You did not explain to me last year about the water 
appeal board. I was not serving as the environment critic; I 
would not have forgotten such an explanation. 
 
On item 10, Mr. Minister, I see that the budgeted amount for the 
members of the Executive Council statutory has gone from 
28,300 last year to 35,200 this year. Would you explain to the 
House the almost $7,000 increase? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  The change is that I now have a Legislative 
Secretary charged to the Department of Environment. Last year 
I just had a Legislative Secretary charged to the water 
corporation. I just still have one Legislative Secretary, but this 
time he was appointed to the department. So the difference is 
that appointment. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  So this year the department is paying the extra 
salary to the member who serves as your Legislative Secretary, 
whereas last year the water corporation paid it. That’s correct? 
 
Mr. Minister, could you tell this House who your Legislative 
Secretary is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Yes, the member for Nipawin. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  The member from Nipawin. Mr. Minister, 
could you provide for this House a summary, a list of the 
activities undertaken by the member from Nipawin as your 
Legislative Secretary in the course of the past year so that we 
might know what we’re getting for this $7,000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  As the member may realize, he was 
appointed in late January, so his year was fairly short; it was 
just a couple of months. Just for the two month period I could 
give you that information. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Yes, I would appreciate that information, Mr. 
Minister. And I take it that you will provide it in printed form 
and send it. Thank you very much. 
 
Vote 9 agreed to. 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1128 
 

Supplementary Estimates (No. 2) 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Environment and Public Safety 
Ordinary Expenditure  Vote 9 

 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Item 3 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, the operation recycle program of 
course has been wiped out. There was a budgeted amount of 
700,000, if I recall, in last year’s budget. Here we’re having an 
additional $650,000. Why? Why the extra 650,000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  That 650,000 included 200,000 for the 
completion of the vehicle gathering and hauling from all the 
collection sites in the province; clean-up of the collection sites 
was 350,000, and compensation for contract terminations was 
100,000, for a total of 650,000. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  I’m sorry, I didn’t just catch that, Mr. 
Minister. One hundred thousand for contract terminations? 
Figure was correct? 
 
Item 3 agreed to. 
 
Vote 9 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, are your officials from the 
department . . . will they be leaving now? 
 
An Hon. Member:  Yes 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Then let me take this opportunity to thank 
them for their part in these estimates and to thank them for their 
ongoing contribution to the people of Saskatchewan. When I 
look at a budget that has been cut since some years ago, I 
recognize that perhaps your work is not always easy, that the 
demands are heavy. And I want to, on behalf of the opposition 
and certainly on behalf of the people I represent in Moose Jaw 
and on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, to extend thanks 
to you folks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Mr. Chairman, I’d also like to thank my 
officials for the work and the assistance they provide me on a 
daily basis, and or the special assistance they provide during the 
time of our estimates. I might also say that we appreciate them 
having an extra four weeks to get this year’s work done. Thanks 
very much. 
 
(2130) 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 
Ordinary Expenditure  Vote 50 

 
Mr. Chairman:  Would the minister introduce his official. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Mr. Chairman, I’d like to introduce my 
officials: Vern Fowke, president of the water corporation sitting 
here beside; directly behind me Wayne Phillips, vice-president, 
finance and administration; and here, Wayne Dybvig, chief 
planner, resource management 

division? The critic for Environment have said that others were 
not making speeches. I’ll bless them tonight, no speech. We’ll 
go right into the question and answer period. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, I want to welcome your officials 
to this House. Mr. Minister, I would like some clarification 
from you as to the questions that perhaps are most appropriately 
asked here, and other questions that may more appropriately be 
asked in Crown Corporations Committee. 
 
Perhaps because I am a junior member of this House, if you 
could just give me some indication as to the field of questioning 
that you will permit in the Crown Corporations Committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Well the Crown Corporations Committee 
is always the year under review, so in that term you would have 
to stay within the things that the water corporation did during 
the year that will be under review next . . . and I believe we’re 
up on Tuesday. 
 
An Hon. Member:  No, that’s not true in this committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  No, just . . . he asked about the Crown 
corporations and that’s what’s available then. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, again just for my clarification, if 
in fact a study was commissioned by the water corporation in 
the year under review, but that study has only become available 
publicly now, or at least parts of it, will you accept questions in 
Crown Corporations Committee in regard to that kind of study? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I believe that if a report were 
commissioned on a certain year, then that report . . . the cost of 
the report and who is doing it, that sort of things would be up 
for discussion. But the actual report, if it came in in the 
following year, would not be up for discussion till the following 
year. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  And, Mr. Minister, we may or may not then be 
able to complete this portion of your estimates tonight. I’d hope 
we could do much of the material in the Crown Corporations 
Committee. 
 
Let me begin by asking if you will provide for this House . . . 
The other day in question period we had a very short exchange 
about a study, which I believe was commissioned by the water 
corporation, into soil salinity and related problems to irrigation, 
a study conducted by Professor Henry of Saskatoon. Mr. 
Minister, would you make a copy of Professor Henry’s study 
available to myself as critic? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  That particular study arrived on my desk 
yesterday. I haven’t had an opportunity to even take it to the 
Sask Water Corporation board of directors yet, so I can’t tell 
you just when it will be released, but it’s not available at this 
point. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Well, Mr. Minister, this is a very peculiar 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1129 
 

thing, because in question period you were telling me what was 
in the report, and what was in the study, and what it was 
recommending, and where it was recommending things not be 
done. And now you tell me tonight you just got it yesterday. 
How is it that you had the knowledge of what’s in the report 
when we dealt with this issue in question period and you 
haven’t had a chance to read it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  If the hon. member will recall, the question 
he asked was yesterday, and I got the report yesterday. And yes, 
I read the executive summary and parts of the main report 
yesterday, and I gave you factual information. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, these days in this House seem so 
long. 
 
Mr. Minister, then let me ask a number of questions around that 
report. If I understood you correctly in this House you said to 
the House that Professor Henry’s recommendation for a 
moratorium on irrigation applied only to that area around 
Outlook that has been irrigated for some years. Is that the 
recommendation of Professor Henry that only that area have a 
moratorium placed on it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Yes. I would tell the hon. member that the 
study only covered irrigation district no. 1, it didn’t cover any 
other area of the province. It looked at specific soil difficulties 
that haven’t shown up in that irrigation district, so his 
recommendation can only apply to the district that was under 
study. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Did he, Mr. Minister, intend his 
recommendation only to apply to that area under study? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  No. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Or did he intend that his findings in that area 
should be extrapolated to the province? Because my 
understanding of that study  and I only understand it through 
the public reports, the press reports  my understanding is that 
Professor Henry was calling for an immediate and total 
moratorium across the province until long-term studies could be 
completed based on his research in that one area. 
 
That’s my understanding. Is that true or false, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  From your research paper, which was the 
newspaper, I think maybe you could extrapolate that kind of 
information. But when you have an opportunity to review the 
report in the near future, I believe then you will realize that he’s 
only dealing with the Outlook irrigation district no. 1. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, then how soon will I have the 
opportunity to review the report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  As a minister of Sask Water I would take 
that report to our board of directors and to our staff, and then 
the decision will be made on which date it will be released for 
public review. And that process will take a little while  a 
month or so, but not too long. 

Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, it’s my understanding, actually 
from an engineering newsletter, that a new irrigation pump is 
under construction, or soon will be under construction, to serve 
that area. Am I mistaken about that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  The pump that you’re talking about will be 
a pump for that pump-house at Gardiner Dam. The pump will 
not be used only for irrigation. it’s for the pumping of water in 
that whole area. It will be pump unit no. 4 because at times they 
were short of water. The water that it supplies, part of it goes to 
Blackstrap, part of it will go to the water supply system out of 
Saskatoon, and some of the water would be used for irrigation, 
but it’s not used just for irrigation. It’s a pump utilized for all of 
those services. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, then, I guess when I see a new 
pump being constructed  and I understand it’s $1 million that 
we’re looking at spending there, $1 million  at least certain 
part of the function of that pump is for irrigation. 
 
Mr. Minister, what I want to ask you then, is when you get this 
recommendation from Professor Henry that calls for a 
moratorium on further irrigation, and you say only in that 
district  and I’m not so sure that’s what he’s calling for, but 
that’s what you say, it’s only in that district. Do you accept, 
then, Professor Henry’s recommendation for that district? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  When you speak of that report and that 
recommendation, the pump was ordered about two months ago, 
and the report of Professor Henry came to my desk yesterday. 
So the pump was needed. If we had one pump stop for any 
reason, that whole area was in difficulty for water, and the 
water system that covers the area near Saskatoon services many 
farms and businesses. 
 
So we can’t have that area without water and the Blackstrap 
area without water. So the pump is very much needed whether 
we add additional irrigation or not. When you speak of a 
moratorium, that doesn’t mean to stop the irrigation that’s been 
going, it’s to not start new irrigation. And the intent that we 
have at this time is not to develop new irrigation in that Outlook 
area. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, you have had a chance to read 
Professor Henry’s report and I have not, so I’ll ask you: does 
Professor Henry in his report indicate how much land, 
productive land, has been lost due to the irrigation project there 
at Outlook? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  When I tell you I’ve read it, I didn’t read in 
detail all of the maps and the technical part of the report; that 
would take a considerable length of time. It’s a major report; 
you don’t read it in just an hour or two. I did spend about three 
hours with it, but there’s much more that I would like to extract 
from that. I couldn’t give you figures from it at this point. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Have your officials had a chance to read it, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  No, they haven’t had the opportunity yet. 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1130 
 

Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, another report that has received 
some publicity in the last number of days has to do with the 
South Saskatchewan study and the proposed diversion of waters 
from the South Saskatchewan into the Souris Basin. Mr. 
Minister, I want to ask you tonight, in the files of the water 
corporation, does there exist a plan for the diversion of waters 
from one basin to another? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Well as the member will realize, there are 
some diversions taking place now, like the water that comes to 
Buffalo Pound that serves the city of Moose Jaw and Regina is 
a diversion. The water that we talk about pumping through the 
SSEWS (Saskatoon South-East Water Supply) canal to go to 
Blackstrap is also a form of diversion, I suppose. 
 
But in the water corporation files there are a number of studies 
that go back many years that have been done by PFRA (Prairie 
Farm Rehabilitation Administration), and they have looked at 
diversions of different types. There are no active consideration 
by the water corporation since it was formed for diversions of 
any kind. 
 
And the report you asked about, though there was a bit of 
information in the paper put forward by a man by the name if 
Kendall that was doing the actual study, we don’t expect to 
have that study for at least two years yet. So it’s in the very 
early stages of a study, so no, I can’t give you any more 
information than what the paper gave you. But as a corporation, 
we’re not considering diverting water out of the South 
Saskatchewan into the Souris or anything like it. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, is it not true that the interim 
report from Dr. or Mr. Kendall is due very shortly, that the final 
report is due in some length of time, but that there is an interim 
report due that will be made available? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  No, there is no interim report expected, and 
the final report is about two years away. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Well, Mr. Minister, then I guess . . . Again 
maybe you’ll want to blame the media for this, but I understood 
through the press that indeed an interim report was going to be 
available. 
 
The studies that you now have in the water corporation which 
propose diversions and map out possible routes for diversions 
from the South Saskatchewan into the Souris, would you make 
those available? Would you make those available to me or any 
others who may request to see them? 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I might advise the hon. member that there 
was a study done between 1974 and 1978, and as you realize, 
that was done under the time when the NDP were government. 
That report I believe is in the files and maybe I’ll be able to 
give you a copy, or maybe it’s even in the library, I’m not sure. 
But we could look for it. I haven’t seen it, but they indicate that 
if they have it, they could likely make it available. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, “if” and “likely” are not quite 
satisfactory to me tonight. If the report, I believe, 

was done and does exist and is in the files, then I would like 
your assurance that your officials will find that report and 
provide it to us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  My staff advise that they could find the 
report and they would make a copy available. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, we have indicated here in the 
blue book that $59,500,000 is coming as a loan and advance to 
the Saskatchewan Water Corporation for construction of the 
Rafferty-Alameda dam project. Mr. Minister, what happens to 
this money if, in fact, the federal approval is not given? What 
happens to this money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  The water corporation would only borrow 
money from the Department of Finance as it’s needed, and 
unless the money is being spent to build the project, there 
would be no need for it. So we don’t have it sitting idle 
anywhere, it would just come forward from Finance as needed. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Minister, then this figure of $59,500,000 
is all then money that could be loan; there is no advance money 
in this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  There were moneys advanced  I haven’t 
got the exact figure here, but approximately 5 million during the 
study period to do the environmental impact study and some of 
the other studies that have been done over the last two years. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I’ve got 
several questions regarding the irrigation project that my 
colleague from Moose Jaw South referred to, and then we’ll get 
back to the minister’s favourite project, the Rafferty-Alameda 
project. 
 
In regards to the . . . Mr. Minister, you have just said in the 
House about 10 minutes ago, I believe, that in fact you were 
going to introduce a moratorium on the development of the 
irrigation no. 1 district, no 1, the projects which were outlined 
there. 
 
I wonder, sir, could you tell us how much money has been spent 
to date by the water corporation on the development of those 
particular irrigation projects? How much had been earmarked 
for future development, and what happens to all the 
infrastructural capital equipment, the new pump, for example, 
now that you’re placing a moratorium on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  I believe again the member is putting 
words in my mouth. I didn’t say a moratorium. What I said to 
you was that we have no intentions at this time to proceed with 
further irrigation in that area, and that’s the way I put it. We 
haven’t put a moratorium on it. I said we have no intentions. 
 
The pump is needed for what is there now. We were having 
difficulty last year in supplying the water because if one pump 
slows down or goes out of service  and that can happen with 
mechanical equipment  then we couldn’t supply the amount 
of water that was needed. So we’re going to need that pump, 
and it’s been ordered and will be installed this year. 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1131 
 

Mr. Lyons:  Okay. Mr. Minister, maybe you don’t want to 
call it a moratorium, but the fact that you’re not going to 
proceed with any future irrigation developments and that you 
have said at this time that you’re stopping any future 
developments, I guess if you look in the dictionary, you’d 
probably find that under the word “moratorium”. 
 
However, given that there is an agreement in place, the 
Saskatchewan-Canada agreement on irrigation  and there is 
$100 million committed to this project  and given that 
concerns have been raised over the last two or three years, not 
only by people in this House, on this side of the House, but also 
by many farmers in the district, when will you be undertaking 
the long-term studies that need to be done to determine whether 
or not irrigation in that area will be viable? 
 
And secondly, is it the intention of the water corporation to 
utilize those findings for those studies which have been 
recommended by Professor Henry to apply to other areas of the 
province with similar soil types and similar identified high 
salinity levels? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  The type of study that Professor Henry did 
in irrigation district no. 1 are very technical kinds of studies that 
are not transposable from one area to another. He even broke 
that area down into a number of different areas because of 
differences in soils and different problems that occur. 
 
So no, you couldn’t transpose the work that he did there to any 
other area. Each area has to stand alone, and the studies must be 
done on each individual irrigation project to be sure that that 
project meets the requirements, soil-wise, salt-wise  the 
whole bit. You have to do each one individually. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Well, Mr. Minister, you and I had a fairly 
lengthy go-around last year in Crown Corporations, on the 
water corporation, regarding the problems of soil salinity. At 
that point in time you assured the House and you assured the 
people of the province that salinity wasn’t a problem in that 
area, that you were confident that the $100 million would be 
spent, and that the Saskatchewan-Canada irrigation project 
would be going forward. Now we’ve got a report that says, 
whoop, you were wrong, that yes, the problems of soil salinity 
are our problem. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: given the experiences of 
Alberta in which salinity has proven a major drawback to 
irrigation, and given the experiences in irrigation district no. 1, 
in which soil salinity has been a problem for the development 
and which has been identified by Professor Henry, don’t you 
suppose that prior to granting irrigation development licences to 
the Souris valley, which is earmarked as an area for irrigation 
development through the Rafferty-Alameda project, don’t you 
think that it would perhaps be a wise thing, before we get 
hooked into spending tens of millions of dollars in capital 
investment, that perhaps you say there will be a moratorium on 
irrigation and development in that area; that we will have some 
test, maybe test plots; we will have maybe pilot projects run 
there, so that we’re not going to have to commit all this capital; 
that in fact, given the nature of soil 

salinity problems in the province, that it may be a wise thing to 
indeed put a moratorium or, in your words, to halt development 
of those irrigation developments before the soil salinity 
problems? 
 
And I just remind you, Mr. Minister, that that particular area of 
Saskatchewan is earmarked as one of the areas with the highest 
potential for salinity problems, in terms of soil types, in the 
province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  The irrigation agreement has not put any 
money into irrigation district no. 1, but it is putting money into 
the Luck Lake project and the Riverhurst project, and possibly 
Grainland. 
 
The hon. member is concerned about salt, as we in the water 
corporation have been, so we have as a project adviser for the 
Luck Lake project and for the Riverhurst project, professor 
Henry, who did the study at Outlook. And he has been working 
very carefully to test the soils and to advise the corporation and 
the farmers of the possible areas that should be watched to 
avoid salt problems. 
 
I believe the method that we are using to put in the irrigation 
there is good, because it’s all piped. You won’t have open 
ditches that cause salt problems, and there are major drainage 
ditches installed which take back the surplus water back to the 
lake. I believe that in this particular project you will find that it 
will go ahead and do a good job, and we expect to turn the 
pumps on for the spring of 1989. 
 
Mr. Lyons:  Mr. Minister, that doesn’t answer the question 
regarding the proposed irrigation development in the Souris 
Valley. Perhaps, sir, if I could make the suggestion, perhaps, 
sir, I can make the suggestion that you hire Professor Henry, or 
you get Professor Henry to do a real study  not the phoney 
study that was done in the EIS  but a real study in terms of 
the problems and potential problems of irrigation in the Souris 
Valley and that area before you give the okay and the go-ahead 
for any potential irrigation development down in that area. 
 
I make that suggestion, sir, because what has happened and 
what the farmers of the area of Outlook are reporting to us is 
that we’re finding hectare after hectare of good  what was 
formerly good arable land  now not, has gone sour because of 
salt problems, and that, in fact, will not be productive for years 
and years to come. 
 
And it’s not, sir, with all due respect, just a question of having 
water through the open ditches. It’s not just that problem at all. 
Having pipes will not solve the questions of water logging; 
neither will the installation of big drainage ditches or, for that 
matter, weeping tiles throughout the whole land area solve the 
problems. There are some inherent problems in soil types, as 
you well know, and as your experts at the water corporation 
know, involved in irrigation when you have high salinity soils. 
 
The fact of the matter is that when it comes to developing 
irrigation, it’s a fairly heavily capital intensive operation at the 
best of times, and when you have the potential problems, 
perhaps it would be more prudent  although 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1132 
 

given your push, your own personal predilection, and I speak 
personally of you and also of the Premier of this province, your 
personal and his personal predilection to go ahead with 
irrigation regardless of what the experts say  perhaps it would 
be more prudent, however, if you took an expert like Professor 
Henry, had him do the investigation before we got into the mess 
that you’re now in. 
 
And the mess that you’re now in, I may remind you, is a mess 
that was raised last year and which you refuse to see. The mess 
we raised was that you’re going to run into problems with salt 
problems in that area because you already are running into salt 
problems in that area, but you refuse to recognize it. It took this 
kind of capital commitment, which, as you well realize, will not 
be utilized to its fullest capacity for irrigation  and you know 
very well that what I am saying in this matter is true, given your 
own projected rate of utilization of that irrigation project  that 
will not be utilized; that you made some significant 
expenditures on behalf of the people of the province, despite the 
fact that other people, not just members of the House, but there 
were technical experts at that time and over the last three or four 
years have been raising, in a very serious manner, the question 
of soil salinity. 
 
(2200) 
 
I want to say, Mr. Minister, that perhaps what I am saying is not 
just political rhetoric. And perhaps what the farmers of the area 
. . . of this province are saying is not just rhetoric. And perhaps 
what the technical experts outside your own coterie of technical 
experts are saying, when it comes to irrigation and the problems 
associated with irrigation, is not just rhetoric. 
 
Perhaps there is a real problem there and perhaps it’s more . . . 
the prudent course of action, just perhaps, although given your 
track record, I doubt very much whether you’re going to even 
agree with prudence  but just perhaps the prudence in this 
area is the wisest course of action and that you will say, yes, we 
have got a moratorium, irrigation district no. 1, and we’re going 
to put a moratorium on blanket irrigation. In fact what we’re 
going to do  and again I make this suggestion  perhaps the 
prudent course of action would be to develop targeted irrigation 
projects more suited for Saskatchewan, the kind of irrigation 
project that the member from Thunder Creek is involved in, an 
irrigation project which makes sense, which is environmentally 
and ecologically sound. 
 
Perhaps it’s more prudent to follow that course of action than to 
try to throw gigantic sums of money at this grand vision of 
irrigation in Saskatchewan which, quite frankly, sir, will not 
work. We said it before; it won’t work; the experts are saying it 
won’t work; your own people are now saying it won’t work, 
and I’m glad that you have realized that, moratorium or not, 
whatever semantics you want to use in the fact, the fact that you 
are going to stop it until you see some common sense approach 
to irrigation in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Sometimes it’s very difficult to get a 
question from my farmer friend. He makes a speech, but 

he doesn’t really get around to the question. 
 
An Hon. Member:  I made a couple of suggestions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  You made a lot of suggestions. I might tell 
you that in the Souris area, the land that was proposed that 
could be irrigated has been tested and found to be suitable for 
irrigation. But we have no application from anyone wanting to 
irrigate there at this time, and we aren’t far enough to have any 
water yet. So that one we don’t need to worry about too long. 
 
The development at Luck Lake has been studied very carefully 
by Professor Henry and by other engineering firms prior to the 
time when the irrigation was approved. I believe that the 
method that we’re using to develop that particular project is 
good. 
 
I don’t take the responsibility for irrigation district no. 1 
because that was done at the time that the NDP were in power. 
They started by scraping all the topsoil off and levelling that 
land which caused considerable difficulty, in itself, and with 
flood irrigation it just didn’t work properly. So we have a 
problem, and our government is not going to take credit for it; it 
happened when the NDP were in power  without proper 
studies; maybe the studies were not available at that time. But 
that was not done properly. We have a problem on our hands 
and we’re going to address it to see if we can correct it to 
reclaim it. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Items 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 6  Statutory. 
 
Vote 50 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 140 
 

Item 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 140 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman:  I’d like to thank the minister’s officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Mr. Chairman, I’d like to thank the critics 
and my officials. Thanks for a job well done tonight. 
 
Mr. Calvert:  We would also want to add our thanks to the 
officials from the water corporation, and we look forward to 
raising many, many more issues and asking many, many more 
questions when we meet again in Crown corporations next 
Tuesday morning. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Change in Hours of Friday’s Assembly 
  



 
May 5, 1988 

 

1133 
 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Nipawin: 
 

That with leave, notwithstanding rule 3, this Assembly 
shall, on Friday, May 6, 1988, meet from 9:30 a.m. until 
12:30 p.m. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:08 p.m. 
n 


