


















































April 11, 1988 Hansard Evening


  
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 11, 1988 
 
 

475 
 
 

 
EVENING SITTING 

 
SPECIAL ORDER 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the amendment thereto 
moved by Ms. Atkinson. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before the supper 
break, we were having a nice little debate here. I was supposed 
to be the only one speaking, but I guess there was more people 
thought they should be talking than me. Mr. Speaker, I’ve just a 
quick coverage of what we were talking about before supper. I 
was bringing to this Assembly on behalf of my constituents, 
opinions from an ad I put in the paper which they asked to have 
read out in here, and I want to do that for them. 
 
We also were talking about farm policies and the policies of the 
members opposite, Mr. Speaker. The only policy, we’ve come 
to the conclusion that they have, is the policies of scare tactics. 
Then what really upset them, Mr. Speaker, when we moved into 
talking about the Regina Manifesto as being their constitution, 
which I thought they would enjoy, Mr. Speaker, because it is 
their constitution. And I’ll just continue on. 
 
The first remark I want to start out with, Mr. Speaker, is the 
remark of the member from Regina North East. He went so far 
that he attacked the distinguished and respected Roman 
Catholic priest by the name of Father Paul Marx. The member 
for Regina North East used this Legislative Assembly to 
personally accuse Father Paul Marx, a respected Roman 
Catholic priest, of preaching hate. I say shame to the Leader of 
the Opposition; I say shame to the member from Regina North 
East. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do not happen to be a member of the Roman 
Catholic faith, but like John Diefenbaker and his Bill of Rights, 
I will always fight for freedom to worship God and the freedom 
of religion. To think that the members opposite sat there and 
approved of a smear attack on a Roman Catholic priest is 
beyond words. It is a shameless statement, Mr. Speaker, to 
attack the family values, to attack free enterprise, and to attack 
spiritual values. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget reflects our family values or 
commitment to farmers, working people, businesses, to building 
a better Saskatchewan. The great defender of freedom, Sir 
Winston Churchill, spent a lifetime warning the world on the 
evils of socialism. In a speech to the British House of Commons 
in November, 1953 Winston Churchill said and I quote: 
 

We abhor socialism; we abhor state ownership; we abhor 
nationalization; and we are opposed to these principles. 

 

Churchill recognized the evils of socialism and so do the people 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me remind this Assembly that the NDP is a member of the 
Socialist International. They believed, and they still believe, 
Mr. Speaker, in the Regina Manifesto. That is why they are 
opposed to the provincial budget. The members opposite don’t 
want to see farmers make it. The NDP opposition don’t want to 
see protection for families. They oppose free trade and public 
participation because all these things do not fit into the 
left-wing agenda. 
 
The wild ideas of socialism have been repeated during this 
budget debate by some of the more extreme members opposite. 
I predict the people of Saskatchewan will not fall into the trap 
of the fanatics who would rather build a family of Crown 
corporations than help real Saskatchewan families. 
 
How could the people of Saskatchewan be asked to have 
confidence in the members opposite, such as the member from 
Moose Jaw North who said, it’s okay for homosexuals to adopt 
children? These are the same people who oppose the budget — 
a budget full of solid economic policies for this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We have the member for Regina Rosemont who is obsessed 
with destroying the Rafferty dam project, Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to inform the members opposite, for all people of Saskatchewan 
to hear, that if it hadn’t been for the initiative of the Progressive 
Conservative government and a Progressive Conservative prime 
minister like the Rt. Hon. John Diefenbaker, we would not have 
Diefenbaker Lake, Gardiner Dam. And water is the most 
important resource in this province of Saskatchewan. People 
say that people is the most important resource. You can’t live 
without water, therefore it must be the most important resource. 
 
And we have people opposing . . . saying that they’re opposing 
Rafferty dam. I just can’t believe this. To store up water for the 
use of the people of this province . . . Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that 
the old . . . They said over there that many people are against 
this here project. Well like the Premier said, good-thinking 
people will not be opposed, and we on this side of the House 
and the good-thinking people of Saskatchewan are 100 per cent 
behind Rafferty dam, and we’re . . . I know that we’ll be going 
ahead with it. I sure hope so because for the sake of the 
province we need water, and we need all the water that we can 
possibly, possibly manage to save. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of course these members opposite oppose the 
budget also; the NDP opposes the budget. The left wing agenda 
is opposed to economic diversification — it isn’t in their 
agenda. The NDP is opposed to our health care and education 
budget. After all, that isn’t in their agenda. And you can see you 
can be certain the NDP oppose protection for families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after nearly 10 years in this Legislative Assembly 
I have never been more startled and shocked by the dangerous 
agenda of the left-wing element. Moderate, middle-of-the-road, 
practical people will never accept the NDP agenda of the 
members opposite. 
 
  



 
April 11, 1988 

476 
 
 

Mr. Speaker, family people, people with traditional values, 
hard-working people from pioneer stock, will never rally to 
those who sit in this legislature and oppose this budget. The 
people of Arm River will not accept the extreme statements of 
those opposite and nor will the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier I said that I have decided to expose the 
statements and policy of the socialistic NDP. They are using 
this budget debate to spread fear, like their medicare and health 
scare. They spread mistrust, such as their attacks on businesses. 
They spread all sorts of damaging rhetoric in the name of their 
cause. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud of this budget. I have welcomed this 
opportunity to speak in support of the budget. The budget 
stands for the positive future of Saskatchewan. It stands for 
families, for farmers, for all that makes Saskatchewan a great 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to make reference to what this government 
is all about: freedom and the family. Sir Wilfred Laurier said in 
1908, and I quote: 
 

It is our proud boast that Canada is the freest country in 
the world. It is our boast that in this country liberty of all 
kinds flourishes to the highest degree. 

 
Mr. Speaker, our Premier is a defender of freedom. The other 
day in this very legislature, our Premier made reference to that 
great Canadian, the Right Hon. John Diefenbaker, and I quote 
from page 233 of Hansard: 
 

Mr. Diefenbaker understood Saskatchewan families, he 
understood pioneers, . . . and he put forward a significant 
Bill of Rights in this country. And the first paragraph of 
his Bill of Rights . . . said this: this country is founded 
upon the principles that acknowledge the supremacy of 
God, the dignity of man, and the role of the family in a 
nation of free men and free women. 

 
And I stand strongly and so does the Premier, and the members 
of this side of the House, on that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a few 
comments pertaining to the abortion issue because of the 
Supreme Court of Canada’s ruling that abortion is now legal in 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when this ruling came down, all pro-life people, 
and most church leaders across Canada, were shocked that now 
abortion on demand is legal. Mr. Speaker, we, the PC 
Government of Saskatchewan, have clearly stated that our 
caucus is 100 per cent pro life. I am thankful for this because I 
do not believe that any other province in Canada is in this 
position, where the Premier would have support such as this, 
including the Prime Minister and his caucus in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is hard for people to understand the power of the 
Supreme Court of Canada but we must, as 

Canadians, believe and accept that the Supreme Court has the 
power. Mr. Speaker, this puts all Canadians that believe that the 
unborn child has its right to life from the time of conception in 
an awkward position. We would like to say to the Prime 
Minister of this country to overrule the Supreme Court. We 
know, Mr. Speaker, that this cannot be done. All we can do, as I 
see it, at this time, is make regulation to stop as many abortions 
as possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the people of my constituency of Arm River, 
and to all Saskatchewan people who are listening to me tonight, 
I would like to inform you and remind you where the problem 
lies. I hope, Mr. Speaker, that Canadians realize and remember 
that it took nearly 20 years for Pierre Trudeau to bring home a 
constitution and a new charter of rights that caused so many of 
these issues to be brought before the Supreme Court of Canada. 
And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that I feel that the Supreme 
Court judges only ruled on the rights of the mother, giving no 
consideration to the rights of the unborn child. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I might add also that many people argue that 
abortion may be acceptable as long as there is not life. The 
example that I like to use, that if you plant a kernel of dry grain 
in the ground and that kernel takes root, there is life and then 
the plant grows. This example is exactly the same when 
conception occurs and the baby begins to grow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Trudeau had an accomplice. He had an 
accomplice when he delivered the constitution of Canada — the 
then minister of Justice, now the Leader of the Opposition, the 
member from Saskatoon Riversdale. Shortly after this 
happened, Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Riversdale 
was defeated in the 1982 election and now in the position of 
leader finds it convenient to state very mildly that perhaps he 
could be against abortion on demand. But, Mr. Speaker, if this 
is right, how can he control his party who believe it is right to 
have abortions? If this is not true, Mr. Speaker, then why do the 
NDP at their conventions continually support abortions? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite also believe that it is all 
right for an MP like Svend Robinson, a public figure, to stand 
up and tell the world he is a homosexual who wants to walk 
through the park with his lover at his side. 
 
Another thing that really bothers me, Mr. Speaker, is the two 
ordained ministers that are sitting in the back row that must be 
against these issues. They must realize that people that believe 
in abortion for convenience sake and homosexuals are the 
people responsible for the decay of the moral fibre of our 
nation. Mr. Speaker, the member for Moose Jaw South and the 
member from Saskatoon Sutherland, when studying theology, 
use the same Bible that I read from. Mr. Speaker, they know 
very clearly that the Scriptures teach that killing is wrong and 
homosexuality is a sin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Moose Jaw South and the 
member from Saskatoon Sutherland are men of the cloth and so 
I respect them and I ask . . . Mr. Speaker, I respect them. I know 
they will do what is right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask these two members to say publicly 
   



 
April 11, 1988 

477 
 
 

where they stand, what their belief is. Do they believe that the 
Scriptures are right, thus making the party wrong, or do they 
believe the party right and the Scriptures wrong? 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my closing remarks, I have one more comment. 
I’ve been an elected member for 10 years. I spent four years in 
opposition and was very let down in what happens in 
government. I was part of forming government in 1982. I am 
quite happy and supportive of the things our government has 
achieved in the last six years. 
 
I’m a little disappointed sometimes, Mr. Speaker, about the fact 
that too much bureaucratic control is still being exercised. What 
pleases me most about my position, Mr. Speaker, is serving and 
helping people. My full attention at this time is to finish out this 
term as an MLA for Arm River, and go for another term if the 
people of Arm River see fit to elect me. 
 
(1915) 
 
One of my main reasons that I am continuing on is that I believe 
in the integrity of the Premier. I am proud to serve under any 
man that has stood up and told all Canada — perhaps I should 
say all the world — that he believes in God and the family and 
in this good country of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it will be a pleasure for me to support the budget. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to have 
this opportunity to respond to the budget, Mr. Speaker, and in 
particular to respond to the health care portion of the budget. 
 
The government has said, Mr. Speaker, that the health care 
budget is increased by 5.6 per cent, but that’s another 
exaggeration, Mr. Speaker, another PC misrepresentation of the 
facts, and another betrayal of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Now, Mr. Speaker, if we look carefully at the 
budget, one sees that from 1987-88 fiscal year to ’88-89, when 
one takes into consideration the capital portion of the budget as 
well as the supplementaries and the portion paid to the property 
management corporation . . . But the increase is actually only 
3.5 per cent — substantially below the rate of inflation in 
Saskatchewan, substantially below. I understand the rate of 
inflation this month, or last month, was at 6 per cent. 
 
Now if we compare in Saskatchewan, at 6 per cent in 
Saskatchewan, if we compare this budget, Mr. Speaker, to 
1986-87 budget now, we will note that the increase over a 
two-year period was only 2.4 per cent over two years. And that, 
Mr. Speaker, is unacceptable to Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over many years people of Saskatchewan have 
accomplished some great things by working together, and one 
of these proudest achievements has  

been medicare — universal, comprehensive medicare. And it 
began, Mr. Speaker, right here in Saskatchewan. It was 
Saskatchewan people who built medicare. And it took the 
foresight and commitment of men like Tommy Douglas, 
Woodrow Lloyd, and Allan Blakeney, working together with 
Saskatchewan men and women, to set up the first public 
hospitalization insurance plan in North America. And it took 
the courage of Woodrow Lloyd, working with Saskatchewan 
men and women, to establish medicare insurance in 1962, and 
the determination of Allan Blakeney, working with 
Saskatchewan to expand on this medicare and implement new 
programs, some of them being preventive, such as the dental 
health program. 
 
Saskatchewan men and women, Mr. Speaker, over the years 
have built a strong health care system, and we achieved a level 
of medicare, a level of health care in Saskatchewan that we 
could all be proud of. Our parents and our grandparents 
envisaged a society that looked after the health and welfare of 
all her people. Our parents and grandparents envisaged a society 
where access to good health care did not depend on how fat 
your pocket-book was and did not depend on whether you could 
afford to pay for the care or not. Saskatchewan men and 
women, Mr. Speaker, had a vision of society where good health 
care for everyone was a basic right. And there’s much wisdom 
in that vision, Mr. Speaker, much wisdom — for a society that 
ensures the health and well-being of each and every one of its 
members is better off for it. And a society that looks after its 
sick and the less fortunate will save themselves much grief in 
the long run. And these, Mr. Speaker, are basic social 
democratic principles, basic socialist principles — and 
medicare is a socialist policy or plan. And even the members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, will pay lip-service to these principles of 
universal, accessible medical care, these principles that sprang 
from the hearts and minds of Saskatchewan men and women. 
 
Saskatchewan men and women of the 1980s, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan men and women of the 1980s want to continue 
that proud tradition, and they know that health, everyone’s 
health, is an essential aspect of the quality of our lives. It is 
fundamental to our lives, and it’s essential for every individual 
to maintain active, productive, and independent lives. And yet 
federal government studies show that the health of low-income 
families is worse than the health of high-income families, and 
there is disturbing evidence, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that shows 
people’s health is directly related to their economic status. 
 
It’s been reported that men who live in high-income groups 
stand to live six years longer than men who live in low-income 
groups. It’s been reported that men who live in high-income 
groups will have 14 less years of disability than men who live 
in low-income groups. And among low-income families and 
low-income groups, people are more likely to die as a result of 
accidental falls, chronic respiratory disease, pneumonia, 
tuberculosis, and cirrhosis of the liver. And it’s also been 
documented, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there are conditions that 
are more prevalent among low-income families than 
high-income families, and they are, for example, high blood 
pressure, mental-health disorders, and disorders of joints and  
  



 
April 11, 1988 

478 
 
 

limbs. But yet in Saskatchewan we have some 22,000 persons 
under the age 15, I believe, who are dependent on welfare, and 
some 57,000 children, Mr. Deputy Speaker, living in poverty in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Prior to this government taking power, we did not have one 
single food bank in Saskatchewan, and now we have line-ups at 
food bank after food bank — tens of thousands of people 
getting their food supply from food banks, Mr. Speaker. And 
I’ll tell you what — one-half of those people are children — 
one-half are children, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and their health is in 
jeopardy, and federal statistics can establish that. Their health is 
in jeopardy. And this government has done nothing to reduce 
the inequities in health disparities. It’s done nothing to reduce 
the inequities in health of low- versus high-income families, 
nothing to reduce these disparities, Mr. Speaker. Yet they say 
they are for the family. They say they represent the family. 
They say they are for life. Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, they 
contribute to the problem. They’re not helping the problem. 
 
And it’s their heartless policies that have increased these 
disparities. And the policies of the member from Meadow Lake, 
the Minister of Health, and his health policies have increased 
the disparities between low-income families and high-income 
families in the areas of health care. And I have only to refer to 
the prescription drug plan for an example, where it is patently 
obvious that it’s very difficult for those who are on a low 
income to buy their prescription drugs every month. In some 
cases, families are making a decision between groceries and 
drugs — between groceries and drugs, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 
as a result of PC policy. And they say that they are for families, 
Mr. Speaker, and I say that’s hog-wash. 
 
So what can we do then? What can we do about removing or 
reducing disparities and moving towards a better health care for 
all? Well there are many things that can be done, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all, you make sure that people have enough food on 
their table. That’s the number one thing to do. But we can also 
move in the preventive area. We’ve seen the results of 
preventive health care already in things such as the smallpox 
vaccination, which has been eliminated, I understand. The 
disease of smallpox, Mr. Speaker, has been eliminated in the 
world, and I think that’s great. But that’s an example of 
preventive health care. We’ve seen a marked reduction in infant 
mortality, for example, through preventive measures, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And the dental plan, the Saskatchewan school-based children’s 
dental plan, was an excellent example of preventive health care. 
In fact, I was recently told by someone who was working in the 
plan that they were getting to the point where many of these 
children only needed minor check-ups on a yearly basis because 
their teeth were so healthy. And that’s an example, an excellent 
example, of preventive health care. But it is also, unfortunately, 
one of the examples of this government’s heartless and 
senseless policies. 
 
So let’s examine the dental program a little more closely in 
order to illustrate my point. In order to deal with poor dental 
health in Saskatchewan and the chronic shortage of dentists in 
rural areas which still exists today — contrary to what the 
Minister of Health, the member from  

Meadow Lake, would have us believe, or the Premier would 
have us believe, there is still a chronic shortage of dentists in 
rural areas — the NDP government established a school-based 
dental plan to provide dental health education, to provide dental 
treatment and dental preventive services, preventive health 
services, Mr. Speaker. The plan was overwhelmingly 
successful. It was the best of its kind in North America, and it 
was even established that the cost of delivery was as cheap, if 
not cheaper, per enrolled child than privatized plans. 
 
But this government counted on a drop in the utilization of that 
plan, and that is exactly what’s happened. Although the 
Minister of Health will tell us that there’s 87 per cent 
enrolment, he doesn’t tell us that utilization is substantially 
down. We were talking a couple of weeks ago about utilization 
being down to a certain figure. I have heard recently — the 
more recent figures that I’ve obtained — is that utilization, that 
is people who have actually gone and seen a dentist under this 
plan, is only about one-third of the potential — one-third of the 
potential. Now that does not mean completions either, Mr. 
Speaker. That doesn’t mean that they have gone back and got 
all their teeth fixed that the dentist had perhaps lined up for 
them. That doesn’t mean completions; that only means original 
visit. 
 
But I must emphasize that that is different from enrolment. And 
for the Minister of Health to suggest that there’s 90 per cent 
utilization when he’s using an enrolment figure is not to put the 
facts out the way they are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when these children who have not had their completions, 
or have not seen a dentist, have a cavity two or three years from 
now, what are they going to do? They’re going to go to a 
dentist. And I’ll tell you what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s going 
to cost us a lot more at that time than it would had we 
maintained the school-based dental clinic and seen children on a 
regular basis with regular preventive health care. 
 
But this illustrates the total lack of commitment on the part of 
this government, the total lack of commitment to preventive 
health care and to health care in general. They’re prepared to 
ruthlessly and insensitively fire some 400 dental workers. And 
every single one of those dental workers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
is a member of a family. And families in Saskatchewan were 
severely affected — not only the families of children who had 
access to the plan, but the families of the dental workers who 
were fired — were severely affected, and all this after years of 
dedicated and competent service to the public of Saskatchewan. 
They heartlessly and ruthlessly fired these individuals. 
 
And what do the PC MLAs tell their dental workers, Mr. 
Speaker? Let’s see what they tell their dental workers. And 
right now I’m reading from the Network of Saskatchewan 
Women, December-January ’87-88. And I’ll give you an 
example of one of these dental workers, Mr. Speaker, Elaine 
Bouvier who lives on a farm near Kincaid with her husband and 
her two-year-old son, a dental therapist with over 10 years 
experience. 
 

Bouvier worked for the past six years in school dental 
clinic in Gravelbourg.  



 
April 11, 1988 

479 
 
 

Bouvier chose dental therapy as a career because she was 
interested in the field of health and wanted to work in rural 
Saskatchewan. “I’m married to a farmer,” she explains, 
“and these days you need a second income to make ends 
meet.” 

 
She’s married to a farmer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1930) 
 

On June 11, Bouvier and 36 other dental therapists and 
assistant were summoned to a motel conference room in 
Swift Current where the government informed them they 
were fired. “At first I felt very, very hurt. And then a 
couple of days later I felt angry,” says Bouvier. 
 
(And) when she phoned her MLA, Ted Gleim, PC, 
Shaunavon, to criticize the government . . . 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Members are not to use 
other members’ names. They are to refer to them by their 
position or their constituency. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, it was a quote. I thought quotes 
were allowed. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — The Speaker has ruled on this earlier 
that he isn’t going to allow names to be used in the House. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Okay. Thank you. So the PC MLA from 
Shaunavon, then. 
 

. . . to criticize the government’s actions, she phoned the 
PC MLA to criticize the government’s action. 

 
And you know what he told her, Mr. Speaker? He told her to 
apply for welfare, that’s what he told her. 
 
And that’s their commitment — that’s their commitment, Mr. 
Speaker, to the families of Saskatchewan. This farm family, 
who were suffering drastically because this government 
senselessly and heartlessly fired 400 dental therapists, you 
know what the PC MLA from Shaunavon told her? He told her 
to go on welfare. That’s where they’re at, Mr. Speaker. They 
take away a job and a career and they tell them to go on 
welfare. 
 
And I think it’s rather interesting that most of these 400 dental 
therapists were women, Mr. Speaker, most of them were 
women. And I’m asking myself, as many other women are 
today in this province, whether the fact most of these workers 
were women had something to do with the callous and 
indifferent way in which they were handled by this government. 
 
But nevertheless, the Premier of this province admitted his 
mistake last November, and he said that they were getting a 
considerable amount of criticism over their movement on the 
dental plan. So he admitted that this was a mistake, and I quote 
now from a Leader-Post article dated December, 1987. He 
concedes that various measures including changes to the 
province’s  

prescription drug plan and the children’s dental plan have 
caused the government grief. So looking ahead to 1988, he said 
there will be a very exciting, brand-new, rural-based dental 
program. That’s what the Premier said, there would be a very 
exciting, brand-new dental program. 
‘ 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I listened to the budget for one and a quarter 
hours. I listened to that budget speech being read one and a 
quarter hours, Mr. Speaker, and not one word about this 
“exciting new dental plan” for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Over 300 communities, Mr. Speaker, were served under this 
dental plan, and most of those communities were rural . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Meadow Lake will have an opportunity to get into this debate 
later on. I’d ask him to refrain from shouting across the floor. 
 
Over 300 communities, Mr. Speaker, served, and mostly rural 
ones, by this dental plan, and now I understand we have perhaps 
78 of these communities being served. 
 
Now this article in the Network of Saskatchewan Women, 
December-January ’87-88, goes on to describe some of the 
services that have been decimated by this government: 
 

Arm River constituency: children’s dental care was 
available in school-based clinics in 12 communities under 
the old plan.’ 

 
It goes on to say: 
 

It’s available in private dental practices in two 
communities under the new plan. 

 
I am not going to read that portion because I understand, from 
what has taken place in the House, that these may be slightly 
changed. But what I will do, Mr. Speaker, is let the members 
opposite, in case they don’t know and aren’t aware just how 
many school-based clinics were open in Saskatchewan. 
 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg: there were school-based clinics 
in nine communities. 

 
Is there a dental practice in that community, I ask the member 
from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. In one community only — in one 
community only, Mr. Speaker, but there were school-based 
clinics in nine communities in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
Bengough-Milestone, there were school-based clinics in 15 
communities, Mr. Speaker. There’s not one school-based clinic 
there now, Mr. Speaker. There may be a dental practice in one 
community, but no school-based clinics. There were 
school-based clinics in nine communities in Biggar. There were 
school-based clinics in 11 communities in Canora. There were 
school-based clinics in 10 communities in Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster; in seven communities in Estevan; in 12 
communities in Indian Head-Wolseley; in nine communities in 
Kelsey-Tisdale; in nine communities in Kelvington-Wadena; in 
seven communities in Kindersley, and in 16 communities in 
Kinistino. Last Mountain-Touchwood, school-based  
  



 
April 11, 1988 

480 
 
 

clinics in 14 communities. Maple Creek, there were 
school-based clinics in eight of these communities. Meadow 
Lake, there were school-based clinics in eight communities. I 
understand there’s dental practices in three communities; 
however, I’m not sure whether these figures are up-to-date and 
that’s why I’m not going on to read the latter portion. 
 
But the fact of the matter is, in Meadow Lake there were eight 
communities being served by school-based clinics and now it 
isn’t being served to the same extent. Melfort there were 
school-based clinics in six communities; Melville, in nine; 
Moosomin in eight; Morse in six; Nipawin in eight; Pelly in 
four; Prince Albert-Duck Lake, there were three; 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, there were 10; Quill Lakes, 11; 
Redberry, 10 communities being served; Rosetown-Elrose, 
eight communities being served by school-based clinics; 
Rosthern, there were school-based clinics in 11 communities; 
Saltcoats, there were school-based clinics in 11 communities; 
Shaunavon, there were school-based clinics in nine 
communities; Shellbrook-Torch River, school-based clinics in 
nine communities; Souris-Cannington, there were school-based 
clinics in 11 communities; Thunder Creek, in 10 communities; 
Turtleford, in 10 communities; Weyburn, in five communities; 
and Wilkie in eight communities. And you know what, Mr. 
Speaker? There’s not one single school-based clinic in 
Saskatchewan today. There may be some dentists that have 
replaced some of those clinics, but by far there has been no 
replacement in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I say that’s disgraceful. And I believe the members 
opposite never took the time to realize how destructive and how 
frivolous and how thoughtless their policy was with respect to 
the decimation of this dental plan. 
 
So I’m still looking, still looking for the Premier’s new, 
exciting, rural plan, and I haven’t given up hope because we’ll 
be back here talking about the dental plan until we get some 
action from that government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to just quote what the Saskatchewan Health-Care 
Association has said in their “Issues in provincial health care,” 
dated March 1988, March of this year, Mr. Speaker. Resolution 
8 on page 19 of that report says, 
 

Be it resolved that the Saskatchewan Health-Care 
Association, whose membership is representative of the 
people of Saskatchewan (Do you get that — representative 
of the people of Saskatchewan) urge the provincial 
government to reconsider its actions with respect to the 
Saskatchewan dental plan and reinstate the program in its 
previous form, (Mr. Deputy Speaker, reinstate it in its 
previous form) at least for children up to 13 years. 

 
They go on to say in their explanation that, “good dental care 
and education are critical in these early years.” They go on to 
say that it’s their hope “that any new approach will make 
quality dental care as accessible as it was under the 
Saskatchewan dental plan.” 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government has not been listening to the 
people. It’s still not listening to the people, and we  

do not have the dental plan restored in Saskatchewan, 
notwithstanding that there’s been such an outcry from the 
people of Saskatchewan with respect to this short-sighted, 
heartless PC policy. 
 
And another example of good medicare and good preventive 
care, as well as good curative care, was the prescription drug 
plan before the PC government got at it and started wrecking it. 
This government has substantially reduced the effectiveness of 
the prescription drug plan, and they’ve made it much more 
difficult for those who are already at a disadvantage, 
healthwise, to get prescription drugs. 
 
By decimating or revamping the prescription drug plan in such 
a manner that 100 per cent of the cost has to be paid up front 
initially by the patient, they have made it very difficult for those 
who are on low income to buy prescription drugs, pay the rent, 
pay the utility bills, and put food on the table. And yet, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, they applaud the fact, they applaud the fact 
that their federal government, the PC federal government, has 
introduced drug patent legislation that will inevitably — and, I 
understand, already has — increased the cost of drugs in 
Canada. They are making people pay 100 per cent up front for 
their drugs. It’s true that some of it gets reimbursed, but the 100 
per cent up-front cost is what people are having difficulty with. 
And they approve the passage of the drug patent legislation in 
Ottawa that will further increase the difficulty for those people 
who are having trouble paying for their drugs. 
 
In 1986-87, 76.2 million was budgeted for prescription drugs in 
Saskatchewan. In 1987-88, that went down approximately $20 
million, a $20 million cut from 76.2 to 56.9; and in ’88-89, 
down to 50.1 million, a slash of some $26 million — less today 
than in 1986 for the payment of prescription drugs for 
Saskatchewan, for the sick and elderly in Saskatchewan. And 
this is an important issue in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I listened on budget day, Mr. Speaker, I listened to the 
Minister of Finance drone on for an hour and a quarter. Ten 
thousand words, Mr. Speaker, 10,000 words, and not one — not 
one word, Mr. Speaker; and I listened carefully — not one word 
about the prescription drug plan and the dental plan. Ten 
thousand words, and this minister and this government, Mr. 
Speaker, have arrogantly chosen to ignore the Saskatchewan 
people, the sick and the elderly, by refusing to listen to their 
pleas about heartless PC cut-backs in health care. This 
government has arrogantly and heartlessly chosen to ignore the 
pleas of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And we have long hospital waiting lists in Saskatchewan. I have 
been told that they’re approaching 15,000, and I understand that 
at the end of February in Saskatoon the hospital waiting list was 
at 10,000. And people are waiting in line for urgent surgery, 
Mr. Speaker. Doctors have to make decisions every day as to 
which patient’s case is the most serious. And they belittle these 
comments, Mr. Speaker. They don’t see any . . . they don’t 
believe what we’re saying. But the fact . . . the member from 
Regina South belittles these comments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact of the matter is, we have unprecedented waiting  
  



 
April 11, 1988 

481 
 
 

lists in Saskatchewan — unprecedented waiting lists that are 
totally intolerable and unacceptable in this province. And 
doctors are making decisions every single day as to who is 
closer to death’s door in order to determine who is going to get 
treatment in this province. They make decisions every day as to 
who is closer to death’s door. And they think that this is funny. 
 
We have cancer patients who are waiting up to five weeks for 
surgery. We have people who may not be considered 
life-threatening surgery but who, nevertheless, could have 
serious medical complications such as circulation cut off in the 
legs. 
 
(1945) 
 
I’ve spoken to another individual today who’s in the same 
situation, and we bring these examples up to this government, 
Mr. Speaker. We bring these examples up to try and put a 
human face on it, to try and show the PC members of this 
legislature that there are real people out there who want to see 
these hospital waiting lists reduced, and what do they do? They 
make light of it and they chortle about it and they definitely 
don’t take it seriously, Mr. Speaker. Instead of attempting to do 
something about the long hospital waiting lists, instead they try 
to throw out smoke and mirrors and say one thing or another 
that misleads the public as to what the problem really is. 
 
And we hear about new hospital beds. Well I tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, we welcome any new hospital beds, but we will be 
watching closely to make sure that these hospital beds remain 
open in the summer because many people have said to me, there 
is not much point in opening new hospital beds if hospitals 
don’t have the funds to keep these beds open during the 
summer. 
 
I note from this budget that the medical care insurance portion 
has not been increased when we look at the supplementaries. It 
has not been increased, Mr. Speaker, and if in fact there is an 
increase in utilization, which there often is from year to year, 
that would in effect mean a decrease in payment to doctors. 
And we can remember last fall, Mr. Speaker, when we were all 
very concerned about not getting medical attention because 
doctors’ fees were being capped. Now I ask you, Mr. Speaker, 
are we going to be facing the same crisis again this year? 
 
And all this, all this, Mr. Speaker, a 2.4 per cent increase over 
two years; 3.5 in one year in the Health budget only — not 
meeting up with inflation; no mention of the prescription drug 
plan; no mention of the dental plan in the budget speech, in 
spite of the fact that people have been demanding that these 
plans be reinstated in the form they were before. All this from a 
government that campaigned on a pro-medical care platform — 
all this from a government that campaigned on pro-medical 
care. 
 
But as soon as they were elected, Mr. Speaker, they broke their 
promises. They decimated the dental plan; they made 
prescription drugs inaccessible to many low-income families; 
we have unprecedented hospital waiting lists — all this from a 
government that campaigned on pro-medical care and 
continually say  

that they stand for the family, Mr. Speaker. Well I tell you, 
those families, Mr. Speaker, that are having trouble deciding 
whether they’re going to buy groceries tonight or pay for 
prescription drugs, don’t see those people as being pro-family 
or pro-life. 
 
So how do they solve this? I ask you, how are they attempting 
to solve this? Certainly it’s not by providing adequate funding 
for health care because they haven’t done that. So how are they 
going to solve this? 
 
Do you know how they think they’re going to solve it, Mr. 
Speaker? They’ve increased their public relations budget by 
some 200 per cent. And we’re going to see a lot of fancy 
openings; we’re going to see phony ribbon-cutting ceremonies. 
We’re going to see glossy pamphlets, maybe even some George 
Hill style promotion programs where a civil servant gets on TV 
and tries to tell everybody what a good job they’re doing. 
 
They’ve identified their problem, Mr. Speaker, as a PR 
problem. They’ve identified their problem as a PR problem, but 
I tell you, Mr. Speaker, it’s not a PR problem, it’s a policy 
problem, and they refuse to recognize that it’s a policy problem. 
But instead they talk. And this . . . the throne speech droned on 
about this. They talked about the high cost of medicare, the high 
cost of medicare, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I want to talk a bit about the myth of spiralling health 
costs. The PC government has shifted many programs and 
expenditures out of other government departments to the 
Department of Health, Mr. Speaker. Examples include: 
continuing care expenditures, which used to be funded through 
Social Services; the minister’s salary, which used to be funded 
through Executive Council; and routine support services, which 
used to be funded through supply and services. And these 
transferred items now amount to more than 240 million per 
year, Mr. Speaker. And they’ve transferred these expenditures 
to the health care budget, to the Health department budget, and 
then they try to claim that health expenditures have increased 
rapidly. And it’s another case of PC arithmetic, comparing 
apples to oranges, Mr. Speaker. But when we compare apples to 
oranges and we make a straightforward, fair and accurate 
comparison, we see that health care expenditures, vis-à-vis the 
entire budget, has not increased over the years. 
 
You know, this whole attempt to talk about the high cost of 
health care, as I see it, Mr. Speaker, is an attempt to get people 
ready for more health care cut backs, for deterrent fees, and for 
the privatization of many of our health care programs. 
 
In fact, the PC Party resolution at its last annual convention 
approved deterrent fees in health care. The PC Party has 
approved and asked for the government to implement deterrent 
fees. And that’s where they are at. When they talk about high 
cost of health care, they are trying to get people ready for the 
privatization of health care as they’ve already started to do with 
the dental program, for example. 
 
But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, it’s not a PR problem, it’s a policy 
problem that they have, and this government has  
  



 
April 11, 1988 

482 
 
 

the wrong priorities. There’s no question this government has 
the wrong priorities. They have chosen not to make health care 
a priority but to make other things a priority. 
 
And let’s just look at some of their wrong choices, their wrong 
priorities, Mr. Speaker; 1.7 billion given away on oil royalties, 
Mr. Speaker — 1.7 billion; 1 billion on Shand and Rafferty, a 
political boondoggle in the Premier and the Deputy Premier’s 
riding; 20 million a year on self-serving advertising, and we’ve 
tasted some of that already . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 25 
million, I’m told, by the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
— 8.4 million a year, that’s $34,000 a day, on empty office 
space, Mr. Speaker; 23 million to Saskoil sell-off, and 22 
million in gifts to millionaire Peter Pocklington. They say they 
have no money for health care and health care costs are 
spiralling. And I say hog-wash, Mr. Speaker. They’ve made the 
wrong choices, and they have the wrong priorities. 
 
Meanwhile they use the cost, the mythological spiralling costs 
of health care, to levy the average Saskatchewan citizen with 
higher and higher taxes, greater and greater tax increases every 
single day. In Saskatchewan we are now paying the highest 
income tax, exceeded only by Prince Edward Island, I believe. 
And this budget gave no relief from the flat tax to the ordinary 
taxpayer — no relief at all from the flat tax. In fact, they 
increased the flat tax to 2 per cent. 
 
We have seen utility rate increases in this province on an 
average of 47 per cent from 1981 to ’87 — 47 per cent on the 
average in utility rates, Mr. Speaker. Well I say that that’s 
deplorable, and its unacceptable. 
 
And these high tax increases, they say, are being used to pay for 
spiralling health and education costs, which we know aren’t 
true. If you look at the figures, it’s just not true. What they’re 
being asked to pay for, Mr. Speaker, is Tory mismanagement 
and Tory incompetence and Tory pay offs to friends of the Tory 
party. That’s what those taxes are being used for — and all this 
from a government that promised a 10 per cent decrease in 
income tax, promised a 10 per cent decrease. Well it’s another 
betrayal, Mr. Speaker, another betrayal of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The New Democrats say, Mr. Speaker, that there is money for 
health, that health needs to be made a priority in this province, 
and that a New Democratic government will make it a priority. 
 
In the meantime we will fight this PC government to make sure 
that each and every man, woman and child and every single 
family in this province will have access to universal, adequate 
health care in this province. We will continue to fight on behalf 
of the people of Saskatchewan to make sure that health care is 
available to them, and that this principle of universal accessible 
health care is respected by these PC members who have chosen 
not to respect that principle, and who instead respect big 
corporations and make them the priority as opposed to people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ms. Simard: — And that’s shown, Mr. Speaker, by the fact that 
corporations get a cut in income tax and the individual doesn’t. 
They sit there and say it’s rhetoric, it’s a fact; it’s a fact — 
corporations get a cut; average citizens get an increase in their 
income tax. They talk about services for individuals being too 
costly, but services for corporations and big out-of-province oil 
companies is not too costly. And this is what we hear constantly 
and yet they say this is rhetoric. They don’t want to face up to 
the facts, Mr. Speaker, where they’re really coming from. They 
would rather attempt to bamboozle the people of Saskatchewan 
into thinking that they stand for the family and they stand for 
individuals. Well we on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
and the families out there, and the men, women, and children, 
know that that’s not true because actions speak louder than 
words, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — And because of this heartless, insensitive 
budget towards health care and other matters, and towards 
individual families, because of the increase in taxes on the 
ordinary citizens in this province, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support 
this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people of 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg constituency, I am very happy to have 
this opportunity today to participate in this budget debate before 
it draws to a close later on this evening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not secret that I consider this budget to be 
deficient. In my view, it is a highly superficial document, a PR 
(public relations) gimmick largely crafted by the PC party 
pollsters who seem to dictate almost every move the 
government makes. 
 
Those pollsters, Mr. Deputy Speaker, especially on the eve of 
certain by-election campaigns, have obviously told this 
government that the Conservatives are in pretty bad odour 
throughout Saskatchewan. And that’s certainly no secret for 
people who take the time to sample a little bit of public opinion 
in this province. The pollsters have recommended that the 
government do something, or at least, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
appear to do something, about those critical issues upon which 
the Conservatives are most vulnerable, issues like the deficit, 
for example, like health care, and like education. 
 
And so we have this budget. As an exercise in cosmetic politics, 
it appears to do something about the deficit. It appears to do 
something about health care. It appears to do something about 
education. But those superficial appearances, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, do not equate with reality. No matter how cleverly the 
Finance minister might wrap up this package of the budget, the 
package itself does not constitute a good budget for 
Saskatchewan. It’s a collection of dribs and drabs and bits and 
pieces, a pollster’s hodgepodge, with no central thrust, no sense 
of direction, and no sense of purpose for the future of 
Saskatchewan. And it does not, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I repeat, 
does not deal effectively with the critical issues like education 
or health care or the deficit. 
 
  



 
April 11, 1988 

483 
 
 

On the deficit, for example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
government is claiming some great progress in bringing that 
multi-billion dollar monster under control, and yet 
Saskatchewan’s public debt will be going up again this year — 
up, now down — up by more than $300 million to a total figure 
since 1982 of close to 3.7 billion, and that is just on the 
government’s so-called ordinary yearly operations. It doesn’t 
include other government debts such as those being carried by 
the Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when all forms of government debt in 
Saskatchewan are taken into account, the true total figure today, 
in terms of Saskatchewan’s debt, is a staggering $11 billion. 
Even for the creative minds in the PC polling agencies, it’s hard 
to characterize that massive debt as some kind of so-called 
progress. That’s what they would like Saskatchewan people to 
believe, that it represents progress, but it does not. In all the 
flimflam in the budget speech, the Finance minister tried to 
portray his huge debt as some sort of improvement. It was a 
classic case of trying to make a silk purse out of a sow’s ear. 
 
(2000) 
 
If there has been any so-called improvement in the deficit, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it is only in a slower growth rate in that deficit 
from year to year. It’s still growing, it’s still getting bigger, but 
the government claims that it is growing more slowly, and for 
that the government wishes to claim great praise. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a few sobering facts will mute that 
praise in no uncertain terms. Fact number one: it was this 
government, this government itself, that created 
Saskatchewan’s huge albatross of debt in the first place. It is a 
self-created problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by this 
administration. And they have taken no steps, none, not one 
single step in this budget or in any other policy initiative to deal 
with their own waste and extravagance which is a prime 
contributor to this deficit and debt problem. 
 
There is nothing in this budget to curtail patronage. There is 
nothing to stop the untendered contracts. There is nothing to 
reduce government advertising. There is nothing to stop the 
waste on the lavish, and, we find now, often unused, 
government office space. There is nothing to change or curtail 
the blizzard of tax dollars literally blowing in the wind these 
days because of wasteful and costly election give-away 
schemes. There is nothing to clean up these messes, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in the government’s own backyard. That’s fact number 
one. 
 
Fact number two: to cope with their huge debt burden, this 
government has imposed massive tax increases on average 
taxpaying Saskatchewan families — the flat tax; the sales tax; 
the gas tax; the SGI rates; the SaskPower rates; the SaskTel 
rates. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all of those things are up, and 
up significantly in the last year. 
 
And speaking of SaskTel, people have noticed that this 
government is actually levying a provincial tax on the newly 
imposed federal communications tax. This Conservative 
government is actually taxing people’s taxes. And that in itself 
is a measure of how desperate they  

are. 
 
Fact number three, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To the extent that they 
may have slowed the rate of growth in their deficit, I would ask 
you to look at how they have shifted that deficit onto others in 
Saskatchewan, others like for example, the municipal level of 
government in our province. Deficit shifting does not constitute 
deficit reduction. The debt is not thereby reduced, it’s just 
moved over to somebody else who has to pay it out of some 
other pocket — and that is hardly an improvement in our 
overall situation. 
 
Fact number four, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The budget documents 
reveal that Saskatchewan gained, this year, well over $100 
million in new equalization payments from the federal 
government. That’s new money, unexpected money in the 
government’s budget plans. 
 
It was a windfall gain this year not previously calculated into 
Saskatchewan’s flow of revenue. And that in itself, that one 
windfall gain from the federal treasury, that one thing in itself 
accounts for a full one-half of any so-called improvement in the 
growth rate of the Conservative deficit. So they can hardly 
claim any credit for that free gift which they had never counted 
on or calculated before into their plans. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all this budget talk about deficit 
reduction is a pretty imaginary exercise with this government. It 
is packaging, not substance. It is superficial; it is not real. And it 
comes on top of a huge credibility gap for this government in 
dealing with Saskatchewan’s finances. 
 
They have a reputation, pretty broadly understood and accepted 
across Saskatchewan, for cooking the books to suit their 
political convenience. Remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it 
was this government and this Minister of Finance who 
consciously miscalculated Saskatchewan’s financial position 
prior to the last election by a full 200 per cent. 
 
That’s not just a little bookkeeping error. That is massive and 
deliberate misrepresentation of Saskatchewan’s financial 
picture. So how can anybody in our province these days, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, have any confidence in any set of numbers that 
this government might produce? 
 
They pull their arithmetic quite literally out of the air. It’s not 
based on fact or reality, it’s based on what their pollsters tell 
them they have to say. So I think people in this province can be 
forgiven if they take this government’s claims about deficit 
reduction with a very large grain of salt. 
 
People look instead, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the reliable 
economic indicators published by independent agencies and 
authorities in this province that are not under the thumb of those 
across the way; agencies and authorities that do not adjust their 
figures to suit the government’s partisan advantage. And in the 
past two or three weeks we’ve had four such independent 
indicators made public. They paint a much different picture of  
  



 
April 11, 1988 

484 
 
 

Saskatchewan’s economy, compared to the rose-coloured 
version produced by the government. And I would invite the 
members of this House to look at those facts from those four 
independent sources. 
 
First, from Statistics Canada we have the most recent figures on 
unemployment. They show that the jobless rate in 
Saskatchewan is above the national average; they show that the 
city of Saskatoon has the second worst unemployment problem 
in the country; they show that youth unemployment in our 
province is at a staggering 15 per cent; and those figures show 
that this government has the weakest record in Canada for new 
job creation. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, also from Statistics Canada, we have 
the figures on inflation. The cost of living in Saskatchewan is 
very nearly the highest in the nation, especially in Regina and 
Saskatoon, and much of that burden is being driven by cost 
increases imposed by this government. 
 
Thirdly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from the Conference Board of 
Canada last Friday, we have the most recent projections on 
economic growth, province by province, for 1988-89. And 
where is Saskatchewan in that picture? Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
sadly we are at the very bottom of the heap, last or second last; 
only Manitoba may be worse in terms of slow growth and 
stagnation. 
 
And finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have the Midland Doherty 
report on accumulated Saskatchewan public debt — the 
government’s debt on current accounts, the government’s debt 
on Crown corporations. It all adds together as the heaviest per 
capita burden in the nation. 
 
You know, there was a debate in the media in Regina two or 
three weeks ago about whether we are really the worst in 
Canada in terms of our accumulated public debt per capita or, 
some would say, maybe it’s not so bad, maybe we’re just the 
second worst. Can you image, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a sillier 
argument? What does it matter? However you cut it, whether 
we’re worst or second worst, it’s a very huge burden. And of 
course now, with his most recent budget, the Finance minister 
has removed all doubt about our debt position. We are now 
without question the most debt-burdened people in Canada, 
over $11 billion in total, Mr. Deputy Speaker, $11,000 for every 
man, woman and child in Saskatchewan — for the average 
Saskatchewan family, a government debt burden of $45,000. It 
just boggles the mind to try to grapple with that kind of 
situation. About a million dollars a day — a million dollars a 
day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, goes down the drain in dead, lost 
interest charges just to service that government debt. And this 
budget tries to pretend that all is well; this budget tries to 
pretend that we are making progress; this budget tries to suggest 
that Saskatchewan is being well-managed. But the facts, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, prove the exact opposite. 
 
Let me turn for a moment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the two other 
issues, beyond the deficit question, that tended to dominate in 
the rhetoric of the budget on March 31. Those two other issues, 
in the language of the Minister of Finance, were health care and 
education. And here again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
Conservative Party pollsters have been at work, telling the 
government that  

they have to appear to be dealing with these issues. People 
don’t trust this government when it comes to health and 
education, and for good reason, after the savage hacking and 
slashing of health and education that occurred last year. 
 
So the pollsters have told the Minister of Finance and have told 
the government that they have to appear to be dealing with 
these concerns, and the operative word, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the operative word is “appear” to be dealing with these 
concerns, because this budget is a cynical triumph of 
appearance over substance. It is cosmetics instead of reality. 
 
The so-called new commitments of this government to health 
care and education in this budget do not even keep pace in a 
realistic way with the rate of inflation. They did some fancy 
number juggling in the blue books to try to make their 
arithmetic look better, but the fact remains that health and 
education will be slipping backwards again this year under this 
budget — losing ground, not gaining it. And the superficial 
rhetoric in the budget speech does not change that hard reality. 
It certainly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, does not change the 
predicament facing the people in towns like Coronach or 
Gravelbourg who now do not have the dental services that they 
used to have. The application of the dental plan in Gravelbourg 
so far is a classic case of failed government policy. 
 
Last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, before this government 
dismantled the school-based dental plan for children, 
Gravelbourg had not one, but two forms of dental services. 
They had the dental therapists and the assistants working with 
children through the school system and, in addition to that, 
Gravelbourg had a dentist on Main Street working in a satellite 
practice from Moose Jaw. 
 
After the previous dental practice was essentially destroyed by 
this government, Gravelbourg, of course, lost its school-based 
dental plan and further, the dentist that had been practising on 
Main Street retreated back to Moose Jaw, closing down his 
Gravelbourg practice. And Gravelbourg has since that time 
been left with nothing, as a direct consequence of this 
government’s failed policies in health care. 
 
The government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has admitted the failure. 
The Premier has confessed that the so-called new dental plan is 
not working out — not working out exactly as they had 
expected it would, especially in rural communities like 
Gravelbourg and others. And this budget, in my opinion, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, should have addressed that failure in very 
specific terms. 
 
The Premier, in his comments going back to last November, 
raised expectations in rural Saskatchewan that there would be 
something coming early in 1988 to deal with the obvious 
deficiencies in the dental program as that program related in 
particular to rural Saskatchewan. But this budget did not 
address that concern. So across much of rural Saskatchewan 
there is a glaring and continuing example of how this 
government is eroding health care and how people are 
disadvantaged as a consequence. 
 
The government says they are working on the problem.  
  



 
April 11, 1988 

485 
 
 

Mr. Speaker, in my judgement, the people of Gravelbourg have 
waited long enough for some definitive product to flow from all 
of that so-called work on the part of the government and they 
should have their dental services restored. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this is just one example of the dozens, literally dozens 
that could be mentioned, illustrations about the worries and the 
insecurity and the instability that people feel with respect to our 
health care system. 
 
The same feelings abound, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the field of 
education policy, where this government has particularly in the 
last year done serious damage. They want some credit now for 
funding the education development fund in this budget this year 
at the level of $14.5 million. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is 
no improvement; it is in fact a freeze; and it comes after they 
chopped $20 million out of that same education development 
fund last year. They want some credit for increasing university 
operating budgets this year by about $2.8 million. That’s some 
increase, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s less than a 2 per cent 
increase — less than half the rate of inflation — and it comes 
after universities have been frozen in their funding since 1986. 
 
(2015) 
 
The Minister of Education likes to quote the initial reactions of 
those in the Saskatchewan education community who 
responded to this budget in the first few minutes after the 
budget was delivered on March 31. The minister says that that 
initial, quick, first response was favourable. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, much of that reaction has turned sour 
during the past week as educators and administrators and 
trustees and others have had a chance to review the 
government’s numbers in greater detail. Once they get past all 
of the superficial P.R. glitz in which the budget was packaged, 
you’ll find that their thoughtful analysis is increasingly critical. 
 
They see through the phony façade that was created by the 
Minister of Finance. They see the reality of underfunding for 
education. And as just one example of several that I could give 
you this evening, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but just this one will do, 
I’d like to refer to the president of the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association, who pointed out just over this past 
weekend that local education taxes across Saskatchewan will be 
going up this year because: 
 

The provincial contribution does not meet the real and 
basic cost increases in education. 

 
Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the further examples about the 
problems this government is creating in education could go on 
and on. But these few that I’ve just mentioned make the point. 
The government’s treatment of education is superficial; it is 
insufficient; it’s an exercise in gimmickry, not reality; and it 
creates worry, insecurity, and instability across our province. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the same is sadly true, the same story 
sadly prevails, when it comes to agriculture. One of  

the truly astounding things about this budget is the total 
omission of anything of substance relating to agriculture. 
 
In their budget last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in June of 1987, 
the Conservatives said this, and I quote: “Many farmers are in 
serious financial difficulty. Farm debt in Saskatchewan is now 
estimated to be over $5 billion . . . it is a serious problem that 
requires a response.” 
 
That was in June of 1987. 
 
And in their throne speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of just a 
couple of weeks ago, March 21, 1988, the government said this: 
 

. . . agriculture policies around the world have wreaked 
havoc on rural Saskatchewan . . . farm debt is of crisis 
proportions. 

 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, having acknowledged this massive 
problem, you would think the government would have moved 
in this year’s budget to begin to do something constructive 
about that problem. But no, the budget had barely a page in it 
about agriculture, and that was buried at the very end of the 
document, almost tacked on as an afterthought. 
 
In 1987 this government slashed its budget for the Department 
of Education by over . . . Pardon me, the Department of 
Agriculture, by over 15 per cent — some $25 million cut last 
year. And this year the cutting continues. Agriculture loses 
another 7 per cent of its funding, down by $9.5 million from 
1987. 
 
And so people, I think, realistically and seriously ask, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, where is the government’s so-called 
commitment to farmers and to rural Saskatchewan. All their 
nice, warm talk about being the farmers’ friend does not hide 
the hard, cold fact that agriculture is repeatedly being cut, 
budget after budget. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what were the 
alternatives? What should have been done as a bare minimum 
for rural Saskatchewan in this budget? 
 
Well first of all, the budget should have straightened out the 
mess that the government created earlier this year in their 
$25-per-acre production loans program and the changes 
announced in that program. They should have lowered their 
interest charges, and they should have eased up on that vicious 
security agreement that they are insisting that farmers should 
sign. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there should have been a 
specific commitment, with detail, to a contingency plan to deal 
with this year’s impending drought conditions over much of 
southern Saskatchewan. That is a real and a major problem for a 
large portion of rural Saskatchewan. The government doesn’t 
yet acknowledge that that problem is there, in serious terms. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his 
feet? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a Cub pack that I’d 
like leave to introduce. 
 
Leave granted. 
  



 
April 11, 1988 

486 
 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My apologies to the 
member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 
I’ve got a group in the Speaker’s gallery that I’d like to 
introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to members of 
the Legislative Assembly. There’s 10 Cubs from the No. 67 
Dieppe Cub Pack, here in Regina Rosemont. They are 7,8, and 
9-year-olds, and it will be my pleasure to share some juices and 
perhaps a little bit of discussion with this fine group of citizens, 
and indeed the very future of our province. Shortly I will be 
meeting with them in the members’ dining room. 
 
Please join me in welcoming the 67 Dieppe Cub Pack. 
 
Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce through you, and to the rest of the Assembly, a lady 
sitting in your gallery, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Her name is 
Kathleen O’Connell. She was born and raised in Quebec City, 
and she’s now in Saskatchewan. And I’d like to have all the 
members give her a real good Saskatchewan welcome. 
 
Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) (continued) 

 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I would join with 
the members who have just spoken in welcoming the guests 
who have joined us in the gallery this evening. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was talking about agriculture, and about 
the commitment, or the lack of commitment, in this budget to 
agriculture, and I had mentioned some of the things that I 
thought were deficiencies in this budget with respect to 
agriculture. And I was beginning to enumerate a list of things 
that ought to have been there. 
 
I mentioned, for example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some obvious 
changes that need to be made with respect to the production 
loans program. 
 
I mentioned some of the obvious planning that needs to be in 
place to deal with the problem of an impending drought across 
much of southern Saskatchewan this spring. And one only 
needs to visit virtually any community or any rural area in my 
constituency of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg to understand the 
magnitude of that problem and what a worrying problem it is 
this spring. We all hope it will rain, but, Mr. Speaker, failing 
that, we are going to have one colossal problem on our hands, 
and it is going to require leadership from government in 
developing the range of programs and policies to cope with that 
situation. 
 

Thirdly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe this budget should have 
produced a specific game plan for the rearrangement of farm 
debt. In my view, it would not be reasonable or fair just to make 
some simplistic attempt at writing off farm debt, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. That clearly would not be fair. It would not be sound 
from an economic point of view. But I believe it should be 
possible to reorganize a portion of that debt on more equitable 
terms, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to give more farmers a decent 
chance to survive through these very tough times. 
 
Fourthly, I believe we need a new long-term approach to farm 
credit programs in the future. What exists now is clearly not 
good enough. The practical experience of the last several years 
demonstrates that, and in my view this budget should have 
included a proposal to deal with this serious vacuum in public 
policy in terms of long-term farm credit for the future here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And fifth, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget should have 
signalled the Saskatchewan government’s clear intention to 
fight for a new effective international grains agreement in world 
grain markets. Just trying to eliminate subsidy programs among 
grain exporting countries, in my opinion, is not good enough. 
That in itself will not restore decent world grain prices. What 
we need is a negotiated agreement involving at least Canada, 
the United States, Australia, and Argentina — a negotiated 
agreement for a grain price range that’s at least twice as high as 
the prices that prevail today. 
 
I don’t pretend that getting that kind of an agreement would be 
easy, Mr. Deputy Speaker; it would not be easy. But it seems to 
me that it should command as much time and effort and 
attention and energy from this government and from the 
Government of Canada as has been expended in the last couple 
of years in the whole exercise surrounding the free trade 
initiative. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the budget was also strangely empty when 
it came to matters affecting small-business policy. Again there 
were words in the budget, but there was very little substance. It 
promised some action, not immediately, but maybe next year, to 
deal with the business tax issue in some small way. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh come on, Ralph. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Read the document, I suggest to the Minister 
of Urban Affairs, who doesn’t like that comment, and you’ll 
find that it’s pretty vague, and you’ll find that many 
Saskatchewan businesses and many Saskatchewan 
municipalities find it pretty vague, and I would suggest to the 
Minister, through you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there is not 
much progress on this very critical issue. 
 
Businesses are crying out for some immediate tax relief, and it 
seems to me that this government and this budget should have 
provided the leadership toward that kind of tax relief for small 
business in Saskatchewan, not maybe next year but in fact 
definitely in 1988. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to create in Saskatchewan the 
very best tax and investment environment in all of Canada for 
Saskatchewan small businesses. We need  
  



 
April 11, 1988 

487 
 
 

preferential interest rate policies for small business, parallel to 
the precedents that have already been established in public 
policy with respect to agriculture. 
 
We need to adjust the stock savings program to favour 
Saskatchewan small-business enterprises. We need to have 
powerful incentives to foster employee investment in the firms 
for which they work. We need a plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, like 
the long-standing proposal that I made a long time ago for the 
creation of Saskatchewan capital investment bonds to help 
transform Saskatchewan people from being big savers into 
being keen investors in the Saskatchewan small-business 
community. 
 
And in terms of educational issues that relate to business and 
enterprise in our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we 
should be encouraging that inclusion, in the high school 
curriculum, for example, of optional courses relating to 
business and entrepreneurship and enterprise, introducing 
young people to what that side of economic life is all about. I 
think we should be offering substantially enhanced career 
counselling in our school system. I believe we should be 
making special efforts to bridge that gap that exists between 
school and the work place. 
 
And we can do that through such things as expanding and 
extending the existing system of work study programs. And 
apprenticeship is another part of that same equation, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. All of those initiatives in terms of 
apprenticeship, work study programs, career counselling, 
business and entrepreneurial educational courses — all of those 
things, together with the investment and tax items that I 
mentioned earlier — all of those could have been in the 
government’s agenda with respect to business and enterprise 
and young people and jobs for the future, but they just weren’t 
there. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need these initiatives for young people 
and for small business to create opportunities and to make 
Saskatchewan build and grow for the future. But by any 
standard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on all of the various tests that I 
have mentioned this evening, this budget falls short. 
 
In Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, my constituents tell me that they 
want a future in Saskatchewan of stable economic growth with 
agriculture and small business as the vital components. They 
tell me that they want a future of hope and opportunity with 
education and jobs as top priorities. The people of 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg tell me they want a future where 
people have a sense of security about their lives and about their 
families and about their communities. They tell me they want a 
future where Saskatchewan’s old self-confidence is rekindled, 
and where Saskatchewan people can take pride once again in 
who we are and where our province is going. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, because this budget does not address these 
vital requirements, it clearly falls short of the expectations of 
my constituents in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and I am therefore 
duty-bound to oppose it. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As we enter 
into this final hour of debate on this budget, presented as the 
government’s plan for 1988-89 for the people of Saskatchewan, 
it seems appropriate, Mr. Speaker, that we would focus on the 
matter of choices. No government will govern at random, in 
slipshod, just happen to have policies and programs fall into 
place. Governments make decisions, and so has this one. 
 
As I listened to the Minister of Health on Friday, in this 
Assembly, talk about his perspective of the budget before us, he 
used the word “choices” over and over again. And I would have 
to say, Mr. Speaker, that I, on this point, would be with the 
Minister of Health; that the issue is, the key issue is a matter of 
choices. Budgets reflect choices. This government has made 
choices. The choices are inherent in its document, in the budget 
document, and it must be held accountable for those choices. 
 
Now what are the choices that this government made, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? And in essence this government summarized 
its one basic choice, its one basic choice that was part of the 
Minister of Finance’s words when he presented the budget 
speech a week and a half ago. And he said, about two or three 
minutes into his speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I quote. He 
said that his government had chosen, and I quote: “to stay the 
course established last year.” To stay the course established last 
year. That was the bottom line choice of the Government of 
Saskatchewan in bringing in the budget today, that we have 
before us. 
 
And many people across Saskatchewan, thousands and 
thousands of people across Saskatchewan, will remember last 
year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when they were literally devastated, 
devastated by the cuts to services, the additions to taxes, the 
firing, and in many cases, unfair and brutal firing of civil 
servants. All that was a part of what we were told was a new 
strategy as a part of what this government considered it to be its 
mandate as a result of its election in 1986. And what did the 
Minister of Finance stand up in this Assembly and say? He said, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this government has chosen “to stay 
the course established last year.” 
 
And as I look at this document I would have to say that that is 
one of the few actual, factual remarks that we can hear from the 
Minister of Finance and take at face value, because this budget 
clearly reflects that this government has intended to stay the 
course established last year. 
 
Well you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was kind of interesting 
to me, about a half hour after we left this Assembly on budget 
day, I got a call in my office from a constituent of mine in 
Moose Jaw. He said that he had listened to the budget 
presentation on the radio, and he picked up his phone and he 
wanted to call. And he told me this, Mr. Speaker. He said that 
for his entire life, and his wife’s entire life, the two of them 
have consistently voted PC in every election. And he said, I’ll 
be honest, I didn’t vote for you in the 1986 election, but he said, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, he said, I listened to the budget 
presentation today and I have had enough. I have had  
  



 
April 11, 1988 

488 
 
 

enough. And not only that, Mr. Speaker, not only did he say 
he’s had enough, he gave me his address and asked to put a 
New Democrat lawn sign on in the next federal and provincial 
election as a sign of the fact that he has had enough. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And he’s not alone. He’s not alone, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, he’s not alone. All across Saskatchewan people are 
feeling that they’ve had enough. And they’re saying that 
they’ve had enough because this government has made choices, 
and it’s made the wrong choices. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — People across Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and they’re in my riding, they’re saying the same 
things as when I touch base around others and I talk to 
colleagues who are talking to people around Saskatchewan. 
They’re saying the same things: this government has made 
choices. It must be held accountable, and it’s made the wrong 
choices. 
 
And what are some of those wrong choices? They’ve said it is a 
wrong choice. It is a wrong choice to increase the funding for 
the Premier’s office and at the same time hold funding for the 
family income program to provide income security to 
Saskatchewan’s working poor — wrong choice. 
 
They said it’s a wrong choice, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to involve 
this government in life-style advertising . . . put $2 million into 
life-styles advertising and at the same time continue, allow to 
continue the alcohol advertising on television, promoting booze 
as a source of a good time — wrong choice. 
 
They said it’s a wrong choice, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to dump 
$1.2 billion into the shafferty project in the Premier’s riding and 
at the same time reduce funding for summer employment — 
wrong choice. 
 
They said it’s a wrong choice, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to put 
$34,000 a day into empty government office space as a 
commitment to piratization and at the same time reduce funding 
for summer employment — wrong choice. 
 
They’ve said it’s a wrong choice, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to give 
royalty holidays to oil companies and at the same time force the 
sick to pay more for medicine — wrong choice. 
 
They’ve said it’s a wrong choice, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
subsidize hot tubs and jacuzzis, and at the same time cut 
allowances to the poorest of the poor, those people living on 
social assistance in Saskatchewan — another wrong choice. 
 
They said it’s a wrong choice, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this 
budget to cut the tax rate for big corporations and at the same 
time to raise the flat tax for Saskatchewan people — wrong 
choice. Another wrong choice, and an example of a continuing 
saga of wrong choices by the Government of Saskatchewan. 

And so, is it any wonder, is it any wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that for the past year and a half — people of Saskatchewan 
literally for the past year and a half, the people of Saskatchewan 
have been asking: when’s the next election? It’s one of the most 
. . . now, the Minister of Health, I’m sure he hears this question. 
He doesn’t like to hear it, but I hear it all the time. People of 
Saskatchewan have been asking, not just with this budget, but 
over the past year and more, when is the next election? And 
when I tell them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the next election is 
likely still two years away, they shake their heads and say there 
won’t be anything left. There won’t be anything left. And we’ve 
all heard that a number of times. 
 
The old-timers are especially depressed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
They remember those long, seven, long, lean years from 1964 
to 1971, when this province had a Liberal government with 
premier Ross Thatcher. But you know, the old-timers are 
saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the old-timers are saying this: 
those long, lean years of the Liberal government, those seven, 
long, lean years are a picnic compared to what this government 
has done and the devastation this government has brought to the 
province of Saskatchewan, and that the last six years have been 
anything but divine. But as I focus, Mr. . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Members are not to use 
other members’ names in the House. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — I appreciate your ruling, Mr. Speaker, and I 
point out that I didn’t, and if there is a similar sounding 
member, I apologize for that, but that’s what people are saying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in responding to this budget, I’d like to focus on 
several areas. I’d like to take a look at the choices that have 
been made, and some of the facts related to health care, 
employment, highways, revenue, taxation, deficit — and I’d 
like to look at a better way, as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
What’s the reality in health care? The first reality in health care, 
Mr. Speaker, is that we’ve got a budget document that’s been 
anything but honest. The increase . . . Granted there are, in 
actual numbers, two departments that have experienced 
increase. Health is one of those. But in real terms, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in real terms, if you were considering a 6 per cent 
increase — because that’s the level of inflation in Saskatchewan 
today, the highest level in the whole country — if you consider 
6 per cent increase to be only holding the line because you are 
just keeping pace with inflation, in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the health care budget has taken a cut. 
 
And let’s get honest; let’s get honest about the fact that the 
health budget has been artificially pumped up simply by the fact 
that budgets for property management corporation and 
ambulance services and home care services and others have 
been simply transferred into the Department of Health from 
other places that they existed before. And as the member from 
Regina Lakeview said earlier this evening, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
a total of $240 million of the health care budget is nothing more 
than a simple paper transaction of transfers that came from 
somewhere else. And so let’s get honest, let’s get honest  
  



 
April 11, 1988 

489 
 
 

when we talk about the health care budget that’s in this 
document that’s before us in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let’s get honest and admit that the prescription drug plan 
changes that were introduced last year were a disaster. Two 
years ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, $76 million was budgeted for 
the prescription drug plan. This year, $50 million budgeted for 
the prescription drug plan. What does that mean, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? What that means is that in this budget there has been 
imposed a $26 million sick tax — a sick tax that is put on the 
backs of Saskatchewan people who need medicine. And I say 
that that’s an injustice. 
 
What we’ve seen, what we’ve seen over this past year, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is a movement from that ritual that was known 
as socialized medicine, and let’s just run through that very 
quickly. We’ve seen a movement from socialized medicine to 
piratized medicine. There was a time a year ago, a year ago, Mr. 
Speaker, in this province in which people would go through this 
ritual of socialized medicine. They’d get sick, they’d go to the 
doctor, they’d get their prescription, they’d take $3.95 or less, 
they’d go to the pharmacist, they’d get their medicine, they’d 
go home and take it and get better. What a strange ritual of 
socialized medicine. Every man, woman, and child in the 
province of Saskatchewan was capable of going through that 
ritual of getting sick, going to the doctor, getting a prescription, 
taking $3.95 or less, going to the pharmacist, getting medicine, 
going home and taking it and getting better. 
 
But this band has come along, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they 
said no, there’s nothing like this socialized medicine that 
couldn’t be improved, couldn’t be improved by making it 
piratized medicine. And so we’ve got a new ritual today in the 
province of Saskatchewan. The new ritual today is this: you get 
sick, you go to the doctor, you get your prescription, and then 
you go to the bank or you wait until the end of the month or, 
worst of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, maybe you don’t even go to 
the pharmacist at all. What a disaster, what a disaster in the 
handling of the prescription drug plan and the choices made by 
the PC government in Saskatchewan today. And I say, let’s get 
honest. Let’s get honest and admit that the piratization of the 
children’s dental care program was a mistake. The Premier has 
said it’s a mistake. But there was nary a mention of the 
children’s dental care program in any attempt to improve it and 
make it more accessible, particularly for rural children, in the 
budget document that was presented. 
 
And who pays the price? Who pays the price for the piratization 
of the children’s dental care program? And the answer 
unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is Saskatchewan children. 
That’s who pays the price. Dental services: the budget for 
dental services and health care this year down $4.5 million from 
last. Why? For two reasons: one, that the age for eligibility has 
been reduced from a maximum of 17-year-old to 13; and the 
other reason is participation in the program. The Minister of 
Health has said in this Assembly that there is only 40 per cent 
participation in the new piratized children’s dental care 
program. And so I say, let’s get honest. Let’s get honest about 
that when we talk about the health care  

budget. 
 
And let’s get honest and admit that $2 million in healthy 
life-styles advertising campaign looks pretty insincere while we 
still have the slick beer commercials on television. And every 
child in Saskatchewan, every young child in Saskatchewan is 
able to hum and sing the beer commercial jingles and conclude 
by watching their televisions that you can’t have a good time or 
you can’t play sports without booze. Well the health care part of 
this budget, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, is anything but honest. 
 
Well let me turn my attention now to employment, because 
that’s another characteristic of a disaster that we’re 
experiencing by the plans of this government and that is being 
borne by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
(2045) 
 
Let’s take a look at some of the facts, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
First, let’s just go back to last Friday and the March statistics 
for unemployment in the province of Saskatchewan, and let’s 
take a look at some of the facts. Fact: 45,000 people 
unemployed in the province of Saskatchewan. Fact: one out of 
eight in Saskatoon looking for work. Fact: one out of six of the 
young people in Saskatchewan without jobs. Fact: 9.2 per cent 
unemployment in the province of Saskatchewan — higher than 
the national average for the first time in years. Fact: seasonally 
adjusted rate of unemployment, 7.9 per cent in the province of 
Saskatchewan — higher than the national average. Fact: the 
government’s economic forecast for the next seven years says 
that we will experience a net loss of 85,000 people from the 
province of Saskatchewan. And fact, Mr. Speaker: of the people 
who left this province last year, literally two out of every three 
were 29 years old or younger — we’re losing our young people 
from the province of Saskatchewan. Fact, Mr. Speaker: there is 
no winter works program announced or included in the budget. 
And fact: there is reduced funding in this budget for youth 
employment. Those are the facts. Those are the facts about this 
government’s record and plans related to employment for our 
people and particularly for our young people. 
 
And what’s the plan? What’s the plan that we are told to 
commit an act of faith that somehow Saskatchewan people will 
be going to work? Well we’re told that we must commit some 
kind of blind ideological faith in piratization and the 
Reagan-Mulroney free trade deal, and that somehow if we trust 
our Premier, who trots around the country extolling the virtues 
of the Mulroney-Reagan free trade deal and piratization, that we 
shall all be saved and that everyone will go to work. Well I say, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it ain’t working. The facts tell the story, 
and that’s it, plain and simple. 
 
You know I had a constituent I was talking to yesterday and he 
raised an interesting point, and I think the fellow makes a point. 
He said, you know, Glen, when I look at this piratization 
business, it seems that piratization brings “povertization” to 
Saskatchewan people. And I think he’s got a point, and I think 
that Saskatchewan people deserve better. 
 
  



 
April 11, 1988 

490 
 
 

Well let’s take a look, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as well, at 
highways, because we’ve had piratized highways, and we have 
the piratization of highways continuing in the budget that we 
have before us here in 1988. We’ll all remember a few years 
ago, and since then, when literally hundreds of our highways 
workers in the province of Saskatchewan had been fired. 
Everybody in Saskatchewan remembers the $40 million worth 
of highways equipment that was auctioned off at fire sale prices 
for $6 million later on. And we all know that maintenance in the 
province of Saskatchewan has come down to sticking red flags 
beside the soft spots and the potholes and the humps and the 
hollows on the roads of Saskatchewan. And is it any surprise 
that the people of Saskatchewan are saying that if this 
government believed in honesty and advertising, it would take 
down the signs that say, “lights on for life” and put on new ones 
that say, “hang on for life” if you’re going to ride on the roads 
in Saskatchewan. Is there any doubt, is there any doubt about 
the mismanagement in highways? 
 
And then we’re told by the Minister of Highways that we 
should rejoice, that we should rejoice because the fact of the 
matter is this. The government is planning to spend only $5 
million less on highway projects this year than the Allan 
Blakeney government, in 1981, Mr. Deputy Speaker, spent $5 
million more than this government is planning to spend this 
year. 
 
And so what do people have to say about that, this highway’s 
improvement program that we’re asked to believe is a strong 
stride forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well I refer to an article in 
the Regina Leader-Post entitled: “Road program called ‘first 
step,’” on April 5. And the article says this, and I quote, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker: 
 

Private roadbuilders say the provincial government’s 
three-year, $30-million highway rehabilitation program is 
a good “first step,” but well below what is needed to 
reverse the deterioration of Saskatchewan highways. 

 
And the article goes on to say: 
 

The Road Builders and Heavy Construction Association of 
Saskatchewan said Monday the new program “will allow 
for some badly needed highway repairs and provide some 
much needed employment opportunities in the 
construction industry.” 
 
But when one out of four kilometres of public highway are 
in immediate need of restoration, the job is an immense 
one, the association said in a news release. 

 
And this will be no surprise to anybody in Saskatchewan who 
dares to venture out in our highways, Mr. Deputy Speaker. All 
drivers in Saskatchewan can attest to this. 
 
It goes on to say, and it’s a quote: 
 

“Over the longer term, it’s certainly inadequate,” said 
Arnold Pedde, executive director of the association. 

 

He referred then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to: 
 

. . . a 1986 study . . . that Saskatchewan would have to 
spend more than $120 million a year in 1986 to halt the 
deterioration of provincial roads and highways. At that 
time, the province was spending $82 million annually, 
about $40 million less than required, the association said. 

 
And it continues: 
 

Pedde said the provincial government should now be 
spending $200 million over five years to get the highway 
system back into shape. “The highways are deteriorating. 
We’re going to have to spend considerably more.” 

 
And then it concludes, the article concludes, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker: 
 

“You can resurface for a lot less than rebuilding — 
probably about five times less.” 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that may just be an absolutely mystical 
statement to members opposite, particularly the Minister of 
Highways. But I say, Mr. Speaker, that that’s practical advice 
that’s obvious to every driver in Saskatchewan, even if it is a 
mystery to the Minister of Highways. 
 
Let me turn, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to revenues and the deficit, 
and take just a quick look at some of the history of this 
government and what it’s done in that area. 
 
People in Saskatchewan will be aware that when Allan 
Blakeney left office in 1981 he turned over a $139 million 
surplus, a surplus — a $139 million surplus in the Consolidated 
Fund. Now for those who may not be aware, the Consolidated 
Fund, in government terms, is simply the family budget: the 
Consolidated Fund, the operating fund — $139 million surplus. 
 
And let me describe just for a moment what a surplus is because 
there’ll be a good number of people in Saskatchewan who have 
never heard that word uttered from the Government of 
Saskatchewan. A surplus, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is when more 
comes in than goes out. Now that’s an outdated notion when 
you look at the track record of this government which has not 
presented a single balanced budget in the history of its time in 
office. 
 
Allan Blakeney left a $139 million surplus in the consolidated 
Fund . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — a dollar thirty-nine. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Yes, and I tell the member for 
Bengough-Milestone, you look it up in your own government’s 
blue books and you’ll find out for yourself that I’m saying the 
truth. That’s where the information is found, and you can verify 
it for yourself if you care to read it. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with this budget we find now that 
this $139 million surplus that was inherited by the PC 
government in 1982, through some hocus-pocus and  
  



 
April 11, 1988 

491 
 
 

being addressed by the best business minds of the PC Party, has 
been turned into a $3.7 billion deficit. Three thousand seven 
hundred million dollars — it’s a mind-boggling term that’s 
difficult for most of us to realize. And that’s the product of the 
best business minds of the PC Party. 
 
And people ask me constantly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they say, 
where did it go? Where did it go? How can you possibly run up 
a $3.7 billion deficit? And the answer, Mr. Speaker, the answer 
really to the question . . . and the real question that should be 
asked is: where didn’t it come from? Where didn’t it come 
from? Because that’s where most of it went. 
 
And what am I referring to? Let me focus just first of all and 
just briefly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on oil royalties. And let’s take 
a look at the cost to Saskatchewan people of just one choice, 
just one choice made by this government in 1982 and continued 
since that time. It was a choice, first of all made by Colin 
Thatcher. People in this Assembly and around the province of 
Saskatchewan remember Colin Thatcher, the son of the former 
Liberal premier, Ross Thatcher, and Conservative cabinet 
minister in 1982. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, he was inspired by his dad who was 
known to say that the only thing wrong with American 
investment is that we don’t have enough of it. And didn’t that 
really reflect the attitude of the former member from Thunder 
Creek, Colin Thatcher, who brought about the first change in 
the record of oil royalties in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Interestingly enough, when we talk about American investment 
and the only thing wrong with it being that there isn’t enough of 
it, 14 years later we find another Saskatchewan premier 
mouthing almost exactly the same words. 
 
Now Colin Thatcher made some decisions, and let’s take a 
look, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at some of the oil royalty 
percentages, the lost revenue, and take a look, as well, at the 
cost of borrowing money that you lost, because if you don’t 
have it, you’ve got to go out and borrow it. 
 
What do we find, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well we find that in 
1981 when Allan Blakeney left the office of premier of the 
province of Saskatchewan, in 1981, for every dollar value of oil 
taken from the ground in Saskatchewan, 65 cents on the dollar 
— 65 cents on every dollar — came back to the province of 
Saskatchewan to be used to reduce taxes and to provide services 
for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Then 1982 came along and along came Colin Thatcher who 
made a choice, who made a choice, and his choice was a policy 
decision that has been continued since that time. And he made 
this choice, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in spite of the fact that in 1982 
oil prices were rising, Colin Thatcher decided that in 1982 it 
was good enough to get 54 cents on the dollar — for every 
dollar in oil revenues, 54 cents should come to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s assume for a moment that 
Colin Thatcher knew what he was doing. Let’s assume he knew 
what he was doing and that 54 cents on the dollar is  

a fair return to the province of Saskatchewan from our oil, from 
our natural resources that we have a constitutional right to in 
this country. What happened in 1983? In 1983 that choice to 
offer royalty holidays began to be implemented and continued 
again, and the pattern was set. 
 
In 1983, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Government of 
Saskatchewan, the PC government of Saskatchewan said 39 
cents on the dollar is enough — for every dollar of oil revenues, 
39 cents to the people of Saskatchewan is enough. In 1984, they 
said 34 cents will be enough this year. These decisions, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in spite of the fact that oil was at all-time highs 
in those years. Then along came 1985. In 1985 they said, well, 
28 cents on the dollar is enough this year. In 1986 they said, 18 
cents on the dollar is good enough for the people of 
Saskatchewan, and in 1987 they went — oh, slightly up, I will 
admit — to 20 cents on the dollar, and they said, 20 cents on the 
dollar is good enough for the people of Saskatchewan for our 
constitutional right of natural resources. 
 
What does that mean? When we take a look at those and we 
say, well let’s assume that Colin Thatcher knew what he was 
doing, 54 cents on the dollar is fair return to the people of 
Saskatchewan. What do the subsequent decisions of the 
subsequent years mean, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
It means that in 1983 the province of Saskatchewan gave up 
$272 million worth of revenue to oil. And assume that the 
borrowing cost of that lost $272 million is nine per cent — 
that’s what it is in this year’s budget — we also put out another 
$24 million, a total of $296 million in lost revenues, interest 
paid in a year n which you had a deficit of 331 million. 
 
In 1984, revenues lost — $429 million. The interest on the 
accumulating now, the accumulating money lost, another 63 — 
$492 million either lost or put out because it was lost in a year 
in which you had $379 million deficit. 
 
In 1985 — $62l million lost, 119 in interest; $740 million as a 
result of the policy decision in a year in which we had a $584 
million deficit. In 1986 — $413 million lost, $156 million in 
interest; $569 million out the window; 1987, last year — $518 
million lost, $203 million in interest; $721 million in total. 
 
Over the course, Mr. Speaker, over the course of those five 
years since Colin Thatcher made that first policy decision that 
has been continued by the PC government, we have given up 
$2.253 billion in lost oil revenues, and in addition to that we’ve 
paid $565 million to make up for that lost revenue — $2.8 
billion in total. And so when the people of Saskatchewan are 
saying where did it go, the honest answer to most of that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is not where did it go, it’s where didn’t it come 
from — a choice made by this government. And can there be 
any doubt that this government’s policy decision on oil royalties 
is a major part of Saskatchewan’s deficit? 
 
Well as a result of these series of choices, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
Saskatchewan has now officially become a have-not province, a 
have-not province. 
 
  



 
April 11, 1988 

492 
 
 

Last year $300 million from the federal revenue share went into 
the province of Saskatchewan because we are the poor sisters or 
brothers of other provinces in this country. The plan this year is 
that another $360 million will come to the province of 
Saskatchewan through revenue-sharing. And so we can only 
conclude, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we are receiving federal 
welfare for Saskatchewan because the PCs have made 
Saskatchewan officially poor. So what is the result of all of 
this? What is the result of all of this for Saskatchewan people? 
The Minister of Finance stands in his place and says, well, gee, 
a whole bunch of things happened that were beyond our control. 
There is nothing we can do about it. We are really doing our 
best to provide services, and I guess we are going to have to 
raise taxes, goldarn it — gosh, goldarn it — we wish we didn’t 
have to do this, but we are going to. And so more royalty 
holidays, more resource royalty holidays this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Corporation taxes for big business go down by 2 per cent; flat 
tax, flat tax for Saskatchewan people, up to 2 per cent. And the 
Saskatchewan family making $25,000 a year of income will be 
paying an extra $500 this year on their Saskatchewan flat tax. 
That is on top of everything else, and the lost gas tax that the 
people of Saskatchewan were told they would never see again, 
the fact that they were told by this government that the sales tax 
was going to be eliminated, never mind, raise it to 7 per cent; 
that income taxes were going to go down 10 per cent, never 
mind, flat tax up to 2 per cent; and property taxes have gone up 
because of cuts in revenues to municipalities and to school 
boards. That is the tax reality. That is the tax reality for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
(2100) 
 
So one has to ask, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what is the cost, what is 
the cost of PC incompetence in the province of Saskatchewan 
today. And the answer is in the budget. If your question is: 
what’s the cost of incompetence? The answer is in the budget, 
and it’s on page 11. It’s on page 11 in a category that’s entitled, 
“Servicing the public debt, government share.” Figure $330 
million — $329.5 million to be exact, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
$330 million just to pay the interest on the deficit. Nine hundred 
and three thousand dollars a day — nearly a million dollars a 
day, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And in it’s simplest terms it comes 
down to this — the cost of incompetence for the PC 
government in the province of Saskatchewan today is a dollar 
per person per day. The cost of incompetence — a dollar per 
person per day. 
 
What that means, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you sit down for 
breakfast in the morning, if there’s four people in your family, 
you take out a dollar and another one and another one and 
another one, and that’s your family’s share of the cost of 
incompetence in the province of Saskatchewan just for today. 
Sit down every morning at breakfast and put down a dollar per 
person per day. 
 
You know, I explained this to a constituent of mine the other 
day and he said: you know, when you look at it that way I think 
I’m going to quit eating breakfast. But the solution, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is not that simple. It’s not that simple. It can’t be taken 
care of that simply because the cost of incompetence is a dollar 
per person per day,  

and it will take decades to undo the fiscal irresponsibility that 
has been thrust on the people of Saskatchewan by this 
government and through this budget. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I said before that there is a better 
way. When I look at this budget, when I look at this budget, 
there is not a very rosy picture painted for the people of 
Saskatchewan because, unfortunately, many of the facts are not 
rosy. But this government has made choices and it’s made 
decisions and it must be held accountable for those decisions. 
But I say that there is a better way, and it’s a way that has been 
demonstrated, demonstrated and is enunciated by the Leader of 
the Opposition, the member from Riversdale. 
 
It was kind of interesting, Mr. Speaker, when you take a look at 
the Leader of the Opposition and compare the contrast to the 
Premier of Saskatchewan today. The Leader of the Opposition 
is a man with compassion and optimism, not bitterness and fear. 
He’s a man with vision, not desperation, a man who wants to 
build up, not tear down, a man who wants to unite, not divide. 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that the New Democratic Party of 
Saskatchewan and the people on this side of the House have 
faith in Saskatchewan people to solve our own problems 
without looking for outsiders to come and tell us what to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — The people on this side of the House believe that 
people are more important than big business. We believe that 
family farms and family business and working families are the 
soul of Saskatchewan. We believe that universities should be 
open to young people, not in quotas. This side of the House, 
Mr. Speaker, believes that kids in Saskatchewan have a right to 
grow up and to dream, and to dream without having to dream 
about things like food. We believe that food on the table is a 
right, not a privilege; that clothes on your back is a right, not a 
privilege; that medicine is a right, not a privilege; that quality 
education is a right, not a privilege; that technical and university 
education is a right, not a privilege; that a chance for a meaning 
job with decent wages is a right, not a privilege for the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — This side of the House, Mr. Speaker, this side of 
the House believes that for the Saskatchewan economy to thrive 
and to flourish and to provide opportunities, three engines have 
to be running — three engines — family business and the 
private sector working in harmony and co-operation with 
co-operatives, working in harmony and co-operation with the 
public sector. We believe in all three sectors of the economy, 
not just the single engine of unfettered free enterprise. We 
believe in fair enterprise in economic co-operation, and not 
piratization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this side of the Assembly believes in 
Saskatchewan people. This side would have made — this side 
would have made different choices, and in 1990 this side of the 
House will be on that side, and we will make different choices 
to move this province to a new  
  



 
April 11, 1988 

493 
 
 

tomorrow, because we believe that there’s a better way, and 
we’ll make it happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, for that reason I shall be voting in 
favour of the amendment moved by the member from Nutana, 
and I will be voting against the motion before us. I shall be 
supporting the amendment which will change the reading of the 
motion to read this: 
 

This Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan to 
provide fair taxation; to provide adequate financial support 
for a comprehensive prescription drug plan, a 
comprehensive school-based children’s dental plan and 
other health care services; and to provide adequate 
financial support for education services; and to take 
immediate and concrete action to address the farm debt 
crisis facing thousands of Saskatchewan farm families. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I support that amendment, and I thank you for the 
opportunity to bring my remarks to this Assembly today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to say a 
few things with regards to the budget debate, and a few 
observations with regard to the budget debate. Having been 
through these debates now for 10 years, I suppose you always 
look at various ways by which you judge how the budget has 
gone over with the people, or has not gone over with the people. 
And I’ve experienced both sides of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But let’s look at this budget here. Budget was introduced. I 
think there was one day, Mr. Speaker — going through 
Hansard there was but one day, and that was the day after the 
budget . . . The budget was delivered on a Thursday. The next 
Monday . . . There was one day in which questions on the 
budget were raised in question period — one day. 
 
Now we’re now into the, what? Fifth day after that — sixth day 
— after the budget was delivered, and only one day were 
questions asked. And then day two you’re on to some other 
questions and many of them rather insignificant questions. And 
that’s a fairly telling tale about the budget. 
 
If you were to look at the amount of coverage of this debate in 
the newspapers, whether the Leader-Post or the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix, what do you see? You saw the response by the 
finance critic. You saw the response by the finance critic that 
was published in the paper, and after that I haven’t seen a line 
in the paper from any of the speeches of the members opposite 
— not one line, Mr. Speaker. And do you see any coverage on 
the news on television, or the news on the radio, hear you on the 
news on the radio, with regards to the members opposite? No, 
you hear nothing, Mr. Speaker. You hear nothing about it. And 
what that tells me, Mr. Speaker, is for the most part I think that 
the people have accepted, have accepted the budget as delivered 
by the Minister of Finance. 

 
Now when you hear the member from Lakeview tonight was 
standing up speaking, Mr. Speaker, and she talked about 
everything but the budget. She spoke about last year’s budget, 
not this year’s budget, Mr. Speaker — not so much as one 
word. Not so much as one word about this year’s budget. Now 
what’s that tell you? That tells you that the members opposite 
do not wish to talk about this particular budget. And I’ve got 
more to say about that in a little bit of time here. 
 
And the member from Moose Jaw just got up and spoke, and he 
gave the same speech that I have heard in this Assembly for 10 
years, and I am sure people that were in here 10 years before me 
heard exactly the same speech, Mr. Speaker. That speech on oil 
goes back to 1944 — it’s the same one. I’ve heard it 10 times, 
in 10 different years. And it was the same thing over and over 
and over again, Mr. Speaker. Now I ask you, I ask you, as we 
approach 1990’s, and I ask the people, as we approach 1990’s, 
is it good enough any more to simply stand up and hear wild 
rhetoric, mostly from yesterday? Is that good enough any more? 
 
Let me deal with a couple of areas that this budget dealt with, 
Mr. Speaker. It dealt with health care. And what it said in health 
care is that there is going to be a task force created to look at the 
health care question. And I would throw you this type of 
questions out that I think the people of Saskatchewan must 
come to grips with. I mean, it’s easy to stand in this Assembly 
and say you should pay more money for this, you should have 
less taxes here, and you should have the deficit lower, and you 
should all do it by some wishy-washy, magic way. And that’s 
what the members opposite are saying. 
 
Now let me deal with health care just for a minute, and the 
Minister of Health has dealt with on many occasions. But let me 
deal with some of the pertinent issues that this country and this 
province faces, that I would believe that elected people to this 
legislature should also raise, but I never heard one iota of it 
coming out of the health critic from the NDP. 
 
Let’s look at this. The budget in health is in excess of $1.2 
billion, well over a third of the entire budget. But let’s look at 
some of the other issues in that, Mr. Speaker. Forty-five per 
cent — nearly half of that $1.2 billion — is spent on senior 
citizens, and they make up less than 13 per cent of the 
population. So what we’re seeing is senior citizens, clearly they 
deserve it, nobody’s denying that, but almost a half of the 
budget is being spent of that. 
 
Now we all know, Mr. Speaker, that that population group is 
increasing and increasing significantly. There are, Mr. Speaker, 
of all the people in the world who have lived past the age of 65 
throughout history, two-thirds of those people are alive today. 
Of all the people in the world that have passed the age of 65 
throughout time, two-thirds of them are alive today. And that’s 
where the budget, and the challenge that we all must face, is 
going to come at us in health care. And how do we come to 
grips with that? Now we can sit and simply say, hey, we have to 
simply roll out more money and pull it out of the hat and deal 
with it. Or do we want to face some reality of some difficult 
questions that are coming at us? And those  
  



 
April 11, 1988 

494 
 
 

are the things, clearly, that we must do. 
 
In the field of education, the Minister of Education has dealt 
with many of them; let me deal with a couple. In Canada today, 
and this is where education system, I think we have to ask 
ourselves, is it totally going in the right direction? In Canada 
today there are 1,500 times more lawyers per capita than there 
are in Japan — 1,500 times more lawyers per capita than there 
are in Japan. In Japan today there are 1,500 times more 
engineers per capita than there are in Canada. Now that’s not to 
say that the training of an engineer is necessarily better than the 
training of a lawyer. The problem is, Mr. Speaker, is very often 
we train lawyers and accountants to deal with our system, 
which is how do we divide up the pie, and spend very little 
thought about how we build a bigger pie. And it’s not just 
should we train engineers and all of a sudden that problem will 
solve itself. That’s not true either. 
 
But what we don’t do today in our society is train people in the 
world of being an entrepreneur, because it’s the entrepreneur, 
whether he’s the farmer or the small business, or somebody that 
extracts resources, or processes those resources, an 
entrepreneur, Mr. Speaker, that creates wealth. You don’t create 
wealth by going to your law office and having them take 500 
bucks out of your pocket. It doesn’t help you to go to the 
chartered accountant and he takes 500 bucks out of your pocket 
to fill out a tax return or fill out something else. And that’s the 
challenge that we face in the field of education. 
 
(2115) 
 
Now there’s a couple of other things in education that I think 
we also must come to grips with, and that is: is our system 
superior to all others in the world? And what you see today in 
Canada and in North America, not any one province, not any 
one jurisdiction, but a Japanese student in grade eight today is 
as proficient in mathematics as a Canadian student in grade 12 
— a Japanese student in grade eight as proficient in 
mathematics as a Canadian student in grade 12. Now it’s easy 
enough for us to say, oh, that doesn’t matter. Mr. Speaker, that 
does matter. And those are the things that this Assembly should 
be dealing with. And when we put our targets towards health 
and with regard to education, those are the things that we are 
starting and beginning to try to come to grips with. 
 
Now if we in the media, and see in the media, if there is a strike 
by some professors at the university, it’s on the front pages of 
the newspaper, and it’s on the lead story on the television news 
that they’re on strike, and the challenge that gives to the 
student, and how they want more money, and how they want to 
run the university, or how they want to have free tuition for 
their children. And that’s unfortunately in our society what 
makes news. It doesn’t make news to ask some of the questions 
that I’ve just asked, and pose some of the questions I’ve just 
posed. And that is exactly what we in government, and we in 
our society, must come to grips with and try to deal with. 
 
Now if we wish to abrogate that responsibility in this Assembly 
and simply stand up and say, well — as a member from Moose 
Jaw just did — we would have all our problems solved if we 
just went out and taxed all the oil companies. How foolish, Mr. 
Speaker, I mean, we’ve  

been through that. We’ve been through that with the members 
opposite when they were in government. 
 
And I happen to represent a part of the province where a lot of 
people, a lot of people make their money from working in the 
oil patch. And somehow those people aren’t relevant to the 
members opposite. They don’t live in the city, perhaps, but they 
are a goodly part of much of the west side of the province — a 
real people. And they’re not making millions of dollars, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re salaried people working on the rigs, working 
on the service rigs. And they work hard and they make a 
legitimate living. And it’s not good enough to simply stand 
back and say, aw, we can just tax those guys and all will be 
well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next thing that we must come to grips with is 
economic policy. And the members opposite somehow would 
say that we really don’t want, we don’t want to expand this 
trade. The . . . (inaudible) . . . the Americans, so we really don’t 
want to deal with the Americans and we’re going to get into 
that debate on free trade in the weeks, the weeks to come in this 
Assembly. 
 
But surely there’s something more, as far as economic policy, 
than they’re advanced. Now they’ve tried to come with a theory 
that says, oh, we like business — sort of. And we like co-ops 
and we like government, and it should be all three of them 
together. But when, Mr. Speaker, did the members opposite 
ever, ever acknowledge the fact that the private sector made a 
contribution to the economy, and that the private sector is an 
engine of growth in this economy? And whenever did this side 
of the House say that you could only have economic policy if it 
was a private sector? This side of the House has involved itself 
with the co-op movement to build the largest upgrader, the 
largest project ever built in this province. Now how can you say 
that we haven’t involved that sector? And clearly we will use 
the engine of government as and when we see appropriate; and 
we’ve used it on many occasions. And that has in fact been 
working, Mr. Speaker, and that’s how you build. 
 
Now the members opposite are reminiscent of what you see 
being debated today in the United States. Democratic primaries. 
You’ve got two views in the Democratic Party in the United 
States — you’ve got the view of the caucus, and you’ve got the 
view of Jesse Jackson. And Jesse Jackson right now is grabbing 
a fair degree of support, and I think, quite frankly, because of 
the fact that he’s coloured and should be given an opportunity 
to run for President — I don’t disagree with that at all. But 
when you go by and through . . . when you go by and through 
of what Jesse Jackson is — how he speaks — what you’re 
coming down to is Jesse Jackson’s view of the economic policy 
of the United States is back to the days of Franklin Delano 
Roosevelt. And that’s exactly the economic policy of the NDP 
opposite. 
 
They say, well we sort of like small business. But how do they 
like small business, Mr. Speaker? This budget . . . This budget 
offered the small business . . . This budget offered the small 
business a $10 million tax break through the business tax. Did 
we hear any member opposite stand up and say, we support 
that? But did you hear it prior to the budget being delivered? 
Mr. Speaker, prior to the budget  
  



 
April 11, 1988 

495 
 
 

being delivered we heard some people over there, because there 
was lots of coverage in the media that says: hey, we stand for 
elimination of the business tax; we’ve got to cut back this 
business tax. And the NDP Party stand for small business. 
When we did it, what do they say? Not so much as a word, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And when you look at the Canadian Federation of Independent 
Business, who represents more small business in this province 
than certainly any organization — a large, large membership. 
And when you ask those people about trade and the trade deal 
with the Americans, you know what they say? For every one 
that opposes it, 12 support it — 12 support it for every one 
that’s against it. Now you’re offside with small business in that 
factor. You’re offside with the . . . oh, here comes the member 
from Regina North West, the expert from the NDP in the side of 
business. And we can get into that if we want, as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Finally, and it’s coming close to the hour, Mr. Speaker, let me 
talk about two other things. Here’s what we see in the 
Saskatoon . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The member from Saskatoon North, I 
think, has been in the grapes, Mr. Speaker, as he returned to the 
House this evening. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member knows that he 
should not refer to the absence of a member or his return, and I 
would ask him to abide by that rule. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite talk 
about their dedication and commitment to the family farm — 
the members opposite. And what do they say, Mr. Speaker, 
what have they said? What have they proposed, in effect, that 
really gets us down to the question that we’re talking about? 
What have the NDP proposed in this budget debate? Have they 
proposed one suggested remedy or solution or idea? Not one, 
not one, Mr. Speaker. In the field of agriculture they have come 
up with one idea — not new — it was the member from 
Humboldt, and he said there should be a total moratorium on all 
farm debt — on all farm debt there should be a total 
moratorium, and no more. Mr. Speaker, that’s their policy in 
that area. 
 
The second policy that they speak of, Mr. Speaker, is the 
following . . . What the members opposite is the following, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order please. The hon. member is attempting 
to make remarks and is having great difficulty, and I ask for the 
co-operation of the House to allow the Minister of Justice to 
continue. And the member who has just spoken, I bring that to 
his attention and the one prior to that while I was asking for 
their attention. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, let me close by saying this 
— in any society, and certainly in the Saskatchewan society, we 
must never, as a society and as a legislature, give ground to 
pessimism. And that’s exactly what we have heard for five days 
of debate from the members opposite. 

 
We have heard the messengers of pessimism, Mr. Speaker, the 
messenger of pessimism — no new ideas. Their speeches have 
been the same ones we heard last year and the year before and 
the year before — no new ideas. Mr. Speaker, how can they 
expect the people of any province to buy into those old ideas, 
those old-fashioned ideas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance put together a budget in 
very difficult times. That budget, Mr. Speaker, I believe has 
been accepted by the Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he had very few dollars to deal with. He targeted 
those dollars in the area of health care, in the area of education, 
in some areas to help the small-business person, the 
small-business person who creates economic activity. Mr. 
Speaker, he has driven the deficit down significantly. 
 
He has had approval by this budget . . . of this budget, Mr. 
Speaker, approval by major players in the health field, by major 
players in the education field. He has had support from the 
business community. He has support from the economists who 
look at his bringing of the deficit down, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What the Minister of Finance has done with this budget, in very 
difficult times, is walked a tight line. He has walked it well. He 
deserves the support of every member of this House; he 
deserves the support of the Saskatchewan people in this regard. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2133) 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 15 
 
Shillington Goulet 
Tchorzewski Hagel 
Koskie Lyons 
Thompson Calvert 
Solomon Lautermilch 
Upshall Trew 
Simard Goodale 
Anguish  

 
Nays — 32 

 
Muller Martin 
Duncan Toth 
McLeod Sauder 
Andrew Johnson 
Berntson McLaren 
Taylor Hopfner 
Smith Petersen 
Swan Swenson 
Muirhead Martens 
Maxwell Baker 
Schmidt Gleim 
Gerich Neudorf 
Hardy Gardner 
 



 
April 11, 1988 

496 
 
 

 
Klein Kopelchuk 
Meiklejohn Saxinger 
Pickering Britton 
 

 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 1 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Chairman, I was hoping the 
opposition would be prepared to deal with the Department of 
Health estimates tonight but since they’re not . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order. The House Leader has 
moved we rise and report progress. Is that agreed? 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:37 p.m. 
 
  



 
April 11, 1988 

497 
 
 

CORRIGENDUM 
 

On page 451 in the Hansard No. 15A, Monday, April 11, 1988, 
about one-third of the way down the left-hand column, the 
name Hon. Mr. Berntson appears due to a transcribing error. 
Please read: 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I think at this time I’d 
just like to make this comment, that unfortunately I have seen in 
the past and now, as a matter of fact, where a minister will 
comment on a question at some length and then say he’ll take 
notice of it. I’m not sure if that’s the way we want to take 
notice. 
 
We apologize for this error. 
 
[NOTE: The online version has been corrected.] 


	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS
	SPECIAL ORDER
	Yeas — 15

	COMMITTEE OF FINANCE
	CORRIGENDUM

