


















































March 23, 1988 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 March 23, 1988 
 

25 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Goodale:— Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise under rule 11 to 
file a petition on behalf of certain constituents in 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. This petition is signed by several 
hundred people, mostly from the Mossbank district in the vicinity 
of Old Wives Lake. These petitioners are concerned about a 
serious public health, environmental, and agricultural problem in 
their area that results from clouds of alkali dust blowing off that 
huge, dry salt flat that Old Wives Lake has become. 
 
These petitioners ask the legislature to urge the Government of 
Saskatchewan .  . .  
 
Mr. Speaker:— Order. order. I believe that the member is getting 
into debate. I believe the member knows the rules of the House 
regarding the tabling of petitions — to simply state the intent or 
the purpose of the petition and to table it. 
 
Mr. Goodale:— Yes, just a sentence, Mr. Speaker, I was about to 
do that. The petitioners concerned about the problem that I just 
mentioned ask the legislature to call upon the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take all necessary remedial action to correct that 
problem. 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 
 
Clerk Assistant:— Mr. Speaker, Mr. Kopelchuk from the 
Standing Committee on Crown Corporations presents the second 
report of the said committee which is as follows:— 
 

Since the committee’s last report on October 30, 1987, your 
committee has held four meetings during the intersessional 
period. 
 
Your committee has completed consideration of the 
following 1985 outstanding reports of corporations:— 
 
Crown Investments Corporation, 1985 
Potash Corporations of Saskatchewan, 1985 
Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation, 1985 
Saskatchewan Government Printing, 1985 
 
Your committee has completed consideration of the 
following 1986 reports of corporations:— 
 
Crown Investments Corporation 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation 
Saskatchewan Government Printing 
Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation 

Souris Basin Development Authority 
 
Your committee is pleased to report that this now completes 
all the outstanding work of the committee. Your committee 
will begin reviewing new reports as they are tabled. 
 

Mr. Kopelchuk:— Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move, seconded by 
the member from Regina North West: 
 

That the second report of the Standing committee on Crown 
Corporations be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Martin:— Mr. Speaker, It is my pleasure to introduce to you, 
and to the members of the House and to members of the gallery, 
22 students from Wilfrid Walker School in Regina in Regina 
Wascana. Many of those students — or several of them at least — 
were here on Monday for the opening of the Legislative Assembly 
and enjoyed it then; I hope they enjoy it today as well. They are 
accompanied by Bruce Baldwin, who is their teacher. I would ask 
all members of the House to please welcome the students from 
Wilfrid Walker School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Possible Sale of Sask Minerals 
 
Ms. Atkinson:— Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. Can 
the Premier confirm that the minister of privatization will be 
holding two public meetings tomorrow in Chaplin, and that the 
first public meeting will be held with the employees of the 
Saskatchewan Minerals, and the second with the people of 
Chaplin? And can the minister confirm that the purpose of these 
meetings is to announce the sale of Saskatchewan Minerals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:— Well, Mr. Speaker, I can’t confirm or not 
whether that meeting will take place; it may be. But the minister 
will certainly be prepared to elaborate about the meetings on 
public participation and privatization to the hon. member. But I 
don’t have the minister’s agenda or itinerary before me, so I just 
can’t say whether that’s the case or not. It may be; it may not. 
 
Ms. Atkinson:— Supplementary. Could the Premier confirm that 
the meetings are to announce the sale of these two provincial 
assets to Agassiz Resources of Toronto? And can he tell us what 
steps, if any, were taken to tender the sale of Saskatchewan 
Minerals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:— Well, Mr. Speaker, I can say that that and 
several other public participation possibilities have been actively 
reviewed and researched, and the minister will be glad to respond 
to them in considerable detail. So yes, they have been considered 
and several others have, and he’s probably involved in discussing 
them with people even as we speak. 
  



 
March 23, 1988 

26 
 

Mr. Calvert:— Mr. Speaker, my question is also to the Premier, 
and perhaps this is a question he can answer. Mr. Premier, why in 
the world would you want to sell off Saskatchewan Minerals in 
the first place? Mr. Premier, as you know, or should know, for the 
past 40 years this company has year after year after year shown a 
profit. It has paid out, as you should know, $61 million in wages. 
It has paid over 12 million to the province in royalties. It has paid 
over 40 million to the province in dividends. It has retained 
earnings of $6 million. In these times, when these kinds of 
revenues are so desperately needed for health care, for education, 
and highways, youth employment, why would you want to give 
them to your friends? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:— Mr. Speaker, the opposition says that they 
understand privatization and public participation. They say that 
they are not necessarily against it and they would endorse it. But 
they will say they don’t particularly like the items that we are 
allowing the public to participate. 
 
If you have a profitable operation, you would like to allow people 
to participate in that, and it’s one of the basic arguments for, say, 
Power bonds where we said, we’ve got a Crown corporation; it’s a 
utility; the people of Saskatchewan would like to participate. Now 
the NDP never did that and allowed Saskatchewan people to get in 
on it, or they never allowed the public to participate in anything 
else except to say that it’s just owned by the government. 
 
We have done that in privatizations like with Weyerhaeuser, to 
take a debt and turn it into a profitable situation and create new 
jobs. We will look at combinations of things that we can do in the 
computer industry and others, so that we can create new economic 
activity. And with respect to operations like this where, in fact, we 
can explore the possibilities for employees to participate and they 
.  . . and not usually recommended by the NDP. In fact, normally 
they’re against having union members participate in a company 
for a profit-taking situation. We encourage that, Mr. Speaker, and 
we have in this case and we will in others. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert:— Mr. Premier, we’re talking about Saskatchewan 
Minerals here. I asked you why in the world you would want to 
sell Saskatchewan Minerals. I have another question. How is it 
that you can describe a sale of a Saskatchewan company to a 
private firm like Agassiz or some other private firm, how in the 
world can you describe that as public participation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:— Mr. Speaker, I have already been through 
the arguments with respect to both privatization and public 
participation in the legislature and in public. Generally what we 
want to see is the economic activity improved and increased so 
that we can have more jobs. 

The best example, and the opposition are against, is taking a 
public corporations like PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company 
and selling it, privatizing it into the private sector hands like 
Weyerhaeuser and creating a profit in creating new jobs. About 
150 to 200 new jobs will be opened in August — I believe August 
1 or August 15 — which is a brand-new industry here in the 
province, because we have decided to privatize it. That makes 
good sense. The NDP forced us into a position where we lost 
$91,000 a day, and we’re going to be making a great deal of profit. 
We want to do the same sort of things to create economic activity 
wherever possible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert:— Mr. Premier, we’re not talking about 
Weyerhaeuser; we’re not talking about SaskPower; we’re talking 
about Sask Minerals at Chaplin and Ingebrigt. If you’re selling 
Sask Minerals to Agassiz or some other private corporation, please 
tell me how that becomes public participation? 
 
Some Hon. Members:— Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:— Every time we do one of these, Mr. Speaker, 
the opposition stands up and said, well, why would you sell it to 
the private sector, or why would you allow employees to 
participate, or why would you allow the public? I’ll tell you that 
you’re quite a ways behind the public. The public wants to 
participate. They want to see it grow, and they want to see 
profitable operations, and they want to see us in a prosperous 
situation. Now we inherited many, many, many public 
corporations that were not doing that well, or that could do much 
better. 
 
We, Mr. Speaker, have allowed the public to participate in this, 
and we’ve privatized some so that we can go on and look at a 
situation where we’re creating economic activity, and this is 
exactly the case here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Collective Bargaining for Teachers 
 
Mr. Rolfes:— Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my question 
is to the Minister of Education. Mr. Minister, the teachers in this 
province, as you well know, are a patient and dedicated group of 
individuals, Mr. Minister. However, the morale of the teachers has 
been going down very steadily, and I am concerned that the 
quality of education is going to be going down very quickly unless 
we have some resolution to the collective bargaining procedure. 
Your colleague, Mr. Minister, the Minister of Finance, didn’t 
hesitate to intervene in the bargaining position with his zero and 
zero announcement. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is this: when are you going to 
use your office to intervene and have a fair and reasonable 
offering to the teachers of this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:— Well, Mr. Speaker, I continue to be 
optimistic that the process that has worked over the last decade, 
more relative to teacher bargaining in this province, can work 
again. I continue to be optimistic that there will be a satisfactorily 
concluded agreement. I acknowledge that while negotiations and 
the satisfactory  
  



 
March 23, 1988 

27 
 

agreement is outstanding that it does hang like a dark cloud over 
teachers’ heads and does probably curb enthusiasm in terms of 
getting on with a very busy and positive agenda in education. 
 
At the same time we are there bargaining in good faith. There’s a 
new deal on the table, a good deal, a fair deal, a reasonable deal, I 
think. A mediator has now been called in, and I may view that as 
having been somewhat unnecessary, but if that can bring this deal 
to a successful conclusion, then I favour that, and I indeed do 
believe that we will have a successfully concluded contract 
negotiations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes:— Mr. Minister, you told the teachers three weeks ago 
that you were optimistic and that you had made a new deal to the 
teachers of zero, zero, and three. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m asking you again. You violated, through your 
government, your zero, zero announcement when you made an 
offer to SaskTel, SGI, and SaskPower. The Minister of Finance 
violated it when he sent out the $1,000 to those employees. I ask 
you, Mr. Minister: do you not believe that the teachers in this 
province are as important as your own patronage appointments 
that you gave increases to? And don’t you think that the teachers 
in this province deserve the same kind of raise that the managers 
of your Crown corporations, the friends of the Premier, received 
just recently? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:— Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m .  . . nor do I 
think the hon. member would he want us to, or .  . . this is not the 
forum nor the process that negotiations should take place in. I’m 
not here to negotiate. And in so far as that is or isn’t on the table, 
I’m not so sure that the hon. member has a good understanding of 
what in fact the new offer as it relates to teacher may well be. 
 
And in so far as how well the bargaining is going on, I think it’s 
significant, Mr. Speaker, that the bargaining team, up until 
yesterday, had met six out of the last eight days, including all 
through Saturday and all through Sunday and, as I understand it, 
Monday morning as well. Yes, a deal not yet concluded, but I 
continue to be something more than cautiously optimistic, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Rolfes:— Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. Mr. 
Minister, let me ask you again. The Minister of Finance did not 
hesitate to intervene, but that has been the stumbling block for the 
last 25 or 26 meetings that were going on. Not one offer made by 
the negotiating team on your side of the first 22 meetings, 
basically because the Minister of Finance had intervened in the 
collective bargaining process. I ask you now, Mr. Minister: do you 
think it is fair on your part, as Minister of Education, to let the 
quality of education suffer because of the interference of your 
colleague, and now you won’t interfere to make sure that the 
teachers of this province get a fair and reasonable offer? Mr. 
Minister, I ask you: will you assure this House that you will get 
involved and settle this dispute so that the teachers can get on with 
their job of educating the children of this province? Would you 

give us that assurance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:— Mr. Speaker, I and our government are 
involved. The negotiations agree that we represent one-half of the 
government-trustee bargaining team. It is true that about a year 
ago now the Minister of Finance, on behalf of our government, put 
forth an economic statement. The whole basis and the reason for 
putting out that economic statement was this: is that in dealing 
with the economic realities and making sure that we have our 
economic house in order so that the very children who are in 
school today will not see their education jeopardized, the whole 
base for the economic statement was to lay out some guide-lines 
so we could deal with the teachers and the nurses and our own 
public servants and Crown corporations, and the list goes on and 
on, in a fair and even-handed way. 
 
What we were saying to the public of Saskatchewan is that we’re 
all in this together, and we’re not about to start picking and lining 
up sides or driving wedges in between one group and another. And 
I think I, and I think many of the teachers, would dispute your 
statement about the quality of education in our schools. They are 
professionals, and I have every reason to believe that this very day 
they’re giving 100 per cent, as the true professional would. And 
they are true professionals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker:— Final supplementary. 
 
Mr. Rolfes:— Final supplementary question. Mr. Minister, don’t 
you think it’s somewhat unfair, first of all, for the Minister of 
Finance to intervene? And that’s fair for everybody, you say. But 
then you intervened again, your government, and gave raises to 
people who didn’t even ask for that raise. 
 
Secondly, you gave a raise to your Crown management people of 
up to $10,000. I ask you, Mr. Minister:— how do you think that 
that is fair to the teachers of this province when you give to your 
own friends these huge increases? When are you going to start to 
be fair to everybody? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:— You raise the point relative to fairness. It 
seems to me the only way that you can judge that is if you have 
some understanding of indeed what is on the table and what has 
been discussed at the table with the teachers. I don’t believe that 
you do have a good understanding, and I think if you did you 
would see that indeed we are being fair, and we aren’t interested in 
driving a wedge between one sector or another — rural versus 
urban, teacher versus farmer, or any other scenario you might like 
to raise. 
 

Task Force on Health 
 
Ms. Simard:— Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Health. Yesterday, Mr. Minister, the 
Premier spoke in glowing terms about his 
  



 
March 23, 1988 

28 
 

 task force on health care issues, but just last year, on April 7 to be 
exact, you appointed Mr. Elmer Schwartz, president of Saskatoon 
City Hospital, to undertake a 12-month study of the provincial 
health care system. 
 
Mr. Minister, we haven’t seen Mr. Schwartz’s report yet, and yet 
you’re still talking about another study. Is it that the Schwartz 
study is not to your liking, Mr. Minister, or is it that you’re 
planning to use the task force to steer the heat that you are taking 
on your government’s poor performance in health care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod:— Mr. Speaker, just a quick reference to the 
report the hon. member refers to, the Elmer Schwartz report. 
Elmer Schwartz did a study as it relates to the role of regional 
hospitals in this province — a very, very narrowly defined study, 
and so on, and that’s fine. And those kinds of things will go on 
from time to time. They have for a long time, and they will 
continue in an enterprise as large as the health care system in a 
province like Saskatchewan. That’s one thing. 
 
But as far as the hon. member’s suggestion that this task force .  . . 
and we heard it from her leader here yesterday, standing in the 
lead-off question of a brand-new session and condemning the idea 
that people in this province who will represent excellence in the 
province, people who will represent excellence and a good 
cross-section of this province — and we’ll announce that as time 
goes on with the members of that task force — and they come 
forward and say:— oh, this will not work; this is the kind of thing 
that you’re trying to do as some kind of a partisan whitewash job 
— all the kinds of rhetoric that you hear coming from that side of 
the House, Mr. Speaker. We’ve heard it for — how many years 
now? And the new leader comes into the House and brings his 
new Health critic in with the same rhetoric that’s been around for 
— what is he into now? — the third decade of his time in the 
House, and the same issues are being raised by them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are committed to this task force for this reason: 
the demographics in this province are changing. The need for 
significant expenditure as it relates to high technology and the 
kind of technology which will serve the society well is extremely 
important to understand. There’s a whole series of issues 
surrounding health care which are far too great to be tied to the 
kind of rhetoric that comes from the mouths of those members 
over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This province will be very well served by the task force that comes 
forward, and the citizens of this province will welcome it, as we 
have seen from the press reports from people in the health sector. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard:— Mr. Minister, the public would like to have this 
study of Mr. Schwartz made public. You will have heard, Mr. 
Minister, that Dr. Scharfstein, president of the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association, has in effect said that there are enough 
health care studies sitting on government shelves, and we don’t 
need another one unless it has some teeth. 

Now, Mr. Minister, have you been in contact with Dr. Scharfstein, 
and have you been able to convince him that this study is 
somehow different and that it will not be proposing the same old 
outdated PC policies? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod:— Mr. Speaker, when I say that the health 
care sector in the widest possible sense will include representation 
of the doctors, Dr. Scharfstein being the president of the SMA 
(Saskatchewan Medical Association — Dr. Scharfstein is one of 
the people in this province that I’ve talked to at some length about 
the need for a blueprint in the development of a health care 
system, which is more than just a discussion of — if this task force 
ever came to be just a discussion of the costs or just a discussion 
of some narrow aspect, Dr. Scharfstein’s fears that you quote 
would be well founded, I agree with that. But Dr. Scharfstein 
knows, as well, that that’s not the intention. 
 
And you see in the press today, representatives of the SRNA, the 
registered nurses association, asking for an opportunity to be very 
much involved in this because they see the need for just this kind 
of blueprint developing mechanism. 
 
You go across all of the sectors; the Saskatchewan Health-Care 
Association are asking for this kind of thing. This is a response, 
this is a reasoned and thoughtful response to the kind of 
representation that have been made to us, and they say: come 
forward with a blueprint, come forward with a mechanism 
whereby this society — this society, not just this political party, 
but this wider society which holds health care very dear — has an 
outline for the future. And that outline for the future must be 
beyond next Tuesday or beyond the .  . .  
 
Mr. Speaker:— Order. Order. Order. 
 
Ms. Simard:— Mr. Minister, I have to laugh when I hear rhetoric 
about you holding health care dear when you decimated one of the 
best dental programs in North America .  . .  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard:— .  . . all in the name of ideology, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, almost a year ago you fired more than 400 
dental care professionals connected with the school-based 
children’s dental plan, and I understand only about 50 of them 
have been able to find employment since then, and it’s not all 
full-time employment. Have these dental technicians, Mr. 
Minister, been invited to sit on your task force? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod:— Mr. Speaker, I have in my hand .  . . The 
members opposite will stand in the House, two days in a row now, 
and suggest that the mechanism of a task force, that kind of thing, 
is inappropriate. She says it’s inappropriate and once again she 
stands today. I have in my hand: Health, a Need for Redirection, A 
Task Force on the Allocation of Health Care Resources. One of 
the  
  



 
March 23, 1988 

29 
 

commissioners, Mr. Speaker .  . . here we are, Joan Watson, 
chairman; Roy Romanow, B.A., LL.B., QC .  . .  
 
Mr. Speaker:— Order. Order. Order. Order. The hon. members 
knows that the members’ names are not to be used. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod:— I do realize, Mr. Speaker, and I apologize 
for using the name of a member, although I was quoting from the 
book and showing you the picture which had his name under it. 
But he was on there. 
 
Some of the recommendations of this task force — that the 
member condemns the idea of task forces on one hand and on 
another hand will have served on a task force — which among the 
recommendations were: quit building new hospitals; stop building 
new hospitals, is what he said in here, and now as a new leader 
will stand and say, here you have a whitewash in the task force. 
Was that member involved in a whitewash exercise when he was a 
commissioner? Is that his view of the way task forces are done? 
 
I don’t deny that this task force did some good, or I don’t deny the 
existence of it or anything else. I deny the way those folks will 
stand on one side — on one side of their mouth they will say, this 
task force proposed by you and by the health sector of 
Saskatchewan is somehow wrong, but a task force that that now 
leader served on is somehow right. Mr. Speaker, that makes no 
sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the task force proposed in our throne speech is a task 
force which will well serve the people of this province, not only 
now, but into the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard:— Mr. Minister, we want to know who you 
appointments to this task force are going to be. Your record in the 
past has been less than good, I might say, with patronage 
appointment after patronage appointment. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the city of Saskatoon we have almost 11,000 
people who are waiting for hospital beds in order to receive 
necessary surgery. Have you asked these patients, Mr. Minister, to 
chose a representative to sit on your task force? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod:— Mr. Speaker, the task force, as I have said, 
will have representation of excellence in this province. There is no 
question about that. 
 
And I just invite the members to wait, and when the task force is 
announced I will be willing, and I will be very quick to quote back 
some of these things they are saying about the kinds of members 
that will be on the task force. And we’ll see what they will have to 
say at that time, as they sit here in advance and condemn people 
who will serve on this task force. 
 
But that’s good. I want to see this. I’m very pleased they’re taking 
the attack that they are. It’s the attack that I couldn’t believe that 
they would do, but they are now into it. That’s wonderful, as far as 
I’m concerned. 

Mr. Speaker, I quote once again from the same task force report, 
one recommendation, one of the things, and I quote now, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

The health problems we face today are complex and difficult 
to solve (said the former commissioner). Moreover, it would 
seem probable that tomorrow’s health problems will be at 
least as complex as today’s and will continue to place further 
demands on our resources. 

 
One of the things .  . . All of these things that he was involved in 
are the kinds of things which we are trying to grapple with, as we 
are involve din the responsibility that is ours at the present time to 
try to bring a health care system to this province which makes 
sense in a financial, as well as in a service point of view. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard:— Mr. Minister, if your government was a little more 
competent, we wouldn’t need a task force on health care issues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard:— Now In the last provincial convention, many 
members of the PC Party expressed the opinion that we needed a 
health care system, that what we need in health care was deterrent 
fees. 
 
Now I know you say you’re going to appoint good people to the 
task force, and we’re waiting to see who you appoint, but quite 
frankly, Mr. Minister, we don’t trust you, and nor do the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard:— What I want to know is how many people who 
put forward the resolution for deterrent fees in the PC Party are 
going to sit on this task force? Can you tell us how many, Mr. 
Minister? And isn’t that the real reason for this task force, to 
validate the PC Party policy for deterrent fees in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod:— Mr. Chairman, once again the very narrow 
view, that what should be noted here is the very narrow, extremely 
narrow view of that New Democratic Party opposition. Extremely 
narrow. She says we don’t need a task force if you were more 
competent. She says that everybody in the health care sector, not 
only in Saskatchewan but in this country, knows that this health 
care system in our country, 25 years old, an excellent system, has 
served us well, needs some good hard looks in terms of the service 
into the future. She says, oh, we don’t trust you. Well I can tell the 
hon. member this much: I won’t be the chairman of the new task 
force; I’ll tell you that much. I won’t be the chairman, so you can 
rest assured of that, that’s fine. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod:— And the people that will be running this 
task force and will be part of it will be people who 
  



 
March 23, 1988 

30 
 

will represent excellence in this province — people who have 
served this province in various capacities in the past and will serve 
this province well in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker:— Order, please. Order, please. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:— Before orders of the day, I’d like to raise a 
point of order. You have ruled on many occasions that members 
shall not use direct quotations when putting a supplementary 
question in a question period. I wonder then, is it proper for a 
minister to also then use quotations in answering a supplementary 
question. 
 
Mr. Speaker:— I will take not of the member’s point of order and 
bring back a decision at a later date. Order, order. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Neudorf. 
 
Mr. Romanow:— Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am going to resume 
the debate on the Speech from the Throne. Yesterday I touched on 
what I thought were some of the major flaws and shortcomings 
evident in that Speech and have made this government opposite, 
Mr. Speaker, probably the most unpopular government in the 
history of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— And this afternoon I intend to expand on some 
of those themes, perhaps not at too much length. But basically I 
want to make one point clear, and to make one message, if I may, 
in he result of my remarks this afternoon, and that is that this 
Speech from the Throne is evidence beyond any doubt that this 
government in Saskatchewan at this time in its history, Mr. 
Speaker, has no game plan, has no blueprint, has no vision for the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan — none whatsoever, none 
whatsoever. 
 
It has no idea as to how it is going to get the farm crisis resolved or 
eased; it has no game plan for young people unemployed — the 
jobless rate’s sky-rocketing, the welfare rate and those on welfare 
also increasing; has no idea as to what to do with taxes except to 
pile more on, and I’ll have a word to say about that; has no idea as 
to how to bring the fiscal house of Saskatchewan into order, a 
cumulative debt of $3.5 billion at least. This, Mr. Speaker, is a 
government which is rudderless, leaderless, and visionless, and 
this Speech from the Throne verifies that beyond any doubt 
whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Romanow:— Now let me give you a specific example. In 
question period today a good deal of the time was spent on the 
question of a task force on health care services, and it’s also in the 
Speech from the Throne, so it’s very relevant to my remarks. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I invite you to consider what’s happening here. 
This administration was elected in April of 1982. We are now in 
operation under the Progressive Conservatives in Saskatchewan 
for approaching six years. In that six years .  . . inaudible 
interjection) .  . . Thank heavens, somebody opposite says there. I 
wonder if they’d say thank heavens to one of the 11,000 people in 
Saskatoon alone, many of whom are suffering from serious illness 
like cancer, who can’t get in a hospital bed. I say shame on the 
opposite member opposite who says thank heavens for that. 
 
Under a health care system, 11,000 people without hospitals beds 
in Saskatoon alone, 5,000 or 6,000 in Regina. Mr. Speaker, we 
have had, under this administration of six years, the decimation of 
the children’s dental scheme — finest program in Canada, if not 
North America; we’ve seen the denuding of the prescription drug 
plan; we’ve seen an attack on the health care system both at the 
medicare level and the hospitalization level, probably the likes of 
which we have not seen since the days of the late premier Ross 
Thatcher; and we’ve seen a repeated rhetoric, a repeated drum beat 
message put out by the Premier and the Minister of Health as we 
do today again, saying that all of this is justifiable. All of this 
misery which they wrought upon the ordinary people of 
Saskatchewan is justifiable, they would have us believe, because 
of some crisis, financial crisis, which the health care system has 
imposed upon the province of Saskatchewan, when the truth of the 
matter is that it is the profligacy and the waste and the 
mismanagement of this PC government that has brought about the 
financial crisis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— No one, no one, Mr. Speaker, would oppose a 
legitimate discussion of the services and health care and where 
we’re heading in our health services. I think it’s time to take a look 
at health care services. No one’s attacking the potential nominees 
of any such task force on health care services. That’s not the issue 
that is here. 
 
But there are two issues here. The first one has to be asked and has 
not been answered: why is it that after five years of decimation of 
health care, all of a sudden this PC government has decided that it 
needs now a task force to study the future of health care? Why is 
it, after five years of, in effect, attacking and tearing it down brick 
by brick, they are now going to put this thing on shelf, virtually for 
a year or two years — nobody knows the timetable either of this 
task force — to study it in detail. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, there’s an easy answer why they’re doing that. 
This government is doing this for one simple reason — its 
unpopularity generally. But its unpopularity about what it’s done 
to health care is at such an all-time low that the task force is the 
only possible way of saving the political bacon for the government 
opposite, and that’s the real reason behind this force. 
  



 
March 23, 1988 

31 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— The Minister of Health in question period 
referred to my involvement with the Canadian medical 
Association task force on health care costs. That’s true. He says he 
can’t deny the existence of the report. It’s pretty hard for him to 
deny the existence of the report since he’s waving it around. 
 
I wish he would read the report. I think the report was a very, very 
good study, limited budget, a limited timetable, limited agenda for 
the report. But given the circumstances that we were provided, the 
commissioners that were involved on this privately commissioned 
review f the task force services of health care did a job. You may 
accept or reject the recommendations, but we did a job. 
 
But the point that I ask here, Mr. Speaker, is this, of the 
government. If health care is such a big drag on the treasury, as the 
Premier would have us believe, as the Minister of Finance and the 
Minister of Health would have us believe, if health care needs a 
new reorientation and a direction, if this government would have 
us believe that it’s on top of the job, that it knows which way it’s 
going, that it truly is managing the affairs of the province in the 
best interests of the people who are ill and those who need access 
to our health care system, why is that they’re not able to tell this 
legislature and the people of Saskatchewan the details of the task 
force, namely, who is going to be on it, what are the terms of 
reference, what is the budget, what is the timetable? Why don’t 
they let the people of Saskatchewan in on this secret so that we all 
know that their intentions are honourable? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— Mr. Speaker, I have a belief that one of two 
answers can be given to that question. Either the Premier and the 
Minister of Health as of this day don’t know the answers to those 
questions, because so much of their policy is policy which is just 
grabbed out of the air seemingly in response to political opinion 
making, and now they’re rustling to political opinion making, and 
now they’re rustling around trying to make phone calls to 
individuals in Saskatchewan, asking for the circumstances and 
who would ask to contribute. 
 
Last night I spoke to the Saskatoon and District Medical Society. 
A hundred doctors were in attendance. Question period asked: did 
I know anything about the task force on health services in the 
province of Saskatchewan? I said I didn’t know, but I’d ask 
questions. I asked the doctors, did they know anything about he 
task force on health care services? Not one doctor there 
volunteered any information about their participation or 
involvement about the task force on health care services, Mr. 
Speaker, not one. 
 
Nobody knew it, no openness, no consultation, no consideration 
with the nurses. No wonder everybody approaches the Minister of 
Health today and says: look we want in on this task force. You 
know why they want in on this task force because they have seen 
the record of this government, that if they’re excluded from 
serious studies, the damage that this government is capable of 
could set medicare back even a further 25 years than it’s 

 been set back under this administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— But I think there is another aspect also to this 
question that I ask about: why is it the government cannot provide 
the details? We’d be prepared to support a task force on health 
care, if the composition is one of independent an concerned 
citizens; I will support that task force. If this task force is given a 
proper budget and a proper time table and a free and open 
mandate, we’ll support them to study it. 
 
But there is another ominous aspect of this whole question and 
answer and of this Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, which I 
think needs to be brought out. Yesterday in question period I 
directly and purposely and simply asked the Premier two or three 
questions pertaining to his understanding of what the mandate on 
this task force would be. 
 
I asked him and the government whether or not the issue of 
deterrent fees would be excluded from the mandate. I don’t care 
who you asked to serve on the task force, Mr. Speaker; if you limit 
the terms and the conditions of the study, you’re going to get a 
certain result. I’ve asked the Premier in question period; my 
colleague, the critic for the Department of Health, the member 
from Regina Lakeview, today in question and answer period did 
the same thing. 
 
They could solve a lot of the confusion that they say we’re sowing 
in the seeds of the province of Saskatchewan by telling us in 
simple straightforward terms: have they ruled out in this task force 
the mandate of looking at deterrent fees as a way of controlling 
what they say are runaway costs in health care. And the Premier 
refused, flatly refused, not once but three times yesterday, to deny 
that that was on the agenda. 
 
I say to you, sir, and I say to the Premier and the PC government 
opposite, what they are doing is this: they are establishing 
repeatedly through this rhetoric of the costs of health care by the 
way of false allegation. Our Canadian Medical Association task 
force study — it’s dated now, about two years ago — proved that 
Saskatchewan’s and Canada’s portion of devotion to the health 
care scheme is not wildly out of control, that we don’t have 
runaway, sky-rocketing costs in health. That documentation is 
there. But I think that this rhetoric, Mr. Speaker, is being put 
forward specifically to set the stage to establish a task force which 
could look at the question of deterrent fees or some other 
imposition of penalty on those who are sick and those who are 
needy. 
 
I say to you, sir, that the lack of information in the Speech from 
the Throne about the task force; I say to you the evasiveness in the 
answers given to us by the minister; I say to you the 
gamesmanship given by the Minister of Health and the Premier 
should sound off warning bells and alarm bells for everybody who 
loves and cares and is concerned for the medicare and 
hospitalization system of this province. And for our part in 
opposition, Mr. Speaker, we are going to be asking these questions 
until we get the answers, and we’re going to be monitoring this 
task force to make sure that they don’t further dismantle health 
care  
  



 
March 23, 1988 

32 
 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1445) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— Because, Mr. Speaker, the record of this 
government is that; it’s a record of dismantlement at every stage of 
the game. 
 
I want to turn to an issue which turns to be the corner-stone, or one 
of the corner-stones, of this government’s policies announced in 
the Speech from the Throne — privatization. Now, Mr. Speaker, I 
take the position that privatization, when it’s advanced, should be 
taken a look at by all members of the legislature and the public, 
and the proposal should be examined carefully before a 
pronouncement is made on what the proposal is. 
 
But I don’t think that’s the government’s approach. They’re not 
viewing privatization from a pragmatic point of view. They’re not 
advancing it as something which is in a common sense 
proposition. Privatization to them is an article of faith, Mr. 
Speaker. Privatization to them is an ideologically blinkered, right 
wing, small c, conservative message which harkens all the way 
back to the 1930s and beyond. There is nothing new which is at 
the core, at the fundamental core, or privatization. It’s been the 
message of every dinosaur Conservative and Liberal Party that’s 
ever walked the face of the political map in Canada and North 
America. 
 
Privatization belongs to those groups of men and women who say 
that there is little role for government, or virtually no role for 
government. They would denude the role of government in some 
key, important areas. 
 
I say to you, sir, that the prosperity of this province, before this 
gang opposite you, to the right of you, took office in the province 
of Saskatchewan, was based because our forefathers and those of 
us who still care and love this province believed in a mixed 
economy. We knew that private enterprise alone could not do it. 
It’s handicapped by vast distances. It’s handicapped by the 
climatic decisions. It’s handicapped by Conservative governments 
and Liberal governments in Ottawa which are remote and have 
many thousands of miles of distance from our needs. They don’t 
know the problems. 
 
We’re handicapped by the railways and the discriminatory freight 
rates. We’re handicapped by the grain exchange in Winnipeg, in 
Manitoba, in the historical purposes. We’ve been handicapped, the 
private sector has, at every stage of the game. And every 
successive government, whether it’s Liberal or NDP or CCF — 
with the exception of this one that is here today, the PCs — has 
understood that the private sector alone can’t make the economy 
work in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
What’s taken place? In recognition of this reality, Mr. Speaker, we 
have understood that we’ve had to build a mixed economy, that 
we had to have three engines working for us. We had to have a 
strong, healthy private sector; we also had to have a strong, 
healthy co-operative sector which arose partly in response to the 

circumstances that I’ve just described; and we also had to have, 
where necessary, a vital, active public service or public 
involvement, public enterprise, in the mixed economy. 
 
Private enterprise. First and foremost, the Saskatchewan business 
men, they make it work. They provide the jobs; they take the risk; 
they should be given the reward. The co-operative sector, because 
they have another ideology and philosophy — but they too 
provide jobs; they too are Saskatchewan, and where necessary, the 
people of this province, through government involvement and 
government intervention. It’s a mixed economy, and in proper 
proportions the three of them working together are like the engines 
that fuel the economy of this province to some wealth generation. 
 
And that wealth generation can be redistributed so that we can 
have medicare, and we can have hospitalization, and we can have 
roads, and we can have the finest educational system — which we 
had prior to 1982, because all governments believed in that mixed 
economy and those three engines. Now once in a while you’d 
have a Liberal administration like the late premier, Ross Thatcher. 
His emphasis, because of ideology, might be to put more approach 
to the private sector. Under a CCF of NDP some might argue there 
might be more emphasis on a co-op sector or, on occasion, a 
public sector. I think that’s subject to some debate, however. 
There have been these differences, but all three sectors and all 
three engines have been relied upon regardless of the political 
ideology of the government of the day. 
 
But not so with these new people, these new centurions that are in 
office in Regina. Not so, Mr. Speaker. They now want to take us 
back to the 1930s. They want to take us back to the days of pure 
private enterprise right here in the middle of the prairies where we 
have to pay excessive and exorbitant freight rates, where we have 
difficulty getting our products to the markets. What they want to 
do is, they want to cancel out two of the three engines. They want 
to privatize ideologically, blindly, without any economic sense, 
those aspects of public enterprise which contributed to our 
economy, and they want to hinder and to hobble the co-operative 
sector. They want us to be working on one cylinder only, the 
private enterprise cylinder — one only. 
 
And I tell you, the minister over there from Regina, the member 
from Regina South, who is the biggest advocate, and the one who 
sits on the right wing of that administration more than anybody, 
not only Saskatchewan small business he wants to ignore, he 
wants to have us run on one cylinder. And that one cylinder, by his 
notions of grandeur, must be from Weyerhaeuser in Alabama or 
from Pocklington in Edmonton or from the big boys outside of 
Saskatchewan. They’re even hurting their own Saskatchewan 
businesses .  . .  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— What stupidity, what folly, what 
short-sightedness! These people have got themselves now so 
seduced by the office of power, they have some of these big boys 
come in from Washington and Dallas for  
  



 
March 23, 1988 

33 
 

half an hour for a coffee, they give them a bit of a scheme about 
how they’re going to have the private sector work, and the next 
thing you know you’ve got a Weyerhaeuser deal — a 
Weyerhaeuser deal where we underwrite $265 million, or 
whatever the figure is, and the boys from Alabama come in and 
they take all the profits, and all the profits go right back to 
Alabama. There’s nothing for the roads or for the hospitals, 
nothing whatsoever. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— These boys, these people right opposite there, 
these people who come from Regina South and elsewhere, they 
think they can handle the Americans in their negotiations. The 
member from Regina South, the Premier, they think they’re going 
to outslick the Americans when they come into negotiations. And 
in fact, Mr. Speaker, they say on the privatization, you know, not 
only that, Mr. Speaker, but I tell you we are downright angry, and 
we’re going to pass this law on potash as if the American nation 
comes tumbling down breaking before the Ayatollah of 
Saskatchewan. What petty-minded, narrow-minded people. What 
folly there is. I mean, I could almost accept it if the minister from 
Regina, and if the Premier said, I want to defend Saskatchewan 
chambers. 
 
Look, I’d tell the minister opposite, I’d tell the Premier — get out 
there and speak to the Saskatchewan business men and the 
Saskatchewan business women. Listen to them. They’re having 
difficulties. The bankruptcies are at an all-time rate. They’re 
having difficulties in keeping their businesses afloat. The taxes 
that you’ve imposed upon them — I’ll have a word or two to say 
about that — are driving them out of business. The paperwork is 
driving them out of business. They have to hire more accountants 
and more lawyers. You have ignored them. 
 
Your tried to sell them a dream which is turning out to be a 
nightmare, that somehow Weyerhaeuser and Pocklington are 
going to save the bacon for Saskatchewan business, and in reality 
you are destroying the economic foundation of the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— And the record on privatization, Mr. Speaker, 
has been damning, damning. They privatized the highway 
workers. Do we have more jobs on highways? No. Do we have 
better roads, Mr. Speaker? No. 
 
This is one of the oldest jokes in all of Saskatchewan, but it’s got 
to be said. It happened to me when I was driving up to a rural 
Saskatchewan speaking engagement and somebody said, I hear 
that you came up — well I can’t say it according to the rules — 
but you came up the Premier’s golf course, Highway No. 41, I 
think it was. And I said, what do you mean by that? Eighteen holes 
to the mile. Not 18 holes to the mile now, Mr. Speaker; I’ll tell 
you, this year it’s 24 holes to the mile. That’s how bad it’s got. 
 
No jobs, no roads. Lower costs, Mr. Speaker? Have there been 
lower costs? None whatsoever. Privatization. But now they’re free 
to be privatized. 

What about the children’s dental plan? What’s the record there on 
privatization? Are there more jobs there? 
 
An Hon. Member:— Eighteen holes to the cavity. 
 
Mr. Romanow:— As my colleague says, 18 holes to the cavities 
of the young people with respect to the privatization of the dental 
plan. 
 
What about the privatization there and the service to rural 
families? Do they have anything more? What about the 
privatization of PAPCO to Weyerhaeuser? Enough has been said. 
I’m not going to repeat that this afternoon. Or the privatization of 
Saskoil. More jobs there, Mr. Speaker, for Saskoil? — 275 less. 
 
More resource revenue, Mr. Speaker, for Saskatchewan and 
privatization? No. More dividends to the treasury so that we can 
build our schools and settle the problem of teachers — none 
whatsoever. 
 
An Hon. Member:— Yes. 
 
Mr. Romanow:— The Minister of Education says yes. I’ll want 
to see that evidence when he takes part in this debate. More 
dividends in the treasury — no. 
 
And what about .  . . well the Minister from Education is talking 
about the 21st century. How about his great dream? This was 
going to be the high-tech industry — north Saskatoon. And do you 
know what they did there? The Minister from Science and 
Technology .  . . they privatized a company that was functioning 
and working. It was called SED Systems. One year ago the former 
minister of Finance, now the Minister of Economic Development, 
the member from Kindersley, issued a press release one year ago 
saying, don’t worry ladies and gentlemen of Saskatchewan, we’re 
going to privatize SED, but there isn’t going to be a job lost, he 
said. Don’t worry, they’re not going to take any of our technology 
to Ontario. Don’t worry, we’re going to have the decision-making 
power here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the results — the bitter, said results today are simply 
put: 80 people without jobs; 80 families without jobs. They fired 
people yesterday — 15 more people fired. The management has 
moved from Saskatchewan to Ontario. It’s another example of 
privatization which has gone belly-up because of this 
government’s inability to manage; its short-sighted, ideological, 
narrowly-blinkered, right wing, antediluvian ideas which 
Saskatchewan people reject and will reject strongly at the next 
chance that we get. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— So how in the world is it that in a province like 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker .  . . I invite you, and I invite the 
back-benchers of the government opposite to ask themselves this 
question. I ask the hon. member from Rosthern back there to 
answer this question to himself: why is it that in Saskatchewan we 
have a population of approximately a million people, and why is it 
straight south of the 49th line in the United States, in the Dakotas 
and Montana, the populations are 550,000,  
  



 
March 23, 1988 

34 
 

600,000? Same topography, same kind of economic benefits, same 
kind of .  . . (inaudible interjection) .  . . there are differences. Yes 
.  . . (inaudible interjection) .  . . that’s right, we have potash, we 
have .  . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:— Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order. Order. I don’t think that we need two speeches or debates 
simultaneously. I would ask the members to allow the Leader of 
the Opposition to continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— Thank you. Mr. Speaker, the question that I’ve 
asked is:— why is it that that’s the case? And I tell you what my 
answer to that is, is because, Mr. Speaker — and I will drop this 
point by emphasizing — because we have worked in a wise way, 
regardless of ideologies of political parties, the best that is capable 
of us, the private sector, the co-operative sector, and the public 
sector, through potash and through uranium and the God-given 
resources that we’ve had. 
 
We’ve done this through a sensible set of taxation policies and 
other legislative programs. We have done it because of the mixed 
economy. We have not killed two of the three engines in doing it. 
In the United States their only engine is the private sector engine, 
and it is the large private engine. 
 
And I tell the small business people of this province, and I tell 
every farmer of this province, if you want Saskatchewan to go 
down to 600,000 people in population, if you want an 
infrastructure which cannot be supported in rural Saskatchewan in 
your small towns and in your R.M.’s, then all you have to do is to 
continue to follow the Pied Piper of privatization, the Premier 
from the province of Saskatchewan, and we’ll have that result. 
 
I tell you, Mr. Speaker, for our part we’re going to use the 
pragmatic, common sense approach of a mixed economy to build 
for the young people and for the working man and woman of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— And of course the results are obvious 
everywhere, Mr. Speaker, with that kind of mismanagement. The 
results of where we’re at in the province are there to be seen. We 
have a cumulative debt, operating debt, Mr. Speaker, of $3.4 
billion. I can’t imagine that amount of money. The debt takes 
about $300 million a year in interest charges alone — in interest 
charges alone. If we ever should balance our budget, the amount 
of money coming in and the amount of money going out, we need 
to have a surplus of $300 million just to pay the interest rate alone 
without touching a penny of the debt that those financial wizards 
over there have accumulated in six years. God help this province if 
they should be given another two to four years, given that kind of 
fiscal record. 
 
This is an enormous burden, Mr. Speaker. This debt of $3.4 billion 
is like a drag, a major drag, on any kind of economic or social 
enterprise that we might want to embark upon. This is a debt 
which places us captive, Mr. 

Speaker, to the lending institutions of the world. Whether they are 
in New York, or London, or Toronto, I don’t care. But it now 
means that the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Education 
must come cap in hand, like little supplicants that they are, to the 
lending institutions, begging approval for subsequent expenditures 
for the people of the province of Saskatchewan. And what’s 
worse, there is no game plan to tackle in a responsible way this 
deficit of $3.4 billion. 
 
(1500) 
 
One of the ironies of this is, Mr. Speaker, that they claim that they 
are a business-like government. Those people opposite say that 
they know how to run a business-like government. Mr. Speaker, 
any treasurer or any Finance minister who racked up a debt of $3.4 
billion would be fired, and fired summarily, and that’s what 
should happen to the Minister of Finance of this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— But of course we’re going to have to wait for a 
complete firing; that is to say, when the next provincial election 
takes place. I think we might see a few of the little straws in the 
wind whenever the Premier has the courage to call the two 
by-elections which are forthcoming. 
 
But you know this debt just doesn’t sit there, Mr. Speaker, 
unaddressed. Somebody has got to try to service it and to pay off 
this debt. And typically again in the 1930 style of these free 
enterprise people, who do you think pays that debt, Mr. Speaker? 
Where do you think the burden for paying that debt falls? On 
whom does it fall to shoulder? 
 
Well the first thing that we know that takes place is that there’s 
been a massive attack on our social service programs and our 
health care programs. We see that; the record is documented. But 
the taxation load, Mr. Speaker, is absolutely unconscionable. The 
taxation load on Saskatchewan people as a result of this debt, Mr. 
Speaker, is not only unconscionable; I tell you, Mr. Speaker, it is 
an outrage. That’s what it is. 
 
Let me just run through some of the figures and some of the 
statistics. We’re paying for this debt all right. In the six years of 
this administration, Mr. Speaker, we now, this province is the 
second highest provincial income-taxed province in Canada — 
second highest only to be topped by the province of Quebec. 
That’s how high we are topped. We are almost, in the words of the 
Premier, first class and world class and the highest provincial 
income tax loads in the province in Canada we’ve ever had, per 
capita debt. 
 
Now this means that a Saskatchewan family of four, to give you a 
specific example, with an income of $35,000, the PC tax man, the 
member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, takes more than $2,800; or in 
another way, 8 per cent of family income, and that’s after applying 
all the credits that this government can give to it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this government is very fond of talking about 
support for the family. Is that support for the family? Working 
men and women working hard hours, nine to 
  



 
March 23, 1988 

35 
 

five, or even harder hours, extra hours, to keep their homes 
together. They’re worried about the future of themselves for their 
jobs and for their families. And after he works like this, or she 
works like this, the PC government takes a tax bite which is the 
equivalent of 8 per cent, nearly 10 per cent of the family income. 
 
Now the PC government stops at the family well for taxation way 
too often, sir. Personal income taxes now supply almost 
one-quarter — one-quarter — of all provincial revenue. Stop to 
think of that, Mr. Speaker. One-quarter of all provincial revenue 
comes from you, from me, from the working person, from the 
farmer if he can afford to pay the tax, from individual income tax, 
compared to something less than 15 per cent in a short five or six 
years. 
 
But in contrast, what do these people opposite do with respect to 
corporate taxation? The individual income tax is 25 per cent share 
of the revenue, but for corporations it’s 4 per cent, large 
corporations, and it hasn’t budged, Mr. Speaker. It remains at 4 
per cent, and possibly is even going to go down. That’s exactly the 
same percentage which has taken place over the last four or five 
years of this government’s administration. 
 
What conclusion can be made? Well the conclusion is we’ve got a 
massive debt; someone has to look after it, but the Conservatives 
aren’t going to ask their big-business friends from Weyerhaeuser 
or Pocklington to help pay their fair share of the load. No. The 
people who are going to pay are the hard-working people in the 
cities and in the mismanagement and it’s unfair, and the people 
won’t stand for it in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— Mr. Speaker, I could make, and I intend to do 
this during the budget speech, a lengthy talk about this record of 
taxation to support this massive debt. But I just want to give you 
one other statistic which I think is very interesting — 47 per cent 
increase in utility rates, that is to say, electricity, home heating, car 
insurance, and telephones, 40 per cent in five years of this 
administration. That’s nearly a 50 per cent jump. 
 
And by the way, when we’re talking about question periods, I tell 
the minister now — we’ll give them notice — I would like to 
know, this side of the House would like to know when it is that the 
other shoe is going to drop on SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance). We know that there’s a secret cabinet memo around 
that says that there’s going to be a $25 surcharge — when you’ve 
had an accident or you haven’t had an accident — $25 per car 
surcharge on top of that; that’s not even factored into the 47 per 
cent. We’re going to want this government to explain that kind of 
a taxation load as well. 
 
And then there is the flat income tax, 1.5 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 
now rumoured to go up to 2 per cent. These ordinary families will 
have to pay $500 extra in the flat tax if that 2 per cent actually 
takes place at budget time. We’ll see that in about a week’s time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and those who may be watching this debate, 

if you haven’t filled out your income tax yet, I invite everybody 
watching, I invite the back-benchers with the Progressive 
Conservative Party — take a look at your income tax form, fill it 
to, and ask yourself that old cliché question, but it’s more relevant 
in Saskatchewan than anywhere else:— are you better off today in 
taxation or worse off? And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, that with 
utilities and with the flat tax and with the sales tax and with the 
broken promises on taxes and the fact that we are the second 
highest individual taxed province in Canada, I say that we are 
worse off. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, this is a government which can’t manage a 
peanut stand. It has brought this province virtually to its knees, on 
the verge of bankruptcy. It’s making the ordinary people pay when 
they can’t afford to pay. It’s attacking the small-business men, the 
farmer, the young person and the worker. Mr. Speaker, it’s time 
for this government to go and go it must — go — because of its 
financial policies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— Oh, but we’re not to worry because there’ll be 
a task force on health care which is going to be coming down the 
pipe, Mr. Speaker, a task force on health care. 
 
Now let me just move to another area. This government prides 
itself with respect to the question of family farms and agriculture. 
The statistics, of course, show that what’s happening is a steady 
and rapid erosion of family farms in the province of 
Saskatchewan. To be fair to this government, some of the 
problems are beyond its control. There are international factors 
which are at play. One has to be fair about that and to be quite 
frank. 
 
But this is the government that says that it really represents rural 
Saskatchewan. It’s the government, it likes us to believe that 
understands what’s happening at the farm gate. Mr. Speaker, this 
government has double-crossed and betrayed the farmers of 
Saskatchewan, and I want to point to one program in particular, 
although there are a number, to make my point. 
 
In 1985 farmers were given hassle-free cash, $25 per acre at 6 per 
cent. Today in 1988 when the crisis is far worse, this government 
has forced the family farmers of this province to make the difficult 
choice of scrapping up money wherever they can to either pay on 
under the old scheme or, in the alternative, sign a Draconian 
10-year extension contract which raises the price of that money, 
that hassle-free cash, from 6 per cent to nine and three-quarters per 
cent. 
 
Now there are a lot of arguments about the provisions on the 
security. I won’t belabour the house about the legalities there as to 
whether or not it cuts off the operating loans of farmers. I’ve had 
many farming people tell me that the banks, the credit unions, are 
worried now that because of this 10-year agreement they’re not 
going to be able to get operating capital. 
 
The Premier tells us he’s got a deal with the banks. He says the 
banks and ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) have agreed now that operating capital 
  



 
March 23, 1988 

36 
 

will still be coming to the farmers. That’s what he says. Mind you, 
nobody has seen this deal, which by the way, in parenthetical 
terms, tells you something about the state of government in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Here you have a program which affects how many farmers — 50 
thousand-plus farmers, 58 thousand farmers? Here is a program 
which affects virtually every farmer working person farming on 
the land in Saskatchewan who has to make a critical decision, and 
that farming person is not even given the courtesy of being shown 
the details of what that secret deal is between the banks and the 
Premier and this PC government which would allow, presumably, 
the security provisions and operating capital to flow to the farmer. 
 
Now maybe the problem has been solved. I don’t know. Maybe 
the problem has been solved. But if the problem has been solved, 
why in the world doesn’t the Premier and the Minister of 
Agriculture table that agreement to the people of Saskatchewan? 
Why didn’t he table it today? Why didn’t he table it long before 
today, to put at ease the worries and the fears of the family farms 
in this regard? Why has he kept this deal a secret deal? 
 
I tell you, Mr. Speaker, there’s a problem here. Because if there’s 
an agreement between ACS and the banks, that’s one thing, but 
that agreement doesn’t extend between ACS and the farmers. The 
farmers are not privy or they’re not a party to any agreement that 
they may be entered into between ACS and the banks. 
 
And so here we have this kind of a confused situation where the 
Premier and the Minister of Agriculture continues to hide behind 
the bland assurances that say simply: trust me, we’ve got a deal 
which will look after the family farms. I hope he has, and if he 
does, we’ll congratulate him on it. 
 
But my question, Mr. Speaker, is, if he’s got such a deal .  . . not 
my question, my challenge to the Premier is, and to the Minister of 
Agriculture: table that deal in the legislature tomorrow so that all 
the farmers can see and judge for themselves whether the situation 
has been solved or not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— But what really is at issue beyond the details? I 
don’t want to talk about the details of the production loan because 
I think they’re fairly well-known, certainly by farmers, judging by 
the several phone calls a day that I keep on getting. What’s behind 
this is an attitude of this government which pretends itself to be a 
rural Saskatchewan-based farm party. It isn’t. It isn’t such a farm 
party. This government has lost touch with the family farms. This 
ACS story is proof positive that it’s lost touch. 
 
No consultation with an farm organization before the change in 
plan. Hurried consultation afterwards. No revelation of the deals. 
But the most important thing, Mr. Speaker, is a betrayal, a basic 
betrayal of the principles of that 6 per cent, $25 per acre 
production loan which was to be a hassle-free proposal to be given 
to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, and I say to the Minister of Agriculture and to 
the Premier, that is a betrayal which has cost this government 
deeply. They don’t believe it. But I can tell the Premier and the 
Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Speaker, that the very last people to 
know that they’ve lost the confidence of the farming people will 
be the government itself, and this government has lost the 
confidence of the farming people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— Then what about the debt load situation? Here 
we’ve got a major debt load crisis. In Saskatchewan today, it’s 
estimated by economists and others that we’ve got a debt load of 
$6 billion on the farmers — maybe more. By the way, the 
production loan is about 1.3 billion of that 6 billion. Something 
that started out to be a part of the solution has now become a part 
of the problem, a major part of the problem — $6 billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can you or can any member on the government side 
opposite bring to my attention a reference in the Speech from the 
Throne with specifics which tells us where the leadership is to try 
to get us out of that debt morass? That is probably the most serious 
crisis, the debt crisis. Pricing as well; it’s all very serious — that 
needs to be addressed. One point two billion is farm debt 
occasioned by the ACS production loan, maybe about 2 billion — 
I haven’t done the exact numbers. But a large portion of that 6 
billion falls right within the provincial coffers of the government 
opposite itself. If, in other words, has got the answers, or a great 
deal of the answers in its own hands, if it wanted to do it. Nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they set up a committee of back-benchers to go out 
there in the December and January period of the legislature — 
when the legislature is not sitting — to explore the idea of equity 
financing. That’s their only idea to date. What happened? At every 
one of those meetings, those task force members, the PCs, were 
virtually hooted and hollered out of the town halls because the 
farmers didn’t accept it, because they know what’s behind this. 
 
What they want to do is to set up a scheme where private, 
large-scale investors from Bay Street — and with free trade, 
perhaps even New York; it doesn’t matter where it is, maybe even 
from Saskatoon; I don’t care — they want to set up a system 
where investors will own the farm land and the farmers of our 
Saskatchewan will become the tenants or the share-croppers for 
these big investors. 
 
Now the Premier and the Minister of Agriculture and those 
opposite were very, very fond of criticizing the land bank. It 
wasn’t perfect, that’s to be sure. But they’re switching from land 
bank to bank land, Mr. Speaker, and I predict that the equity 
financing side-show or road show by these back-benchers is going 
to be rejected. It has been rejected, and once again this 
government is left without no game plan to deal with this 
devastating crisis — nothing whatsoever. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the only policy that the Premier and the 
Minister of Agriculture has in farming, if you look at it, is reduced 
to one. Well basically, two. One, is to plead  
  



 
March 23, 1988 

37 
 

with Prime Minister Mulroney for deficiency payments. As a 
farmer told me, he said, I wish you had an election once every 
three months; we’d be sure of getting deficiency payments to help 
us out. 
 
That’s the one strategy, that umbilical cord relationship between 
the Premier of our province and the Prime Minister of Canada. 
These two are like two peas in a pod. They are inseparable. They 
are tied by that political umbilical cord. Mr. Mulroney says 
something and out Premier salutes, aye, aye, captain. Our Prime 
Minister says, here’s free trade; our Premier without even giving it 
a second thought says, aye, aye, Captain Mulroney. Our Prime 
Minister says, don’t worry about the CF-18, it was all looked after, 
according even to the insider’s books from the Prime Minister’s 
office. And our Premier says, aye, aye, Captain Mulroney, I won’t 
question you whatsoever. 
 
(1515) 
 
Our Prime Minister says, we’re not going to do anything for the 
family farm right now; and our Premier says, aye, aye, Captain 
Mulroney. It’s either aye, aye, or hallelujah, I’m not quite sure 
which. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the farmers of Saskatchewan don’t need a Premier 
who is going to play the role of being an hallelujah choir boy. The 
people of Saskatchewan and the farmers want a Premier who is 
going to stand up for them, is going to stand up for Saskatchewan, 
and that means stand up to Prime Minister Mulroney if it’s in the 
best interest of Saskatchewan to do so. That will leave us what we 
need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— So that’s one part of the strategy. One part of 
the strategy is to say, aye, aye and to sing the Hallelujah Chorus, 
and the other part of the strategy is almost as insidious and more 
dangerous. The only other panacea for the farmers that the Premier 
offers is something called free trade. They say it’s free trade. 
We’re going to open up this great hope of free trade for the 
farmers, they say. 
 
Notwithstanding the fact that the free trade deal will not open up 
any markets of any significance, that it attacks our canola industry 
with the Western Grain Transportation Act subsidies to the West 
Coast being done away with — ask Ted Turner of the wheat pool. 
Notwithstanding the fact that the ongoing working group, as the 
free trade deal talks about, for the next five to seven years is going 
to look at a whole range of farm programs and policies ranging all 
the way from the PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 
Administration) to the stabilization programs and WGTA 
(Western Grain Transportation Act) and the whole host of 
Canadian programs which we’ve built up over the years to help 
our family farms. 
 
Notwithstanding all of those things there is, to be fair, perhaps an 
advantage in the short run for the red meat industry on the free 
trade deal. I wonder how good that’ll stand up, however, when the 
dollar and the exchange rate equalizes. I wonder how that’ll stand 
up when the beef from California and Texas starts coming back 
the 

other way. 
 
But nevertheless there is perhaps an advantage there, and that is it, 
Mr. Speaker. It is a chimera. It is an illusion. It is like one of those 
little things that you see down the highway on a hot summer 
afternoon as you’re driving. You think it’s another town or another 
city where you can stop to get some refreshment, maybe some 
relief. That’s what these people opposite are trying to sell. They’re 
trying to sell us a mirage. They’re trying to sell us this hope that 
by linking our ship irrevocably to the United States in agriculture, 
that somehow we’re going to be able to give some relief to the 
family farms, Mr. Speaker, that will not happen in Saskatchewan, 
and if it ever should happen by some stretch of the imagination, 
which it won’t, by the time it gets going there won’t be a family 
farmer left in Saskatchewan to provide for services on the family 
farm. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— No, Mr. Speaker, we have provincial 
government in farming which has abandoned, if it ever did have 
these roots in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I always felt that that was more of a public relations gimmick than 
it was a reality. Farmers in this province know who it was that 
dealt with them in indifference over the years historically. Farmers 
in this province know which party stands for the commitment of 
the family farm and which doesn’t. I always felt that image that 
they were a party of rural Saskatchewan was just what it is 
proving to be, an hallucination, a chimera, a phantom, a mirage, an 
image, a dream which is turning fast into the nightmare. 
 
And this government, in this Speech from the Throne, Mr. 
Speaker, not having any specific policies for the family farms, not 
having anything concrete to offer, is proving that to be the case. 
This government is so preoccupied with free trade and all the big, 
flying ideas in the world, that it’s forgotten that farmer on three 
quarter sections or section and a half, who is worried as his debt 
load is weighing him down, who sees his family being broken up 
— this government’s forgotten. 
 
And I have one piece of advice for the Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan. He would do himself a great favour, and I say this 
on a personal basis, and you’d do a great favour for the farmers of 
Saskatchewan if the Premier of this province fired the Minister of 
Agriculture and put a full-time minister to do the job for the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— Mr. Speaker, I said yesterday, before I moved 
to a conclusion in my remarks, I said yesterday that there is in this 
government a listlessness. Not a listlessness — individual 
ministers are not listless. Some are very enervated and they’re 
agitated and they do their announcements and they make their 
statements and some are listless and some .  . . I don’t mean 
listless. This government is not listless. It is .  . .  
 
An Hon. Member:— Rudderless. 
 
Mr. Romanow:— Rudderless, somebody said. 
  



 
March 23, 1988 

38 
 

An Hon. Member:— Incompetent. 
 
Mr. Romanow:— Okay, I don’t want to invite my caucus 
because we could end up with all kinds of adjectives. 
 
But what I’m trying .  . . The word that I’m searching for here, Mr. 
Speaker, is a government which has lost a will, not even a will, 
that has lost a vision or lost a dream — if it ever had one; I don’t 
think it ever did have one — about the kind of Saskatchewan it 
wants to build. 
 
You note the dream that I’m advocating — the mixed economy 
and the commitment to the family farm and the points that I’ve 
raised with respect to health care in my remarks. But this 
government seems to have lost the drive. There is no punch. I 
don’t mean punch in speeches; there just is no punch in the 
documentation and there is no punch in where they proceed. 
 
It’s a flip-flop government. They decide to raid the wildlife fund, 
and then they flip-flop and give it back after enormous pressure by 
our former Environment critic and other members in the wildlife 
federation. And then they introduce this 10-year agreement on 
ACS, and the member who’s a legislative secretary for the 
Premier, he defended it. He actually went to Yorkton and he said 
that 10-year deal was good. Then they flip-flopped. 
 
And then they made an announcement on abortion as a result of 
the Morgentaler decision. The Premier came out and he said it was 
going to be abortion on demand. And the president of the 
Progressive Conservative Party, Mr. Speaker, I remind you, Dr. 
Peter Matthews, the very next day ended up saying, yes, this was a 
bold, courageous statement. Why, he said, he even couched it in 
philosophical terms, because, Mr. Matthews said, that’s the 
essence of Conservative philosophy, individual right — abortion 
on demand. 
 
Of course the problem was that Dr. Matthews made the statement 
on the 17th of February and on the 18th of February the Premier 
again flip-flopped. And this is that now on health care, after five 
years of beating down the nurses, after five years of beating up on 
the medical profession, after five years of allowing 11,000 hospital 
beds, after at least a year on the drug plan, after a year on the 
children’s’ dental plan, after wrenching everything they can out of 
it, now they’re trying to flip-flop with a task force report on health 
care. Now you wonder our scepticism. I repeat again, if this is a 
study done by independent, interested, and competent people, 
we’ll give support to it. But how can one take with credibility and 
seriousness and gravity that kind of an approach 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has lost its control of the agenda. 
This government’s only hope for survival is that something called 
free trade comes about. That’s what they’re really hoping for. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to remind you and the members of this 
house that virtually nothing that we will say or do in this 
legislature will affect, other than in the larger scheme of the public 
debate, the outcome of the free trade argument. It will be decided 
in Washington and Ottawa, regardless of what the Premier says or 
does, although we 

all have opinions on this. But I do want to make one point as my 
opinion on this free trade, which is the last straw, the last hope for 
survival of this administration. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, without being an alarmist — and 
maybe I am an alarmist — this deal holds the threat, the danger to 
Canadian and sovereignty independence, the kind of which we 
have not seen ever since 1867. This is a deal, Mr. Speaker, which 
is more than an economic arrangement. 
 
Free trade is a brand-new economic, social, and inevitably 
political arrangement, Mr. Speaker. It’s a wide-ranging 
comprehensive deal. The Premier is very fond of saying, well you 
know, we want here in Saskatchewan what Ontario has. Well I 
have news for the Premier. I want in Saskatchewan what Ontario 
has in terms of per capita living. But I’ll tell you where I disagree 
with the Premier, when he singles out the auto pact, which is but 
one chapter, small chapter, in the free trade deal, and tries to 
compare the auto pact to a comprehensive 14- or 15-chapter free 
trade deal — I don’t have it in front of me — which covers 
everything from services to agriculture — which, by the way, was 
not to be on the table — to energy, to financial services, to 
investment operations. We are talking, not about a trading 
arrangement, we are talking about a new social, economic, 
political arrangement with the United States and Canada. 
 
And I want to make something else abundantly clear for 
everybody. Nobody on this side of the House is opposed to trade. 
Everybody on this side of the House would make trade a 
corner-stone of our economic development policy. We believe 
trade with the United States is very important. We want to see it 
expanded; I want to see it expanded. But I’ll tell you something 
else. We don’t want to say that it’s free trade with the United 
States, full stop, period. It’s free trade with the world’s countries, 
with the Pacific Rim and the others. That’s where the growth area 
happens to be. 
 
We have .  . . I don’t say this, it doesn’t give me any pleasure to 
say this. I just visited the United States for five days for family 
matters. This is a society which has contributed a great deal to our 
North American way of life and to the world. But the reality is that 
it is suffering from major economic problems itself. It’s debt load 
now is the largest in the world. It moves from a large creditor 
nation to the largest debtor nation. The smoke-stock industries are 
dying. There is a new form of industry, the shape of which no one 
can really describe in any accurate terms. The capital has shifted 
elsewhere to Japan and to the Far East. 
 
What in the world are we doing as Canadians in linking up with an 
economic situation and a country of this nature facing these 
economic circumstances? I tell you what I worry about. I worry 
about that we in Saskatchewan or Canada may be linking our 
lifeboat to what could very well prove to be the American 
economic Titanic, and they do this with a willing compliance. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s not so much that I oppose that they’re for 
free trade; I disagree that they’re for free trade. They have a right 
to hold that view, but they do it with no  
  



 
March 23, 1988 

39 
 

analysis. There has not been one internal government study tabled 
in this legislature or anywhere, to the best of my knowledge, 
which shows who the winners or the losers of free trade are in 
Saskatchewan or Canada — not one. And we have studies that 
said there’ll be jobs, up to 500,000 which are lost. There isn’t one 
independent study tabled by the Minister of Economic 
Development, the member from Kindersley, not one that shows 
that he, himself, has analysed this thing — not from some 
ideologically right-wing, Conservative point of view, but in the 
best interest of the province of Saskatchewan. If there is, table it. I 
plead with you: table such studies. 
 
We’ll be putting a motion on the order paper asking you: table 
such studies to at least show that we’re wrong if you want to score 
a political point. But if you don’t want to score a political point, at 
least assuage the concerns of the farmers who fear that in the next 
five to seven years the wheat board may be next on the bargaining 
table, that the supply management programs may be next on the 
bargaining table, that the egg management programs and dairy 
programs — those will be gone as well. Show us the studies if that 
isn’t going to be the case but no blind allegiance and adherence to 
a union, a potential union, which is more than just simply trade. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the evidence is everywhere. In energy .  . . I’ll 
tell you what galls me particularly on a personal basis. When I was 
in this legislature on that side of the House in the late 1970s, we 
joined forces with another Conservative government, the 
Government of Alberta, Mr. Peter Lougheed, and we fought on 
the issue of resource control. 
 
(1530) 
 
The provinces should constitutionally control resources over oil 
and natural gas and potash, because our theory was that, with fair 
taxation, we could get the profits form that natural resource, 
God-given natural resource, and we could redistribute it to our 
health care system and to our education system so that we 
wouldn’t have the crisis of faculties striking and teachers striking 
and doctors bickering and 11,000 people on hospital bed waiting 
lists. 
 
We adopted that policy of provincial control over resources so that 
we could distribute to the businesses of this province the benefits 
of this God-given blessing that we have here. And we fought it in 
the constitution, and we gained it in the constitution, and we did it 
at great peril at a time in Canadian history, when at one time it 
looked as if maybe the country would break apart. We did it and 
we achieved it, and it’s now a constitutional right. And with one 
simple stroke of the pen the Premier of this province has given it 
away, and we have no control any more over our resources. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— Given it away. Sure we have the constitutional 
provision which stays there, but what good is the constitutional 
right if you have signed a treaty which says, I own the resources 
but I will not have the right to charge the price for the resource; I 
will not have the right to charge the amount of the volume of the 
resource that is 

to be given. Americans must be charged the same that I am 
charged as a Saskatchewanian. If I cut back in case of a supply 
shortage, I must cut back in the same proportions to the 
Americans. I fought for that! 
 
And by the way, they supported us when they were in opposition 
in that fight. The leader of the opposition, not the current Premier, 
but the leader of the opposition, the member from 
Souris-Cannington, supported us in that fight. The Conservatives 
in Alberta supported us in this fight. 
 
And out of this free trade deal they have signed by treaty — 
international treaty — they have given away the one major 
competitive edge that we could have used to build up small 
business and diversify our economy. I say shame on the Premier 
of this province of Saskatchewan, shame on the Conservatives, 
shame for denying the future generations of Saskatchewan hope 
for prosperity and growth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— There are examples which are legion in this 
regard, Mr. Speaker, legion. I want to close on free trade by just 
giving you one other one which troubles me a great deal. 
 
I don’t know if this interpretation is a correct one. I suspect that 
there are alternate interpretations which can be given, but I tell you 
the one that I look at troubles me. It’s under the services section 
for free trade, and this is a provincial issue — under the services 
section, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I need not remind you, but if you’ll bear with me I must do 
so, to remind you of this. When Donald MacDonald’s royal 
commission studied free trade a few years ago and recommended 
free trade, the MacDonald commission recommended itself that 
there ought not to be — I underline, sir — ought not to be a 
provision on services. He said for a number of reasons. The 
Americans, this was their next growth industry — services. And 
we weren’t ready. 
 
And he said also that services had great potential for working 
women in the service sector. That’s where the majority of our 
women work — I might add at underpaid wages, at second-class 
wages, at discriminatory wages. This is where the first onslaught 
on a services sector trade agreement implemented in Canada will 
have the impact on. It’ll impact negatively, first on the working 
women, many of whom are single mothers. That, I’m sure, the 
studies will support. 
 
But nevertheless, under the services section, Mr. Speaker, if you 
haven’t seen it, I invite you to take a look at the annex of what 
services are identified. There are over 300 different services 
identified, from advertising agencies to accounting firms. 
 
And what does that free trade’s provision say on services? It says 
this: It says that if an American company or individual should 
come in to provide a service under one of those categories in 
Canada, that person or corporation must be treated the same way 
as a Canadian providing the  
  



 
March 23, 1988 

40 
 

same services is to be treated. And in theory we could do that 
same thing, presumably, to the United States. 
 
I want to identify one area with health care. And this is something 
I ask the Minister of Health to ask his task force to take a look at 
because under the services section there is a specifically identified 
provision which says — I don’t have the text in front of me, but 
the words of it are this way, in essence they’re correct: health 
services management facilities are now allowed under the services 
section of the free-trade deal between Canada and the United 
States. 
 
Now let me paint a scenario to you. 
 
There are 11,000 people .  . . I say this to the Minister of Health:— 
there are 11,000 people waiting to get a hospital bed in Saskatoon. 
Now that’s a jam-up. Supposing some American entrepreneur or 
hospital, because there they have many fee-for-service, private, 
profit-oriented hospitals — you can name them — supposing 
some private hospital said, now look, looks alike a pretty good 
market existing up in Saskatoon because there are 11,000 people 
who want to get in and they can’t. Now we don’t have to build a 
full hospital, but maybe we can build a specialized set of hospital 
services or a special facility under hospital management services, 
and out of the free-trade deal we’ll come in and we’ll ease that 
backlog of 11,000 patients, many of whom are desperate. 
 
They’re scared, they’re worried, they’re frightened. Their 
finances, everything is at issue emotionally, and do you blame 
them? And if they came in and one of those people said — or a 
number of those people said:— Well we’re going to try this new 
facility coming in from the United States. What does it mean? 
 
It could mean, it could mean that since under the free-trade deal 
they’ve got to be treated the same way as St. Paul’s Hospital, that 
they would get the benefit of SHSP (Saskatchewan hospital 
services plan) taxpayers’ dollars that we all pay — this 
imported/importing United States health care service. But they 
could do something else; they could charge a little extra on top, 
Mr. Speaker, because they’re profit oriented, because that’s the 
way they work. And those who could afford to pay, or those who 
are do desperate and worried to pay, would pay, and, Mr. Speaker, 
we would have the beginning of a two-tier system for health care. 
Mr. Speaker, if that happened we would have the beginning of the 
end of medicare and hospitalization because of the free trade deal. 
That’s the result. 
 
Maybe there’s another interpretation that’s possible. I want to hear 
the Minister of Health or the minister in charge directly, next to 
the Premier in negotiating this free trade deal, to explain 
otherwise. But that’s the danger of it. 
 
Energy, agriculture, health care services, financial investment 
services. You know this equity financing .  . . I’ll give you one last 
example, Mr. Speaker, on free trade. Supposing the Tories ever do 
get their equity financing program going — and now we have 
bank land inventory — under the free trade deal, Mr. Speaker, do 
you know that the first $150 million of investment, nobody in 

Canada will be able to check after a certain period of time? So that 
the ownership of that farm land — it is not too preposterous to 
say; in fact it’s very likely — will move from ownership of 
Canadian investors, which I think is wrong in principle to begin 
with, to American investors, be they New York and Dallas. 
 
Is that the vision and the future that this government is building for 
us? Are they heading us to the 500,000 people of Montana and 
North Dakota and South-Dakota? They’re killing the public 
sector. They’re attacking the co-operative sector. They’re putting 
all of their eggs in the one basket of private enterprise, big private 
enterprise, and now they’ve opened it up to the free trade deal of 
the United Stated and they think we can do better than North 
Dakota. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that if anybody thinks that free 
trade has worked well in the United States, go down to North 
Dakota and ask yourselves how well it’s worked for them and the 
United States. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— And the conclusion will be there for everybody 
— no medicare, no hospitalization, no government insurance, 
none of the amenities that we have, none of the civilized society 
and the developments to of this Saskatchewan and Canada which 
have made us so different will exist. That is what this free trade 
deal has imperilled, and that is what the Premier and the ministers 
are not telling the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I say to you, sir, I say to the members in this House, I say to those 
who are watching and listening to us: if you have no vision of this 
province, join the Tories. If you’ve given up in building an 
independent Canada, join the Tories. If you’ve given up hope on 
Saskatchewan and the family farms, join the Tories. They say that 
we are timid and cowards. They say that we’re afraid to compete 
in the world. No. The challenge of this country has been those 
who have had the encourage and the guts to build the country east 
and west, not north and south. Those who have been courageous 
have been those who have built the CN and AirCanada and even 
the CBC — God bless its soul — and to build all those institutions 
of federal-provincial institutional support for development in 
industry and development — those are the courageous people, Mr. 
Speaker. Those are the courageous men and women who are 
dedicated to a sovereign, free, independent, civilized Canada, not 
those timid souls who have no vision except to turn themselves 
over to the United States. Those are the visionaries. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— In fact, Mr. Speaker, I would say that the 
Premier should stay a little more at home, rather than going 
around on the free trade thing to all over the world. He’s travelled 
so far and so wide, selling free trade, and he’s come back with 
such a passionate commitment to free trade, I think that what we 
ought to do is title his experience and his travels and we should 
call it Gullible’s Travels. That’s what I think we should call it, Mr. 
Speaker, because that’s what it is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
March 23, 1988 

41 
 

Mr. Romanow:— Well, Mr. Speaker, there is a better way. There 
is a better way. It’s a tougher way, it means that we’re going to 
have to pull together Saskatchewan people in a co-operative 
fashion to build on all of our strengths. There is a better way 
which says that there is room, encouragement, support for small 
business and for co-operatives and for the public sector where 
necessary. There is a better way. 
 
There is also a role for compassion in government, and honesty 
and decency and political honesty. You know, I noted with interest 
some of the members in this debate who’ve talked about moral 
values. I commend them for doing so. I think public policy is 
about moral values very often. We develop priorities among 
various moral values and moral issues. We seek practical and 
effective means which are morally sound to achieve the ends of 
the goals that we have set. And I don’t impugn any motivation 
malevolent to my colleagues opposite in this regard. In my view, 
Saskatchewan politics should be morality, to a large extent, public 
morality. Today in our province and here in this city, children go 
to bed hungry, Mr. Speaker. Families are forced to rely on food 
banks, Mr. Speaker. That is immoral. That’s morality, but it’s 
immoral. 
 
Today here in Saskatchewan, families with pressing medical needs 
are forced to make the choice between prescription drugs and 
groceries. That, Mr. Speaker, is immoral. 
 
Today in Saskatchewan, men and women are forced to wait six 
months or more for a hospital bed for surgery, as I’ve pointed out, 
at a time, sir, when this government of yours is pending more than 
$8 million per year on empty office space. That is immoral, Mr. 
Speaker — that is immoral. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— Today in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, working 
men and women, young people, families, are being scarred by the 
tragedy and the waste of unemployment. That, Mr. Speaker, is 
immoral. 
 
And thousands of farm families across the province have been 
betrayed by a government that said that they were of them. 
Families, communities, Saskatchewan’s infrastructure is 
threatened, and it’s not good enough to give them the illusion, the 
nightmare of free trade. That is immoral to do so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So morality is important in politics. And let us seek compassion 
and understanding and empathy and tolerance, Mr. Speaker, in this 
House. Let’s shun those who would impose their own narrowed, 
blinkered and bigoted, sometimes, view of morality and the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here in this provincial legislature we’re bound to 
concern ourselves with Saskatchewan affairs primarily. That’s our 
responsibility first and foremost. But to state the obvious, sir, we 
in Saskatchewan are also part of a larger world, and as part of that 
larger world we have an obligation, I would say a moral 
obligation, sir, as citizens of the world to concern ourselves and 
involve ourselves with the issues of the larger world. 

And over the last several days we’ve all been reminded by the 
tragic events around the world — in Northern Ireland, in the 
Mid-East, in Central America — of the fragility of peace, of the 
decade of man’s inhumanity to man, reminded that free and 
democratic institutions are rare. They must be nurtured and 
protected. That is morality, and we should be talking about it, 
reminded that the peace we enjoy is not enjoyed by all. 
 
And as this legislative session gets under way in earnest, I would 
like to think that we could rededicate ourselves to banishing — 
and banishing for ever — a limited view of morality but basically 
banishing in the pursuit of our policies and our programs what I 
think are probably the four greatest threats to civilized life in our 
province today: ignorance, fear, hate, and want. 
 
(1545) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what this Speech from the Throne did not do is 
address those ideals or those objectives. It lacked that vision. It 
told us nothing about the future of the province. 
 
And while the government opposite may not know it, or may try 
to ignore it, I think the ordinary people of this province do have a 
vision, sir. I’ve experienced it in my travels, now virtually 
non-stop in the seven months or so that I’ve been involved in the 
leadership, in taking over the leadership of this great party. I tell 
you around the kitchen tables, meetings of which I’ve held — 
well, I won’t say hundreds, but tens — they have a vision, those 
people do, a vision that respects and builds on our traditions and 
our history and respects our positive and valuable traditions in the 
province, the best place on earth to live and to raise a family, a 
tradition that respects and builds so the future will even be 
brighter. 
 
Those people tell me they have a vision of an economic 
prosperity, not needlessly shooting ourselves twice and killing the 
engines of our economy in two of the areas, but using everything 
that we have for economic development and security for all. They 
have a vision. 
 
Farmers have a vision, the backbone of rural Saskatchewan, the 
backbone of this province, a commitment to the family farm. In 
some quarters you almost think that that’s an old-fashioned 
commitment. Well, Mr. Speaker, it may be an old-fashioned 
commitment. I might even be accused by the members opposite of 
saying the same old thing about the family farm. 
 
I want to tell you, sir, that as long as I hold this position, and as 
long as I am in this legislature, that is a vision, a family farm, and 
there are numbers of family farmers in this province that will be 
healthy and strong and contribute to the moral and economic fibre 
of this province. They have that vision and commitment; a vision 
of economic development which is compassionate; a vision of 
economic development which places jobs; a vision for the 
environment that the water and the land and the air should be 
clean; a vision of a better and brighter future for Saskatchewan 
where the public good is not sacrificed for private gain, where 
there is a balance, where there is a decency and pragmatism. 
  



 
March 23, 1988 

42 
 

And a vision, Mr. Speaker, where a government and our 
government leaders seek to unite us, not to divide us; that the 
leadership should be to build bridges and not to destroy those 
bridges. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— A vision of a society that realizes that we are 
only as strong as the weakest minority; a vision that does not 
pillory those who cannot defend for themselves; a vision which 
builds bridges; a vision which seeks to build the common 
co-operative and decent society in Saskatchewan. 
 
There’s a great agenda out there. I’ve touched on some of them, 
Mr. Speaker. Our job in opposition will be to nurture those visions 
and to flesh out in detail the weeks and months and the years 
ahead as we move to the by-elections and as we move beyond that 
to the great provincial election coming, we will be fashioning a 
vision of democratic socialism and a vision of co-operation and 
decency and wealth creation and redistribution which will be 
consistent with the history of our province, which has faith in our 
people, which says Saskatchewan first. 
 
We can do it here alone. We don’t need free trade, and we don’t 
need Weyerhaeuser’s. We’ll get business coming in here, but 
we’ll do it on the values because we are the courageous party and 
province that will build this history and this people of the province 
of Saskatchewan. That is a vision. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— And, Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the 
Throne has no vision. This government has no leadership. This 
government is ready for defeat. Mr. Speaker, it must be and will 
be defeated because of its betrayal of Saskatchewan people and 
the double standards and the errors and faults that it has exhibited 
to using the years of its government. 
 
Before I close, and I do close, I want to make two very brief 
additional statements if I can, Mr. Speaker. This is directly related 
to the Speech from the Throne, in one instance for sure, and it 
deals with section 110 and the Father Mercure situation, and the 
fact that the Speech from the Throne was absolutely silent about it. 
I talked about minorities and decency and civility and the weakest 
links. Not a word from the Speech from the Throne on a decision 
and a law and an institution which affects Canada the way it is. 
 
With your permission, Mr. Speaker, I’m, I think for the first time 
in my address, referring to a note, but I have to. 
 
Monsieur le Président. En effet il est très étrange qu’il n’y a pas eu 
mention de la décision de la Cour suprême du Canada sur le 
dossier Mercure et l’article 110 dans le discours du trône. Quelle 
est l’intention de ce gouvernement vis-à-vis le respect de l’article 
110? C’est vrai que la Saskatchewan se vantait d’être la première 
province anglophone à ratifier l’accord constitutionnel du Lac 
Meech. Il est donc nécessaire que la Saskatchewan respecte 
l’article 110 et le droit des 

francophones. 
 
Au nom de l’opposition et de tous les gens de la Saskatchewan, je 
dois dire que je suis surpris que le gouvernement n’a pas encore 
consulté l’ACFC (Association Culturelle Franco-Canadienne) au 
nom des francophones concernant la meilleure façon de mettre en 
application l’article 110 et la décision Mercure. La communauté 
francophone demande d’être consultée et demande que la décision 
soit respectée. J’aurais espéré que cette consultation aura déjà eu 
lieu et que le gouvernement soit en position de nous annoncer 
cette décision au sujet de l’article 110. Il est primordial que tous 
les politiciens des deux cotes de cette chambre respectent ces 
droits humains fondamentaux. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— Merci, Monsieur le Président. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, as I close, this is March 23, as we know, 
and I must close with a very brief, with your permission, tribute to 
my friend and colleague, the member from Regina Elphinstone — 
with you permission and the permission of the House this one time 
only — Mr. Allan Blakeney, whose last day in the legislature in 
the province of Saskatchewan is today. 
 
Mr. Speaker:— Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Romanow:— Allan Blakeney served in the Saskatchewan 
legislature for 28 years, as everybody knows, as MLA, leader of 
the opposition, and premier of this great province. Throughout 
those years, Al Blakeney has personified, in my judgement, all 
that is good about politics, all that is good: dedication to public 
service, a desire to help change people’s lives for the better, 
tolerance of others’ views, hard-hitting in debate — not personal 
in debate — hard-hitting in debate, and tolerance. That is Allan 
Blakeney. 
 
He was a politician who led by example, and his example has 
inspired certainly all of us, and certainly me. I consider it a great 
privilege — speaking personally and on behalf of some of my 
colleagues like the member from Regina North East, my desk 
make, and others, the member from Quill Lakes — but speaking 
personally, I consider it a great privilege to have served under Al 
Blakeney during his hears in the premier’s office. Sometimes 
cabinet meetings were run like school classes. We had to know 
our stuff and know it very well, but it was debate of public issues 
in the highest order. 
 
And I consider it an honour to have followed him in the position 
of Leader of the New Democratic Party. His achievements in early 
30 years of public service are too numerous to mention, but I 
would like to just mention the one important area of health care 
which has been mentioned before. 
 
Allan Blakeney was minister of Health when the province became 
the first jurisdiction in North America, in 1962, in medicare. And 
during his years in this province as premier, this province was the 
first to introduce the drug  
  



 
March 23, 1988 

43 
 

plan, the dental plan, the province-wide home care system. 
 
I also have fond memories of him in the constitutional — how do I 
describe it? — battles or discussions of the late ’70s and early 
’80s, where Blakeney’s intellectual prowess and vision of 
Saskatchewan and Canada played, in my judgement, when history 
records it, one of the most major roles in finally ending that 
ignominious period of our life where we were ostensibly an 
independent country but had the humiliation of seeking patriation 
of our constitution from Great Britain. He was a giant in that 
process. 
 
Al Blakeney will be missed by the people of Regina and 
Saskatchewan and Canada, and by his colleagues in the caucus 
and by the people here in the party and by me. And I’m sure that 
all Saskatchewan people would want to join with me in wishing 
Al Blakeney all the best as he ends his career and launches in what 
will be, I know, a new and productive career in academic life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not for the last words, but for all the other preceding 
words, I cannot support this Speech from the Throne. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin:— Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise this 
afternoon and speak on behalf of the Speech from the Throne. I 
would like, however, before I get into the meat of my comments, 
to make some reference to the Leader of the Opposition who 
spoke briefly about morality and ethics. I ask you, sir, where is the 
morality in allowing interest rates to rise to 22 per cent, breaking 
farmers and home owners around this province? I ask you, sir, 
where is the morality in accepting money from a law firm who 
represents a bank that closes down farms, and then have the 
audacity to stand up in this House and say that you represent the 
family farm in this province? The people in the country know who 
you represent, and it ain’t the people in this province, I assure you 
of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin:— You talk about morality in financial ways. 
Morality, sir, I suggest to you, should be talked about in terms of 
the family, the family life, and not financial terms. Get your head 
out of the law firm and into the people of this province. 
Understand what they’re talking abut. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the record I wish to express to this Assembly my 
confidence of the government of our province and equal 
confidence in the Speech from the Throne. 
 
The constituents of Regina Wascana entrusted me to represent 
their interests in this legislature. The people of Regina Wascana, in 
electing me t this legislature, also put in my the trust in our 
Premier and the Progressive Conservative Party. And I say with 
pride that that Speech from the Throne is a clear reflection of the 
goals an the aspirations of the people of this province. The Speech 
from the Throne is a vision of faith and the future of this great 
province. Our province is destined to solid 

economic growth and prosperity because of the leadership of this 
province. 
 
At the outset today, I would like to congratulate the government 
for its continued commitment to Saskatchewan families. Families 
are Saskatchewan’s greatest strength, and safeguarding family life 
is of vital importance to the people of this party and to this 
government. 
 
I also wish to commend the government for promoting excellence 
in education. The children of our province deserve a quality 
education in a quality environment. 
 
It was my privilege, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to be the Legislative 
Secretary to the Minister of Education for this past year prior to 
January when I was named to Health. It was an opportunity for me 
to spend a lot of time in northern Saskatchewan, to talk to the 
people of northern Saskatchewan, to talk to the teachers, to talk to 
the children of northern Saskatchewan. It was an opportunity, for 
me to be involved with the Northern Lights board of education, to 
see their move from Prince Albert, which is not seen as to be in 
the southern as a northern part of the province, to move their head 
office to Lac La Ronge and set up an additional office on the west 
side of the province. 
 
The people of northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are 
aware that this government is concerned about quality of 
education, and in the months to come new curriculum will be 
introduced into northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I assure the people of this province and the members of this House 
that the people of northern Saskatchewan, that is, north of 
Montreal Lake — not Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, but in northern 
Saskatchewan — know that this government is committed to a 
quality education in northern Saskatchewan. It’s very important 
that they be educated so they can take part in the economic growth 
of this province in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I favour free trade. Free trade will give 
Saskatchewan a new edge in the global competition for skills, 
technology, and trade. Free trade will promote positive economic 
growth. 
 
I congratulate the Premier of our province for his leadership in 
bringing about Canada, the Canada-US free trade. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the critics opposite and the critics 
of free trade talk abut, we’ll lost our cultural identify somehow 
with free trade. Well I say to the people opposite and the people 
who are opposed to free trade that if our culture is so weak that we 
have to be insulated from forces outside of this country, then we 
have no culture. 
 
(1600) 
 
But I say to you that the Ukrainians, the Poles, the English, the 
Norwegians and all the others in this province who call themselves 
Canadians today will remain as Canadians. I have no fear 
whatsoever about losing my  
  



 
March 23, 1988 

44 
 

Canadian identity because of the free trade agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they talk about, how can we in Saskatchewan, a 
small province of a million people, compete? Well I say to the 
members opposite, the only time you have to fear competition is 
when you’re trying to flog an inferior product, and they should 
know about that. 
 
The Speech from the Throne announced that this government will 
establish a new Department of Public Participation, a department 
that’s now under way, and I welcome that news. Public 
participation represents exciting new economic opportunities for 
Saskatchewan people. As stated in the Speech from the Throne, 
public participation is something that Saskatchewan people can 
look forward to and take part in. It can be exciting. It will give 
every citizen an opportunity to invest in what should rightfully 
belong to the people. They can be part of it. 
 
Oh yes, there’s the prophets of doom and gloom who will 
frantically oppose this because of their hard-headed ideological 
commitment to the socialist agenda. That is their prerogative, Mr. 
Speaker, but public participation represents a new wave for the 
future. I confidently predict, within a matter of time public 
participation will be so successful that every other province in 
Canada will follow the Saskatchewan example. 
 
You know health care has always been a prime concern of 
Saskatchewan people, and indeed it should be. We have a proud 
legacy of building a health care system that is known far an wide 
for its excellence. The architects of Canada’s medicare plan are 
from Saskatchewan. 
 
Today I want to spend a few moments to reflect on our health care 
system. I am proud of the record of this government when it 
comes to health care. Indeed, some months ago when I was 
appointed Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Health, I seized 
that opportunity to not only learn more abut the health care system 
in the province, but maybe take part in helping to make some of 
those renovations that we’ll perhaps be hearing about in the future. 
 
I can say with a degree of authority that our Health minister and 
the many dedicated public servants who work for Saskatchewan’s 
Health department are working together to give the people of this 
province a first-class health care system. Let me remind this 
Assembly that our province spends over one-third of its entire 
budget on health care. We spend $3 million a day — $3 million a 
day on health care in this province. Last year alone our health care 
budget was the highest ever in the history of the province. Those 
are clear, undisputable facts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This Progressive Conservative government has worked to build a 
health care system that is considered by professional observers to 
be one of the best in North America, yet there are those people in 
the province who persist in attacking and undermining our health 
care system for political reasons. They sit on the opposite benches 
of the legislature, and we heard some of it this afternoon. Their 
scare tactics are so irresponsible that I feel, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that I must set the record straight. 

After coming into office in 1982, we found a health care system 
that was the third worst in all of Canada. Don’t take my word for 
it. All you have to do is check Justice Emmett Hall’s medicare 
report. That was the state of Saskatchewan’s health care system in 
1982 when this government came to power. The NDP had created 
a myth about our health programs and literally pulled a cruel hoax 
on the good people of Saskatchewan. They manipulated and used 
scare tactics. 
 
We’re all too familiar with the cruel tactics that the NDP used in 
years gone by. They’d go into seniors’ homes and tell them that if 
the Tories come into power they’re going to close down the homes 
and throw them out on the street — such shameless and 
outrageous tactics. And the sad thing is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
they continue that today. 
 
Who can forget the NDP medicare scare of the 1970s? The NDP 
went up and down this province telling people medicare would be 
abolished by the Tories, and they continue that same line today — 
the same scare tactics. Well the people didn’t believe them in 
1982, and they sure don’t believe them today — another example 
of the shameless practices of the NDP. We hear them over and 
over and over again, the same old line — but then of course, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s the same old faces. 
 
The time has come to set the record straight with respect to health 
care. Since 1982, Saskatchewan’s health care budget is up 63 per 
cent, to more than $1.3 billion, the largest in the province’s history 
Health care spending in this province is at its highest point in 
history because of the leadership and commitment of the 
progressive Conservative government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker — and I ask the members of the press gallery 
to take note of what I’m about to say next because I know they’re 
watching back in television, if they’re not up in the rafters up 
there. It’s a sad fact, and take note of, it is a fact that we intend to 
make all Saskatchewan people aware of, and that is, since 1982 
the NDP in Saskatchewan legislature have voted against every 
health care budget. Despite the increases, despite the new 
programs, despite the help for elderly, despite all the new 
programs that have been introduced which, of curse, involve the 
63 per cent in funding, 63 per cent increase in funding, the NDP 
have voted against every health care budget. 
 
So I ask them and I ask the Leader of Opposition, where is their 
commitment? Where was their so-called commitment to 
medicare? They would have denied the people of Saskatchewan 
increases in health spending. The record speaks for itself. 
 
There are other facts that we intend to remind the people of 
Saskatchewan about. Prior to 1982 there was extra billing on 
health care in this province. Those people who could not afford 
extra billing, especially the seniors and the needy, had to pay extra 
dollars out of their limited incomes for certain health care services. 
At the same 
  



 
March 23, 1988 

45 
 

time, the members opposite were allowing interest rates to rise to 
22 per cent. People couldn’t afford to pay for anything under those 
interest rates. And did they do anything? Not a thing. 
 
Where was the NDP caring and compassion when they imposed 
extra billing on health care? It didn’t exist, Mr. Speaker. No 
compassion, no caring. The NDP refused to take off extra billing, 
but history will record that it was a Progressive Conservative 
government, that this government that had the passion and the 
decency to remove the unnecessary burden of extra billing to 
senior citizens and those who didn’t have the money to pay for it. I 
can understand the members of the opposition not wanting to face 
the reality of history. There’s nothing so powerful as the truth. 
 
I’d like this Assembly to know some other important facts about 
health care. The NDP neglected senior citizens by putting a 
moratorium or freeze on the construction of special care homes for 
seniors. From 1976 to 1982 the NDP refused to build any nursing 
homes. To correct those years of neglect, this Progressive 
Conservative government approved for construction a total of 
2,190 special home care beds. 
 
Cancer treatment services were allowed to deteriorate during the 
NDP years. This government put a stop to that, I’ll have more on 
that in a moment. With the leadership of our Premier and the 
commitment of the Progressive Conservative government, we 
have a health care record that we can be proud of. Since 1982, 
there has been a 157 per cent increase in funding for ambulance 
services. There has been a 90 per cent increase in funding to help 
deal with the serious social problems of drug and alcohol abuse. 
 
The Speech from the Throne made mention of the first-class 1.5 
million Whitespruce Drug and Alcohol Treatment Centre, 
Canada’s first specialized youth treatment centre. And of course 
along with that goes provision for after care. 
 
This government has established a chiropody program to provide 
foot care services throughout the province. There’s been a 78 per 
cent increase in home care funding. Six new CAT scanners have 
been placed in Saskatchewan hospitals to provide modern 
diagnostic technology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of those facts represent the record of a 
government that has a solid commitment to excellence in health 
care. We do not want to shy away from speaking about health in 
this legislature. We welcome the opportunity to compare the 
records. 
 
For instance back in 1978 the NDP Health minister of the day, the 
member for Saskatoon South, said the sign of an efficient hospital 
system was long waiting lists, that was his attitude. And he sits 
here today in the opposition, and, of course, that is no wonder. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, the member 
from Saskatoon Riversdale, in 1985, in a speech to the Canadian 
Hospital Association, opposed increased hospital construction. 
The member who was just on his feet a few minutes ago talking 
about how he cares about 

the people of this province was with a government whose minister 
of Health said that the sign of an efficient hospital system was 
long waiting lists, and he opposed the increase in hospital 
construction. Well it’s certainly not the approach of this 
government. We believe hospitals are an integral part of our health 
care system. 
 
Since 1982 we have implemented a major program of hospital 
construction that has brought about this government’s investment 
in rural and urban health care centres to over 50 million. Regina 
and Saskatoon have also benefited with major expansions to 
Regina’s General and Pasqua, and Saskatoon’s University and St. 
Paul’s hospitals. In addition, the Premier recently announced the 
construction of a new City Hospital in Saskatoon. Saskatchewan 
stands out like a beacon for its excellent health care system. 
 
The Speech from the Throne shows this government has the vision 
and leadership to keep on building on the excellence of that 
system well into the next century. That is why a task force on 
health care has been and will be established. 
 
I think it appropriate that 1988 marks two important dates in our 
history. Fifty-five years ago this year, in 1938 .  . . That’s 50 years 
ago, in 1938, John Diefenbaker became the first public figure to 
publicly call for a health care plan. Yes, 50 years ago he laid the 
foundation for what we proudly call medicare. Twenty-five years 
ago medicare became a reality in Saskatchewan. Tommy Douglas, 
as premier of Saskatchewan, earned his place in history for 
making medicare a reality. Our province has been a pioneer in 
building health care that is a shining example for Canada and 
indeed North America. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, rather, I conclude my remarks 
on health care by emphasizing our commitment to meet the 
changing health needs of our province. The Speech from the 
Throne clearly states that we have a commitment to see that 
Saskatchewan continues to have the best health care system in 
Canada. In my duties as Legislative Secretary for Health, I shall 
personally work for those goals. 
 
The pages of Hansard are full of speeches in response to throne 
speeches of years gone by. That does not alter the fact that today 
we have the same pride and optimism in our province that those in 
the past displayed. Today especially, we see the making of a new 
Saskatchewan, a new province in economic opportunities and of 
advancement, all because of the leadership of the Premier and of 
this government. 
 
I’m proud to be part of this team, the Progressive Conservative 
government caucus in this legislature, and I proudly support the 
Speech form the Throne. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet:— Mr. Speaker, this is my second Speech from the 
Throne, and I will be dealing with the issues in relation to the 
province of Saskatchewan, and also the North, and also on Indian 
and Métis people. 
 
Being that I only have experienced one budget speech of  
  



 
March 23, 1988 

46 
 

which did not impress me in the least, I thought maybe there was 
just a mistake on that one particular year. 
 
As I listened to the debate throughout last year, I started 
recognizing that that wasn’t the case, that as we look at this new 
throne speech it reminds me of the whole of last year, or in simple 
terms, the PC government simply hasn’t listened. It simply doesn’t 
seem to care. And under the rhetoric of building it continually, 
slowing starts destroying the fabric of many people in this 
province. 
 
I will give my examples. The first thing is in relation to the 
province of Saskatchewan. As I was going on my initial phases of 
work, I happened to be working in Ontario and looking at the 
health care system in Ontario, and also looking at the insurance 
system in Ontario. And when I lived there for a five-year period 
and I came back, I was able t compare the two systems and I 
learned to appreciate what a Saskatchewan resident felt in terms of 
what a good health care system was, and what good insurance 
rates were. 
 
I will deal, therefore, on the aspect of health. The throne speech 
mentions only the task force, but as I look back into this past year 
and have learned to deal with the promises, the glowing promises 
of this government, and I started looking at the reality, I have to 
reflect back on my experiences at the community level. 
 
(1615) 
 
When, for example, the prescription drug plan was brought in this 
past year and there was glowing terms of how it was going to help 
health in Saskatchewan, a lot of people were caught by surprise, 
and they were wondering, is it really going to help. Well the fact 
of the matter is this:— in northern Saskatchewan a lot of people 
came up to me and complained abut how difficult that prescription 
drug plan had been. 
 
We’re in a situation where there is high unemployment and very 
little in regards to up-front money on a daily basis. And all of a 
sudden the people were expected to have the up-front money to 
pay for their drug costs. It was extremely difficult for the seniors, 
and also it was extremely difficult for the parents, especially with 
their children who had special problems. It was an extremely 
difficult time for people. 
 
And many people will recall the story in northern Saskatchewan 
where there was a mix-up in the initial stages, and I will talk about 
the mix-up in the best way possible. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
And the point that I’m making here is this: that a lot of the people, 
in a second language context, speaking Dene and in Cree, were 
unable to fathom a lot of the historical changes in the law that 
were taking place in regards to the prescription drug plan. 
 
There was a death, I remember, in Ile-a-la-Crosse last year which 
was connected to the change in the law of the drug plan, and of 
course the government automatically denied that there was any 
connection. But a lot of people 

recognized that although there wasn’t a complete connection, that 
there was still a partial connection; that people were beginning to 
realize that this government would rush into things — they would 
rush, rush, rush, and push their laws through without any 
consideration of the people in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
As a result, many people were puzzled. A lot of people were 
mixed up in regards to exactly what the law had to say. Many did 
not know exactly the procedures to follow, and as a result of a lot 
of this drug plan, which was a mix-up for people in general in this 
province, was especially more difficult for people in a second 
language context. There was nothing done in that regard to get 
people to translate the information out to people in the North. 
 
Because — simple — it was simple. I found out this government 
was uncaring. They didn’t care. You raise that question, but they 
wouldn’t care; instead they would deny that there was any 
connection. They would try and defend their position. They would 
not try and work with people. 
 
So as I looked at other issues, a lot of people were also a little bit 
scared. They heard about the dental plan being taken apart in the 
South. A lot of people had recognized that tremendous benefits the 
dental plan had been to the little people in the schools. they knew 
that, when they compared the history of 20 years ago and the 
introduction of the new dental plan by the NDP government, that a 
great degree had changed in terms of better health and healthier 
teeth and so on, that there was a regular place for their children to 
be taken care of. When they heard this, they were wondering, is 
this government going to move the next year on this case. And the 
information that was given to me also came from not only the 
people but the doctors up there They have recognized that 
tremendous improvement. 
 
The other thing that I would like to mention in regards to where 
the throne speech doesn’t mention anything on, is on the seniors. 
Many of our seniors are forced to get out of northern 
Saskatchewan and get into a different social an cultural context, 
and they more or less have to slowly die away from their 
communities. 
 
A lot of them want to come back and have these things, these 
facilities, in northern Saskatchewan, but there is absolutely no 
mention in the throne speech about the need for not only facilities 
for the elderly but on even promises such as the building of 
hospitals such as in La Ronge. And these things we do not see at 
all in regards to general statements of improving facilities in the 
throne speech. 
 
The only thing that we hear is a very defensive statement in 
regards to the fact that oh, maybe we’re spending too much on 
health. And of course it says, quote, in all the throne speech: we 
can’t have everything in terms of all specialists and all kinds of 
services in every town, in every village, in every city. 
 
Of course this in one sense is a false statement because we don’t 
even have the basic services in a lot of our hospitals and in our 
communities in northern Saskatchewan. So in the first place, we’re 
not at that stage. 
  



 
March 23, 1988 

47 
 

So the government is building their information base on false 
premises. They’re not telling the real truth about what their intent 
is, and of course we know. 
 
As a person who was a critic for Indian and Métis programs last 
year and also this year, I know very well what studies mean. We 
know that Indian and Métis people ought to be put in a situation 
where studies preceded cut-backs. 
 
So when I look at the proposal for a task force, I look at it in deep 
suspicion. I would not be suspicious if the record of the 
government was indeed on solid ground, if the government had 
done things in a positive way, but I am concerned because I have 
seen the complete opposite. I am worried that the task force is just 
an excuse for the old efficiency syndrome of this government. 
They will say, we’re trying to effectively deal with this on an 
administrative basis so we have to do these cut-backs. So it 
becomes a rationale for cut-backs. 
 
Not only that. In many cases, as we’ve seen in Brian and also in 
France and in the United States, that indeed these efficiency 
syndrome-type task forces are built at a time when the 
privatization question is an important question, and we see that 
more deliberately in England. When we look at England we know 
right now that health is the number one problem. You see that in 
the headlines if you read any of the newspapers in England. We 
know that. But when we talk about the erosion of medicare in this 
province, this government will say we are fear mongering. 
 
Well when we raised questions last year about dental plans and 
they cut it back, they would call that fear mongering. When they 
cut back on services to prescription drugs, they would call that fear 
mongering. But this is not fear mongering. This is the reality of 
right wing governments and the justification for getting at the 
privatization question. That is what the intent is in this statement 
on the throne speech. 
 
When we look at another aspect of the throne speech, we look at 
the question of the Mulroney-Reagan trade deal. Now if you look 
at the Mulroney-Reagan trade deal, it’s couched in soft sell 
rhetoric. It’s no longer the Mulroney-Reagan deal or the free trade 
deal; it’s now fair trade. And I looked at it and said, fair trade. And 
I know right away they’re trying, the PC government, Mr. 
Speaker, is trying to soft sell this item, basically because 
historically we know that it has been defeated on every case that it 
has reared its ugly head. 
 
When we look at the questions of free trade, one has to examine it 
in regards to the Canadian historical dimensions. The questions 
have to be, really: why are you trying to change from the existing 
system that’s there to getting into a continental American policy 
system? Why are we moving, unquestioning the basis of control 
that exists so that another form of American big corporate control 
will take over? Who will benefit in the long run from the free trade 
arrangements? And the answer of course is pretty clear. All we 
have to do is look at the historical context of Canada. 
 
When we started the free trade debate, and I listened to 

the Premier, the Premier mentioned that it was more like the 
building of the railroads. Somehow it would be in the context of, 
let’s say, the building of the CPR (Canadian Pacific Railway), that 
it would be in the spirit that it would be built. 
 
Well I must remind the Premier of history. Number one:— the 
question of the building of railroad was not one where it went 
north and south; the building of the railroad went east and west. It 
was built to unit Canada. And that was the essence of the railroad 
at that point in time. Of course there were certain other aspects to 
the question of the railroad which may more relate to the reference 
that the Premier had made at that point in time. 
 
One must remember that there was another aspect to the railroad 
which caused one of the PC governments to fall at that point in 
time in 1973, and that was in relation to the Pacific scandal. And a 
lot of the Canadian terminology came to be in regards to this, that 
people, ordinary people ended up paying, you know, for part of 
the costs in regards to the building of the railroad. So the word of 
being railroaded came into effect. 
 
And as I look at the different railroads that the Premier has built in 
this province in the past while, we recognize that there was an 
open-for-business railroad in 1982. And later on he talked about 
this four pillars of strategy railroad that he’s now dismantling. A 
lot of people would now say that the Premier is simply trying to 
railroad us into another one of his simplistic and gullible deals. 
 
(1630) 
 
As we look at the question of free trade, in the historical context 
and when it was defeated in 1911, and even when it was brought 
out into a different context in the ’70s, a lot of people thought it 
was completely ridiculous and incredible that the former leader of 
the opposition, Dick Collver, would have raised the point that we 
would join the United States. As a member of the PC Party and 
government — not government — as a member of the PC Party at 
that time, they were talking about becoming part of the 51st state. 
There was a lot of people in the Tory party who felt that there 
should be a deeper connection with the United States. This was in 
the middle ’70s period. And of course everybody thought, well 
that’s a little bit off the track. I think this railroad, you know, was 
going to a little bit off the track. So now you see the Premier 
couching his rhetoric in words like free trade, of all things. 
 
Well getting away from it, the question is: who benefits? We all 
know that the benefit to free trade will be the American big 
corporations. That’s where the benefit will be. It will not be to the 
ordinary people in the United States or to ordinary people in 
Canada but it will benefit the large-scale corporations. What we 
are looking at therefore is the fact that as we benefit the large scale 
corporations, where they take more of our land and they take more 
of our resources and so on, what we are seeing in Saskatchewan is 
that we are paying more. Our taxes are going up. There is not 
enough money for our schools; there’s not enough money for the 
waiting lists; there’s not enough money for the elders; there’s not 
enough money this and that. In the long run we pay. And this is 
the type of system that this Premier and his PC government are 
  



 
March 23, 1988 

48 
 

promoting. 
 
I would say to the Premier in regards to the free trade debate, the 
Mulroney-Reagan deal, I would say that, number one, the Premier 
should have more faith in the people who built Saskatchewan, that 
the Premier should have more faith and work beside the people of 
Saskatchewan in continuing to build the base that they’ve already 
started to work on in the past. 
 
Secondly, I think it’s important to recognize that a continentalist 
policy in this day and age is not the correct policy. The best way is 
to trade on an international footing. This trading on a bilateral 
basis is not enough. We have to go on the international front to be 
able to sell our resources all over the world. But we need to, 
number one, go back to the first point, that we want to control 
those resources rather than have other foreign multinationals 
control them for us. 
 
As I look at the other aspect that is deeply connected to the free 
trade question — that’s the question of privatization — and as I 
look at it again the government, the PC government, goes on a soft 
sell image. They already know that privatization in Britain meant 
poor services; it meant lesser services; it meant higher costs for 
those services; it meant less jobs in many situations. They already 
know that so they want to soft sell it. Instead of dealing with those 
questions directly they want to go and talk about public 
participation. 
 
This is the same government who has not consulted people in 
education, in health, in economic development, in any particular 
issue that this province has seen in this past six years. And here 
now it’s couching its privatization deal under public participation 
— soft sell rhetoric. 
 
When you look at what really happens in the question of 
privatization, one has to look at Weyerhaeuser and Pocklington. 
The deal is basically to give away our resources, part of our 
agricultural industry, to outside people, rather than control it 
ourselves over here. It also wants to give away our forests to be 
controlled form the outside — well, I look at the example of 
Weyerhaeuser. 
 
Weyerhaeuser, we talk a lot about interest rates and the farmers, 
interest rates for the ordinary people and how they’re going up. 
But when you look at the Weyerhaeuser deal, what does this 
government do for big business? We know very clearly that 
Weyerhaeuser doesn’t have to pay a cent of interest if it doesn’t 
make any profits I mean, if it was that kind of deal for the rest of 
the people in this province, we’d be on solid ground. I mean, right 
now there is a great degree of unfairness and inequality in the way 
the PC Saskatchewan government treats ordinary people and how 
it treats big business. 
 
And when you look at not only the interest rates, we look at the 
fact of land in the Weyerhaeuser agreement. We look at the issue 
of 12,460 acres of land provided for Weyerhaeuser with no 
taxation. While taxation is paid by trappers in northern 
Saskatchewan from people who are living off the land who are 
trying so hard to feed their families, Weyerhaeuser gets away scot 
free. 

While a lot of farmers are losing their farm land to big banks, we 
also see in northern Saskatchewan, this government forcing the 
issue of greater taxation on all of ordinary people. We know that 
there is one law in regards to land policy for big business, and one 
way of treating ordinary people, farmers, and trappers of this 
province. 
 
When you look at the other aspect of privatization, you have to 
also look at Weyerhaeuser in regards to highways. We know that 
the towns and the municipalities in northern Saskatchewan have 
been meeting with the cabinet minister and the Premier, and even 
at the SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 
convention people did raise the issue of highways. Resolution 48, 
for example, this past year said that: 
 

Be it resolved that the Minister of Highways, after consultation 
with northern municipalities, implement a rigorous 
improvement and development northern highway program. 

 
And a lot of people recognized the need for highways because not 
a stitch of one kilometre had been built in regards to the 
improvements on Highway No. 102 north of La Ronge, and many 
other highway systems in the North. And I looked at 
Weyerhaeuser — they got $8 million last year, $7 million on the 
transfer of the agreement, 32 kilometres per year to be built, but 
not a stitch for the North. 
 
So when I look at the whole question of the throne speech in 
regards to privatization, I know very clearly that it benefits only 
the large-scale corporations and the friends of the Tories and not 
the ordinary people. 
 
In regards to the question of the North and the question of Indian 
and Métis people, I think the issue is very clear. One is, in the 
historical context in the past six years there has been tremendous 
neglect of the North and also Indian and Métis people. When I 
look at the budget, nothing, absolutely nothing, is mentioned for 
Indian and Métis people. And I think that’s an historic first in 
Saskatchewan in the throne speech. There is no mention at all. 
And I say to this government in relation to Indian and Métis in the 
North: is there any compassion or fairness when you don’t even 
mention jobs? Is there any fairness or compassion when you don’t 
talk about positive resource-use policies in regards to mining, in 
regards to forestry, and in regards to traditional resource use in 
northern Saskatchewan? 
 
There is no mention of .  . . Is there compassion and fairness in 
regards to no mention of health facilities or housing or the building 
of bridges in the North? No mention. 
 
When I raised the point last year, a lot of people were amazed that 
this government in 1983 put down in their map that in northern 
Saskatchewan there was beautiful lakes an drivers but no people. 
We are seeing in 1988 that they are continuing this policy where 
they are stating .  . . where there is absolutely n mention, and I 
think this sin of omission is a deliberate one. It’s a deliberate one 
to put down people who are down already. 
  



 
March 23, 1988 

49 
 

This government believes in beating up on people who are already 
down and out. We have seen that in 100 per cent cut-backs in 
regards to Indian and Métis people and their AMNSIS 
(Association of Métis and Non-Status Indians of Saskatchewan) 
— 100 per cent cut back on the native court worker program; 55 
per cent cut back on Indian economic development. These 
examples from last year show that this government simply doesn’t 
care about what happens to the people in the North and what 
happens to Indian and Métis people. 
 
I would say that, in closing, we are looking at this throne speech, 
and I am extremely disappointed. I feel that this government has 
really put the people in a terrible situation, not only Indian and 
Métis people, not only people from northern Saskatchewan, but a 
lot of people in the whole province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I feel that they’re trying to rhetorically say, yes, we are building, 
but what they are doing is destroying the very foundation of what 
made Saskatchewan what it is today; that indeed they have 
destroyed a lot of the base of what families learn to live with on a 
daily basis. They have destroyed the aspect and the initiative for 
northern development. They have destroyed many other essential 
services that Saskatchewan learned to live with. 
 
And I would say that when I look at the throne speech, the only 
thing that I can remember about it, and a lot of people remember, 
and it’s really a sad thing — and when I did relay some talk with 
people in the North, and the only thing they could remember was 
the issue of — not the people of the North or Indian and Métis 
people — but the only issue they could remember was dangerous 
dogs. And of all my experience when you talk about the aspect of 
fighting for jobs fighting for health, fighting for education, 
fighting for this and that, fighting for daily existence, and all you 
can remember from the throne speech is dangerous dogs, it’s a sad 
day in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1645) 
 
The 1988 throne speech by the PC government will go down in 
history as a day where the concern of dogs overrides the concerns 
of people from the North, Indian and Métis people, and for many 
other people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Petersen:— Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great pride 
that I rise today to remark on His Honour’s Speech from the 
Throne. I’d like to comment on a couple of things to begin with 
and to emphasize, and that’s the optimism and commitment of this 
government to the future of Saskatchewan. All three of those 
words are unknown in the rhetoric of the NDP. 
 
Now we recognize the hardships that people in this province and 
this country, and indeed countries around us, have endured during 
some pretty difficult economic times. I’d even go so far as to say 
that members across the way recognize that we’ve had some sharp 
drops in commodity prices and sharp drops in resource prices. So 

what makes us different from that? So what makes our Premier 
and our PC government unique from all other political parties? 
Optimism and commitment to the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, on this side we take recognition of difficult 
economic times, and we take it one step further than the members 
opposite. We recognize and we act. We act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
to bring realistic solutions forward for the people of our province. 
Now over there, well you heard it today, rhetoric, empty rhetoric, 
time and again. 
 
Saskatchewan has made its mark in history as being a place that 
was built by common sense people, and we plan to continue that 
proud tradition. One of the most integral parts of Saskatchewan’s 
fabric, Mr. Speaker, is it’s ability to never, never lost sight of their 
vision for the future — for the future generations and for their 
children. The members of this government represent that kind of a 
commitment, that kind of a vision, because we’re that kind of 
people; we look forward. We are the doers, the movers, the 
shakers, the builders. Across the way, the complainers, the 
whiners, the fear mongers, the buyers — the buyers of potash 
mines. Never build anything, just buy it. Don’t build, just buy. 
 
I see you people opposite today busily thumbing through their rule 
books on NDP policy and solutions, their old, tattered book. 
They’re looking for answers for today’s questions in their old, 
tattered book, time and again. The rest of us, Mr. Speaker, 
understand where the answer lies. They look pretty funny over 
there, despair on their faces. We know what the answer is. 
Nowhere in that NDP rule book can you find the word future. The 
good old days, the past, so on and so forth, let’s go back to the 
past, let’s go back to the Regina Manifesto. 
 
We heard it today in question period, the same old rhetoric on 
health care. The Tories are going to tear it down; the NDP are the 
guys who are going to make sure that it continues. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, during our administration we have spent more on health 
care than the NDP ever did — an increase of 63 per cent, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. But the Tories are going to tear it down, aren’t 
they? So says the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the right in this province to pursue every 
opportunity available to us. We’ve got the right to produce the best 
products that we know how. We’ve got the right to market those 
products to our largest trading partner to the south, without 
penalties and tariffs, I might add. We’ve got the right to compete 
for those markets without political interference. We have the right 
to free trade with the United States, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
What will happen if people are denied that right? What will 
happen to the thousands of people in this province who rely on our 
potash industry, our oil and gas, our beef industry, our hog 
industry, our forest industry? Members of the opposition would 
have us hang on to it, close our doors — close our doors to that 
market. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe the damage in doing something like 
that would be endless. They want to isolate this province form this 
country, from our 
  



 
March 23, 1988 

50 
 

neighbours to the south, and if they are allowed to do so, Mr. 
Speaker, they are guilty of maiming us from now until for ever. 
 
Those who deny our people the right to free trade are essentially 
stunting the growth of this province and of the people that live 
here. They’re guilty of putting a padlock in the door. They want to 
throw away the key. In 1982 that key was taken away from them, 
and it was denied to them in 1986. We want to provide all 
Saskatchewan residents with a key to the future, with a key to 
opportunity, that they can open at their own discretion. 
 
Public participation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in our province’s 
economic growth is another opportunity laid out in His Honour’s 
throne speech. Our Progressive Conservative government believes 
very strongly that Saskatchewan people have the right to invest 
their skills and their capital in areas that may not have been 
available to them in the past. Programs such as we’re seeing with 
respect to Saskoil share offerings, SaskPower bond issues, the 
reorganization of the delivery in some areas, some government 
services, are examples of the ways that the public can be involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government looks forward to the many ideas and 
proposals from the public, from workers, from companies, 
involved t help develop new, effective, efficient ways of providing 
services to Saskatchewan residents — the best services and the 
best investment opportunities available. 
 
Let me assure you, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan, 
the legislation that will be introduced to mandate the new 
Department of Public Participation, will ensure the quality of 
government services. It will ensure that it will be retained. The 
rights and the privileges of the public sector employees will be 
fully respected. 
 
The Speech from the Throne outlined, for all to see, the strong 
commitment of this government in the areas of free trade and 
public participation, but outlying the commitment that we’ve 
made in Saskatchewan’s agriculture sector. And I just want to 
dwell on our agriculture sector for a moment since that came up in 
today’s question period .  . . pardon me, yesterday’s question 
period. 
 
The members opposite, in their ever-expanding search for new 
rhetoric, talked about the production loan program, the PLP. The 
member for Humboldt was very indignant in his questioning. The 
member for Riversdale was trying to be perhaps a new minister of 
agriculture, should the NDP ever get re-elected — I’m not too 
sure. But they were questioning the production loan. That 
production loan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was put forward at a time 
when farmers needed help, with a three-year pay back. We asked 
people in a time of some concern over their ability to pay back, 
what should we do? We talked to Sask Pool, the SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), and they 
said, you know if we had 10 years to pay that back instead of 
three, I think we could make it. Well, Mr. Speaker, that makes 
some sense to me. It’s a lot easier to pay back a tenth at a time 
instead of a third at a time. Obviously, Mr. Speaker. Well we did 
that. 

We provided that for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that today there are some comments 
that certain members wish to make, and with your permission I 
would beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

RESIGNATION OF MEMBER 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:— Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity 
with leave of the Assembly to acknowledge the fact that the 
member from Regina Elphinstone will be leaving the legislature 
for the last time today, and I wanted to say a couple of things to 
express my appreciation for his long contribution here in the 
Saskatchewan Legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker:— Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:— I want to add all the good wishes from the 
members of my side of the House to the former premier of the 
province of Saskatchewan and the leader of the New Democratic 
Party in the province of Saskatchewan for his distinguished 
service, not only to Regina Elphinstone and the people there and 
to the people of Saskatchewan, but indeed for his significant 
contribution as a Canadian. 
 
His retirement from political life in Saskatchewan indeed turns a 
page on a long and colourful chapter in our history. I want the 
member to know — and I’ve expressed this personally to the 
member — that I consider it my privilege to have had the 
opportunity to be in the legislature with a distinguished debater 
and parliamentarian, a man of quick wit, of good humour, and, 
frankly, a man who will be sincerely missed by both sides of the 
legislature in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
On the other hand, I’m sure that there will be new generations of 
lawyers graduating from Osgood Hall and the universities of 
Toronto and other places that will have a lifetime of experience 
laid out before them and will benefit tremendously from the 
member’s experience and his wisdom, and I know that in years to 
come he will continue to leave his mark on the lawmakers of the 
country and on the general public. 
 
I will say one last thing. One of the comments that the member 
made in this legislature, and I believe has made it at one other 
function that stood out in my mind, was about this institution. Mr. 
Blakeney said the following — he said, and I’m just paraphrasing, 
that this is not a very efficient institution, but it’s not supposed to 
be. The institution is where free men and women express their 
views in a democracy, and they can do so at will, and that they can 
speak on the kinds of things that they are supposed to be able to 
speak on and want to speak on for abut as long as they want to 
speak on them. And he said we should remember that that’s what 
this is all about, that it’s a place where free men and free women 
can design their own laws and govern themselves and probably, 
  



 
March 23, 1988 

51 
 

thank goodness, economists don’t run the legislature — and I’m 
again paraphrasing and I wouldn’t dare put words in the member’s 
mouth. But I thought it was from his experience and from the time 
that he had been in here, it sort of summed up his views and it hit 
me that he would have reflected on that about the Saskatchewan 
legislature. 
 
We have many a long, hard debate in here, and you’d often 
wonder: are we wasting the people’s time, our own time, or 
money? And he made it very clear, this is not a place for quick 
decisions, and it’s not a place for a textbook definition of 
efficiency in the classic economic sense. 
 
So I say to the hon. member, I believe that he was right. The 
institution itself, and what it represents, and what it stands for 
world-wide, is more important than the individual members and 
probably the debates of the day on any one of several different 
issues. 
 
So I would just again say, it’s been a pleasure to serve with you. 
You have made a significant contribution. I view you, and we all 
do, as a man of integrity and honour, and a great Canadian. 
 
And on behalf of all the people of Saskatchewan, I wish you and 
your wife, Anne, a very happy and rewarding future, and the best 
of health to you and your family. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane:— I would like to join with the Premier, if I may, 
Mr. Speaker, and I do this with some trepidation because when he 
hon. member from Elphinstone leaves this Assembly, I become, I 
understand, the dean of this Assembly, and it’s not something, I 
can assure you, I aspired to when I was first elected. I checked the 
members’ handbook to see what the advantages were, and I didn’t 
find many in that. But it brought home to me that 17 years this 
June that I have been associated in this Assembly with the hon. 
member, and I want to congratulate him for only his contribution 
to the people of this province but for his contribution to the 
parliamentary system. 
 
When I recognize the event of today and thought about it, I have 
many happy memories from my association in this Assembly. 
 
(1700) 
 
I must say I’ve lost a lot more than I ever won in my debates with 
the hon. member, but I came through with a tremendous 
admiration, not only for his integrity, but for his dedication, but for 
his political skills. And I, as I say, having been on the short end of 
the exercise of those skills from time to time, I have nothing but 
admiration for them. 
 
I can recall one of my first debates in this Assembly where the 
then leader of the opposition, Mr. Steuart, had done a very, very 
effective job in rousing his troops and getting the government 
troops down, and the member form Elphinstone coming into the 
House, and I watched him very carefully. He talked to one or two 
of his members, and that was it — and came in and got up and 
gave a 

speech that just turned the whole debate and the emotion of the 
House right around, and we went crawling out. I learned 
something that day, I must say. 
 
I admired, much to my frustration if I may say so, sir, trying to pin 
you down in a debate through a potash nationalization and the 
tremendous frustration in the opposition as we tried to get the then 
premier hooked with this debate and his skill at staying above the 
fray. And there was a tremendous frustration in the opposition 
during that period of time with our inability, and that was a tribute 
to your skills. 
 
I remember suffering the tremendous strategy that you have to 
take credit for in the 1978 election, and we all knew the political 
environment at that time, and I thought that was, frankly, a superb 
political victory by your party. I certainly didn’t say that at the ’78 
election time, but I have no hesitation is saying it today. 
 
So I reiterate what the Premier said on your contribution and .  . . 
but I would like to say, from one politician to another, sir, I had 
nothing but respect for your political skills. I’ve always admired 
your love of this Assembly and the way you’ve dealt with the 
Assembly and dealt with the members, and I’ve appreciated that 
for some several years. 
 
I, with others, wish you a very enjoyable and certainly a very 
healthy retirement. And to your wife, Anne — so many times we 
forget the contribution of spouses, and I know that her 
contribution to your success is something that you can measure 
better than any, but certainly, on behalf of myself, I would like to 
extend best wishes to her as she now has to put up with you a little 
more than perhaps she had to in the past, but I’m sure that she’s 
more than capable. So on behalf of myself and the government 
members, we certainly wish you well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:— Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will not speak at 
length because I made most of my remarks in the course of the 
Speech from the Throne, the debate on the Speech from the 
Throne, other than to say the following two or three things. 
 
This is kind of a day of mixed feelings for me. Here I was on my 
first occasion as the new Leader of the Opposition making what I 
thought was this great, fiery speech in response to the Speech from 
the Throne, but I realize now that all the headlines will be in 
honour of Mr. Al Blakeney — can’t win. 
 
My other recollection, of course, is back in 1970 — perhaps I 
shouldn’t be acknowledging this far back — but the great 
leadership contest that we had in 1970 within our own party, and 
Al Blakeney, I’m sure, will remember that. My recollection was, 
apart from the vigour of the debate, that it was conducted in 
relatively civilized terms. That sometimes is very difficult, as we 
know, in political campaigns of various kinds. And when I stop to 
think that as things unfolded in 1970, that I was within something 
like 56 votes of actually winning, today I absolutely wake up in a 
cold sweat to think that I would have denied the province and the 
country a man of the intellect and the  
  



 
March 23, 1988 

52 
 

ability, and the integrity of Allan Blakeney, but it all worked out to 
the best. He won and moved on, as we all know, to the great 
contributions in this province that have been mentioned by the 
premier and by the Minister of Finance, contributions which span 
all the way from the civil service to Premier to Leader of the 
Opposition, back to Leader of the Opposition, accomplishments 
from the Wascana Centre and health care programs and resource 
policy and constitutional involvement. 
 
I guess I’d have to say that, in my judgement, one of Al 
Blakeney’s finest yours — and it turned out to be a long four 
years’ hours — was post-1982 when our party suffered a mild 
rejection at the polls — shall I put it that way? — at the hands of 
the Premier, and it must have been difficult. 
 
I was one of those who retired with the consent of the majority of 
the people in Riversdale in 1982, and therefore didn’t have to be 
here. But it must have been difficult with eight or nine people in 
opposition to take on the task and try to rebuild the party and to 
develop a new set of guide-lines and approaches for us and for the 
new caucus members that have come on stream subsequently. I 
really do think that that tells, for me, much about Al Blakeney and 
Anne — a dedication to public service, a dedication to doing the 
job. It just simply had to be done, and he did it with, as the 
Premier says, integrity, intelligence and principle and compassion 
— hard-hitting debate to be true. 
 
All that I can hope for on a personal basis is to emulate in a small 
way some of those great attributes that we’ve all described. I’m 
sure that I won’t be able to fill his shoes. My only answer is that 
I’ve got my own shoes. 
 
We in this cause very much appreciate, Al, your guidance and 
leadership and contribution. We wish you and Anne Blakeney and 
the family happiness, good health and, I know, continued public 
involvement. Don’t be surprised that if from time to time you get a 
phone call late in the middle of the night from me and perhaps 
others again seeking your advice and help in this very important 
and challenging task in which we’re all involved. So, my 
congratulations to Al and Anne Blakeney for a job very well done. 
Thank you, sir. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank:— Mr. Speaker, I hadn’t intended on speaking 
this afternoon, however — and I rise with mixed emotions to 
speak — first and foremost, I was very relieved to see the member 
from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden rise and take upon himself the mantle 
of dean of the House. Perhaps it was thrust upon him. For that 
reason I had some fear that it may fall on this side of the House, 
and I’d rather not have it. 
 
The other opinion that I wanted to express this afternoon, and I felt 
a feeling in my heart that I had to say something about the member 
for Elphinstone who was here before I cam here .  . . in this place. 
And I had the opportunity of serving in the legislature on both 
sides of the House with his guidance, and I found it invigorating 
and always had a refreshing turn to it, something that I appreciated 
over the years. I never felt I was up to the standards he set, but 

sometimes I attempted to achieve them, and that was refreshing 
that I could come reasonably close. 
 
So it’s with a great sense of happiness that I say to the member for 
Elphinstone: good luck. I know that you will acquit yourself very 
well in the new field that you’ve chosen, and it will be a great 
benefit to those people that you are associated with. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney:— Mr. Speaker, I don’t intent to detain the 
House long. We have had an opportunity last fall to say our 
goodbyes, and I very much appreciate the kind remarks which 
were directed to me at that time, and I certainly appreciate the 
remarks which were addressed today. 
 
The member for Riversdale suggested that this was perhaps 
unfortunate and that I would be taking away the headlines from 
him today. All I can say is that he’s taken away the headlines from 
me a great many times. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney:— And if I’m able to recoup one today, I’ve 
got .  . . (inaudible) .  . .  
 
I noted the member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden complimenting me 
on my political skills. I certainly thank him for the kind words. I 
only wish the political skills had been a little more evident in these 
last few years, which they singularly have not. 
 
I also thank him for the remarks directed to my wife, Anne. She 
has been .  . . In a serious vein, I say she has been my helpmate 
and a colleague with me for my years in public office, and I’m 
sure that the spouses of members well know the pressures which 
fall upon a spouse, particularly if one is in an executive capacity 
with the Government of Saskatchewan. The demands on one’s 
spouse and one’s family are considerable, and I have to thank her 
for bearing with me during those years when I was in that position. 
 
I will pass on to her the high opinion which the member for 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden has of her staying power, and I think that 
she has demonstrated it in the past and will, I believe, be able to 
deal with the somewhat traumatic situation of having me around 
the house more than has been previously the case. 
 
I had an opportunity earlier to say what I thought this institution 
meant to the people of Saskatchewan and the people of Canada 
and indeed the people of the world. When I say this institution, I 
mean the institution of parliamentary government. We are 
practitioners in our own back yard of that particular institution, 
and I won’t say further why I think it is a valuable institution and 
why the word we do is therefore important. However unlikely that 
may seem, if we sit here and listen to the proceedings for a day or 
a week, we sometimes are not fully apprized of the fact that we are 
doing valuable work, but in my judgement we are. 
  



 
March 23, 1988 

53 
 

Basically, Mr. Speaker, what I wanted to do today was to confine 
my remarks to thanking all the members on both sides of the 
House for the courtesies which they’ve extended to me over my 
years, now approximately 28 years, in this House. 
 
I say, while I suspect all will agree with, that it’s a privilege to 
have the opportunity to serve in this House, and for that we all will 
thank the voters who sent us here and the voters who we serve, 
even though they might not have voted for us in the particular 
constituency. And I thank them and have taken another 
opportunity to do so. 
 
My purpose today is to thank the colleagues who I have served 
with in this legislature, colleagues on both sides of the House, 
because ultimately we are all colleagues in attempting to make this 
institution work and in attempting to serve all the people of 
Saskatchewan. I have enjoyed the opportunity to work with all of 
you and with the members of previous legislatures in our common 
cause. It is not all that serious. There is a serious element, but 
fortunately there is an element of camaraderie which makes the 
life here in this legislature, the drab and dreary aspects of it from 
time to time, somewhat more endurable. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and to all of the others, thank you for 
the courtesies you have extended. I leave this House with mixed 
feelings, looking forward to new opportunities of course, since 
when one closes the door, one doesn’t look back, but also 
remembering fondly the opportunities which I’ve had to serve and 
the friendships which I’ve made from members of all parties. 
 
Thank you all; thank you again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:15 p.m. 
 

  



 
March 23, 1988 

54 
 

CORRIGENDUM 
 
On page 13 of the Hansard No.2A Tuesday, March 22,  
1988, the last line at the end of the sixth paragraph on the 
right-hand side of the page should read: 
 
that is unavailable to all except public employees. 
 
[NOTE: the online version has been corrected.] 
 
 


