


















































April 7, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 7, 1988 
 

367 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk: — According to the order, I wish to report that I have 
examined the following petitions which were presented 
yesterday, and under rule 11(7) I now lay them on the Table: 
 

Of certain citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 
praying that the Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 
urge the Government of Saskatchewan to stop eroding 
post secondary education in Saskatchewan. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Gerich: — Mr. Speaker, through you and to the members 
of the Legislative Assembly, in the Speaker’s gallery I’d like to 
introduce from the RM. of Blaine Lake, the reeve, Fred 
Androsoff, and councillor Nick Kadaroff. I hope that they find 
the afternoon interesting and informative and entertaining. 
Please make welcome my guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sauder: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure this afternoon to 
introduce to you, and through you to the other members of the 
Assembly, a guest from my constituency that’s in town today, 
the mayor of the town of Carrot River, John Corner. He’s seated 
in the west gallery. John isn’t a stranger to this House. He spent 
one term as a member here and is now, as I say, in Carrot River 
and the mayor there. I just ask all the members to help me 
welcome him back and show their welcome to him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I join with the members from 
Nipawin to welcome my former seat mate who has had many, 
many discussions while he was in as a member of this House, 
and after he left this House, as a colleague in the teaching 
profession. So welcome to this House today, and I hope I can 
meet with you later. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d also 
like to introduce a guest to this legislature. We don’t get many 
guests to this legislature. We don’t get many guests from my 
home constituency, and I’d like to welcome Mrs. Prebushewski, 
who is one of my neighbours. She’s here in Regina visiting her 
sister and brother-in-law, and I hope you find some the 
afternoon informative. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you Mr. Speaker,. I’d also like to 
introduce to you, and through you to the other members of the 
legislature, a couple of gentlemen from my constituency of 
Melfort, I notice in your gallery, Mr.  

Speaker. These two gentlemen are teachers in my constituency. 
I would bet that they are in here for the teachers’ annual spring 
council meeting. I was unable to attend their meeting last night, 
and I would like to welcome these two gentlemen to the 
legislature and ask all members to join with me in welcoming 
them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you, and through you to the other members in the 
Assembly, a group of students here, adult students, with the 
urban native pre-employment program. They are accompanied 
by their teacher, Winnie Malbeuf. I ask all members of the 
Assembly to greet them in the manner to which we are 
accustomed to greeting visitors. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Farm Land Crisis 
 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the absence of the 
Premier and the Deputy Premier, I will go to the Acting 
Minister of Agriculture. My question, sir, is that today we have 
the Farm Credit Corporation becoming a major holder of land. 
Most current figures show 1,160 quarters of land that they own 
— 185,000 acres, or about 290 square miles. We are also 
finding that land is falling into the hands of other lending 
institutions. 
 
Your government ignores the crisis. When, Mr. Minister, is 
your government going to stop the rhetoric and, for the sake of 
the farmers out there, lay your solution on the table? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, as minister responsible for 
the farm land security board, I could perhaps respond to the 
question. While it is true that more and more land is being: (a) 
foreclosed, as members opposite are fully aware of; or land is 
being quit-claimed back to either banks or to the Farm Credit 
Corporation, that land falls in the hands of those institutions. 
Those institutions then put that land onto the market for sale, 
Mr. Speaker, and it becomes a situation where I think all 
concerned — if their issue is whether or not all this land should 
be put up for sale — then if it all comes on to the market at one 
time, obviously that has the effect of driving down the price of 
land and that hurts all farmers, and I think we should appreciate 
that. 
 
So as it is put onto the market — and we certainly do not 
encourage the institution to hold that land — as it comes on the 
market we would see that particular sale. Now if the hon. 
member is asking as to whether or not, as he did the other day, 
that he wants a total moratorium on all foreclosures which is 
what you indicated two or three days ago in this particular 
assembly, I’m not sure that even the farmers support that 
theory, and perhaps you could expand upon that being your 
policy if it in fact is your policy. 
 
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

368 
 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
supplementary question to the Premier, the Minister of 
Agriculture, now. We’ve just seen a case where Farm Credit 
Corporation is increasing that amount of land they are holding 
as are the lending institutions. We in the province of 
Saskatchewan have seen the farm bankruptcies increase in the 
province as opposed to across Canada where they declined. 
FCC (Farm Credit corporation) has 700 notices of foreclosure 
out . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker — Order, order. Order! The hon. member is 
asking supplementary, and as such I would ask him to get to the 
supplementary question now. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, in light 
of this crisis that we have out there, and everyone knows it’s 
there and I’m sure you must too, you have nothing in the 
budget, nothing in the throne speech — why, why, Mr. Premier, 
can you tell me why you have abdicated all responsibility to the 
farm crisis in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the 
general public would, first of all, endorse the protection and the 
money and the assistance that this administration and the 
national government have provided for the people and the 
farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Secondly, they did not appreciate at all — and I believe we see 
it here reflected in this legislature — the fact that the previous 
administration, the NDP, would not help farmers with high 
interest rates. The solution was the land bank, where you went 
out and bought the farm from mom and dad and tried to sell it 
to the kids for quite a bit more money, which was not a 
solution. it was unfair. What did you do? You escalated the 
price of land. You went out into the market, bought a million 
acres from your mom and dad at one price, and you turned 
around and sold it to the children at 2 or 3 or $400 more, so 
they could speculate with the value of the land — speculate, so 
that you could take it inside government. That was no solution; 
it was rejected. 
 
What they want is real help against high interest rates; that’s 
what they want — protection. They don’t want the leaders of 
political parties foreclosing on the farmers. They don’t want 
law firms, respected by political parties. going out there and 
working with financial institutions, focusing on farmers. They 
don’t want that; they want somebody to stand up and fight for 
them. That’s why there’s deficiency payments; that’s why 
there’s 10-year agreements for long, low-run interest so farmers 
in this province can have some help. Why there’s cash 
advances, Mr. Speaker, at zero per cent interest rates that were 
never here before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is difficult, and we recognize that. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
we’ve all heard that so many times before. you continue to live 
in the past, while the farmers of today . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Upshall: — . . . while the farmers are losing their land 
today and tomorrow. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, with all due respect to the farm land security 
board, as was talked about by your colleague over there, since 
its inception, 2,251 foreclosures dealt with; ruled in favour of 
the farmers, 106 — less than 5 per cent. In your opinion, Mr. 
Premier, is that a sufficient means of addressing the farm debt 
problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I please would request that 
the opposition review the reasons that the farmers are in some 
trouble. 
 
The reason that the farmers are in trouble, one of the major 
reasons, is they experienced 18 and 20 per cent interest rates — 
20 per cent interest rates, Mr. Speaker, and they asked 
government of the day, in 1981-1982, to please help them — 20 
per cent interest rates. And do you know what the members 
opposite . . . not a dime. 
 
If they’d have stepped in when interest rates were 20 per cent 
and said, you’ve got 8 per cent or nine and three-quarters or 
some protection, there wouldn’t be half the problem, there 
wouldn’t even be half the debt. 
 
They lost the election; they lost two elections, Mr. Speaker, on 
that issue, and they’re coming back and saying, well what are 
you going to do now. You’ve got interest rates settled down, 
you’ve got assistance, you’ve got deficiency payments. They 
say, well it still isn’t enough, Mr. Speaker, they even make 
money on the backs of farmers by going out getting cash from 
financial institutions, foreclosing on them. And they’re ashamed 
of it, and they should be. They didn’t help them when there was 
20 per cent interest rates; they go out and make money on their 
back right now, foreclosing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all I can say is we will continue to defend the 
farmers with our treasury, and we’re not going to exploit them 
like the NDP did for years and years and years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — New question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, that type of response makes me a 
little bit happy, a little bit sad. Very sad that the farmers of this 
province have to have you their Minister of Agriculture . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — . . . but happy for me because you’re so far out 
of touch with the people out there it’s incredible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Premier, in 1977 you said, and I quote: 
 

Realizing that most of our food is produced with less then 
20 per cent of the farmers, society may not wish to support 
higher food prices or producer  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

369 
 

security so that the non-productive 80 per cent of the farm 
population can live in the country at a profit. 

 
That’s what you said in 1977. Your action today shows that you 
still think that way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — But for the record, Mr. Premier, I ask you: is it 
still your position that 80 per cent of our farmers are 
non-productive and should be wiped out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I just . . . I want to make the point that the 
NDP should learn that when farmers are in trouble, or home 
owners are in trouble because of high interest rate, it’s not a 
time to capitalize on them and own the land for the government. 
And that’s what the opposition did — they had a million acres 
in land bank. 
 
Everybody agrees in the province. Today if the NDP was in 
power they’d have hundreds of millions of dollars in land bank 
so the government would own the land. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
people don’t want farmers to own the land. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. I think you should give the Premier an 
opportunity to answer the question rather than immediately 
interrupt him when the question is asked. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I would . . . the argument is 
very clear in the House. The opposition socialist party would 
want to own the land. We, as a Progressive Conservative Party, 
want the farmers to own the land. There’s a significant 
difference, Mr. Speaker, significant difference. 
 
At the same time, at the same time, Mr. Speaker, the opposition 
socialist leader can be involved in the foreclosing on the 
farmers for profit. He can foreclose on them, Mr. Speaker, and 
he can say there that this is the man who will defend it. They 
don’t like to hear it, Mr. Speaker. Listen to them. I want the 
galleries to watch the NDP. They can’t stand the heat, Mr. 
Speaker. Listen to them. Listen to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the public of Saskatchewan needs to know the 
truth — the NDP law firms representing the leader will 
foreclose on farms and at the same time say that they’re to 
protect them. They don’t understand protection of families; they 
don’t understand protection of farms. This side does. That’s 
why there’s billions of dollars going out to help farmers since 
we came in, and there wasn’t a dime when the NDP were there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Delay in Administration of Patients for Surgery 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I took notice of 
a question, in fact of two questions, Mr. Speaker, one from the 
member for . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sutherland 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Sutherland . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Nutana 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Nutana . . . and one from . . . 
Sutherland and Nutana. In any event, Mr. Speaker, they were 
dealing with medical emergencies and waiting lists, etc., and 
I’m sure the members remember that question. One of them was 
dealing with a 73-year-old woman, Mr. Speaker, . . . this 
woman, Mr. Speaker, had cataract problems and indeed she has 
a legitimate . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order. Order. 
Order, please. The Deputy Premier is trying to answer the 
question, but he can’t if he’s immediately interrupted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, indeed this woman does 
have some legitimate reason for concern because waiting lists in 
ophthalmology are indeed longer than we would want them to 
be. We have a shortage of ophthalmologists in the province. 
The Department of Health has done some things to work with 
the hospitals and the profession to attract some more 
 
The interesting thing about this being raised yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker, was that three months ago this woman raised the 
question with her MLA and the Leader of the Opposition’s 
office, and in three months she heard nothing back from them, 
and so she called once again one week ago. Mr. Speaker, during 
that three-month period there wasn’t one inquiry made by the 
opposition office to Health as to the welfare of this lady. 
Number two, Mr. Speaker, during the intervening period of her 
call last week — the one as to what had been done — there 
hadn’t been one inquiry made. And so, Mr. Speaker, I raise that 
only to point out how seriously caring they really are. 
 
Now I’ll deal with the next one, Mr. Speaker, I’ll deal with the 
next one. There were three asked, Mr. Speaker. I want to deal 
with all three of them. 
 
The next one, Mr. Speaker, is a gentleman in Regina, the 
elderly gentleman in Regina who has blood clots in his legs. 
That patient, Mr. Speaker, went to see his doctor three years 
ago . . . I mean three weeks ago — three weeks ago. We had a 
little difficulty chasing this one down in our records in the 
department because the letter that I got from the member 
opposite had his name spelled wrong, but we did finally chase it 
down and we talked to that gentleman this morning. 
 
What he tells us is that he went to see his doctor three weeks 
ago. He was put on an elective surgery list, and he asked his 
doctor if he couldn’t get it earlier than that and the doctor told 
him — I think inappropriately told him by the way — that he 
should phone his MLA because only the government could get 
the urgency or the level upgraded. 
 
So he did phone his MLA, the member for Wascana, three 
weeks ago. The member for Lakeview, I’m sorry. Not the 
member for Wascana. The member for Lakeview. Three weeks 
ago, Mr. Speaker. And in three weeks there was not one inquiry 
made — not one inquiry until yesterday, Mr.  
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

370 
 

Speaker. 
 
Tell me, Mr. Speaker, how sincere are they in dealing with the 
concerns of these people, these people who are suffering some 
emotional strain, concerned about their own health and welfare. 
And these people, Mr. Speaker, dragged them through this 
place for their own cheap political . . . [inaudible] . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — I have a question for the Deputy Premier. 
Deputy Premier, as I explained yesterday, there are over 15,000 
people on the hospital waiting lists in Saskatoon and Regina. As 
you will note, we have not seen a significant increase in the 
Department of Health budget. You will recall last summer that 
there were over 308 hospital beds closed in the city of 
Saskatoon and over 100 hospital beds closed in the city of 
Regina. 
 
I would ask you this, sir: in the light of the fact that we have 
15,000 people in this province waiting to get into hospital; in 
light of the fact that you have not significantly increased your 
budget to deal with that tremendous health problem in this 
province, can you tell us today whether or not hospitals in this 
province are once again going to have to shut down hundreds of 
hospital beds because of your government’s underfunding of 
health care and your government’s incompetence? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Thank you. Thank you. Mr. Speaker, 
the reason I stood up was I was asked a question. That may 
have gone over the head of the member opposite. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I answered this question yesterday. It seems 
strange, to me at least, that from that party we get questions 
relative to funding of health care in this province, when never 
before has there been the kinds of money that’s spent on health 
as there is today, in our history, Only yesterday, Mr. Speaker, 
the Premier and the Minister of Health opened a new wing at 
Regina General, and I went through that yesterday. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, The point that I want to make here is why did 
the Leader of the Opposition’s office, if they are sincere in their 
caring about these people, if they are sincere, why did he sit on 
it for three months before it was raised with the government? 
And then in this House in a very inflamed way, if you like, a 
very inflamed way . . . I don’t suppose it would have anything 
to do . . . I doubt it would ever have been raised except that 
there’s a couple of by-elections called, Mr. Speaker. I just think 
that those people, Mr. Speaker, have absolutely no care in their 
hearts for these people. They’re on a political agenda and 
nothing more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Short supplementary. The Deputy Premier 
did not obviously hear the question. My question is this: are we, 
or are we not again this summer going to be faced with 
hundreds and hundreds of hospital bed closures? Will your 
government assure this House and  

assure the people of this province that we will not have 
hundreds of beds closed again this summer? Will there be 
funding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m quite prepared, and 
I’m sure the Minister of Health is quite prepared, to deal with 
the reality of health care in Saskatchewan during estimates and 
talk about the increase surgical procedures, etc., that have been 
done under this administration. 
 
The final point that I want to make, Mr. Speaker, is that we are 
dealing with people, real people. And if those people have these 
kinds of concerns, I’m quite prepared, as I’m sure the Minister 
of Health is, I’m quite prepared to deal with them if they will 
get these kinds of situations to me. But they sit on them, in one 
case for three months, in another case for three weeks, and they 
sit on them, and they truck them out for a by-election, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s absolutely incredible. Tell me how much they 
care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Highway Construction for 1988-9 
 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Minister of Highways and Transportation and it involves the 
$10 million in so-called new money you announced in the 
budget for highway construction. 
 
Mr. Minister, despite all your lofty rhetoric and the fanfare, that 
figure is nothing but a desperate joke from a desperate 
government. Cost of highway construction runs at about 
$250,000 per mile. That figure will get us about 40 miles or 64 
kilometres of reconstructed highway. Are you telling the people 
of Saskatchewan that, given the state of highways in this 
province, that they should be overjoyed with that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In response to 
the hon. member’s question, I think it would be fair to say that 
the public of Saskatchewan is indeed pleased with a three-year, 
$30 million enhanced highway rehabilitation program. 
 
I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I have had calls to my office 
pleased with the budget, and particularly in that respect. I can 
tell you, Mr. Speaker, that as early as this morning, at 7 o’clock 
this morning, I met with the entire road building industry at the 
Landmark Inn and had a nice breakfast meeting. And I can tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, that the road building association, the people 
who invest millions of dollars in those businesses to construct 
highways in this province, are pleased with the budget of this 
province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m not here to say we can’t spend a little 
more, and we may in a year or two. But, Mr. Speaker, the 
people of Saskatchewan, I believe are pleased with that level of 
funding. 
 
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

371 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, don’t 
try and tell us about your great commitment to the highways of 
Saskatchewan. Every person in . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order. Does the 
hon. member ask a new question or a supplementary? 
 
Mr. Trew: — If you will check Hansard tomorrow you will . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. I find it 
interesting that hon. members would take exception to that. It’s 
normal practice in this House, as all hon. members know, to 
indicate at the outset of their question whether it’s a new 
question or a supplementary. I ask for that courtesy. 
 
Mr. Trew: — New question, Mr. Speaker, for the second time. 
New question. Your commitment obviously is not there. Your 
list of highway construction products, Mr. Minister, your list 
last year for construction projects, you bragged about 386 
kilometres of road grade work. This year in your announcement 
that’s been reduced to 307 kilometres, or a reduction of over 12 
per cent. Of the 30 projects you list in this year’s construction 
projects list, eight of them are simply re-announcements of 
projects from last year — eight out of 30. And in road 
surfacing, you also offer fewer kilometres this year than last, 
fewer kilometres. In fact 11 of the 61 projects 
re-announcements of last year’s projects. 
 
Mr. Minister, rather than worrying about bumper heights and 
license plate lights, why don’t you address the real problem of 
the vehicle safety and get on with fixing the highways and the 
roads in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I really wonder whether 
the member opposite was here for budget day and has paid 
attention closely to the budget that we announced. For the 
member’s information, there were fairly healthy increases in 
such departments as health and education. There was a great 
emphasis on health and education. I was very pleased, as 
Minister of Highways and Transportation, to have had a 
substantial increase in the budget for Highways and 
Transportation, and yet what I view as a realistic increase. 
 
Now the member can talk about the brochures and the projects 
and try and convince the public of Saskatchewan that we’re not 
fixing more roads or spending more moneys. But the facts are, 
Mr. Speaker, that a new, additional, incremental $30 million 
highway enhanced rehabilitation program was announced 
within this budget. It is a program of which I personally am 
very, very proud, and which the people of Saskatchewan, I 
expect, will be very, very much satisfied by. It is only members 
of the NDP who, for their own political gain, will stop and 
criticize a new program that is good for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Trew: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Your words ring 
awful hollow when there’s fewer kilometres of highways being 
constructed and resurfaced this year than last — by your own 
department records, what you issued for the public, fewer 
kilometres this year than last. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would ask you this: can you tell the Assembly 
why the people of Saskatchewan should be satisfied with an 
additional, a mere $10 million. going into reconstructing 64 
kilometres of highways when your department has entered into 
a long-term agreement with Weyerhaeuser to construct 32 
kilometres of road each and every year at a cost of $6 million? 
 
Why does one large multinational corporation rate $6 million of 
your Department of Highways’ budget, and the rest of the 
province only gets 10 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, firstly in response to the 
hon. member’s allegation of some 64 kilometres or some such, I 
can tell you. Mr. Speaker, that the way highways are built in 
this province is through true competitive bidding by the road 
construction industry. And you will see how many miles are 
constructed, Mr. Speaker, and at what price. And there may 
indeed, at the competitive prices we are seeing today, there may 
indeed be a few more kilometres than what is listed. 
 
With respect to your concerns about Weyerhaeuser, we have 
placed before you, sir, better than a year ago, a comprehensive 
document on our agreement with Weyerhaeuser. It is a 
document that I suggest you read and take careful note of. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite does not yet 
realize, but it will soon become public when the Weyerhaeuser 
corporation makes their payment to this province, we on this 
side of the House, the people of Saskatchewan, and in fact 
everybody but the NDP, will be happy with the payment that 
Weyerhaeuser will be making to this province that will enable 
us to build more and more highways and more schools and 
more health care, and on and on and on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I rise, under orders of the 
day, to raise with you what I think is a very serious situation 
that is being developed in this House by the ministers who 
respond to questions. 
 
We saw today a blatant and serious abuse of the question period 
by the Deputy Premier, Mr. Speaker, in which the Deputy 
Premier responded to a question which is questionable whether 
he really took notice the other day, at great length, longer by far 
than normally would be expected for a minister to be allowed to 
ask such a question. 
 
Under those conditions, Mr. Speaker, unless you enforce the 
rule on ministers, this House will become disorderly. I ask you, 
therefore, to look at what happened here today.  
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

372 
 

Take the time you need to look at what happened here today on 
the part of the Deputy Premier, and make a ruling and make 
sure that this question period functions for the purposes for 
which it was intended, and that is the asking of questions and 
the answering of questions, rather than giving ministers an 
opportunity to filibuster and to debate in question period. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Speaking to the point of order, as I 
understood the point of order, Mr. Speaker, it was that I didn’t 
have the legitimate right to respond to questions that I had not 
taken notice of. I suppose I could ask what members opposite 
do with their research money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It says on page 345 of Hansard, Mr. Speaker . . . in response to 
the question, it says: 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson (That’s me, the Deputy Premier) Hon. 
Mr. Berntson: — (it says, Mr. Speaker) . . . I will take 
notice as well (Mr. Speaker), and I will be happy, Mr. 
Speaker, as well, to talk with that member . . . (etc., etc.) I 
will take notice . . . 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — My point of order was the length, the 
length of the speech by the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker — Order. Order please. Order, please. Order, 
please. Order. Order. Order. Order. The members have the right 
to speak to the point of order, and I believe the member for 
Regina North East is doing that now, and I’m going to give him 
that privilege. I’m going to give him that privilege. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I understand 
why the members opposite would be concerned and not want to 
hear what’s being said. 
 
I want you to clarify for the House, in my response to my point 
of order, whether, having taken notice of a question, a minister 
then can proceed to give an answer or speak further, as 
happened yesterday in question period, and then come back 
another day and speak again to that question when he, in fact, 
has provided the answer and spoken on it after taking the 
notice. Is that appropriate? I would like you to rule. 
 
Mr. Speaker — I have listened to the point of order, and I have 
listened to the member’s arguments, and I will take note of it. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, in the spirit of 
co-operation, and the sense of complete harmony in the 
legislature, the opposite House Leader and myself earlier agreed 
that we could, with leave, move directly to second readings and 
deal with the . . . My understanding at least was that, Mr. 
Speaker, to move directly to Bill No. 3 in second readings. 
 

Leave granted. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 3 — An Act to provide for the Resumption of 
Instruction, Teaching and Examination of Students at the 

University of Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to propose second 
reading of a bill to be a temporary cooling-off period at the 
University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Before legislation of this nature is contemplated, Mr. Speaker, it 
is generally had in our society that two important conditions 
must be met. First, the normal collective bargaining process 
must have been given an opportunity to arrive at a solution. 
Second, there must be a clear showing that the work stoppage in 
question represents a serious threat to a vital public interest. I 
believe it is apparent that both of these conditions have been 
met in the present strike by faculty at the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me briefly review the situation, Mr. Speaker. The last 
contract, which provided for an increase of 4 per cent, ended in 
June last year. Since that time no agreement has been reached 
on a new contract. Negotiations broke down during the week of 
March 21 and a strike vote was passed by a small majority on 
Thursday, March 24. A strike was immediately called and 
began on Monday, March 28, Mr. Speaker. A conciliator was 
asked for by the administration, and he began meeting with both 
sides on Tuesday, March 29. 
 
Following introduction of the provincial budget last Thursday, 
the administration tabled a new offer in line with other public 
sector agreements in recent times. It provides for approximately 
7 per cent over three years. This has been rejected by the faculty 
association whose latest position called for approximately 20 
per cent over three years. 
 
I am advised today by the conciliator, yesterday rather, Mr. 
Speaker, by the conciliator, Mr. Sterling Gilmore, that talks 
have been adjourned by both sides and that major differences 
exist between the two parties. It is apparent then that no 
immediate prospect exists for an end to the strike. Certainly we 
cannot expect an end to the strike in time to allow for exams to 
go forward this Saturday, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me talk a moment about public interest involved. The 
critical period of final exams is about to begin on campus. If the 
strike continues through this period, which lasts for 
approximately one month, the results will be devastating for our 
students 
 
It is not an exaggeration to say, Mr. Speaker, that the academic 
careers of some of the students may be destroyed if the exams 
cannot be held. Many face external deadlines which cannot be 
delayed. Some will lose vital summer jobs without which they 
may be rejected by graduate programs elsewhere because their 
final standing is unavailable.  
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

373 
 

And above all, Mr. Speaker, there is the added worry and 
uncertainty for 18,000 students during what is already a very 
stressful period of their lives, and there are many moms and 
dads across the province who share the some worry and anxiety. 
 
And just an example, Mr. Speaker, of some of the distress and 
anxiety and worry that’s going on in the minds of some of these 
students, and in many of these students, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had 
many calls in my office — and one that I received yesterday 
morning was typical of many of those calls. It was from a 
distraught young lady, a student at the university in fourth year 
chemical engineering, Mr. Speaker. She explained to my office 
how she has a job waiting for her. Chemical engineering 
apparently is one of those areas that do have a number of job 
opportunities in it this very year, and she put it this way, Mr. 
Speaker: I have the stress and anxiety of this being my final 
year; I have the stress and anxiety of now coming into my final 
exams; I have the stress and anxiety of knowing that I have a 
job waiting for me, but that stress and anxiety is compound by 
the fact that I don’t know if I’ll finish to get to that job that’s 
waiting for me. 
 
And that’s typical of many phone calls I’ve had placed to my 
office, Mr. Speaker. So I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, to you 
and to all the members of this legislature, that this is a very 
sober understanding. It’s one that the public views seriously; it 
is one that our government views seriously, and I would suggest 
to you that it is clear that this represents a vital public interest 
which no government could ignore — the interest of our young 
people, the students. 
 
So let me turn to the legislation which I am introducing today. 
First, let me make clear that this is for a limited period only. 
The legislation will come into effect upon approval by the 
Legislature, and will cease to have effect on May 12 when 
exams are essentially ended. In this way we make provision for 
the main period of exams to go forward on schedule. 
 
The right to strike is not removed by this legislature, Mr. 
Speaker. It is temporarily suspended to allow the exams to take 
place. The faculty continue to enjoy all of the normal rights of 
the collective bargaining process in the future. 
 
During this cooling-off period, Mr. Speaker, the legislation 
makes provision for the appointment of a mediator. Hopefully 
both sides will be able to agree on selection of the mediator. If 
not, then after five days the Minister of Human Resources, 
Labour and Employment will appoint someone. The mediator 
will be asked to assist both sides in attempting to find a solution 
and report back to the Minister of Human Resources by the end 
of the cooling- off period. 
 
It is my hope that both sides will continue working toward a 
negotiated end to the dispute. As I have made clear, this 
suspension of the strike is for a short period of time. Sooner or 
later the two parties will have to resolve their differences, and I 
would voice the desire of all citizens of our province that it be 
as soon as possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me close with a plea to my many friends and 
former colleagues at my Alma Mater, the many fine  

professors and administrators I have known throughout my 
professional and political career. I realize that there is genuine 
discomfort on both sides. I do not wish to place responsibility 
for this strike action on either side. This legislation is designed 
solely to protect the interest of 18,000 students — 18,000 young 
people, Mr. Speaker, whose future is a trust we all share. And I 
ask that a determined effort be made by both sides to find a 
resolution to the situation quickly, in the interests of both the 
students and an institution which we all respect and love and 
cherish. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill 3, An Act to 
provide for the Resumption of Instruction, Teaching and 
Examination of Students at The University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
while I welcome this opportunity to enter the debate on the PC 
government’s Bill before us today, I do so with some regret and 
with some sadness, for this is a regrettable Bill. 
 
And this is a sad day. It’s a sad day for our university system in 
Saskatchewan. It’s a sad day for the faculty, staff, and students 
at the University of Saskatchewan. It’s a sad day for education 
in this province. It’s a sad day for Saskatchewan young people, 
Mr. Speaker. Therefore, it is also a sad day for this legislature. 
 
(1445) 
 
And I said this Bill is regrettable, and it is. But it is much more 
than that. It is arbitrary; it is unnecessary; it is hypocritical. It is 
a bad Bill, Mr. Speaker, and it should not be passed. 
 
I listened with care to the minister’s remarks. I heard this 
rhetoric; I heard his talk. I heard his excuses; I heard his 
self-justification, but I did not hear him say, Mr. Speaker, which 
of the two parties to the dispute had asked for this Bill. 
 
Does the minister pretend that either of the two parties — either 
the faculty association or the university administration — 
actually asked for the Bill? Will he stand in his place in this 
legislature and say that the faculty association asked for this 
back to work Bill? Will he stand in his place and say that the 
president of the university asked for his heavy-handed and 
wrong-headed Bill? No, I don’t think he will, Mr. Speaker, 
because here we have a collective bargaining dispute, a dispute 
between an employer and employees, a dispute that is certainly 
unfortunate, but where bargaining has been taking place, 
bargaining . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker — Order. I’d like to ask the hon. members to 
allow the member to make his remarks without interruptions. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I said, here we 
have a collective bargaining dispute. The dispute is certainly 
unfortunate, but where bargaining has been taking place, 
bargaining could continue to take place, a dispute which neither 
party has asked for government intervention, and therefore a 
Bill that is unnecessary,  
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

374 
 

arbitrary, unjustified and wrong — unnecessary, arbitrary, 
unjustified and wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This Bill now before us illustrates all too clearly what has 
become a conscious and consistent policy of this government: 
its constant attempt to divide Saskatchewan to divide 
Saskatchewan people, to divide our communities. That is the 
Conservative policy, and this Bill is a clear example of that 
policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has always seemed to me that one of the true 
tests of wise and mature political leadership is whether the 
government seeks to divide the people or whether it seeks to 
unite them, to build bridges among them. That’s a simple test of 
political leadership, and I believe it’s a good one. And by that 
test this Bill is a failure, Mr. Speaker. And by that test this 
government opposite is a failure. 
 
Today this government has divided the university community. 
With each passing day, the government is seeking to drive that 
wedge deeper with its decisive policy, its deliberate, divisive 
approach. Rather than seek to build bridges, Mr. Speaker, rather 
than seek to unite the university community, the PC 
government opposite are pursing their cause of ruthless, 
deliberate divisiveness. Pitting faculty against faculty — that’s 
our brightest and our best people; pitting students against 
students, our best and brightest students, undermining their 
actions, and by their policies and this Bill the balance and 
solidarity of the university community is also undermined. 
 
We’ve seen that PC policy of divide and dominate before, Mr. 
Speaker. Saskatchewan people have seen the PC government 
trying to divide rural versus urban, trying to pit farm families 
against working families. Saskatchewan people have seen the 
PC government focus on vulnerable minorities, attacking those 
who are most vulnerable, trying to divide Saskatchewan — the 
PC policy of divide and dominate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when a government resorts to such tactics, it not 
only fails a test of statesmanship, it fails the test of leadership. 
And it also shows it is unscrupulous, unprincipled, immoral, 
and desperate. And that is precisely the impression of this 
particular Bill and this government’s policy. It is leaving the 
people of Saskatchewan with that kind of an impression, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They watch the behaviour of our Premier, they watch the 
behaviour of our Minister of Education, and they watch the 
behaviour of this government, Mr. Speaker, and that is what 
they see — a government that is unscrupulous, unprincipled, 
immoral, and desperate, Mr. Speaker, a government that seeks 
to divide Saskatchewan people, that has lost its moral authority, 
I say, to govern this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the PC government wants to talk about almost 
anything regarding this dispute, almost anything but the real 
problem. The government says that this Bill now will somehow 
address the problem. But I question whether they even 
understand the problem. They certainly don’t even recognize it. 
 

The problem simply put, is this: the government has betrayed 
the university, the faculty and the students. The government has 
betrayed the future of Saskatchewan by its systematic 
understanding of the university education in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — The minister can try to spout all the 
statistics he wants. We’ve heard the numbers repeatedly. But 
listen to his numbers carefully. Does the minister claim that 
government funding has kept up with inflation? No, because he 
knows that’s not true. Does the minister claim that his 
government funding has kept pace with student enrolment 
pressures? No, because he knows that that would not be true. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the facts are there. Since this PC government took 
office, inflation in Saskatchewan, which is now the highest in 
Canada, has eroded the value of the dollar. It has eroded the 
value of the dollar by more than 30 per cant. And since this PC 
government took office there’s been a steady enrolment 
pressure on the university. More and more young people eager 
for education, eager to make their contribution to the future of 
our society, enrolling in our university. Enrolment records, 
enrolment pressures, steady and heavy enrolment pressure at the 
university, but has the government’s funding kept pace? No, it 
has not. 
 
In fact, since this government took office the level of operating 
grants per student in real, constant dollars has declined; it has 
declined by more than 20 per cent, 20 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill which is now before us does not address 
that problem which is the real problem, PC operating grants, 
which on the basis of constant dollars per student have declined 
by more than 20 per cent. And that’s the cause of the problem at 
the university, and that’s the cause of the crisis of the 
university. The minister opposite knows these are the facts, Mr. 
Speaker, but he is unwilling or unable to address the real 
problems the real problems which his Bill ignores. 
 
Last year, for example, the university grants were frozen. In 
fact, that’s an effective funding cut. This year, at a time when 
inflation in Saskatchewan is the highest in Canada at 6 per cent, 
the minister tries to brag and boast about his 1.9 per cent 
funding increase. That’s yet another cut, Mr. Speaker, a further 
attack on the quality of education by this PC government. 
 
And what are the consequences of such PC funding cuts? 
Crowded classes, crowded labs, less opportunity for students to 
interact with and learn from their instructors, fewer library 
resources, ageing laboratory equipment, professors who have 
become demoralized, students who are short-changed. And 
most tragically of all, Mr. Speaker, enrolment quotas — 
enrolment quotas at the University of Saskatchewan caused by 
PC underfunding. Turning students away, that’s the 
consequence of their policy, Mr. Speaker. No, that is the PC 
policy, turning students away, closing the door to their 
opportunities,  
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

375 
 

closing the door to their future. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, does not address the problem of 
government underfunding to our universities and 
short-changing of our young people. That’s their record and it’s 
a sorry record. 
 
I was not surprised to hear the minister’s words, saying that his 
only interest here is the students. He claims that this Bill and 
this government have the students’ interests at heart. Never in 
this legislature, sir, have I heard such hypocrisy. I do not use 
that word lightly. 
 
Where was their commitment to students last year when they 
effectively cut university funding? Where was their 
commitment to students in the latest budget when, once again, 
they effectively cut university funding? Where was the 
so-called PC commitment to students over the last seven years 
when they cut the constant dollar funding for students by more 
than 20 per cent. Hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker. Where was their 
commitment when they attacked the student aid plan or when 
they cut summer jobs for students by 60 per cent? Where was 
their commitment to students when they were forcing university 
enrolment quotas, closing the door on opportunity, turning 
students away? 
 
Mr. Speaker, never in the history of Saskatchewan has any 
government so betrayed Saskatchewan people, betrayed their 
future, betrayed the future of our province. And for that 
minister to stand in his place in this legislature and pretend that 
this Bill and that this government has the interest of students at 
heart, that is PC hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker, of the most 
contemptible kind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister likes to talk about spending priorities, 
but he’s afraid to talk about the choices his government has 
made. Government and governing is about choices. Governing 
is making choices, and this PC government has made the wrong 
ones. 
 
They’ve made the choice to give up more that $2 billion to big 
oil companies, and the choice to have overcrowded classes; the 
choice to give more than $20 million to Alberta Tory 
millionaire, Peter Pocklington, and the choice of funding cuts to 
the university. They’ve made the choice of funding cuts to the 
university. They’ve made the choice to waste $20 million per 
year, Mr. Speaker, on political advertising, and the choice to 
turn students away. They’ve made the choice to spend $34,000 
a day on empty government office space. And the choice to 
undermine the quality of education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the University of Saskatchewan, the students 
and the faculty would like this government to make a better 
choice. Choose to spend less money on empty office space, and 
choose to spend more money on crowded classrooms. 
 
This Bill before us today, Mr. Speaker, is introduced by a 
government that indeed has made choices — has made the 
wrong ones. The government has created problems, Mr. 
Speaker. The government is like a drunken daddy — drunken 
daddy taking money for booze, where a family is left to 
struggle, struggle whether to make a decision as to buy boots or 
clothes or food. And this government is acting like a drunken 
daddy of education. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, the Bill before us here today is 
a bad Bill. It is an arbitrary, unwarranted, an unwarranted 
intrusion to the free, collective bargaining system. It ignores the 
real problem, the real problem of university underfunding, the 
problem caused by this government. The Bill provides one 
more example of the PC government’s destructive policy 
approach — divide and dominate. 
 
And moreover, Mr. Speaker, the Bill fails to resolve anything. It 
does not resolve the dispute; it doesn’t even attempt to resolve 
the dispute. It is a bad Bill, Mr. Speaker, and I shall be opposing 
it at every stage, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to add a few words in this debate, if my sore throat and cold 
permit. I want to say that this is indeed a very sad day for the 
University of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. No one can take joy 
or comfort, except perhaps some of the back-benchers in the 
government opposite, about this Bill being introduced now. 
 
This day is a sad day, Mr. Speaker. My colleague said it so well 
— a sad day for students, for faculty, for the administration, for 
the parents of the students, a sad day for all of us across 
Saskatchewan who love that place in Saskatoon — the 
University of Saskatchewan. And it’s a sad day for this 
legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s sad because this Bill sets an unfortunate and alarming 
precedent. I’ll say a word about that in a moment, but it’s also 
sad, Mr. Speaker, because this is the first time — I think I’m 
correct on this — in the living history of the University of 
Saskatchewan that we’ve had to resort, as a legislature, to direct 
interference into the internal affairs of an autonomous, 
autonomously administered organization and body like the 
University of Saskatchewan — the first time. 
 
There have been years in the past, in periods in the past, of 
restraint. There have been difficult negotiations, Mr. Speaker, in 
the past, involving both faculty and the administration; there 
have been hurt feelings, emotions running high. And for all of 
the difficulties in those periods, and for all of the ideological 
differences of any government that occupied, had the honour to 
occupy the front benches of the treasury, never ever in the 
history of this province, Mr. Speaker, never ever was there an 
occasion to introduce back-to-work legislation, to interfere with 
the autonomy and the independence of the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It took 75 years plus, and a Conservative government with this 
particular philosophy; it took 75 years plus, and this group of, 
frankly speaking, incompetent individuals to finally bring the 
university to its knees and to set the unprecedented move of 
direct back-to-work legislation in the area of university 
autonomy and university independence. 
 
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

376 
 

Mr. Speaker, that is a day which we should mourn; it is a day 
that we will live to regret, those of us in politics in 
Saskatchewan and in this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I think the very fact that this legislation is 
being introduced by this government indicates grounds enough 
for opposing the legislation. Something is wrong. One can say 
that it is the faculty association; one can say it’s the 
administration. But the reality is, what is wrong here is the lack 
of guidance and leadership, both financially and from an 
academic and philosophical perspective, by this government of 
what a university in a free and independent and democratic 
society should be all about. That’s what’s at fault here. It’s the 
deeds and the thoughts of small-minded men and women who 
apply so rigidly a policy of fiscal restraint in a period of 
apparently economic difficulty — I might add, Mr. Speaker, in 
a period of economic difficulty largely created by the misdeeds 
and incompetence of this government opposite. 
 
It is the slavish devotion to that mentality which has gotten this 
province into serious economic difficulties — a debt of $3.7 
billion. And I guess it’s only inevitable that sooner or later that 
mentality would result in that crisis slopping over to the 
University of Saskatchewan and to the people there who are 
trying to make it work, and to establish this dastardly principle 
— there is no other way to describe it — dastardly principle of 
interference in the economic and the administrative 
independence and autonomy of the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
This is a sad and shameful day for all of us in this legislature, 
Mr. Speaker, make no mistake about it. And it sets a precedent, 
Mr. Speaker, because if government can do this once, as this 
government seems prepared to do and determined to do, then 
the precedent has been set. It can do it again a second time and 
a third time and another time. And it may not be this 
government; it may be some other government that is 
purporting to do this. 
 
This is a precedent which is dangerous, Mr. Speaker. If you 
believe that the corner-stones of a university are three: 
accessibility for students to university education; academic 
excellence, excellence in the quality of education; and 
autonomy and independence of a university as that place where 
men and women who are dedicated to knowledge and searching 
out the truth, as that place where they have the freedom and the 
independence to do it without the pressures of day to day 
society. 
 
If you have that vision of university, which is my vision of 
university, then what you see is a government coming very, 
very short in support of those mainstreams and those pillars. 
What we have here instead, Mr. Speaker, is a government 
which has no vision or notice or indication or belief of what a 
university should be in our free society. 
 
This is a government that views this university like a 
department of government. This government views this 
university just as it would any line department, or Crown 
corporation, or any other agency. It does not revere it. It  

does not place it in any era of speciality, or in any kind of 
compartment of speciality, and I say that is a shame. It’s a 
betrayal of what our pioneers and our forefathers did when they 
built the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — How it used to be, when you look at the 
history of this province, back in 1905 and earlier, and in the 
period post-1905, when those pioneers who argued about how 
to set up a legislative building and get our parliamentary 
democracy going in this province, and also those pioneers who 
had the vision of building a centre of excellence called the 
University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon; how they sacrificed 
and how they worked. 
 
And they went, Mr. Speaker, through the Dirty Thirties. They 
went through difficult times. In those early formative years of a 
university and the province of Saskatchewan, imagine what 
kind of an argument could have been made for restraint; what 
kind of an argument could have been made by men and women 
of timid vision and timid souls and no approach to university 
life; what kind of arguments they could have mounted to say 
that we don’t have enough to proceed with making 
Saskatchewan and the University of Saskatchewan a centre of 
excellence, a centre of accessibility for students, a centre of 
autonomy and independence. 
 
But no! Luckily, Mr. Speaker, those were not little men and 
little women with little visions. Our pioneers came here with 
guts and with foresight and determination, and they found the 
money. They found the money in the Dirty Thirties when their 
fathers and themselves were being forced off the farm lands. 
They sacrificed in order to make sure that their children would 
get a better life and a better education. 
 
There were no arguments during the J.T.M. Anderson period of 
government that they had to restrain, provoking a strike. There 
was no kind of activity by the minister of continuing education, 
in the midst of the disputes, which would escalate and provoke 
the situation. No! 
 
There was a commitment to an ideal which I ask you to 
remember, Mr. Speaker, an ideal which is as important in my 
mind as this institution, the legislature itself, the ideal of a best 
university that one can ever get in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And what a university it’s been, Mr. 
Speaker. It has produced the best of academics, and it’s 
produced the best of students, and our Rhodes Scholars are here 
at home and helping and they’re elsewhere, across the world, 
using that knowledge, building on what was given to them by 
their fathers and their forefathers, to be the leaders of our 
community, whether the community is Saskatoon or Regina or 
Saskatchewan or Canada. 
 
And they co-operated. And they have their disputes, and they 
have their differences. And they were the brightest and the best, 
from Diefenbaker to all of the other graduates one could think 
of, who contributed in a  
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

377 
 

distinguished way because they were able to come to our 
university. 
 
Now what happens, Mr. Speaker? Now what happens in the 
1980s? In the 1980s we have a new administration with a new 
philosophy, a philosophy that says, in effect, this is the year of 
the rugged individual, and forget about the fact that we have 
created the financial mess for the province; forget about the fact 
that this financial mess that we created is now spilling over to 
our hospitals, and in this case to the university. 
 
We now have this band of timid men and women who seek to 
apply that restraint to the university in a consistent way, to in 
effect starve it out under circumstances which are desperate. 
There’s no doubt about it, given today’s agricultural crisis — 
but surely no worse than they were in the 1930s, where men and 
women of greater spirit and greater determination were able to 
find a way because they had the will. 
 
These people opposite have no will, they have no vision, and 
they starve out the university by denying that great institution of 
ours, funds. And they’ve done it not once, Mr. Speaker, they 
have done it repeatedly since 1982, and that is a shame on them. 
It’s a shame on all of us in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — My colleague, the critic in continuing 
education, the member from Prince Albert, documented this 
very importantly, but it has to be stated again, Mr. Speaker. You 
take a look at the budgets, Mr. Speaker, of this government with 
respect to the university to highlight or to emphasize or to 
confirm, if that’s required, in your mind the argument that I’m 
making here about underfunding. 
 
The evidence is everywhere. In the last seven years, the 
operating grant levels to the University of Saskatchewan have 
failed to keep pace, Mr. Speaker, have failed to keep pace with 
the combined pressure of enrolment growth and inflation — 
failed to keep pace. And as a result, by whatever yardstick the 
minister would want to choose, the dollar level of per student 
funding has declined and declined drastically. In constant dollar 
terms that level of decline, Mr. Speaker, has amounted to at 
least 20 per cent on a per student basis — 20 per cent less in 
seven years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s at a time when we have high rates of inflation; that’s 
at a time when the cost of living has gone sky-high. We keep on 
being told by the Premier about what his government has done 
to buttress people against inflation and the ravages of the 
economic circumstance, and yet nothing for the university with 
respect to operating grants. 
 
And this provincial budget, Mr. Speaker, the one that we have 
temporarily postponed debate on today in order to deal with this 
important Bill, this provincial budget continues on in that vein. 
This provincial budget froze the university grant levels, 
virtually froze them, by giving the operating amount of money 
to about — what? — 1.9 or 2 per cent. 

An Hon. Member: — 1.9. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — 1.9. That, Mr. Speaker, does not even keep 
pace with the rate of inflation, 1.9. And last year’s budget froze 
the university grant levels in nominal terms, again an effective 
cut. The budget provides inadequate funds. I don’t mean 
marginally inadequate funds, Mr. Speaker; I mean, it provides 
inadequate funds on an ongoing basis in a grand scale — on a 
grand scale. 
 
An Hon. Member: — There’s never enough money. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — This government . . . The member says, 
there’s never enough money. I’ll tell you, there is money for the 
university. If that is the priority that you choose to ignore, to put 
money into the shafferty process down in the Premier’s riding, 
there is money for the university and the students. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — The member from Cut Knife, the member 
from Cut Knife says there’s not enough money. That’s right. 
He’s got a billion dollars for his Premier in Estevan; he has 
nothing for the students. The member from Cut Knife says 
there’s never enough money. He’s got $1 billion for the 
Premier’s riding, and he freezes out the administration and the 
students. I say to that member, that silent member in this 
legislature, shame on him for his denial and rejection of the 
university world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — There is never enough money. There is 
never enough money, Mr. Speaker, if you want to choose that 
there never should be enough money. If you want to put 
$34,000 a day, Mr. Speaker — $34,000 a day — on empty 
government space, of course there’s not enough money. If you 
want to say that there’s $20 million for your Conservative 
advertising friends, of course there’s not enough money. 
 
Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I tell the minister, I tell the 
Premier and I tell all the members opposite, we don’t accept 
that there is — there must be money for our students and higher 
learning in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And so, Mr. Speaker, what is the end result? 
The end result is obvious. It only stands to common sense, the 
end result is chronic underfunding, crowded class-rooms, 
crowded labs, ageing equipment, enrolment quotas, students 
being turned away, and this is a systematized approach, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m not even saying they’re doing it in a 
machiavellian, deliberate, conspiratorial way, although I’ll say a 
word about that. Maybe they’re doing it because they honestly 
think that that’s the way the economic situation should dictate 
them acting, but even so the net result can’t be denied. 
 
Whatever the motivation, the net result can’t be denied. There’s 
overcrowding. There’s no space. The morale is down. This is a 
crisis which just hasn’t arisen like that, Mr. Speaker. It’s a crisis 
which has been brewing for the last  
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

378 
 

two or three years. It was inevitable that it was going to come to 
a head. Anybody who was reading about the university, knew 
about the university, dealt with the university people, ought to 
have known, Mr. Speaker, that this crisis was coming. 
 
If the minister of continuing education was doing his job, he 
wouldn’t act as if he was somewhat surprised by this crisis. 
He’d have been putting in the mediation; he would have been 
putting in the conciliation; he would have been getting the sides 
together. He would have been doing everything that needs to be 
done in an informal, supplementary, supportive way of this 
university. He would have done that which was needed to 
protect the independence and the autonomy of this great 
institution and benefit the students. But he was asleep at the 
switch, Mr. Speaker. He was asleep at the switch, and the result 
was absolutely the chaotic condition that we find now. 
 
And I said this is a sad day in this legislature, and a sad day it 
is, Mr. Speaker, sad day because of the first point I make about 
the interference and the principle of university autonomy, but 
it’s a sad day, too, because of this chronic underfunding. What 
we have seen here, Mr. Speaker, are dreams of young men and 
women jeopardized — no, in some cases, dashed. Enrolment 
quotas, denial to get into university. 
 
(1515) 
 
Remember, I said the three characteristics of a university — 
accessibility. A university is something that we should all, if we 
have the ability and the drive and the willingness to learn, we 
should have accessibility to it. For the first time in a long time, 
if not in the history of this university, the accessibility situation 
now has turned away young men and women, young children of 
farming sons and daughters who wanted to have opportunities 
for higher education; their dreams have been dashed, Mr. 
Speaker, they have been shot down by this government. 
 
And that member says there’s never enough money. That’s 
what he says. Dreams of parents, farming parents. This 
government talks about the family. It talks about how it tries to 
defend the family. Mr. Speaker, what it does, in effect, is the 
reverse, by every social action, and this Bill is an example of it. 
What they do is they are tearing apart the family. They’re not 
helping our young people stay here in Saskatchewan. They’re 
not helping our families stay together. 
 
No, what they do is they attack those who are less needy. They 
attack minorities, whether those minorities are French Canadian 
people, whether they are gay people, whether they are 
university students, whether they’re working men and women, 
they attack; they don’t seek to unite, they seek to divide, Mr. 
Speaker. I say this is a sad day and shame on the Premier, and 
the people of this province are going to take the opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And now what about the Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
and how the government handled this legislation. Let’s even 
forget about the precedent. You just ask about your colleagues 
and farm families on  

foreclosures, and we’ll talk about that when the estimates of the 
Premier comes up at length, and your involvement. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, I ask this member opposite who does 
his thinking . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. I ask members on 
both sides of the House to allow the member to continue. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I now come to my third point, 
the first being the precedent and the sadness of the day; the 
second point being the chronic underfunding. I now come to the 
third point, and that is this piece of legislation itself. 
 
I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, in many ways this Bill is the 
worst of all worlds, and I’ll explain this in a moment. This Bill 
is the worst of all worlds for a number of reasons. First, the Bill 
obviously is an interference in the process of collective 
bargaining, free collective bargaining. The government admits 
that; everybody admits that. Now this should be done, Mr. 
Speaker, only when the public interest is clearly demonstrated, 
and also it should be done, not only when the public interest is 
clearly demonstrated, but when it is obviously and patently 
clear that there has been no external interference by people like 
the people in the government with the free collective process. In 
other words, that it’s been given its full, best opportunity to do 
its thing, if I may put it that way. That has not been the situation 
here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And here, as I said, I’d make a comment about whether it was 
negligence on the part of the minister, or whether there’s a 
conspiratorial theory which can be attached. But I refer your 
attention, Mr. Speaker, to the intervention last week in the 
legislature, unprovoked, by the minister of continuing 
education, who got up and stood on his feet and said — 
unprovoked — that if there is no settlement, this government is 
going to introduce back-to-work legislation. No one asked him 
in question period. So far as I know, no one asked him from 
either of the parties involved to make such a statement. This, 
Mr. Speaker, came at a time when the conciliator, Mr. Gilmore, 
was doing his best; this at a time when the negotiations were at 
their most sensitive, their most important stage, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the minister knew that. The Premier knew that. They 
named the conciliator to do the job. Why did the minister get up 
in the middle of those negotiations and say to the parties 
involved, we’re going to legislate you back? Because I tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, the moment he did that, that was a signal to one or 
both of the parties that they didn’t have to be serious about 
getting a voluntarily settled, negotiated, voluntary settlement 
agreement. One or both of the parties surely must have had 
running through their minds; well, what’s the sense of settling; 
we’ll just sit back and wait until the government legislates us 
back and there’s an interruption in the free collective bargaining 
process. 
 
If he had made that statement at the end, at the total collapse of 
the negotiations, and set out to the House and to the people of 
Saskatchewan why he’s leading us to that conclusion, then I 
think one could say he acted in an  
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

379 
 

honourable and proper fashion. The collective bargaining 
process was going its normal course, but it failed, and then he 
could get up in the legislature and say: I, on behalf of the 
government, am now acting in the public interest; here is the 
public interest. 
 
But this minister and this government didn’t do that, Mr. 
Speaker. This minister and this government deliberately chose 
to get up in the midst of the negotiations and say that they were 
going to legislate back to work those participants in this dispute. 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that the minister knew full well what he was 
doing. I say that by doing this the result was non-confidence, 
both in the administration and in the faculty association. 
 
But I say that there was even a better motive on his part, and 
that better motive was, he was setting the ground rules to 
introduce this needless legislation at this time for political 
purposes. That’s what he was doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — There can only be one of two explanations. 
He either got up because he was incompetent and he didn’t 
know about free collective bargaining, which I’m not sure if I 
would accept of the minister opposite, or he knew what he was 
doing. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that of those two options, while there’s 
a little bit of truth for both of them, in my judgement the better 
version of events is that the minister knew full well what was 
going on. The minister knew exactly what his game plan was 
going to be, and in saying those words that he said last week, 
Mr. Speaker, he destroyed the free collective bargaining process 
and in effect sealed the fate of the actions of this government, 
forcing this sad day today with the introduction of this Bill. 
 
But there’s more, Mr. Speaker, about this Bill which I find to be 
in bad legal taste and in other ways. Let’s take a look at this 
thing, Mr. Speaker, first of all this Bill does nothing before us to 
resolve the dispute; absolutely nothing before us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the situation is this: the Bill clearly implies that on 
May 13, when the Bill lapses, the dispute may recommence, 
perhaps even more bitterly, and drag on then for a long time. 
 
Now just get what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker. For the members 
of the House, the back-benchers who may not have seen this 
Bill, what this Bill does is, it says you go back till May 13, you 
can’t strike, and we’ll appoint a mediator. Now nobody wants 
that. 
 
Here the president of the university says, back-to-work law 
attacked by Krisjanson, and he says, with respect to the 
mediator, we don’t want that. And he says we don’t want 
interference in the university. That’s the president in today’s 
Saskatoon Star-Phoenix and widely reported in the media. 
 
But what does this government do? Notwithstanding that advice 
this government goes ahead and appoints a mediator, and then 
the government goes ahead on top of  

that and says, this strike is going to last until, what is it, May 
13? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Twelfth. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — May 12, May 12. And then on May 13 it 
lapses, Mr. Speaker, the Bill lapses and it’s silent. What 
happens then, Mr. Speaker? What happens if that strike 
resumes, Mr. Speaker? 
 
This Bill doesn’t solve the disputes. What it does is it 
exacerbates the tensions. I mean, whether you agree with 
back-to-work legislation or not, whether you think this is an 
appropriate case for the dispute to be solved by legislation or 
not, you either do it or you don’t do it. 
 
But this is the worst of all worlds. You take away the right to 
strike virtually for the professors for a period of 30 days and 
leave them powerless, and you don’t solve the dispute either. 
You put a mediation process to work. 
 
Now I hope that the mediator can do his job during this 30 days. 
I mean, we all wish that. But surely, from the beginning of the 
statements made by the faculty association and the president, 
there is clearly no indication that this is going to be the end 
result of the developments. 
 
I find that to be a very unusual feature of a back-to-work piece 
of legislation, and I invite the members opposite, the journalists, 
to check past precedents, and they’ll find where the public 
interest has dictated back-to-work legislation this has not been 
the form. This Bill does not do the job. That’s another point. 
 
I make a third point with respect to this Bill, and I want to tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this relates to a matter 
which may seem to be small on the surface but to the university 
community it is a major concern. This Bill does not have a 
minister assigned to it as the minister responsible for doing . . . 
administering the Bill. This Bill doesn’t have a minister 
assigned to it. That too is very unusual. 
 
But what it does, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is it does this: it give 
mixed signals to the university community. The member from 
Weyburn, the continuing education minister, he introduces the 
Bill, but the minister who is actually going to appoint the 
mediator is our good old friend, the member from Melville, the 
Minister of Labour. That’s the person who’s going to introduce 
the mediator. 
 
Now apart from confusion, I ask you, Mr. Speaker, to be as 
objective as you can, and I ask you to put yourself in the 
position of either a faculty association member, or an 
administration member, or any fair-minded parent — what 
signal does that give to you that the member from Melville is 
going to do the job of appointing the mediator to try to solve 
this dispute between the faculty association and the university? 
What signal does that give to us? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t want to be personal against the 
member from Melville, but the reality is, the reality is, judging 
by his comments made yesterday in the course of the budget 
debate, which was widely reported, dealing with the United 
Church and the NDP, his comments  
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

380 
 

about minorities, his comments toward working men and 
women — all of his observations, Mr. Speaker, give people at 
the university grave fear about what this one individual alone 
could do by the mediation process. 
 
Surely it’s not beyond the capacity of the Premier, who knows 
about the sensitivities of the university people — perhaps better 
than anybody in this room — surely it is not beyond his 
capacity to understand that if he wanted to calm down the 
waters at the university, if he really wanted this Bill to do the 
job, apart from giving the Bill specific purpose and form, the 
last thing he would have done is appointed the member from 
Melville, the Minister of Labour, to be the person responsible 
for nominating the mediator. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in truth, the blunt, bitter truth is that 
nobody in university, and certainly few in the province of 
Saskatchewan today, have any confidence that they’re going to 
get a fair break from that minister appointing the mediator in 
this dispute. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is an act of high 
provocation. It’s anti-intellectual, it’s highly provocative, and I 
say, Mr. Speaker, in the light of the comments made about a 
bad precedent with respect to the university, it also leads to the 
danger of potential conflict after the Bill runs out on May 12 
and May 13 and beyond. 
 
Now I’ve two other points to make with respect to this 
legislation. I know we’ll deal with it in detail in clause by 
clause, but I wanted to make these two points on second reading 
as well. 
 
There is the question of whether or not this government really 
knows what it’s doing. I mean, having decided to legislate back 
to work, one would like to think that they’d do it as competently 
as they can do it. But look what they’ve done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This Bill forces the faculty and the administration to get back to 
get the exams written, a laudable objective. It runs out on May 
12, Mr. Speaker, I am advised that there are colleges that are 
writing final exams on May 13, May 14, still. I don’t know how 
many, but I’m advised that dentistry is one. They didn’t even 
cover the date. 
 
Convocation is May 27, Mr. Speaker. In order to convocate, the 
convocation relies on a faculty member naming those who are 
going to be the convocated people — May 27. That’s an 
important act in the academic process. It’s an act where families 
can get together and rejoice in the accomplishments of sons and 
daughters, but this Bill runs out on May 12 with a mediator that 
nobody wants, and has no other solutions offered, Mr. Speaker. 
This is a solution which totally misses the mark. 
 
You wonder what in the world the Premier and the minister are 
doing? What are they thinking about? I mean, if they’re going 
to act this way . . . I made my earlier comments about justifying 
it in the public interest . . . For goodness sake, at least they 
should be acting in a way that accomplishes the job rather than 
in a way which prolongs  

the agony — no, not prolongs the agony, exacerbates the 
conflict which exists on the University of Saskatchewan, and 
that’s exactly what this Bill does. 
 
(1530) 
 
And one last point with respect to this legislation, although 
there are other matters as well. The legislation talks about 
people who are on strike to go back to work. And by the way, 
there’s some interesting language in there — to assume their 
usual duties; failure to perform their usual duties involves some 
sort of large fine. I’ll make a comment on that in Committee of 
the Whole. But who is to enforce, Mr. Speaker? Who is to 
actually determine whether or not a faculty person goes back to 
work? On whom does the job of, if you will, enforcement of 
this legislation fall? 
 
Who is going to be the tattle-tale? Who is going to say that this 
professor from history, or that professor from bachelor in arts 
and science course is not honouring the picket . . . not 
honouring the legislation, and therefore needs to be reported, 
and the penalties of $5,000 and $1,000 a day are to be levied? 
That provision, Mr. Speaker, implies clearly that it is the 
administration’s job to in effect spy and to monitor the activities 
of their colleagues — because that’s what this really is still, a 
collegial enterprise, notwithstanding the bitterness and feelings 
that are around — to monitor and to spy on their activities. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that provision will guarantee continued 
animosity, upset, and anger. That too is a failing of the Bill. 
 
So if you look at it, Mr. Speaker, it is a tissue-thin, hastily 
concocted — perhaps not so hastily concocted — but a 
tissue-thin Bill which fails to do the job, a bad precedent for the 
University of Saskatchewan, a sad day for the university, a sad 
day for all of us in this Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, a 
Bill produced by a government that can’t get its house in order. 
From the gang that couldn’t shoot straight, this Bill here is 
another example of how it misses the mark with respect to 
public policy. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, what are we to do? What are we to do as 
members of this Legislative Assembly? Clearly no one wants to 
see the students penalized. That is an objective that everybody 
in this House wants to see achieved. We want to have those 
students get their exams and get on with their lives. We know 
that, but are we to condone how we got here? 
 
Do the ends and the means justify themselves under these 
circumstances, given the facts that I’ve recited? How do we, as 
an opposition, how do we, as men and women of the 
community at large who love that university, who love the 
independence of it, who love what it’s accomplished, who 
cherish its ideals — are we to stand by without registering our 
protest at the mismanagement and the deliberate policies of this 
government, idly, and to sit back on our hands and to vote for 
it? I don’t think so, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think we can do that. 
 
I think if we’re talking truth here, if we’re talking truth about 
the interests of university students, we also had better start 
talking truth about the activities of the administration and also, 
more particularly, the activities  
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

381 
 

of this government and its administrations — the bitter truth. 
And the bitter truth, Mr. Speaker, is very, very clear for all to 
see, in my judgement. 
 
This legislation is unwarranted; it’s unhelpful; it’s going to 
exacerbate the situation; it’s badly drafted. The problem is 
underfunding. It sets a dangerous precedent for the University 
of Saskatchewan. It fails to resolve the dispute. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nobody who has a conscience and a commitment 
to our university, and a conscience and a commitment to this 
legislature, could vote for this legislation. I’m going to vote 
against it. The members on this side of the House are going to 
vote against it. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wonder if I could 
have leave of the House to introduce a group of guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to have you 
join with me, and other members of the House, in introducing a 
group of students that are in the Speaker’s gallery today. 
 
It’s my understanding that they’re with the Association of 
Canadian Community Colleges, Kelsey campus, Saskatoon. 
There are 30 exchange students there, accompanied by four 
adult staff. The exchange students are from Holland College in 
Prince Edward Island. The teachers that are accompanying them 
today are Jerome Konecsni, Laurel Myers, Jake Shaw, and Gail 
Caseley. 
 
The students that are visiting here today have arrived at a very 
interesting time in the legislature. What you are hearing today 
in the legislature is a debate about Bill 3. Bill 3 deals with a 
dispute at the University of Saskatchewan, which is in 
Saskatoon; you may have gathered that by now. And I’m sure 
that when you leave the gallery today to meet with me outside, 
you will have made some judgements about the legislation 
which is being discussed in principle in second reading. Later 
on, this Bill will go to further stages for further discussion in 
detail. 
 
I’m sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all members will join with me in 
welcoming this group of 30 students and their accompanying 
teachers from Kelsey Institute and from Prince Edward Island. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I, too, 
would like to, through you, welcome these students here on 
behalf of the government side and express our sincere apologies 
that we weren’t the first to be able to bring greetings to you 
people and to Saskatchewan. But as you can well imagine, 
we’re going to be at kind of a disadvantage, being my opponent 
has the opportunity to  

speak to you after you leave the Chambers. So with that, I hope 
that you will . . . you could stay a little longer and just hear our 
side of the story before you leave the Chamber, so that you can 
make up your own minds. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 3 (continued) 
 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I view this debate today on 
legislation to end a strike at the University of Saskatchewan as a 
very sorry day and a very sorry debate for this legislature and 
for the university. I don’t come to participate in this discussion 
with any great sense of joy. There is nothing happy about it. 
 
And I want to take a few minutes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just a 
few minutes, to put a few comments on the record and to put 
this sad situation in some context. The government is wrapping 
itself in the flag, so to speak, today, proclaiming its so-called 
commitment to post-secondary education in Saskatchewan and 
its alleged concern for the well-being of students at the 
University of Saskatchewan. All that fancy rhetoric, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is nice to hear, if only it were true. 
 
But the hard, cold facts do not support, do not support, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the government’s fine words. They have not in 
fact put their money and their real commitment where their 
mouth is. And in their Neanderthal way, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
this government of dinosaurs is hostile to universities in 
Saskatchewan, and that hostility shows. 
 
Throughout their term in office, since 1982, this Conservative 
government has consistently and chronically underfunded 
Saskatchewan’s universities. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the root of 
that problem of underfunding stretches back into the 1970s, 
back to about 1977, when the cost-sharing arrangements 
between the federal and provincial governments were changed. 
The new EPF (established program of financing) system, as it is 
called, introduced at that time — about 1977 — produced more 
federal money for post-secondary education in Canada and at 
the same time more provincial autonomy in the use of that 
money. The idea was supposed to be that provinces would 
basically match the available federal dollars for education, but 
the Government of Canada would no longer be looking over the 
province’s shoulder to ensure the province was honouring its 
side of the bargain. 
 
As I said, that all began about 1977, and the erosion in 
provincial commitments to post-secondary education can be 
traced back to that point. So, Mr. Speaker, it is true to say that 
the former NDP government in Saskatchewan has a portion of 
the blame to shoulder in this situation. It was under that former 
government, in the late 1970s, that the problem got started. But 
it has continued, Mr. Speaker, the problem has continued and it 
has accelerated since 1982 under the Conservative 
administration to the point now where what was supposed to be 
a 50-50 federal-provincial, cost-sharing  
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

382 
 

arrangement is more like 75-25, with the federal government 
paying the larger share. 
 
The province has clearly not honoured its side of the EPF 
bargain, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And what then are the 
consequences of that for post-secondary education in 
Saskatchewan? The consequences are many and they are 
serious. 
 
Physical facilities are deteriorating, space is crowded and 
uncomfortable, teaching positions are being lost, class offerings 
are reduced, student fees go up, student aid is restricted, there 
are admissions controls and quotas imposed. The reputation and 
even the accreditation of our universities is subject to some 
question and some doubt; academic freedom and responsibility 
are under attack. Everyone’s morale, to put it bluntly, Mr. 
Speaker, everyone’s morale is the pits, and the best and the 
brightest of our students, our faculty and others in the university 
community begin to look elsewhere for a more favourable 
university environment. That is all part of what happens when 
your government is hostile, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or at the very 
least, when your government is ambivalent and indifferent 
about the well-being of universities. 
 
And in large measure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the problem 
that lies at the root of the present dispute at the University of 
Saskatchewan. It is a chronic and long-standing problem. It is 
deep, and I think from the evidence we see in what we are 
debating today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is serious. And this 
government cannot escape its primary responsibility in causing 
this chaos. 
 
The government pats itself on the back for presenting this 
particular piece of legislation today to end, or at least to 
suspend, the action at the University of Saskatchewan saying 
that it has no alternative in the circumstances and that it wants 
to defend the best interests of students. But, Mr. Speaker, the 
record must show that the policies and the practices of this 
government have been consistently contrary to the best interests 
of students and the faculty and the administration and all of 
those in Saskatchewan who are concerned about universities. 
 
This government has been holding students to hostage, holding 
the faculty and the administration to hostage, holding parents 
and families who are concerned about the education of their 
children to hostage, holding taxpayers to hostage, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and holding that venerable University of 
Saskatchewan to hostage — a 79-year-old institution that has 
never before faced the kind of crisis that it is experiencing 
today. 
 
The government’s hostility and ineptitude in this matter has 
been demonstrated in another way, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Beyond its underfunding of universities generally, and its 
failure in terms of developing proper education policy, there is 
another more immediate illustration of the government’s 
hostility and its ineptitude with respect to universities, and I 
refer specifically to the ill-advised and ill-timed public 
comments of the minister and his deputy and the Premier, 
suggesting the government was ready — indeed, Mr. Speaker, 
anxious to intervene in this dispute with legislation. 
 

There is no other possible interpretation that can be put upon 
the comments that have been made by representatives of the 
government with respect to this situation. 
 
They may, they may in fact deny that that was their intention. 
Most interesting, Mr. Speaker, the denials come after the fact, 
and the interpretation was there for all the world to see when 
the comments were first made about a week ago. 
 
Before the conciliation process had hardly begun, the 
government was rattling its sabres with legislative threats. They 
sat on their hands for months, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for months 
and months doing nothing, doing absolutely nothing to assist or 
facilitate the bargaining process. They saw the process 
floundering, going from bad to worse. All the danger signs were 
there, and they didn’t lift a finger constructively to try to help 
things along and expedite a settlement. 
 
(1545) 
 
And then at the eleventh hour they belatedly sent in a 
conciliator to become involved in the situation, after it was 
almost too late. And then before the conciliator had a chance 
even to get decently started, the minister and his deputy and the 
Premier started to make those ominous public comments. And 
that of course doomed the conciliation process from the very 
outset. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not just my opinion. Both sides in this 
dispute, both the faculty and the administration, have said loud 
and clear and in no uncertain terms that this government 
bungled and bungled badly in its conduct in this matter. That 
point is universally agreed, except for the few folks who happen 
to sit on the government side who want to try to defend an 
indefensible position. The unequivocal view of all of those who 
have watched this situation is that the government stumbled and 
bungled with it in a very serious way. 
 
And there is an obvious conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
can be drawn from the government’s conduct in dealing with 
this matter. Either the government was clumsy and just plain 
dumb in the verbal interventions that destroyed the work of the 
conciliator or, as the alternative, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
government was playing out the premeditated steps in a cynical 
political game whereby the government was deliberately 
provoking an impasse, contriving a situation where the 1988 
spring exam schedule could be maintained or salvaged only by 
legislative action in this House. Those, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are 
the only alternatives: stupidity on one hand or cynical 
manipulation on the other hand. Either way, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this government deserves no credit. 
 
The minister’s claim to be the great friend of students in this 
situation rings very hollow indeed. The government has created 
a situation now that can only get worse. The legislation will 
allow the exams to proceed in a very messy atmosphere, but it’s 
not likely that anything is going to be settled by May 12. We 
hope that it will be, but given what the government has done up 
to now, they have certainly made that happy outcome less 
likely.  
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

383 
 

Relationships, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are very likely to 
deteriorate further, and the problems thereafter will just be that 
much tougher to deal with. 
 
The government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government could 
have involved itself in helping to settle this dispute at a much 
earlier stage constructively, but the government failed. The 
government could have made some gestures in its recent budget 
to show that it was going to make some progress on 
post-secondary education. It could have done that 
constructively, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but again the government 
failed, and now we’re faced with today’s crisis. And it is one 
colossal mess. 
 
If you ask any member of the faculty, if you ask any member of 
the administration, if you ask any student that has gone through 
this experience, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’ll find out how big a 
mess there is at the University of Saskatchewan today — how 
deep the trouble goes and how long it will take to heal the 
wounds. It is a very troubling situation. 
 
This Bill to suspend the strike temporarily can not be regarded 
by the government as any kind of final solution. It is like 
putting a band-aid on a cancer, and the government created that 
cancer, in large part, in the first place. And whatever so-called 
peace this Bill may buy for the government in the next month or 
so during the examination period, that underlying cancer 
created by the government in terms of post-secondary education 
and, in particular, at the University of Saskatchewan — that 
cancer must be cured by the government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the government has that obligation. 
 
The government must commit itself to adequate university 
funding; that is absolutely fundamental, both in the short term 
and over the long haul, in terms of the future development of 
the University of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, in my view, 
the government must work carefully and conscientiously with 
the administration, with the faculty, with the students and the 
public to restore confidence and trust in this situation, to 
improve the atmosphere and to draw people together 
constructively, rather than dividing them. 
 
This Bill gives the government about a month — to May 12 — 
to get its act together with respect to post-secondary education. 
If the government, Mr. Speaker, has nothing further to offer in 
that space of time; if the government has nothing further to say 
constructively; if the government has nothing further to 
contribute to a solution; if this Bill is the sum total of what the 
government intends to do; if it’s this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
nothing more; if the government’s policy with respect to 
universities begins and ends with this legislation, then on May 
12 this minister and the Premier and this government will find 
that they have an even larger problem on their hands, a larger 
and a messier situation than the one that exists today. 
 
And in the face of those circumstances, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the government will stand condemned of chewing the heart and 
the soul out of the beloved University of Saskatchewan in the 
city of Saskatoon, that has such a remarkable record in the 
history and the  

educational tradition of this province in serving Saskatchewan 
so very, very well. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we may have very well no alternative but 
to deal with this legislation today, because the government in its 
conduct has left no other conceivable way out. But, Mr. 
Speaker, if the government has in its mind that now, with this 
legislation, it can wash its hands of the situation and walk away 
from the situation and pretend that they have nothing to do with 
the situation, Mr. Speaker, they will indeed find themselves 
with a much larger and a much more troubling problem. The 
problem is bad enough as it exists today, Mr. Speaker, but the 
government has a duty to deal with this situation in a far more 
constructive way that we’ve seen to date. 
 
The members across the way, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are 
extremely agitated. Obviously they don’t like to hear some of 
the facts of their record on post-secondary education put on the 
record so the people and the public of Saskatchewan can 
understand the magnitude of their failure in dealing with these 
issues. And I’m glad to see the hon. gentlemen are that agitated 
and that concerned about the situation, and they ought to be 
concerned about the situation, because their record in 
post-secondary education is a complete and an abject failure, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
As I have indicated before, if the members opposite would for 
once, Mr. Speaker, turn off their mouths and turn on their ears 
and listen to some of the things that are said in the debates in 
this legislature; if they would just listen to the answer to the 
question that they have been asking in terms of the legislation 
. . . Mr. Speaker, because of government failures in the past, 
right up to and including last week and this week, there is 
virtually no alternative but to move forward with this 
legislation. But, Mr. Speaker, it is a sorry day indeed for us in 
this House and for the University of Saskatchewan that it has 
come to that desperate measure. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the vote is called on this 
matter, with the greatest of reluctance I will support the 
legislation, depending, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on our work in 
Committee of the Whole. But the exam schedule must be 
allowed to proceed. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government 
surely, even though they giggle and they chortle across the way, 
surely the government, the Deputy Premier, the Minister of 
Health, the Minister of Education who giggle from their chairs 
and make light of this catastrophe at the University of 
Saskatchewan, surely, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they can take no 
satisfaction in a desperate situation at that university that they 
themselves have contributed so enormously to creating. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, their giggles from their chairs will be 
recorded in the records of this debate, and the people of 
Saskatchewan who are concerned about that institution will 
have an opportunity to judge these comedians across the way 
who think this dispute is a joke, who think the introduction of 
this legislation is a joke, Mr. Speaker. That will be a part of the 
condemnation of the people of Saskatchewan who will vote 
against this bunch in droves — in Elphinstone and in Eastview 
and in the next general election — to remove them from office 
in the fastest and most expeditious  
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

384 
 

manner possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I think that a constituent who phoned me yesterday 
afternoon put this matter into perspective when he said to me 
that if the government had stayed out, perhaps things would 
have worked out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he felt that government intervention at this stage 
in the situation on the university campus was totally and utterly 
inappropriate. He communicated to me just yesterday evening, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that students, for the most part, basically, 
have their exams under control and their assignments handily in 
place. He indicated that most professors had handed in exams to 
the registrar’s office ahead of time so that all exams, as we now 
know, are basically set for this Saturday and about half of the 
exams, or more than half of them in fact, are ready in total. 
Most profs have seen to it that provisions are in place so that 
students are not unduly penalized. 
 
And so this brings me then to comment on the real issue at stake 
here in this legislation, and that is chronic underfunding for the 
University of Saskatchewan. And I’d have you know at this 
point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I worked for five years on the 
campus of the University of Saskatchewan as Lutheran chaplain 
to students and faculty at that institution. 
 
I have walked through those hallways and met with countless 
numbers of students and faculty, met with people in 
administration, and know first hand, from my own firsthand 
experience, what some of these people at the various levels of 
academia are having to put up with and have had to put up with 
for the last seven years since this government has come into 
power. 
 
Now the minister said earlier this afternoon that sooner or later 
the strike is going to have to be settled; sooner or later the strike 
will have to be settled. Yet this same minister refuses to address 
the real issue in this strike, looming underneath it like an 
iceberg, and that is underfunding. 
 
Today he can jump into the fray on campus. But from the day 
that they were elected, they have starved the university campus 
of adequate funding for first-class, excellent education, and 
deprived Saskatchewan young people of an opportunity to grow 
and to learn and to become competitive, which is what this 
government likes to talk so much about, in a competitive world. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one only has to step onto the campus of the 
University of Saskatchewan to see that starvation firsthand. 
Since this PC government has taken over in 1982, we’ve 
experienced 23 per cent less funding per student on the campus 
of the University of Saskatchewan — 23 per cent less funding 
per student in the last seven years. And most recently we see 
this kind of trajectory perpetuated with a 1.9 per cent increase in 
funding for universities in this most recent budget. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, everyone in Saskatchewan knows 
about the waiting lists for people to get into  

hospitals. Maybe people aren’t aware that there are some 
15,000 people waiting to get into Saskatchewan hospitals, 
waiting for health care. Maybe they also don’t know that there 
are waiting lists to get into the University of Saskatchewan, 
waiting lists to get into the university. For the first time in the 
University of Saskatchewan’s history we’ve seen admissions 
quotas imposed on students entering the College of Arts and 
Sciences. 
 
(1600) 
 
And it isn’t just that there are waiting lists to get in, but once 
you get into the university there are waiting lists to get into labs, 
to get into computer rooms, to get into professors’ offices. 
Many people on the university campus like to joke about the 
waiting to get into parking lots to find a parking space, but 
when it comes to waiting to get into the university and to talk to 
a professor, they sure aren’t joking. 
 
This same minister says he doesn’t want to put responsibility or 
blame on either side; he doesn’t want to assign blame. But he 
handily ignores the fact that neither side has asked, in the first 
place, for his heavy-handed intervention. In fact just this 
morning in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix president Kristjanson of 
the university, the headlines read, “attacks back-to-work orders 
from the government.” Administration and faculty don’t want 
and don’t need this kind of government interference on their 
university campus. 
 
They are owed an opportunity by this government to sit down 
together and to consult and to see whether they can’t work out 
some of their own internal problems on their own terms, and 
not on the government’s terms. It’s absolutely unnecessary at 
this time. 
 
This same Minister of Education, Mr. Speaker, says this 
afternoon that he is acting solely in the interests of the students. 
I say, what a joke this is. Both the press reports and the personal 
reports that I have heard indicate, as I have said, that exams are 
set for this Saturday. That’s no problem for students; students 
aren’t threatened in that regard. And if more than half of the 
exams have already been handed in to the registrar’s office on 
the university campus, that certainly doesn’t constitute a threat 
to students. 
 
So to talk about being concerned solely about the interests of 
the students seems a little bit full of duplicity when the minister 
talks that way. 
 
I talked to a student this morning, Mr. Speaker, who had the 
initiative to phone me here in Regina, and he said that 
personally he sees no problems with exams, that his own exams 
aren’t threatened, and neither are those of most of the students, 
the majority of the students that he’s talked to. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think it was interesting that this particular 
young fellow noted that he didn’t believe that the university 
was in any way an essential service that needed to be legislated 
back to work. Now I think, Mr. Speaker, that that is rather an 
insightful remark for a young man on the university campus to 
make — that his own education, when it is jeopardized possibly 
to some  
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

385 
 

extent, isn’t viewed as an essential services. 
 
On the contrary — and this is what I was struck with — he saw 
the strike as essential for the future of not only his own 
education but for the larger educational picture on the university 
campus. And this was a perspective offered by a third-year 
student in the arts college at the University of Saskatchewan — 
that the strike itself, he said, was essential for the future of the 
university and for education. 
 
And for this minister then to say that he is concerned solely 
about the welfare of students doesn’t quite fit with some of the 
facts of underfunding and some of the issues involved in terms 
of the larger questions of university governance and the quality 
of education that we will find at that university in the years 
ahead. 
 
The minister’s concern certainly didn’t wash with this young 
man, because for him, Mr. Speaker, it’s . . . a student’s 
education or degree doesn’t mean very much in the first place 
because it comes from a second-class educational institution 
where faculty are dissatisfied, underpaid, under-equipped, 
where there is bickering and quarrelling between the university 
and the administration over the resources available for student 
education. 
 
This young fellow said, if students come from an institution like 
that, a degree from such an institution is not going to mean very 
much down the road. And he pointed out that while he may be 
inconvenienced in the next few days or in the next week or two 
with respect to some of his class work or his exams, he would 
rather be inconvenienced in that regard than to carry through 
life a degree that was inferior because it came from a 
second-class institution — and it would show up on every job 
application to which he applied later in life — and have people 
laugh at it because it didn’t come from a first-class educational 
institution where faculty had adequate salaries, where there 
were adequate facilities for students, and a first-class 
educational environment. 
 
I must say that I was impressed with the remarks of this young 
man, and I think they are very pertinent and very telling to the 
kind of legislation that was brought in earlier this afternoon. 
This young man had the maturity to recognize that a person 
can’t always take into consideration what’s best for himself or 
herself. An individual, a student, as he said, can’t just look at 
the end of their nose and think that that’s reality, but they have 
to look further down the road and to see what is, in fact, in their 
larger best interests. And he certainly didn’t feel, Mr. Speaker, 
that this legislation was in his best interests or in the best 
interests of the university campus as a whole. He labelled it 
“undemocratic”, and he saw in it a threat to the democratic 
process, to the process of consultation, collaboration, 
communication — all measures by which the real underlying 
issues between faculty and administration are going to be 
settled in the final analysis. 
 
Legislating the faculty back to work won’t settle the larger 
internal issues between faculty and administration; it will 
simply gloss over them and never really get at the real problem. 
And what is the real problem? As I indicated, Mr. Speaker, 
underfunding. The underfunding for the University of 
Saskatchewan is the real issue, and we’ve seen that consistently 
in the last seven years from this  

government. Fewer students granted admission to the 
University of Saskatchewan, and now if we look at the present 
effects of this underfunding in terms of the strike situation at the 
University of Saskatchewan, we just might have fewer faculty 
as well. 
 
Underfunding, you see, will force faculty to look down the road 
to see what other educational institutions are available for them 
to teach at and are willing to recognize their services and to pay 
adequately for them. University faculty realized that they 
shouldn’t have to work in an impoverished environment. 
 
I talked just yesterday evening to a constituent who again had 
taken the initiative to phone me and to contact me rather than 
the other way around. He indicated that right now, at this time, 
he is holding an offer, considering an offer from another 
educational institution — he didn’t indicate where — but that it 
was a very excruciating experience to go through this strike and 
to wonder what he should do with his future, whether he should 
strike out and accept a future at another institution of higher 
education that might fully recognize and appreciate his services, 
or if he should decide to tough it out here at the U of S which is 
chronically underfunded, and gets into situations where the 
administration and the faculty can’t talk to each other because 
of this underfunding. 
 
He also was concerned that civil rights are being violated by 
heavy-handed government tactics. And he said that in such a 
situation as this strike these civil rights have to be measured in 
terms, not of inconvenience to people, but in terms of 
fundamental individual human rights. And this was a key 
concern of his. 
 
I talked also, Mr. Speaker, to yet another constituent yesterday 
evening. Again the constituent who initiated the contact with 
me to bring her concerns. And the major issue for this 
individual was what she termed, and I’ll quote her, “the 
supreme arrogance” of this government in bringing in this 
legislation — “the supreme arrogance,” she said. 
 
Shut up and do as we say — that’s the message she got from the 
Minister of Education — and if you don’t like it, we’ll shut you 
up. That’s the message that she got. And I must say, Mr. 
Speaker, that she communicated to me her dissatisfaction at the 
pure rhetoric that she heard coming from the minister. And I’m 
giving voice to her words and her concerns now and not simply 
my own. 
 
And so we see, Mr. Speaker, that individual members of the 
faculty at the University of Saskatchewan and individual 
students are in fact very concerned, not just about the strike, and 
not just about this legislation — although they certainly are — 
but fundamentally, Mr. Speaker, they are concerned about the 
future of the educational institution that they hold near and dear. 
 
These are people who are committed to the University of 
Saskatchewan or they wouldn’t have been there in the first 
place. And these are people who see no commitment, no 
corresponding commitment from their own provincial 
government adequately to fund their enterprise of teaching and 
learning in that academic environment. 
 
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

386 
 

I know, Mr. Speaker, from firsthand experience at the 
University of Saskatchewan campus, that the faculty there is 
committed. I know, again from firsthand personal experience, 
that the administration there is concerned about the quality of 
education that they offer to students. What’s the problem then? 
If we have a faculty that’s committed, if we have an 
administration that’s concerned about the highest quality 
education that they can provide, what’s the problem? 
 
The problem is very squarely with the provincial government 
not funding the University of Saskatchewan adequately. That’s 
the problem. The government is the problem. Underfunding is 
the problem. Because you can have all the commitment in the 
world from the faculty and you can have all the concern for 
high-class education on the part of the administration, but if 
they don’t have money to work with, they won’t get very far in 
terms of providing educational excellence. They won’t get very 
far. 
 
This government wouldn’t be stepping in now to interfere with 
the independence of the university if it had been adequately 
funding it over the last seven years. Instead what we have seen 
is the administration having been pressed into the role of a 
miser. What else was the option if they didn’t have money 
there? The administration has been pressed into the role of 
grasping, self-serving individuals, and that’s certainly not the 
case in either instance, Mr. Speaker. These are people who are 
committed and concerned to what they’re doing there on the 
university campus. But they are pressed into that role by this 
government that is totally unprepared to make a full and 
adequate commitment to excellence in education. 
 
Just yesterday evening I visited with educators from the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation and received a button that 
said, “Make Education a Priority.” Make education a priority: it 
didn’t say education is a priority, because with this government 
it isn’t. We need the verb, “make,” the imperative: make 
education a priority — because with this government it isn’t. It 
isn’t a priority on the elementary school level or the secondary 
level or the post-secondary level, and that’s why we see the 
need for this government to bring in the legislation in 
heavy-handed fashion. 
 
(1615) 
 
This government has perpetrated the problems between faculty 
and administration at the University of Saskatchewan. I say, 
Mr. Speaker, it has perpetrated these problems over the past 
seven years because it has no substantial commitment to higher 
education and educational excellence at the University of 
Saskatchewan. I say that on the basis of firsthand experience; I 
say that on the basis of communications from students and 
faculty, from my constituency which adjoins the University of 
Saskatchewan directly. 
 
And for these reasons, Mr. Speaker, I speak against this 
unnecessary, arbitrary, and undemocratic Bill 3. Thank you 
very much for your attention. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Even if the 
public is not aware of all the issues underlying the dispute, of 
all the issues underlying university underfunding, all the issues 
underlying the problem here before us, I think that the public 
and the people of Saskatchewan do understand some simple 
concepts such as preventative maintenance. Even if the words 
are long, I think they understand the concept. 
 
I think people understand that in order for things to run 
successfully, you have to pay attention to the things. You have 
to make the minor repairs and the minor adjustments to make 
sure they run right. You make sure that the thing has the right 
fuel or energy so that it can run. 
 
I think that people understand, for example . . . and most people 
have a car, and let’s take the car as an example. Most people 
understand that their car needs a regular oil change from time to 
time. Most people understand that their car needs lubrication 
from time to time. People understand that you need these things 
to make sure that the car runs well, to make sure that you will 
avoid future repairs. 
 
People know . . . and even if it’s sometimes from painful 
experience, Mr. Speaker, they know that if you ignore 
something such as an oil change, and if you ignore something 
such as a grease job, that you will have problems in the future. 
They know that if you ignore the oil changes, your engine will 
ultimately wear out, and much faster than if you did not make 
the oil changes. They know that if you do not undertake the 
necessary lubrication that you’re going to have to be spending 
money far ahead its time for things such as tie-rods. People 
know those things. People know that. 
 
And I would submit, Mr. Speaker, so it is with the university. 
What we see today is the logical outcome, the logical outcome 
of years of underfunding, years of neglect by the PC 
government. I think that there is very little dispute on these 
points. I think that it’s recognized by students, it’s recognized 
by the teachers, it’s recognized by the administrators in our 
universities. It’s recognized also by the people of 
Saskatchewan. They know that successive budgets by the PC 
government have starved education, have starved health, have 
starved a number of things in this province. And so it is with the 
university, Mr. Speaker — starvation. 
 
Now the government members will try to point out and try to 
make the pitch that, well we’ve increased operating grants to 
the universities; it’s more today than it was in 1982 when we 
took office. And I would have to agree with them that they’re 
correct. There’s more money today for the universities than 
there was in 1982. It’s true enough, but it’s not enough. 
 
What the government members fail to take into account, what 
they fail to mention, is that since 1982 we have seen an increase 
in inflation in the order of about 35 per cent. What they fail to 
mention, what they fail to take into account, is that there has 
been a substantial increase in student enrolment since 1982, and 
I think that enrolment increase is understandable given the 
limited employment  
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

387 
 

opportunities for our young people in Saskatchewan since 1982. 
 
Increasingly, young people have gone to the universities to seek 
a better education, to better prepare themselves to take 
advantage of the limited job opportunities that there might be in 
this province and elsewhere in Canada. And I understand also 
that they’re leaving Saskatchewan in record numbers, Mr. 
Speaker, to seek those opportunities elsewhere. 
 
Well when you take all those things into account, when you 
take into account inflation, when you take into account 
increases in student enrolment, a different picture gets 
presented, and it becomes clear that real operating grants for 
students, per student, have declined drastically. 
 
Operating grants, Mr. Speaker, in 1982-83 approached $9,000 
per student — 1982 is when the PC government took office in 
Saskatchewan — this has declined to $6,900 per student in 
’87-88. This is a substantial decrease, a decrease of 23 per cent 
since the PC government took office. That’s the Tory record — 
a Tory record of underfunding, a Tory record of neglect, and is 
it any wonder that we see now the outcome of that neglect? Is it 
any wonder that we see now the outcome of that underfunding, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
This Bill is not the first symptom or the first sign of that 
neglect. Reference has been made in this debate to crowded 
classrooms. Reference has been made in this debate to a 
shortage of facilities, facilities such as libraries, facilities such 
as laboratories, laboratory equipment. 
 
Reference has been made to this House by university students 
as recently as yesterday, and throughout the years that this 
government has been in power, that they are underfunding, that 
they are undercutting higher education in this province. The 
government chooses to ignore that. 
 
The university community knows these things painfully, and 
it’s no surprise, Mr. Speaker, that the morale on the part of 
students, the part of teachers and our administrators at the 
university is at a very low ebb; that their morale is sinking and 
continues to sink. And it’s no surprise that, given the neglect 
and underfunding that we experience, a dispute over wages and 
conditions within the university community should erupt. I 
think that’s the logical outcome of the kind of neglect that 
we’ve seen from the PC government since they took office in 
1982. 
 
It’s no surprise to the university, it’s no surprise to this side of 
the House, and it’s no surprise to the people of Saskatchewan. 
And it may be a surprise to the government, and that doesn’t 
surprise me, Mr. Speaker. This government has an unenviable 
record of incompetence, neglect, and mismanagement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that the people of Saskatchewan, if they 
could speak today to the government, would say that it’s time 
that the government came to its senses; that it’s time that the 
government recognized that new priorities are needed in our 
province today. The government needs  

to set out new priorities. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan would say that it’s time they 
recognize that you cannot neglect our most treasured 
institutions — whether it’s our universities, whether it’s 
medicare, whether it’s our school system — that you cannot 
neglect these institutions and expect these institutions to 
continue to function effectively, to function as if there were no 
problems. 
 
I think the people of Saskatchewan want to say that it’s time 
that the government recognized that you cannot expect to 
continue to spend on waste, to spend on patronage, and have the 
necessary funds for the people’s real priorities — real priorities 
such as health, real priorities such as education. 
 
It’s time the government recognized that you cannot afford to 
mismanage and still come out ahead. Even if the Premier of our 
province fervently believes that, I think the record now shows 
that you cannot afford to do that. And it’s time that government 
listened to the people; it’s time that the government understood 
that you cannot afford to mismanage. 
 
It’s time the government recognized that the people of 
Saskatchewan do not support continued neglect of our most 
important institutions — institutions such as our universities. 
And it’s time that the Premier of Saskatchewan recognized that 
you cannot take all of your time, that you cannot spend all of 
your time on the trade deal and have the time to run the 
government here at home and to run it effectively. A Premier of 
this province can simply not take 90 per cent of his time or 
more to be flitting across this country and into the United States 
trying to preach a bad, bad trade deal to the people of those 
other jurisdictions, and have the necessary time to devote to the 
crucial issues here in this province. He will not have the time to 
deal adequately with the health care issues and the health care 
problems in this province. He will not have the time to make 
sure that crises such as this one that we’re dealing with today do 
not arise. He will not have the time. 
 
And my feeling is, Mr. Speaker, that should the government fail 
to recognize that . . . and I don’t have very much more to say on 
this, Mr. Speaker, but I would say that should the government 
fail to recognize that, fail to recognize that you must begin to 
manage the affairs of the province competently; must for once 
stop this spending on patronage and waste; must begin to 
reprioritize our spending, to have less for waste, to have less for 
patronage, to stop spending $34,000 a day, I believe it is, for 
vacant office space in this province . . . 
 
The government needs to realize that you cannot make bad 
decisions as we’ve just witnessed the other day where you sell 
an office building for $280,000, rent one-half of it back for 
$370,000, and by anybody’s figuring — with the possible 
exception of the members opposite — that’s a bad deal and 
you’re losing money; that you cannot continue to do those kinds 
of things if you want to have the money for the real priorities in 
this province, if you want to have the money for the priorities 
the people see as being necessary — priorities such as our 
universities, priorities such as medicare, priorities such as  
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

388 
 

agriculture, priorities such as our school system. 
 
The government needs to understand what it is the people are 
saying. And I would venture to say, Mr. Speaker, that if the 
government chooses to ignore what it is the people are saying 
about what our priorities will be, that the people will speak 
loudly in the upcoming by-elections to give them that message 
and will let them know in uncertain terms that our priorities 
need to be restructured. 
 
The last time, Mr. Speaker, we had a by-election, the Premier 
swallowed his pride and the Premier said, well, the people of 
Saskatchewan have spoken and we’ve been wrong in how 
we’ve spent our money and we’re going to reprioritize and 
we’re going to do things differently. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why do we have to wait a further month to find 
out what the real situation and that there is a crying need for the 
government to change its priorities? Why do we have to wait 
that further month? 
 
I say to the government, come to your senses. I say to the 
government, listen to the people. I say to the government, begin 
to put forward the priorities that the people of this province 
want. Fund the universities, make sure the universities have the 
adequate money to keep going, because you have not been 
providing that. You have not been providing that. And if you 
take the position, as you have in the past, that somehow, well, 
we’re spending more money, that everything is okay, that I’m 
all right Jack, there’s simply no problem out there, then I think 
that this government has an ostrich-like approach to governing 
— like an ostrich — that it chooses to ignore the real problems 
and the dangers that are out there. 
 
(1630) 
 
And there are real signals, Mr. Speaker, real signals that the 
people of Saskatchewan are dissatisfied with this government. 
And I think truer signals will come in a month’s time, but that 
there are real signals that the people are sick and tired, sick and 
tired of the underfunding of our education system, and not just 
in the universities. 
 
I had many people in my constituency express concerns to me 
about the underfunding of our school system. They see a need 
to increasingly put more money through their property taxes 
and unfair tax to support the local school system. They see 
themselves having to pay increasing sums every year for 
income taxes, personal taxes in this province to fund an 
education system. They see all those things, yet they see the 
quality of services declining. 
 
They say to me and they say to members on this side — and 
I’m sure they say it to members on that side, but they don’t 
seem to be listening — they say that my children will not have 
this program or that program in our education system that they 
had last year or the year before, because the money isn’t there. 
 
We’ve all heard many times over in this House the concerns 
expressed about health, the long waiting lists in Saskatoon and 
Regina, the inability of people to get the proper medical care 
and health care in this province, and that’s a reflection again of 
the wrong priorities this  

government has set in its spending. These people seem to 
believe that you can afford to continue to mismanage, afford to 
continue to misspend and still come out ahead, as the Premier 
said some few short years ago when he said, well, anybody can 
afford to mismanage Saskatchewan and still come out ahead. 
 
And I think now we see the folly of that. Today reflects years of 
neglect and underfunding by the Tory administration in one 
specific example in the university system. We see that neglect 
in other areas, but in this particular case, this Bill comes as no 
surprise. The work stoppages comes as no surprise. The labour 
dispute comes as no surprise. The low morale in our universities 
comes as no surprise. The overcrowded class-rooms comes as 
no surprise. The inadequate laboratories comes as no surprise. 
None of these things come as a surprise to the people of 
Saskatchewan who understand some simple concepts: that if 
you have an institution and you want that institution to function 
well, you need to make sure that you provide that institution 
with the necessary funding; that you cannot starve that 
institution and expect that institution to function and to function 
well. 
 
And this is one institution, Mr. Speaker, that I think we all have 
a stake in to make sure that it continues to function well; that it 
provides the educational opportunities for the young people of 
Saskatchewan and, I might also say, provides the kind of 
leadership that it has provided in the past for all of higher 
education in this country and in North America. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, is a reflection of the misdeeds, the 
misspending, the mismanagement of that government. It’s time 
they came to their senses. It’s time they set new priorities so 
that we see no further need for this kind of band-aid, stopgap 
solutions to the real problems of this society. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
sad day to have to take part in a debate of this nature — a 
debate, Mr. Speaker, that is necessary, in large part, because of 
the policies of the Minister of Education and his inability, Mr. 
Speaker, to understand the problems of people working in 
post-secondary education in this province, and because of his 
lack of caring and appreciation for the University of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To put this in context, Mr. Speaker, the first point I’d like to 
make is that we’ve seen a government that in the past year and a 
half, and particularly since the member from Weyburn has 
become the Minister of Education, has fostered continual 
industrial relations problems among all professional educators 
in this province. 
 
And I want to review the record for a minute, Mr. Speaker, 
because first, Mr. Speaker, last year you will recall that we had 
a debate in this legislature on the decertification of technical 
institute instructors and staff in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And the government of this province, Mr. Speaker, chose very 
consciously to launch a direct attack on Saskatchewan’s 
technical institutes by doing two things: first of all, by gutting 
the  
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

389 
 

institutions like Kelsey, and STI (Saskatchewan technical 
institute), and Wascana of some of their most experienced 
instructors, either by way of early retirements or by way of 
direct lay-offs, so that at Kelsey, for instance, we in effect saw 
the loss of almost one-third of the staff in the institution. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, we saw a situation where the government 
brought in legislation that actually took away the trade union — 
the right of instructors to belong to the trade union that they 
currently belong to. In other words, we saw a decertification 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. And the faculty working in 
Saskatchewan’s technical institutes and the instructors working 
in the urban-based community colleges in this province — in 
Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw and Prince Albert — lost their 
right to be represented by the Saskatchewan Government 
Employees’ Union by way of legislation that the members 
opposite chose to bring into this Assembly. 
 
So that was the first attack on professional educators, Mr. 
Speaker, was the initiative by this government to take away the 
right of instructors in Saskatchewan’s technical institutes to 
belong to the union of their choice that had represented them up 
until the time of the legislation which was introduced late last 
year. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we saw a government that, as a result of 
its underfunding of the kindergarten to grade 12 system in this 
province, provoked a 16-month contract dispute between 
teachers in this province and the bargaining team that represents 
the provincial government and school trustees in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, because of this government’s underfunding 
of K to 12 education in this province with, in fact, a 1 per cent 
cut in school operating grants last year and then an increase of 
only 2 per cent in school operating grants this year, we saw a 
situation, Mr. Speaker, where it took 16 months for teachers to 
get a contract settlement with the bargaining team on which the 
government has major representation. 
 
And once again therefore, Mr. Speaker, we saw a situation 
where, as a result of the government’s underfunding of 
education in Saskatchewan, as a result of that underfunding, in 
effect, the morale of professional educators and their ability to 
feel that they were appreciated by the government of the day 
was severely curtailed. 
 
Morale today, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan’s technical 
institutes is dismal. People are depressed. Faculty there are 
depressed about the state of underfunding. They’re depressed 
about the fact that their ability to bargain collectively has been 
very much interfered with by this government. 
 
Teachers in Saskatchewan are upset that it took 16 months to 
get a contract settlement, Mr. Speaker, and that they had to 
come down to the legislature here in Regina and demonstrate in 
front of the legislature. More than 2,000 of them had to address 
the Minister of Education before he began to understand that 
the salary increases of, in effect, zero per cent, that were being 
proposed by the  

bargaining team on which he has representatives, were 
unsatisfactory to the teaching profession and were putting at 
stake the quality of education in the province of Saskatchewan 
in the kindergarten to grade 12 system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I mention these two case examples because I believe they 
are directly relevant to the current difficulty that we are 
experiencing as a result of this government’s policies at the 
University of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And that is, Mr. 
Speaker, that it doesn’t matter whether we’re talking about the 
technical institutes of this province, or we’re talking about the 
kindergarten to grade 12 system of this province, or we’re 
talking about our precious university system in the province of 
Saskatchewan, this government doesn’t understand the 
importance of education in Saskatchewan. They don’t 
understand the importance of quality education in the province 
of Saskatchewan. They don’t understand the relationship 
between a fair salary increase for professional educators and the 
maintenance of those quality standards in education in the 
province of Saskatchewan. They don’t understand, Mr. Speaker, 
that the professional educators in this province need to feel 
from time to time that they are genuinely appreciated by the 
Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so what we’re seeing here is the third example, since the 
member for Weyburn became the Minister of Education, of a 
situation that has been allowed to develop that reflects, first of 
all, the dismal state of quality education in this province, in this 
case at our universities as a result of underfunding; and 
secondly, Mr. Speaker, that reflects the growing problem of 
morale in our educational institutions, in this case at the 
University of Saskatchewan. But in many ways this is not all 
that different in some important ways, Mr. Speaker, from the 
crisis that we saw developing in the K to 12 system and in our 
technical institutes in this province. 
 
So this Bill, Mr. Speaker, I see this Bill as part of a continuing 
attack by this government, and particularly by this minister, on 
the educational system of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, with that in mind, I want to specifically 
address some of the issues that this Bill raises. And the first 
point, Mr. Speaker, that I want to make is that Bill 3 comes 
about because this government has not been willing to make a 
priority of helping to bring the parties in this dispute together 
and, above all, to be willing to give them another chance to get 
back to the bargaining table. 
 
When I look at how late the process of conciliation began and 
how few steps the Minister of Education has been willing to 
take to bring the parties in this dispute together, I’m appalled, 
Mr. Speaker. I’m appalled, and what is particularly appalling 
about this piece of legislation is that neither party in the dispute 
sought this legislation from the Minister of Education. 
 
And the Minister of Education has just returned to the House 
after an absence, Mr. Speaker, and I . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. The hon. 
member I’m sure realizes that he should not refer to  
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

390 
 

the absence of members. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I respect your ruling. But I do 
want to say, Mr. Speaker, that neither party in this dispute asked 
for this Bill, Mr. Speaker. Neither party in this dispute asked the 
Minister of Education to intervene in the way that he’s currently 
intervening. 
 
I’m sure that both parties in the dispute would have welcomed 
any creative suggestions for the resolution of the dispute that 
the Minister of Education might have wanted to offer. But the 
minister chose not to offer creative solutions, Mr. Speaker. 
Instead, the minister offered only the heavy hand of government 
in the form of back-to-work legislation to settle this dispute. 
And he decided, Mr. Speaker, I think at a highly inappropriate 
time, to bring this legislation forward. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a situation in which the Minister 
of Education chose, shortly after the conciliator began his work, 
to threaten back-to-work legislation in this Assembly. 
 
Last Wednesday, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education rose 
in this Assembly and made it very clear that he intended to 
intervene in this dispute if it wasn’t very quickly settled. And, 
Mr. Speaker, from the time that the Minister of Education rose 
in this Assembly last Wednesday and threatened to intervene in 
this dispute, the process of conciliation was very, very seriously 
hampered. 
 
(1645) 
 
I invite the Minister of Education to go and talk to either of the 
parties in this dispute and I’m sure that they will candidly tell 
him that his statements in this House last Wednesday damaged 
the process of conciliation, damaged the collective bargaining 
process, and did absolutely nothing to enhance the ability of the 
two parties to work out an agreement. And I think, Mr. Speaker, 
that that is very, very, very unfortunate. 
 
So. Mr. Speaker, we see now for the first time in Canadian 
history a government that is coming forward with back-to-work 
legislation for faculty members at a Canadian university. And I 
say, Mr. Speaker, that this first is a very sorry first, not just for 
the people of Saskatchewan, but for all Canadians. 
 
And it sets a very, very dangerous precedent, Mr. Speaker — a 
very dangerous precedent in that, once introduced, once 
back-to-work legislation is introduced once in this Assembly 
for this kind of a strike situation, there’s no reason to think that 
it won’t be introduced again. 
 
What guarantee, Mr. Speaker, do members, faculty members at 
the University of Saskatchewan have that they won’t be faced 
with a similar situation on another occasion when they go on 
strike? And what sort of precedent does this set in terms of 
intervention by other provincial governments in similar disputes 
that may occur in other parts of Canada? 
 
Now I say, Mr. Speaker, that this piece of legislation is going to 
be highly divisive. I’m not sure if the Minister of  

Education recognizes, Mr. Speaker, how much this Bill will 
damage industrial relations at the University of Saskatchewan, 
but I say to him, Mr. Speaker, that if this Bill is passed, the 
Minister of Education will have done untold damage to the 
relations between faculty and administration, and between 
faculty members themselves, in some cases, on the University 
of Saskatchewan campus. 
 
This policy, Mr. Speaker, seeks to pit faculty members against 
faculty members. It seeks to pit faculty members against 
university administration. It seeks to pit faculty members 
against students, Mr. Speaker. It seeks to foster further division 
on the University of Saskatchewan campus. And I say to the 
Minister of Education, as the member for the university area, I 
should know better than he what the implications of this Bill 
will be. 
 
I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Education needs to 
take a good deal more time to study what the implications of 
this legislation will be on the future of industrial relations on the 
University of Saskatchewan campus, because I say to the 
Minister of Education that this Bill will foster further 
disharmony and create more problems in industrial relations on 
the University of Saskatchewan campus than it will resolve. 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, it’s highly inappropriate at this 
point in time. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s my contention that despite the fact that 
there is certainly going to be great inconvenience to students 
caused by the continuation of the strike — no one denies that 
there will be significant inconvenience caused to students. That 
is, if the exam schedule is delayed for more than another two or 
three days, there will be very, very significant inconvenience 
caused the students on the university campus. And I don’t 
dispute the Minister of Education’s claims in that regard at all, 
Mr. Speaker — but I say, Mr. Speaker, that the only time that 
back-to-work legislation can be justified in this province is if 
there is a legitimate emergency. 
 
And I say to the Minister of Education that at this point, Mr. 
Speaker, we do not have an emergency on the university 
campus. And surely, Mr. Speaker, no one is going to argue that, 
in the traditional sense of the word, the work of university 
faculty is an essential service in this province. This is not for a 
moment to demean the great importance of the work of the 
university faculty to this province and to the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But surely, Mr. Speaker, no one can argue that their service is 
an essential service. Their service is not, for instance, equivalent 
to the service of health workers where, if the services of health 
workers and hospital workers are withdrawn, the health of 
certain people, or the lives of certain people in this province 
may be jeopardized. This is not an equivalent situation to that at 
all, Mr. Speaker, and for that reason alone, the government 
should have great pause to be bringing in back-to-work 
legislation. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill has come about because the 
government of this province has been unwilling to look to 
alternative solutions to avoid this very serious crisis now on the 
University of Saskatchewan campus in terms of industrial 
relations, this very serious breakdown  
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

391 
 

in industrial relations between faculty and administration. And I 
say, Mr. Speaker, that the alternative for the government was 
obvious. If this government had brought in a funding increase to 
the University of Saskatchewan of even 5 or 6 per cent; if the 
funding increase for this year had at least reflected the rate of 
inflation that we’re currently experiencing in this province, I 
say, Mr. Speaker, that I am confident that the current dispute 
could have been resolved at the bargaining table. I have no 
doubt at all, Mr. Speaker, that the current dispute between 
faculty and administration would have, in large part, certainly 
with respect to salary matters . . . 
 
There are other important issues in this dispute. There is at 
stake in this dispute a great deal more than just the question of 
salary. The whole question of quality of education in the 
province of Saskatchewan at the university is at stake. The 
question of the right of faculty members to have input into 
administrative appointments at the University of Saskatchewan 
is at stake. 
 
But clearly, one of the issues — two of the issues, in fact — 
that could have been resolved by a funding increase to the 
university are the questions of salary and are the questions of 
quality of education in so far — particularly as it relates to the 
university’s ability to hire additional faculty, to hire additional 
staff and to correct many of the problems that relate to the 
underfunding of important services like library services at the 
University of Saskatchewan. And I have no doubt, Mr. Speaker, 
that an increase of 5 or 6 per cent would have at least provided 
the additional funds that were required to get a contract 
settlement on salary matters in the current dispute. 
 
And if this government had been serious about avoiding this 
very difficult dispute that the university is currently facing, it 
would have given the University of Saskatchewan the three or 
four additional millions of dollars that it needed to avoid the 
current crisis. 
 
Now I say, Mr. Speaker, that what we have instead, then, is a 
government that has determined that its solution to the problems 
of the University of Saskatchewan will be ones of what I would 
describe as manipulation. Rather than dealing with the urgent 
issue of the underfunding of the university; rather than being 
willing to put more money into improving the quality of 
education at the University of Saskatchewan; rather than being 
willing to provide additional funding to hire the extra faculty 
and staff members that are needed to avoid many of the 
overcrowded classrooms that we see on the University of 
Saskatchewan campus; and rather than being willing to improve 
funding to the university so that faculty members could begin to 
be paid in a manner equivalent to the salary scales that are 
offered at other universities on the Prairies — because at the 
present time, Mr. Speaker, faculty members at the University of 
Saskatchewan are paid less, in many cases significantly less, 
than their counterparts at other universities in Saskatchewan 
and Alberta and Manitoba, Mr. Speaker — if the government 
had been willing to come forward with the additional funding 
that is required, then I say, Mr. Speaker, that this legislation 
would have been unnecessary. I say that the Minister of 
Education would not have needed to bring in this Bill. I say that 
the current dispute would not have  

existed. 
 
So what we’re seeing today, Mr. Speaker, is a government that 
is, in effect, diverting attention from the major issue, which is 
the underfunding of the University of Saskatchewan, and 
therefore, Mr. Speaker, trying to resolve the current difficulties 
on the university campus in a completely inappropriate way, by 
in effect using the heavy hand of law by introducing 
back-to-work legislation instead of using the more thoughtful 
and gentle hand, and more appropriate hand, of improving the 
funding of the University of Saskatchewan in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill not only jeopardizes industrial 
relations on the university campus in the short term, but it 
threatens the ability for effective collective bargaining in the 
longer term on the university campus, because a government 
that’s willing to introduce back-to-work legislation once, is a 
government that is, in effect, hanging the threat of back-to-work 
legislation on University of Saskatchewan faculty for many, 
many years to come. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that that’s very, 
very inappropriate indeed. 
 
What we have, Mr. Speaker, what we in effect have in this 
legislation is a naked attempt to postpone the collective 
bargaining process that simply invites future strife and does 
nothing to resolve current difficulties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s noteworthy that this Bill in fact 
provides no mechanism at all for resolving the current dispute. I 
suppose that if the government had been serious about a 
mechanism for resolving the current dispute — I want to make 
it clear I’m not advocating at all the introduction of 
back-to-work legislation — but if they were serious about 
providing a mechanism in this Bill for resolving the dispute, 
they would have provided probably some mechanism for 
binding arbitration, Mr. Speaker. But I note with interest that 
there’s no such mechanism in this Bill. 
 
There is no such mechanism in this Bill, and I suspect that one 
of the reasons why there’s no such mechanism in this Bill is 
that binding arbitration might have required a significant 
increase in the amount of money that the administration would 
ultimately have offered the faculty members of the University 
of Saskatchewan. And in effect, Mr. Speaker, that would have 
forced this government to increase the budget of the University 
of Saskatchewan in the current fiscal year, and this government 
didn’t want to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I suspect that that’s one of the reasons why there is not 
provision for binding arbitration in this Bill, because that 
would’ve meant that the government would have to have been 
prepared to take the risk, to put more money into the U of S 
operating budget, and they weren’t prepared to do that, Mr. 
Speaker. I suspect that that demonstrates their real motives in 
introducing this Bill; their motive, namely, that they’re 
unprepared to properly fund the universities in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to particularly point to some of the 
specific inadequacies in this Bill before I address, in detail, the 
larger issue of university funding. And I want to  
  



 
April 7, 1988 

 

392 
 

particularly draw the Minister of Education’s attention to two 
aspects of the Bill. 
 
The first one, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that this Bill, apart from 
being a very bad and inappropriate piece of legislation, directly 
interferes with the autonomy, the academic autonomy, of the 
University of Saskatchewan. And I want to explain, Mr. 
Speaker, specifically how that comes to be the case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education, in bringing down this 
Bill, has made a provision under which the mediator has a 
mandate to not only deal with salary issues in this dispute but 
also to deal with questions such as the request by university 
faculty to have more input into administrative appointments at 
the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
It deals with such issues, Mr. Speaker, as the request that the 
faculty are making to have a joint committee of faculty and 
board of governors established to look at the whole question of 
faculty input into administrative appointments. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is clearly an internal matter for the 
University of Saskatchewan. And yet this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
provides for the mediator to report to the Minister of Labour on 
a number of questions, including the question of faculty 
members having input into administrative appointments. 
 
There’s nothing in this Bill that excludes the mediator from 
reporting on that issue, Mr. Speaker, nothing at all. And that’s 
one example . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. It being five o’clock, this House 
does now stand recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


