


















































April 18, 1988 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 18, 1988 
 
 

655 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Energy and Mines 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 23 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. The question before the committee is 
estimates for Energy and Mines. Would the minister introduce 
her officials. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Tonight I 
have with me for estimates from the Department of Energy and 
Mines, the deputy minister to my immediate right, Mr. John 
Reid. Behind Mr. John Reid is the assistant to the deputy, Mr. 
Ray Clayton. Next to Ray is Pat Youzwa. And next, on my 
immediate left is Mr. Bruce Wilson, and behind Mr. Bruce 
Wilson is Mr. Les Beck. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to, on 
behalf of the opposition, welcome the officials for the 
department here this evening, and I’m sure we’ll have a very 
educating evening. 
 
I’d like to start out very quickly, Madam Minister, and I’d like 
to ask you, as Minister of Energy and Mines in the province of 
Saskatchewan, what do you believe your role is in the areas of 
energy and energy policy development. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, and to the hon. member 
from Regina North West, I basically see a couple of roles when 
it comes to the minister and the Department of Energy and 
mines within any government across Canada, and I speak, 
basically, of provincial governments right now. 
 
Obviously the one is one of regulations and the monitoring of 
the resources and the collection of revenues, making sure that 
regulations are being adhered to, regulations that flow from the 
various Acts that the department has responsibility for. 
 
I guess more important than that, or perhaps it comes first, is 
that of setting the policy of policies and the framework from 
which development can take place of these resources. And, Mr. 
Chairman when I speak of development, I think of all the 
natural resources or non-renewable resources within the 
province from oil and gas to gold and coal, potash, uranium, 
and other minerals that we may have. Those are the two basic 
functions that I see within our department. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Within that framework, Madam Minister, 
what is your — as a minister — person priority and objective, 
and what is the government’s priority and objective with regard 
to energy policy? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The priorities, I think, have been stated 
relatively clearly under this administration in the last term and 
since 1986. And I would see those priorities as one of 
development of our non-renewable resources within a safe 
environment for the workers and also with 

paying attention to environment and issues such as 
conservation. 
 
I guess there are some people who would say that 
pro-development is in conflict when it comes to environment 
and conservation issues, but I see a balance in there, and when 
the priorities are set it is in fact one of development. From the 
development flows, for obvious reasons, revenue, but I think 
more importantly to the revenue, Mr. Chairman, comes the 
issues of jobs, the economic development of the communities 
where those resources are, and the taxation base along with it. 
Not only does it allow economic development but it provides 
some social well-being when people are gainfully employed. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister has 
indicated that her priorities . . . what her priorities and what the 
government’s priorities are. And it seems to me that when you 
look at what she has said and what she has done and what the 
government has done, there doesn’t seem to be a marriage of 
the two, whether her priorities that she has just stated are not in 
fact what the government is doing but more what the 
government would like to do. That perhaps would be the big 
question here. 
 
Madam Minister, because of your government’s short-sighted 
and unsound and senseless royalty holiday policy from ’81 to 
’85, when prices of oil were high and profits to oil companies 
were the highest they have ever been, the people of this 
province are faced to date with lost revenues of approximately 
$2 billion, a huge deficit, and once again this year, a substantial 
increase in taxes. 
 
What has happened is that the government, through their 
mismanagement and through their patronage policies, part of 
the government, have left the people of this province with the 
fastest growing deficit in North America. We now have a deficit 
of $3.7 billion or thereabouts in operating, and about $7.7 
billion in Crown corporation capital debt. What this means, 
Madam Minister, is that the taxpayers of this province are now 
faced with a fantastic amount — almost an incomprehensible 
amount — of interest payments just on the debt alone. 
 
With regard to the operating deficit of $3.7 billion, there is 
around a $340 million interest cost to the taxpayers of this 
province on an annual basis, and that’s just for this current 
fiscal year. And what that means, Mr. Chairman, is that every 
woman, man, and child in this province are faced with an 
interest cost of about $3,400 each per year — that’s a $3,400 a 
year per man, woman, and child. For a family of four, that’s 
nearly $15,000 a year interest payments. 
 
What this government has done, as well, is not just left a legacy 
that future generations will be paying for, but they have, as well 
with the deficit, done a double dirty, in my view, on the people 
of this province. With the deficit, if you are going to create jobs 
and charge the economy — that is charge up the economy, not 
charge the economy — perhaps a deficit is worthwhile. But 
what has happened here in this province and with this 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

656 
 

Conservative government is that we have seen the fastest 
growing deficit in North America be established by this 
Conservative government, and with that, Mr. Chairman . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask leave of the 
House to introduce some guests in the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Martin: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I want to welcome to 
the House, introduce to all the members and yourself, the 83rd 
Regina Cub Pack. They meet at Wilfred Walker. There are 32 
of them here and a fine looking bunch, as you can see. They 
have with them chaperons and Cub teachers, Bud Green, Mike 
Molloy, John Yaehne, David Jeggo, and Mark Poll. And in 
addition to the 31 in the Speaker’s gallery, we also have on the 
floor Genne Draper and his mother Donna Draper. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think almost all of us here at some time or other 
were a Cub and, perhaps, could even recall the prayer of the 
Cubs, and perhaps I can remember it too: 
 

I promise to do my best, to do my duty to God and the 
Queen, to obey the laws of the Wolf Cub Pack, and to do a 
good turn to everyone, every day. 

 
Mr. Chairman, would the members of the House please 
welcome the 83rd Cub Pack. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — I too would like to join the member from Regina 
Wascana in welcoming the 83rd Regina Cub Pack. Why I rise 
on this occasion is that the contact person, Mr. Bud Green, is a 
long-time acquaintance of mine and has shared some time with 
me and has been in my house. And I just want to take this 
opportunity to welcome the group and especially my friend, 
Bud Green. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Energy and Mines 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 23 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. What we have 
seen as a legacy from this government and its policies, Mr. 
Chairman, is a deficit of $3.7 billion, $3,700 of interest debt, 
depending on what year you calculate it. The latest calculations 
is $3,400 per man, woman, and child. 
 
For every Cub in this Assembly today, they are carrying with 
them an interest payment on an annual basis of $3,700 per year 
as of right now. As the deficit grows, Mr. 

Chairman, the debt on their shoulders grows as well. And 
where, where in that, Mr. Chairman, is the Government of 
Saskatchewan going to get the money to pay for this kind of 
burgeoning debt? Well, what they’ve done is very clear. Rather 
than to create employment, which would generate money in the 
economy, which would generate business activity in the 
economy, and through the multiplier effect of 3:1 would 
generate a significant amount of additional tax revenue through 
personal income taxes, sales taxes, and the like, what they have 
done, Mr. Chairman, is that they have forgone about $2 billion 
of royalty income to the large multinationals, which has left the 
province. 
 
What we have seen, Mr. Chairman, is not just a deficit of $3.7 
billion, but we have seen, as well, a total lack of credibility 
displayed in spades by this Conservative government. We have 
seen, for example, in writing, in pamphlets after pamphlets, in 
commitments after commitments by all the members opposite, 
that they were going to decrease personal income tax by 10 per 
cent if they became government. Well that promise, as all the 
taxpayers in this province know, is gone. 
 
That promise, Mr. Chairman, has not materialized. Instead, in 
fact, of a 10 per cent personal income tax reduction they have 
added another tax on to the people of this province’s personal 
income tax rate, the flat tax, and we now have an additional tax 
on this province in terms of personal income of about 30 per 
cent since they got elected five, six years ago. 
 
As well, Mr. Chairman, we have seen their credibility shattered 
when they made a promise to do away with the sales tax. They 
promised to eliminate the 5 per cent E&H tax in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Instead of eliminating the sales tax, Mr. 
Chairman, they have increased it by 40 per cent. It has no 
zoomed from 5 per cent to 7 per cent. And this, Mr. Chairman, 
is another clear example of the lack of credibility of the 
Conservative government opposite. 
 
What they’ve also done in the past, in terms of affecting their 
credibility and destroying it, is they have promised to do away 
with the gas tax. The Premier of this province, the member from 
Estevan, stood out front of this Legislative Assembly Building 
in May of 1982, and he promised to the TV cameras and the 
people of this province and to all the people that were there, that 
as long as there was a Conservative government in this 
province, we would never see a gas tax reintroduced. That is 
what the Premier said. It’s on the record, it’s in newspapers, it’s 
on television film, and it’s in the ears and the memories, seared 
in the memories of people around this province as another 
example of the lack of credibility of the Premier of this 
province and the lack of credibility of this government opposite. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the reason I’m mentioning some of these major 
difficulties the government is crippled with right now — their 
lack of credibility, the massive debt that they’ve been the author 
of, the fact they’ve burdened taxpayers in record amounts with 
tax increases, and they have lost all credibility — is because, 
Mr. Chairman we want to determine tonight, and we want to 
establish tonight, that whatever this government says is 
tarnished 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

657 
 

with that lack of credibility. And the people of this province 
must be aware of that, and they will, with respect to answers 
that are given tonight and from previous and further ministers. 
 
Mr. Chairman, with the forgone revenues in terms of oil 
royalties — the $2 billion that I spoke about a few moments ago 
— that would have produced a significant amount of economic 
benefit to this province if it was collected. It’s forgone because, 
in times of the highest oil prices in the history of the world, this 
government reduced oil royalties and therefore crippled their 
ability to secure revenue to operate the province in a reasonable 
fashion, without having to increase taxes to the individuals and 
taxpayers of this province. 
 
(1915) 
 
And when I say $2 billion, it’s not a matter of $2 billion, 
because every dollar that government spends in the economy, 
any economist will tell you that the economic impact of that 
dollar is about a multiplier effect of three. So if government is 
going to spend $1 billion in the economy of Saskatchewan, it 
will generate another $3 billion of economic activity. 
 
So if we’ve forgone the $2 billion in oil royalty revenues in 
times of the highest prices for oil in the history of the world, we 
have not just forgone the $2 billion one-time royalty revenue 
for the people of this province, we have forgone . . . we have a 
lost opportunity as a result of the policies of this government, a 
lost opportunity, Mr. Chairman, of $2 billion in revenues plus 
another $6 billion in economic activity. That’s a total of $8 
billion that could have been spent in this province over the last 
six years — $8 billion wouldn’t created a significant number of 
jobs, tens and tens of thousands of jobs; $8 billion of economic 
activity would’ve reduced the number of record bankruptcies 
we’ve had in businesses across this province; $8 billion in lost 
opportunity, Mr. Chairman, would’ve been very important to 
these Cubs in the Speaker’s gallery today, and to all children 
and adults in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I maintain, Mr. Chairman, that because of this lost 
opportunity, this lost opportunity for jobs and saving businesses 
and promoting business throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan, that this government really is an incredible 
government. They have not helped the people of this province. 
 
The $2 billion royalty holiday, where has it gone now? Well 
those poor, starving corporations like Shell and Exxon and 
Texaco, and other major multinationals, have taken their money 
and run. It wouldn’t have been so bad if they had spent that 
money right here in the province of Saskatchewan. But it didn’t 
happen; it just didn’t happen, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The resources . . . And the point I want to make tonight to the 
members and the people who are watching this on television 
and to the Cubs and their escorts in the Speaker’s gallery is this: 
the resources of this province, whether they be natural 
resources, non-renewable resources, or other resources, belong 
to the people of 

Saskatchewan — not just current generations, but future 
generations as well. 
 
And what we see here, Mr. Chairman, is the government being 
the custodian of those resources. And the government has an 
obligation to ensure that the people get a fair and reasonable 
return for these non-renewable resources, such as oil and others. 
And the most important thing, Mr. Chairman, is that the 
government has the obligation and the duty to husband those 
resources and to manage those resources so that future 
generations get a fair share. And, Mr. Chairman, what we have 
seen here is not a government that has been living up to its 
obligation. On the contrary, we have seen a government that has 
totally shed its obligation and not looked towards managing and 
husbanding resources for the future of Saskatchewan people, 
but in fact, they’ve been negligent in their duty as government. 
 
Unfortunately your policy allowed the wholesale give-away at 
fire-sale prices of these limited resources. The big oil 
companies eagerly took the huge profits when prices were high 
without any obligation to reinvest those profits now when prices 
are low. The financial burden is left with who, Mr. Chairman? 
The financial burden is left with the families of Saskatchewan. 
The financial burden of welfare for the oil companies is placed 
by your government directly on the backs of ordinary 
Saskatchewan people. And this year we see more welfare for 
the oil companies at a time when they are recording record 
profits. Shell Canada’s 1987 profit, Mr. Chairman, is more than 
double what it was in 1986; it goes from $154 million to $350 
million. This at a time when the oil companies are pleading 
poverty in terms of low oil prices around the world. 
 
This year, the Conservative government in Saskatchewan has 
reduced resource royalties and freehold production taxes once 
again by 1 per cent. There’s absolutely no guarantee that when 
oil prices again rise, the industry will make concessions to the 
public purse in good times. Under your government, Madam 
Minister, the oil sector has come to expect regular reductions in 
royalty levels. When prices rise again, the oil industry will reap 
huge benefits under your royalty structure and the Canada-U.S. 
so-called free trade agreement, which, by the way, eliminates 
export and price controls on a North American scale and ties us 
into a continental energy policy. 
 
My question, Madam Minister, at this point is: where do the 
subsidies for the oil companies end? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, we’re obviously back into 
the same old questions that have been coming for about five to 
six years now. It’s the give-away argument, and I basically 
haven’t heard anything new here tonight that I didn’t hear from 
the hon. member from Saskatoon South last year, and that’s 
rather unfortunate. 
 
I guess on one hand, I had expected something more out of the 
hon. member from Regina North West, for some very good 
reasons, Mr. Chairman. I had seen him at a couple of industry 
functions, taking the opportunity to get to know some of the 
industry people, to talk with them and get to know some of the 
issues. I thought he would have realized with a great many of 
the people that he’s 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

658 
 

probably had an opportunity to meet, that they are in fact 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
What’s more, Mr. Chairman, if the member agreed with that, I 
would have thought he would have learned by now that the 
Saskatchewan oil and gas industry, by far, Mr. Chairman, is 
made up of small companies to medium. In fact, Mr. Chairman, 
out of the 300-odd oil and gas companies in this province, I 
would guess about less than 10 per cent are actually the major 
multinationals that the hon. member refers to. 
 
The member has asked about when we are going to quit 
subsidizing oil companies. Mr. Chairman, we’ve never had 
what I would call a subsidy for oil companies. Now perhaps the 
member and I can get into a fine debate on the definition of a 
subsidy. We haven’t even had a straight-out cash grant as an 
incentive, which the member should be familiar with. When he 
was in power previous to 1982, he and his government in fact 
did have a straight cash grant as an incentive program for 
drilling activity. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, if he wants to debate what kind of 
incentives are the best kind, then I think that would be a most 
appropriate debate for this Assembly because that is basically 
the issue that the member is raising — is the incentive programs 
put into place the best for Saskatchewan and the best for 
Saskatchewan people? And, Mr. Chairman we’ve been through 
that last year, but I would be delighted to go through it again 
because it in fact is a very positive story for this province and 
for the people that work in this province and the people that get 
some benefits through social programs and other programs from 
revenue derived from government revenues. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we all in here know the history of the oil 
industry within Saskatchewan. We’ve also heard a lot of figures 
tossed around. For example, the member tonight has used the 
figure, 2 billion, and that’s unfortunate because it is one more 
niche in their credibility as to what kind of figures in fact are 
really the truth. The hon. member, the Deputy House Leader, or 
the House Leader from Regina North . . . or Regina North East, 
I believe, has used the figure of the give-away of $1.7 billion. 
Well tonight . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s what it is. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well the member from Regina North East 
says it in fact is 1.7 billion, and yet the member from Regina 
North West has used the figure 2 billion. 
 
The other day in the House, the member from Regina North 
East says it in fact is 1.7 billion, and yet the member from 
Regina North West has used the figure 2 billion. 
 
The other day in the House, the member from Regina North sat 
in this House, and he says it’s $2.8 billion that has been given 
away to the oil companies. And then to add further confusion to 
it, somebody with a stroke of a pen tonight has multiplied it and 
come up with the figure, 8 billion. The credibility gap, Mr. 
Chairman, for the opposition across the way when it comes to 
oil policies and oil revenues has something to be desired. 
 
Mr. Chairman, over the last few years Saskatchewan indeed can 
be proud of what it has accomplished within the oil and the gas 
sector. From 1972 to approximately 1981 what we in fact saw 
in the province was a situation 

that someone should have been concerned about. In 1971, I 
believe, when the NDP came into power, they started off with 
about 86 million barrels of oil in reserves in place. By the time 
they left office, Mr. Chairman, that had dropped to 46 million. 
Someone somewhere forgot to add up that if the reserves are 
not added to, the drilling doesn’t take place. Sooner or later 
there are going to be no reserves, and the revenue is not going 
to come in for the future. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the policy that has been put into place is one that 
puts no risk with the taxpayer’s dollar; government give out no 
money. What it simply says is: if you are willing to invest and 
take up a drilling program for oil in this province, the royalty 
structure does not kick into place until a certain period of time. 
 
Mr. Chairman, if you were to lay out the two incentive 
programs, the programs under this PC government and the past 
program under the NDP government, I think even the member 
from Regina North West would agree that the one this 
government has chose is the most sensible and best for people 
and the province. It does not put the taxpayer dollar at risk. It 
rewards success. 
 
And is saying that, I would remind the member that his party to 
the west, the Alberta NDP, in fact have put in a policy within 
their party statement in that program that they would in fact put 
in for the oil industry, in the province of Alberta, an incentive 
program that rewards successes until the well pays out. 
 
Manitoba, Mr. Chairman, has done very similar to what 
Saskatchewan did two or three years ago. They took a look at 
their oil industry; they knew that they had to compete; they 
didn’t live in isolation; they put in many of the points that 
Saskatchewan has put in. So subsidies, no, Mr. Chairman. We 
do not subsidize the oil industry as the member has said. 
 
Yes, there is a royalty holiday program put into place. Yes, the 
royalty structure was revised at the end of 1986 to make it price 
sensitive, and I think if he were to study the material that we 
sent to him, he would find that in fact the price-sensitive system 
does indeed make sense and is a fair system. 
 
There’s no doubt, Mr. Chairman, that when it comes to being 
Minister of Energy and Mines, I think anybody in this room 
would like the prices of oil to be high. I don’t know that the 
consumers would because when that price goes up, as is often 
the case, so does the price of gas. However, the reality is that 
the price of oil does impact on the provincial revenues, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
I’ve often wondered about some of the numbers that the NDP 
have used and how they came about that number. I suspect that 
it’s very simplistic and it’s with a little bit of tunnel vision, or 
narrow vision at the very minimum, in looking at one category 
of the facts before them. That’s unfortunate because it does not 
tell the whole story and it’s certainly not the facts that you 
would even consider in looking at the development of a policy. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the 
minister’s comments. First of all, I would just like to point 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

659 
 

out that whether it’s 1.2 or 2.0 or $2.8 billion in lost royalty 
revenues to the province and the people of this province, it’s 1.2 
or 2.0 or 2.8 too much. That’s the point we’re trying to make. 
But just for the record, Mr. Chairman, I want to point out that 
the calculations that I used were based on the following 
assumption: and that was that the production of crude oil had 
remained at 9.5 million cubic metres and the royalty percentage 
at ’82, 1982, was at 54 per cent. If you include up to about 
where we are in 1988, we’d be around $5 billion in comparison 
to the revenues of 3.0 so we’re looking, from those 
assumptions, Mr. Chairman, the figures that I’ve achieved and 
researched. 
 
(1930) 
 
I’d like to thank the minister as well . . . So for the record I’m 
saying, the figures that we’ve got here are estimates, and I’m 
saying it’s about $2 billion, and whether it’s 1.8 or 2.2, that’s 
not the point. The point is that people of this province have 
forgone that amount of money, that amount of money plus the 
economic activity therefrom. 
 
I’d like to also, Mr. Chairman, take this opportunity to thank the 
minister for sending the information to me with regard to her 
department. Although I didn’t get it till later this afternoon, it 
was about this thick, and I will probably get through the 
material in the next day or two but haven’t had an opportunity 
to consume it. 
 
I would, Madam Minister, note that public statements again this 
year by the Independent Petroleum Association of Canada . . . 
and before I get to that, I want to say that, yes, I have been 
around to a few functions where oil people gather, to seek 
information, to do submission outreach, and to get a better 
understanding of the oil business from their perspective, and I 
appreciate those meetings, and I look forward to many more. I 
am just scratching the surface because I haven’t been in this 
critic post for a very long time, but I can tell you that among the 
people that I’ve spoken to in the oil business, both producers 
and explorers and actually oil field service people, they tell me 
that there’s some concern about the policies of this government 
— some concern about the oil policy, but more importantly, 
they’re very concerned about their economic policies, apart 
from energy. They’re very concerned about the record tax 
increases on the people of this province by this government, and 
they’re very concerned, as well, about the number of people 
having some difficult times in the oil business and moving 
outside of areas, for example, like Lloydminster, and going into 
other oil patches. 
 
But I note, Madam Minister, that public statements, again this 
year, by the Independent Petroleum Association of Canada 
regarding Saskatchewan’s royalty structure in relation to 
Alberta’s. And my question is: does the minister have any more 
plans in the future to reduce Saskatchewan’s oil royalty 
structure further? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Just to answer the member’s question, 
Mr. Chairman, he asks if we have any more plans to reduce the 
royalties further. The member should be aware that within that 
price-sensitive royalty structure, in fact depending on the 
productivity and where price is, 

it’s not lower, it in fact is higher, depending on what price it 
reaches. So that’s the theory behind the price-sensitive royalty 
structure. It’s not automatically lower. 
 
It is lower indeed for lower producing wells, and the reason for 
that, Mr. Chairman, as the member probably knows, is to ensure 
that those wells do indeed keep pumping. Because if they shut 
in, we collect nothing. The municipality collects nothing in 
terms of taxation and jobs are lost, and he knows the effect of 
that on people. 
 
I thank the member for telling me how he had figured out his 
2.8 . . . or, I’m sorry, 2 billion figure. I had assumed that it was 
based on some of the assumptions that the member from 
Saskatoon South had used last year and, in fact, that’s what it 
was . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, that’s what it is. I 
believe if you read last year’s Hansard, you will find that he 
had those assumptions built in too. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I think anyone that is going to base their figures 
on assumptions, I can understand why they came up with some 
of the policies they did and perhaps even agreed with the 
national energy program when it came into place. I would say 
to the member, if he is going to compare revenue shares, he at 
least be sure that he is only comparing revenues which the 
province is responsible for collecting. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I want to refer back to 1981-82 because that is 
one of the figures that is built in to the formula that the member 
finally got to. And he has conveniently included $164 million in 
revenue which was collected by the federal government under 
the export tax system. He has also included, or chosen to 
ignore, the $60 million that the NDP paid out in straight cash 
grants to the oil industry. And, of course, he mentions nothing 
to the liability that they left in place for the people of 
Saskatchewan to the tune of $300 million to be paid to oil 
companies, where did the $300 million in liability rest? Well 
that’s an interesting tale in itself, Mr. Chairman, because by far 
the majority of it was to go to the major oil companies, which 
have bought up credits from the oil companies under some 
complicated system that the NDP had come up with. Well we 
know what happened, the wells weren’t drilled — and even if 
there was a dry well drilled, you still got paid for doing that. It 
simply didn’t work, Mr. Chairman. And as a consequence we 
saw the reserves of our base go down, we saw people leave the 
province, but of course we did collect our export tax. So the 
member has included some of those issues in getting to the 
calculation of his formula. 
 
Interestingly enough, Mr. Member, if you were to exclude that 
export tax, your revenue share would drop to about 35 per cent. 
I don’t know if you have done that calculation, but that 164 
million would take your share down to 35 per cent. If you were 
to take that $60 million and do some further deductions, you’re 
now close to 30 per cent, you’re far from 54 per cent. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I’m not 
saying that at all. All I’m saying is: take a realistic look at the 
actual figures, what was in place, and you simply cannot base it 
on all assumptions. That’s not realistic, and 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

660 
 

nor is it logical when it comes to oil. For example, you’re going 
to have a natural growth decline, if you had 80 wells and drilled 
no more, they would not keep producing the same amount of 
production — there’s a natural decline there. You . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Most of them, most of them . . . You only have 
to look at all three. Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba, and 
you will see that the reserve base does in fact decline. 
 
In fact I think that the statistics out of Manitoba are rather 
startling. It’s why governments, and your past leader of the 
opposition agreed, it is precisely the reason why governments 
look at incentives to initiate or to spur on drilling because that 
natural decline is in fact there. 
 
Let me give the hon. member an example. The average well in 
1981 was capable of producing 21 barrels per day. In 1987, the 
average well is capable of producing 15 barrels a day . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It depends who you’re talking to. Some 
say 18. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well perhaps you’re right. It depends 
who you talk to. You know, who I talk to is the Department of 
Energy and Mines. They have people in the field — the 
geologists, the engineers — and I think their level of expertise 
is fairly well-known right across western Canada. 
 
You should also know that under the current price-sensitive 
system, the average royalty rate difference between 21 and 15 
barrels per day accounts for about 3 percentage points. So that 
. . . you might want to think about that for a while. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the ratio of old oil to new oil has been dropping, 
and that’s a factor in your assumptions as new wells come on 
stream and the old wells are depleted. The percentage of new oil 
in 1981 was 33 per cent; today it’s approximately 80 per cent. 
New oil has had a lower royalty rate under both the NDP 
schedule and the current schedule, and new royalty rates have 
typically been about 8 to 10 percentage points lower than old oil 
rates. So take that into consideration, too. 
 
Mr. Chairman, as our conventional reserves are depleted, 
greater proportions of our production in fact come from 
enhanced oil recover projects, and the percentage of our EOR 
(enhanced oil recovery) oil in 1981 was less than 1 per cent; it 
is now almost 5 per cent. The costs are much higher, and the net 
operating income for the companies is very much lower. And 
that’s going to be an issue, that’s going to be an issue that 
governments are going to have to grapple with not only now but 
in the future as you get into more of the EOR. 
 
Mr. Chairman, let me simply finish up by saying that if I took 
assumptions that the NDP program had stayed in place and 
various other assumptions, in fact what you would end up with 
today is that you would have 6,600 fewer wells drilled over our 
period of time. There would be 1.6 billion less in the oilfield 
investment; there would be 5,000 fewer jobs, and that’s a 
conservative estimate in more ways than one, and there would 
be 124 million fewer barrels of oil produced. Translate that into 
revenue 

over that period of time, Mr. Chairman, ’82 to now, you’d have 
$734 million less in direct government revenue, and that’s 
based on the statistics that are in place, not merely on 
assumptions based on what I called half-baked figures. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that comment by the 
minister begs a response. And the response I want to make is 
that yes, there are assumptions being made. The assumptions 
that are being made in viewing the record of this government is 
that come the next election, there’s not going to be a 
Conservative government in this province. 
 
They have increased taxes at record levels, and we’ve gone over 
what taxes they’ve increased. They have slashed and gutted our 
health care program. They’ve done away with the prescription 
drug program as we knew it — they’ve privatized it. They’ve 
privatized the dental program. They’ve put everybody in this 
province in hock up to their ears. They’re in the process now of 
selling off all of the assets of the people of this province 
through the privatization of Crown corporations. The 
assumption from all of those details, Mr. Chairman, is that 
when the next election rolls around, this minister and other 
ministers in that government will be viewing this proceeding 
from television land or from the galleries in this Assembly, not 
on the floor. 
 
But with regard to the numbers, Mr. Chairman, I don’t want to 
get into a debate on the numbers here because she could tie me 
up all night in responding to numbers, which she obviously has 
very highly paid staff there to help her with, and you’re looking 
at the research team of the NDP energy post right here, maybe a 
half-time person on the side. 
 
And what I want to establish here, Mr. Chairman, is that with 
regard to new oil coming on stream, we have seen, in the 
minister’s own words — and I’ll get to the new oil in a second 
— but I want to get back to my notes here, and the note is that 
this government is a complete captive of the industry mainly 
because it’s responding at all times to the large multinational oil 
companies, it’s responding to the threat of shutting in wells. 
And this government, and all governments, have an obligation 
to ensure that the people get a fair return on the resources. And 
in the conversations I’ve had with the people from the oil 
industry, when they talked about what our oil policy will be 
down the road, is a fairly good hearing, when I have said to 
them in response to their question that we’re not after 
nationalizing everything that’s walking in this province or 
pumping oil; what we’re interested in is deciding and 
determining what the definition of a fair return is on resource 
for the people of this province, and what a fair return is for the 
oil producers and explorers and other people in the business. 
 
And their response to me is that that’s an important step, and 
that’s an important overview of the industry, and that they’re 
prepared to talk about those things when the government 
changes because that’s all we’re looking for, is a fair return. 
 
And according to my definition, the return we’ve had in the 
mid-1980s on our oil was not a fair return for the people of this 
province, and there aren’t very many people around here that 
agree with what the minister is 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

661 
 

saying. Regardless of the numbers, it was not a fair return. Even 
some of the oil people are telling me that it wasn’t, and that is a 
testimony in itself. 
 
(1945) 
 
But what I’d like to do is . . . We would like everyone to see a 
vigorous oil industry with active Saskatchewan companies, 
Saskatchewan jobs in Saskatchewan communities. 
Unfortunately the PC policy has been to give away the resource 
revenues to the big oil companies when they were and are 
making record profits. 
 
The member from Weyburn is squealing and whining from his 
chair, Mr. Chairman, and I can live with that, because he 
whines and squeals quite often when statements are made in 
this House that hurt the government opposite because they are 
truthful. And I am welcoming . . . I’ll sit down here and gladly 
give him an opportunity to get up and make a question to the 
minister, to put a question forward, because I’m sure everyone 
who’s watching tonight are just waiting with bated breath for 
the whining, squealing member from Weyburn to get up and 
ask a question from his feet so they know what he’s whining 
and squealing about. 
 
But when this party and this government threaten to leave or 
shut off production of the people’s resources, the PCs are 
willing to continue their tax break policies. And this means 
higher taxes for ordinary farm families and working people 
across the province, Mr. Chairman. Now the PCs plan to 
expand the give-away of our resources under the free trade 
agreement, and we’ll be getting into that in a few moments. 
 
But I want to know: how does the minister intend to respond to 
the oil sector’s pressure on the 2 per cent tax on corporate 
capital? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, contrary to what the 
member has said which is: we are captive to the major 
multinational companies; nothing could be further from the 
truth. Let me repeat, once again, for the benefit of the member 
across the way, that the Saskatchewan industry in fact is made 
up of approximately 90 per cent of small- to medium-size 
companies — people that live in this province — that he agrees. 
 
If he has really taken the opportunity to talk to the oil industry, 
including the major multinationals as he says, he will know that 
it in fact is the major multinationals that aren’t necessarily that 
pleased with what we’ve put into place. They’re not pleased 
with the fact, Mr. Chairman, that old oil is still a higher royalty 
than new oil. He’ll know that. He should also know, Mr. 
Chairman, there are other aspects of it that the Canadian 
Petroleum Association, which in fact does represent the larger 
companies, are not necessarily that pleased with the 2 per cent 
surcharge that’s been put on because it, in fact, does hit them 
more than what it does the small to the medium company. I 
have no intentions, Mr. Chairman, of doing anything about the 
reaction to the 2 per cent. I don’t believe that it’s necessary, and 
I believe that the companies will adjust and they will learn to 
live with it. 
 
When the member is talking about a fair return, I would 

think that anybody would say that if you have the highest 
taxation, and by taxation I refer to the royalties in North 
America, then your people are probably getting a fair return. 
Mr. Chairman, there’s a fine balance on that fair return and 
leaving enough for reinvestment to ensure that you are going to 
bring some new reserves on. If you don’t, you’re going to be 
losing when it comes to the future and then where are you going 
to get your revenues from? It’s an argument that most people — 
most, Mr. Chairman — understand very clearly. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. While I’m up on 
my feet, my colleagues are canvassing in Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I want to ask . . . I’m pleased to hear that the 
minister has given assurances that she will not bend under 
pressure to this corporate tax that she’s levied. And many of my 
colleagues will be here in a few moments to ask some 
additional questions on that, and perhaps I’ll just leave that for a 
moment. 
 
I note that the minister has made some comment with regard to 
new and old oil, and what I’d like to know from her is: can she 
define for us tonight what new oil is as opposed to old oil? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I can only hope that my 
hon. colleague across the way and his colleagues aren’t out 
campaigning at taxpayers’ dollars, but time will tell. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, no. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No, no, he says. Okay. 
 
The difference between old oil . . . anything is . . . post-1973 is 
new, anything before that is old. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Could you also explain how the royalty 
affects the old and the new oil, please? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Traditionally, Mr. Chairman . . . First of 
all, let me back up a minute and say that they are both under the 
price-sensitive system. Traditionally, new oil has been 8 to 10 
percentage points lower than old. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I have a series 
of figures here with regard to crude oil production in 
Saskatchewan and Canada and Alberta, and their comparative 
figures from 1974 to 1986. I’ll just go over some of them very 
briefly, and if you want to just make some quick notes. I want 
to ask you a question with regard to the Alberta and 
Saskatchewan comparison. 
 
In 1974 the volume of production in Alberta was about 79 
million cubic metres; ’75 went down to 67.5 million — and I’m 
going to round these off — ’76 it was down to 61 million; ’77 
down to 60; 1978 was 60 million; 1979 was 68 million; 1980 
was 63 million; ’81 was 57 million; ’82 was 54; ’83 was 55; ’84 
was 60 million; ’85 was 57 million; and ’86 was 53 million. 
 
When you compare that to the Saskatchewan, the same years, 
and I’ll start with ’74, we went down, we were at 11.7 million 
cubic metres; 1975 was 9 million; 1976 was about 9 million; 
’77 was 9.8 million; ’78 was about 9.6 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

662 
 

million; ’79 was 9.3 million; 1980 was 9.3 million; ’81 was 
about 7.4 million; ’82 was about 8 million; ’83 was 9.5; ’84 was 
about 11; ’85 was about 11.6, and ’86 was about 11.7. 
 
These figures we got from the library, and I assume that they’re 
correct because they’re taken from an oil publication. But my 
question is, Madam Minister, we’ve seen in Alberta from 1974 
production of about 79 million cubic metres; it’s declined 
steadily to about 53 million in 1986. In Saskatchewan we 
started at about 11.7 and we’re back to about 11.7. My question 
is: how do you account for Alberta’s decline in production, and 
how do you account for Saskatchewan’s trend line where it was 
about 11.7 decline and came back up to about the same 
amount? And why — why is that happening? I guess that’s the 
first question I have. 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, perhaps a question of 
clarification so we can make sure that we give some accurate 
information. 
 
The information, or the figures that you’re using, does it include 
the non-conventional oil out of Alberta, or is that a total figure? 
 
For the member’s benefit, Mr. Chairman, the Alberta figures 
don’t match with the figures we have. So I think that it is not 
including their non-conventional production. 
 
Out of the tar sands area, I think their total cubic metres would 
probably be around 87 million now, and this shows 53 million 
which would be on the conventional side — doesn’t include the 
increased investment that both the Alberta government and the 
industry has put in on the non-conventional side over the last 
couple of years. 
 
In terms of the Saskatchewan, Mr. Member, I had spoken very 
briefly a few minutes ago about the natural decline that will 
take place, and that’s what you see: 1974, you have the 11 
million cubic feet, and then it goes down until 1981, and then 
the reserves start to build up again, 1982 and then to 1986, and 
that is simply from what I believe to be some programs in order 
to stimulate investment from the private sector. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I was just trying to help you because you 
were struggling along on the estimates tonight, so I though I 
would give you something to shoot at. 
 
I was not aware that this did not include the tar sands oil. My 
concern would have been, if these figures were 
all-encompassing, was that I was curious to know what the 
Alberta policies were to put the oil industry in the 
circumstances that they were; and secondly, to determine 
whether or not the oil royalty-free holiday in Saskatchewan was 
encouraging infill drilling and sucking out of the resource in an 
accelerated fashion, rather than encouraging oil companies to 
seek new finds and new pools of oil and thereby generating 
more economic activity. 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — The Alberta program . . . When it comes 
to incentives, you should know they redid . . . I think they took 
a look at their royalty structure, but they 

also put into place a royalty holiday very similar to 
Saskatchewan’s, approximately the same time that Manitoba 
was having a look at it. But it is definitely the non-conventional 
side where the investments have gone. 
 
You have made reference to the infill wells. In Saskatchewan 
approximately 10 per cent, or perhaps just a little under, can 
account for infill wells. But you also must apply to Energy and 
Mines for a permit for those infill wells, and there is only a 
couple of reasons for drilling or for giving a permit to in fact 
drill. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What’s to find oil? 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Well they have to show that in fact it is 
going . . . that it’s needed to get the remaining reserves out of 
that first well, and if there is any damage to the reservoir, and 
this might prevent it, then they will receive a permit for that. 
 
But like I said, there is approximately 10 per cent that would 
account for infill wells. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Solomon: — My favourite hockey teams are playing 
tonight so they thought they’d let me do estimates instead. 
 
Thank you, Minister, I appreciate that answer. Part of the 
problem, I suppose, that at least I have as an energy critic for 
the NDP caucus, is that I am concerned that there are too many 
oil wells being drilled in the infill area. Now you say 10 per 
cent, that was not a figure I was aware of, I appreciate that. But 
in that circumstance, with all of the thousands of wells we’ve 
got in this province, if 10 per cent of them are in an existing 
40-acre pool that means that that pool is going to be dry much 
quicker and in an accelerated fashion than under normal 
circumstances. 
 
But my question would be: with respect to the royalty holiday 
for new oil, are you finding a large number of companies or 
some companies or few companies seeking and finding new oil 
pools, or are they just using up property that they have 
purchased or had on hand over existing pools to get that oil? 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to clarify a 
point under infill wells. They in fact are not allowed, will not be 
given a permit if it means that they are going to indeed 
accelerate depletion of that reserve. One of the reasons, as I had 
stated —perhaps not clearly enough — was that you may be 
going to have a tough time getting what is left at the bottom of 
that reserve up, and if it means that you are not going to get it, 
but an infill well will in fact enhance your opportunity to bring 
that up, then it will be given. So it is not done in order to 
accelerate the depletion of the base. 
 
Exploratory wells . . . We have in 1985, I guess was late ’85 or 
early in ’86, was the first opportunity for deep wells, and those 
in fact were exploratory, and about 20 to 25 per cent would 
come under the category of exploratory outside of the reserves 
that were there before. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Under this new policy, Madam Minister . . . 
You didn’t quite answer some of the other questions 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

663 
 

that I asked with regard to oil companies finding new oil pools. 
Under this program, have there been a number of companies, 
and how many, finding new pools, as opposed to sinking wells 
in pools that are already there? And I note . . . The reason I ask 
that is I note that the number of dry wells coming up are very 
few and far between — in particular in Saskatchewan — and I 
am concerned about the depletion of the resource, in particular, 
in an accelerated fashion. 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Well, perhaps the member did not 
understand, Mr. Chairman. The exploratory wells are in fact 
new pools. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well what you’re saying is that the oil 
royalty holiday, the three-year holiday, is for new oil, even 
though it was pumping oil, or the oil was discovered? Or is it 
for new finds? I’m not clear on that. 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — The royalty holiday for exploratory wells, 
deep wells, is in fact a five-year program, and if it’s an infill it 
is only one year, and the other category is for three years. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — The three-year holiday applied to which 
wells, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — The middle category, or those that would 
qualify for the three-year holiday program would be what we 
call a development well. Now that’s inside a known area or a 
known pool, and if you are going to expand that pool, it would 
be classified as a development well. If it is outside of that 
known pool, new reserves, new discovery, then it comes under 
the exploratory. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you. Shell Oil, Mr. Chairman, 
announced a couple of weeks ago that they were shutting in 
some wells for a temporary period near the member of 
Weyburn’s constituency. I’m curious to know if you have a 
number for us as to how many wells they shut in and for what 
duration and whether that’s going to impact on any revenue 
projections that you may have in the current estimates. 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — I am not aware of any wells shut in on 
behalf of Shell. What I am aware of is that in fact the market 
that Shell has had and they buy . . . They are a major purchaser 
and they buy from other producers and they ship it to their 
refinery down East and their refinery is shut in, I believe, for 
about a month, perhaps longer, for some major maintenance 
time. When that happens, then the producers are cut back. If 
they can find another market for their oil in that period of time, 
there would be no problem. But the wells are not shut in. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I want to now 
turn to the so-called free trade agreement, Mr. Chairman, and 
it’s the Mulroney-Reagan secret trade deal in the talk on the 
streets. And I think the problem we’ve got with it is that the 
more people find out about this deal, the less they like it. 
 
The reason that’s the case, Mr. Chairman, is that we have in this 
country a Prime Minister and a Conservative federal 
government, the sister government to this provincial 
government of ours — and I use the term very 

loosely — who, in secret meetings, have made arrangements 
with the United States of America to sell our energy down the 
drain. 
 
And the implications of the Mulroney-Reagan trade agreement 
energy provisions are very massive. They appear to be 
inconsistent with the provisions of the constitution regarding 
provincial ownership and control of resources. 
 
There are important ambiguities and grey areas in the 
agreement that offer fertile ground for U.S. challenge to any 
provincial laws regulating prices, imposing indirect taxes, or 
controlling production — in short, the major provincial controls 
secured by the resource agreement. 
 
Premier Don Getty of Alberta and our own Premier of 
Saskatchewan maintain that their provinces will not lose any 
control of their energy industry under free trade, or their right to 
conserve its resources. That may be the case in theory, but there 
are elements in the free trade agreement that could hinder 
Alberta’s and Saskatchewan’s ability to exercise those rights. 
 
Moreover, this trade deal gives the U.S. almost totally 
unrestricted access to Canadian energy resources — oil, natural 
gas and hydro, as well as coal — on the same terms and 
conditions, Mr. Chairman, as Canadians. 
 
Let me briefly list what we have abandoned in this agreement 
before I discuss them in greater detail. What Canadians have 
abandoned through our Prime Minister in this agreement is: 
one, we have agreed to share out energy with the U.S. even 
when Canadians run short; secondly, we have agreed to 
abandon the potential for new industrial development based on 
preferential energy rates. We have agreed to abandon our 
energy export controls and agreed to allow Americans the 
ability to buy up the ownership and control of even more of our 
resources. Fourthly, we have abandoned our 80-year policy of 
protecting future Canadian requirements through mandatory 
reserves. Five, we have agree not to charge Americans higher 
prices than Canadians, regardless of market conditions, 
regardless of whether there are shortages. And finally we have 
agreed, Mr. Chairman, to “consult on energy regulatory 
actions” in the future. 
 
All of this given up in five short pages in the trade agreement. 
And I have it right here. I want to keep it very close because I 
think there is some important things we want to talk about in 
there. 
 
It must be remembered that Canada has been exporting our oil 
to the United States since the beginning of our oil production. 
In Saskatchewan this has normally been about 60 per cent of 
our production — and that’s an estimate — but Canada’s been 
exporting approximately 800,000 barrels of oil per day to the 
U.S. over the last three years. Only four years ago, the level of 
exports was 400,000 barrels per day, and that was the highest in 
our history. So our exports have doubled since then, since the 
record level of 400,000. 
 
There has never been a time in our history, Mr. Chairman, when 
the United States has not been prepared to buy all 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

664 
 

the oil we were prepared to sell them. The problem has been the 
reverse: we have never been able to satisfy their demand for our 
oil. Yet with article 904 of this agreement, Canada has agreed 
not to restrict the supply of energy to the U.S. below the level of 
what they have received over the previous three years. 
 
This means that the Americans are entitled to continue to 
receive about 800,000 barrels per day from us, and we are 
powerless to deny this to them. We have given away our 
independence, we have surrendered our sovereignty and our 
right to control and manage this vital resource. We are the only 
country in the world, Mr. Chairman, the only country in the 
world through this agreement, this secret deal, that cannot set its 
own domestic price of oil. We’re the only country in the world, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
(2015) 
 
Even in the case of short supply or exhaustion of a resource, 
one of the resources I’ve mentioned, the United States is to be 
given proportional access, which is the average of their 
consumption over the previous three years. Isn’t this, Madam 
Minister, an intolerable situation? Could the minister explain 
why we would surrender our sovereignty in this manner. 
 
Some would argue, some in this House would argue that we had 
to give up this control over our own resources in order to get 
access to the American market. Again, I ask the minister, and I 
ask you to think about this: when is the last time that Americans 
didn’t want Canada’s oil and natural gas? 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, there’s been a fair amount 
of discussion as it pertains to the Canada-U.S.A. trade 
agreement, and my colleague, the member from Kindersley, has 
spoken to it and spoken well. I can only assume that perhaps the 
member from Regina North West was not here or not listening. 
 
As it deals — the Canada-U.S.A. trade agreement, Mr. 
Chairman — with the energy chapter, I think there has been a 
great deal of misinformation and misunderstanding from the 
party across the way. I have, in some of my travels of the 
province on behalf of the member from Kindersley, heard some 
concerns raised as to rumours that they had heard from the NDP 
on how this trade agreement was going to affect the energy. On 
the issues, security of supply and a couple of others that the 
member has raised, Mr. Chairman, most of what the NDP is 
saying is simply not true — if not all of it. 
 
It simply is not the case that we are going to lose control over 
our resources, that we are no longer going to be able to control 
our resources, that those in the U.S.A. are going to be nice and 
warm in the winter-time while we freeze in the dark in the 
winter-time in Canada. It’s a myth perpetuated very similar to 
the old medicare scare that has been around this province since 
about 1975 — the same line, the same story, and when the 
program is actually put into place or the even happens, we all 
find out that the myth is precisely that, a myth, and tonight 
we’re hearing it again, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the member has asked about the U.S. 

wanting our oil and gas. I would remind the member there was 
a period of time in Saskatchewan’s history and Canada’s history 
when in fact perhaps the U.S.A. didn’t even know that 
Saskatchewan had gas. Export permits, there were none. Was 
there even a gas industry? No, and that was prior to 1982 that 
the “no” applies to, Mr. Chairman. 
 
In oil, what can I say to the member? Heavy oil is what 
Saskatchewan can produce and will produce in the future. And 
it is going to be that heavy oil, Mr. Chairman, that is going to be 
there when the light and the medium runs dry. So the future for 
Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan citizens is going to rest with 
heavy oil, as is the future for a great deal of other Canadians if 
Canada indeed is going to be self-sufficient when it comes to 
oil. But, Mr. Chairman, where does our heavy oil go to? We 
have no market for it outside of a very small proportion that is 
utilized for asphalt. The rest all goes south of the border, the 
U.S.A. That has been happening for a long time, Mr. Chairman. 
I never heard the member from Regina North West, or for that 
matter any other member from across the way, talk about how 
they shouldn’t be exporting any heavy oil to the United States 
when they were in power. Of course they didn’t. So now the 
issue comes up with the trade agreement — well we believe in 
trade; yes, we should be trading; and we should sell our oil to 
that market, but we just don’t like your agreement; not that 
agreement. Well it’s been one excuse for them after another, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
I want to take the member back to the days of the national 
energy program and very heavy regulation as it pertained to 
both the oil and the gas sector. And the reason I raise it is 
because that in fact did have a very large impact on our ability 
to trade and to trade with a fair price and a fair return back to 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The national energy program back then, Mr. Chairman, did a 
couple of things. First of all, it controlled prices, and I might 
add, that control took place to the detriment of western Canada. 
In fact, western Canada, in particular Alberta and 
Saskatchewan, lost millions of dollars to that program. Not only 
did it control prices, Mr. Chairman, but it controlled the 
quantity — in other words, the exports, if you could export 
across the border or not. It also put in what we considered to be 
some pretty distorted incentives, such as 80 per cent grants for 
the east coast and a very low rate for those on the west coast. I 
don’t think that in particular is very fair, Mr. Chairman. 
 
This trade agreement, Mr. Chairman, when it comes to control 
for the province . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — We’re surrendering our sovereignty, is 
the question. 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Well he says, we’re surrendering our 
sovereignty control. No, that’s not true. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, no. We’re surrendering sovereignty. 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Well that isn’t true either. It doesn’t 
matter how you phrase it, it simply isn’t true. 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

665 
 

 
Mr. Chairman, we are not going to lose control over our energy 
resources. That simply is not true. And if anyone out there in 
fact does have a concern, I encourage them to get a copy of the 
trade agreement and to read it very carefully, and if they then 
have some questions, we would be pleased to give them any 
information they require out of the Department of Energy and 
Mines. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we’re going to continue to be able to control the 
quantities of energy commodities being produced — the 
quantities. That’s contrary to what the member has just said. 
And we are going to be able to control the pace at which the 
new resource developments in fact are brought on stream. These 
powers, in fact, Mr. Chairman, are provided for us under the 
Canadian constitution. Saskatchewan’s ability to provide 
exploration incentives, to provide for royalties and taxation, to 
provide tax credits, to require prorationing of production, to 
restrict production for conservation purposes — all of that 
remains in place under the free trade agreement. And, Mr. 
Chairman, we’re going to continue to have authority to ensure 
that our own contractual requirements are provided for before 
authorizing any exports out of this province. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the security of supply issue gets a lot of tossing 
around and not always with perhaps some of the history that 
should go with it. I want to remind the member that when it 
comes to the security of supply, Canada, in fact, was a member 
of the International Energy Agency which was created in 1974, 
and basically what the signing of that agreement did was ensure 
that in times of emergency, both countries would, indeed, share 
their resources — very similar to the wording that is in place in 
the trade agreement now. 
 
So you were in power in 1974. From 1974 to 1981, you were 
operating an oil industry or oil policies in a country that 
basically had that same clause. And for your benefit, if you 
want to mark it down, I’ll repeat it. It was the International 
Energy Agency, and that in fact was created in 1974. 
 
And here’s what it did. It required its members to maintain 
emergency oil reserves equal to 90 days of net imports. Now at 
present this requirement is not relevant to Canada since we are a 
net oil exporter. A central feature of this agreement was the 
emergency sharing system, and it said, for the initials ESS, may 
be activated when one or more of its member countries 
experiences a reduction in normal oil supplies equal to 7 per 
cent or more of current consumption. Each member country is 
required to restrain oil demand by 7 per cent and/or draw upon 
its emergency reserves. Oil made available by these measures is 
then shared among the member countries, and Canada was a 
member to that at that time, along with the U.S.A. 
 
So in short, Mr. Chairman, what is being said about our loss of 
control is simply not true. That’s covered under the constitution. 
We are going to be able to do the things that we do now, which 
includes the provision of incentives, the setting of royalty 
structures, and other matters that a government may deem fit 
when it comes to its energy policies. 

 
Mr. Chairman, if there was anything positive for this end of our 
resources and this trade agreement, it would be for the oil and 
gas sector. In fact what it does, it supplies a market without a lot 
of red tape to go through, and if one learns quickly in looking at 
energy policy, if there is not good, fair access to markets, then 
the investment does not take place. That’s been the history of 
this sector and that will continue to be the fact when it comes to 
oil and gas. 
 
The people, through their governments, are still going to be in 
control, but it definitely allows a very positive aspect through 
the increased access to markets with a degree of insurance that 
they are not going to be penalized because they in fact are in 
export or importing into that country. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, what 
you are saying is that this free trade agreement, which I have a 
copy of here, is not really saying what it says. That’s what you 
were telling us this evening. 
 
The Toronto Star published a secret government report around 
Christmas time, and they reported on this government secret 
document of Mr. Mulroney that the more Canadians learned 
about the program of free trade that the less they would like it. 
 
And the reason is, the reason is, Madam Minister, is because 
there was information in this agreement, a nice thin agreement 
of 300-and-some pages at least, in short writing plus 
appendices, which really outlines a very clear policy with 
regard to surrendering our independence with respect to 
domestic oil pricing and exports. 
 
The issue is not a matter of free trade; the issue is this 
agreement. And I’m going to read article 904 with regard to 
export measures which is in contrary to what you were saying a 
few moments ago. Article 904, other export measures with 
regard to energy, page 146. And I quote: 
 

Either Party (that is, the Americans or Canadians) may 
maintain or introduce a restriction otherwise justified 
under the provisions of Articles Xl:2(a) and XX(g), (i) and 
(j) of the GATT with respect to the export of an energy 
good of the Party to the territory of the other Party, only if: 

 
a) the restriction does not reduce the proportion of the total 

export shipments for a specific energy good made 
available to the other Party relative to the total supply of 
that good of the Party maintaining the restriction as 
compared to the proportion prevailing in the most recent 
36-month period for which data are available prior to 
the imposition of the measure . . . 

 
(2030) 
 
What that means, Madam Minister, is that if we determine 
there’s a shortage of energy in Canada, that we cannot terminate 
our exports to meet our energy requirements in this country 
because this agreement says that we must, even in the shortage 
of energy situation, provide the Americans with the same 
volume of oil as the previous three-year average. That’s in this 
agreement. 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

666 
 

 
That means that Canada, a sovereign nation, at least up until the 
signing of this secret deal, has lost its independence. You may 
recall that we are the only country in the world who cannot now 
set that kind of . . . decision with regard to energy in motion 
now. 
 
And I’ll go on to part (b): 
 

The Party does not impose a higher price for exports of . . . 
energy . . . to the other Party than the price charged for 
such energy good when consumed domestically by means 
of any measures such as licences, fees, taxation and 
minimum price requirements. 

 
And it goes on. What this means, Madam Minister, section (b) 
of article 904, is that we can’t charge Americans a higher price 
than we charge Canadians. What this means is that we can’t 
charge Canadians a lower price for energy to meet any kind of 
objectives of a national government’s economic policy that a 
government has some courage to put together. 

 
Let me give you the American response to a couple of controls 
that a province can legally implement today, but which will be 
challenged under this agreement. One of the western provinces, 
whether it’s Saskatchewan or Alberta, anticipating an 
improvement in market price, limits current production of oil, 
much the same as the Saskatchewan government did with 
potash. And as we have pointed out, restrictions on quantity are 
only permitted during clearly defined emergencies or where 
conservation is needed because of resource exhaustion. 
Production controls aimed at ensuring higher future returns are 
a “disguised restriction on trade” rather than “conservation.” 

 
Attempts to restrain production to secure higher prices was, of 
course, the very power the provinces sought to entrench 
throughout the energy crisis. On the other hand, what if a 
province decides to limit production because it foresees a 
shortage that will hurt provincial consumers? Preferential 
restrictions that actually reduce the flow of gas and oil to the 
U.S. clearly are prohibited. Even in those limited cases, in 
which restrictions are permitted, shortages must be prorated 
between domestic and export markets. As well, Canada has 
agreed that it will not bank supplies at the expense of export 
business and export customers. 

 
They have also guaranteed that any of the so-called surplus tests 
used by federal or provincial regulatory agencies to gauge 
whether proposed exports are surplus to the requirements of 
Canadians will never be applied to restrict flows to the United 
States. 
 
Now we’ve got no problem with trading with the Americans; 
the Americans are our neighbour. It’s the longest undefended 
border in the world. We like trading with the Americans, but 
this is not a free trade arrangement, Madam Minister, this is a 
surrendering of our sovereignty. 
 
In sum the treaty provisions are only too clear, and provincial 
production cuts of this nature are undoubtedly in violation . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The member 

from Weyburn is continuing to whine and heckle from his chair, 
and he’s squealing about this deal. I’m waiting with bated 
breath for him to stand in this Assembly and enter the debate, as 
the minister some questions with respect to this agreement, but I 
don’t think he has read the agreement. I don’t think anybody 
over there has read the agreement, perhaps maybe for the Trade 
minister, and his memory’s so weak he’s probably forgotten 
everything he’s read. 
 
But in the same article 904 we have agreed that we will not 
charge the Americans a higher price than we charge ourselves 
for our resources. In other words, we have locked our country 
into the world price no matter where that price goes. This may 
not seem very important when the price of oil is around $16 or 
$17 per barrel, but how will we react when OPEC 
(Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries) regains 
control over international pricing — as they almost certainly 
will — and drives that price up to new heights. 
 
I ask the minister: do we in western Canada really want to 
commit ourselves to pay these prices no matter how high they 
go? Do we want to bind ourselves to pay these prices for a 
resource which we own and for which we can now charge 
ourselves whatever we wish? 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, we’ve gotten into two 
specific sections of the trade agreement. I think the member 
should know that many people on this side of the House, if not 
all, have probably read this trade agreement. I wonder if you 
can say the same thing for across the way. 
 
Section 904 . . . And let me state very clearly that I do not see 
this agreement as being negative. If I had to define it, I would 
say common sense would tell you, when you are dealing with a 
major customer that they be treated the same whether it’s good 
times or bad times, and I think if you were the customer, you 
would feel the same way. 
 
I think you were probably a business man at one time . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well you ask what is wrong with a 
business commercial contract. I would suggest that the trade 
agreement comes precisely close to that being a contract 
between two levels of governments within the United States and 
within Canada. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the member has dealt with section 904 and 
subsection (a) on the proportional access. I would invite him to 
go back and read Hansard tomorrow when I talked about the 
International Energy Agency. It is not much different from that 
perspective, proportional access, than what has been in place 
before. Perhaps one could say that it’s simply reaffirming what 
has been there before, plus setting into place a consultation 
process or a mechanism if disputes arise. 
 
You want to talk about section (b) and lower prices? Who 
benefited when you were in power and there was a 
government-controlled price in this country? Who had the 
benefit? Was it Saskatchewan or Alberta? . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Canadians you say. Well I’ll tell you young 
fellow, when you see 50 to $60 million flowing out of this . . . 
western Canada to east because of a made-in-Canada price on 
oil, then you better start 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

667 
 

re-asking yourself: who got the benefits out of a 
made-in-Canada policy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Who? Some Canadians, Mr. Chairman, 
some Canadians got the benefit. But I’ll tell you what else it 
did. Not too long ago the member gave me a sheet of figures, 
his figures, that showed a period of time when the reserves went 
down in Saskatchewan, that precisely . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes it was, reserves . . . or production went 
down. That’s why the incentives were removed. There was no 
benefit. You couldn’t afford to drill in those times. There was 
no guarantee that you were going to get your money back, 
that’s for sure. 
 
So why would you put your money in and then only to be told 
that it’s a made-in-Canada price and you cannot even sell it in 
the market at competitive prices? You couldn’t do that. Now 
that doesn’t make a whole lot of sense to me, Mr. Chairman, 
and it doesn’t make a lot of sense out there. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Potentially there could be shortages. 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — The member says, what about shortages? 
That’s covered under the agreement, and that is the proportional 
access which we’ve been privy to, a Canadian — U.S.A. and 
other countries — agreement for shortages and emergencies. 
That agreement has been in place, Mr. Chairman, since 1974, 
and once again for his benefit, it is called the International 
Energy Agency, created in 1974, and it looked after that end of 
it. 
 
Mr. Chairman, section 905 of the agreement, I believe, the 
member has raised, and I guess what I see within this is, first of 
all, it is talking about the National Energy Board, it is going to 
hit most at an agency in the States that we call FERC (Federal 
Energy Regulatory Commission), and the other one is the 
Economic Regulatory Administration. 
 
The myths that seem to flow from the other side of the House in 
regards to this agreement is something else again. In fact, Mr. 
Chairman, I would add that much of it doesn’t even deserve 
comment in terms of the NDP and their interpretation of a trade 
agreement between the two countries, particularly in light of the 
trading patterns, the commodities that we are talking about here 
tonight, and the history of this sector, the oil sector as it relates 
to Canadian policy. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well it’s obvious the minister hasn’t read the 
free trade agreement as it applies to energy. And if she has, 
she’s trying to mislead people in this province with respect to 
what the impact of the free trade agreement is, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Cheap and abundant energy has always been one of Canada’s 
most important competitive advantages in international trade. 
When the 1973 oil crisis sent western economies into a 
tail-spin, Canadians learned just how precious their energy 
resources were as governments took steps to protect consumers 
and industry from the full impact of rising prices. 

 
For the past 15 years the debate over energy supply and pricing 
has revolved around the fact that petroleum is a non-renewable 
resource — once it’s gone, it’s gone. This comes to a surprise, a 
major surprise, to the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster 
representing an oil-producing constituency, but indeed yes, Mr. 
Member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster, once the non-renewable 
resource is gone, it’s gone. I’m glad you’ve learned something 
tonight. 
 
But with a new round of oil shortages expected to begin in 10 
years or less, the Conservatives have signed a trade deal that 
gives the United States guaranteed peacetime access to 
Canadian energy resources. 
 
The agreement opens the door to a short-term increase in 
Canadian export earnings for oil, gas, coal, uranium, and 
hydroelectric power. But shortly after the deal was announced, 
a senior Canadian investment banker noted that: 
 

The U.S. wins twice in the long term, once on access to 
energy supplies and again on the basis that we can no 
longer use cheap energy as an element of national or 
industrial policy. 

 
In a letter to Energy minister, Marcel Masse, the Consumers’ 
Association of Canada, asked: 
 

How can a government, which has the interests of 
Canadians at heart, enter into an arrangement with a 
foreign power which would provide that power even 
greater access than Canadians to the diminishing supplies 
of these essential commodities? 

 
End of question, and that’s the question I ask the minister. 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we’re into talking 
about shortages. I think most people are, at one time or another 
through their lives, concerned when it comes to the possibility 
of shortages of energy. And I know that those in the House have 
probably lived through — unless there are some really young 
members around — a time in the ’60s . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Me. 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — The member says he . . . the time in the 
’60s when we, in fact, did see the threat of shortages, and we 
saw the price of gasoline and the long line-ups at the pumps, 
and some pictures like that are still very vivid with people. 
 
I guess when you talk about shortages and relate it to the 
oilfield, one could say that governments should make sure that 
they don’t get to a point of shortages. I suppose there comes a 
point in time when that is not realistic, that in fact you will face 
that shortage many, many years down the road. It’s basically 
one reason, Mr. Chairman, why in fact governments do look at 
the necessary incentives to encourage finding new reserve base. 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

668 
 

 
Now to date in Canada we have dealt with conventional oil, and 
the member refers to this 10-year supply. I believe he’s 
probably talking about conventional oil. 
 
If you want to deal with heavy oil . . . And those remain to be 
developed, whether it’s in Saskatchewan, the tar sands, the tar 
sands in Alberta, then you have some new reserves coming on 
stream. 
 
There is also the issue of finding oil in the frontiers of Canada, 
offshore, Mr. Chairman. That is, perhaps, why governments 
will have to look further for incentives, for encouragement of 
finding those reserves in the future. Most of the industry knows 
approximately where those reserves might be, but the cost of 
actually bringing them on stream is very, very high. 
 
When the member talks about shortages and this agreement, he 
talks of guarantees. The myth has been left out there, or put out 
there that in fact this agreement guarantees the Americans our 
energy. Nothing in fact could be further from the truth. It is not 
guaranteed. 
 
What the agreement does, it guarantees them the opportunity to 
bid for our energy. If they don’t match the price or get the 
contract, it won’t go to the United States. It is not a guarantee of 
demanding and then receiving. It’s going to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It doesn’t say that. 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Well the member says, it doesn’t say that. 
So what is he saying? That anybody in the United States can 
walk into Saskatchewan and say, I’m buying your oil and here’s 
my price? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. World price. 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — He’s not that unrealistic. Well he says, 
world price. Well we operate, Mr. Chairman, in an environment 
that in fact our oil sells for world price. 
 
I think that the member’s going to find that indeed the 
American company is going to have to perhaps look at 
something somewhat higher than the world price because of 
transportation costs. And that’s an issue that he hasn’t raised, 
but that in fact is over and above the going rate of the oil or the 
gas. And it in fact will not be just at world price, that there 
indeed are other factors to be considered within the total price 
— and the major one, Mr. Chairman, of course, is 
transportation. 
 
So the agreement, Mr. Chairman, is not one of guaranteeing the 
Americans our energy at their price and at their demand. They 
must come in if they want it and they must compete with 
Canadians for the fair price. I think that that indeed, Mr. 
Chairman, is a fair agreement as it addresses the issue of the 
proportional access to it. I had stated that there has been an 
agreement in place since 1974 for energy-producing countries, 
Canada being one of them, that in fact if there’s disruptions that 
they would all share proportionately. The agreement simply 
reaffirms that. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well the agreement doesn’t reaffirm what the 
minister has said. It doesn’t even affirm what she 

says. At present, Madam Minister, provinces may impose 
minimum oil and gas prices in order to ensure fairer returns for 
diminishing assets. But because the trade treaty prohibits 
minimum import or export prices, provincial governments can 
no longer set minimum prices even though the resource 
amendment purportedly confirmed this power in ’82. As it 
stands, such price setting is prohibited and Ottawa will have to 
ensure provincial compliance. 
 
Ottawa has already stated that it will undertake all necessary 
measures to make the agreement fully binding on the provinces. 
If you don’t know about that, that’s what they have done. If the 
Mulroney government intended to grandfather the provincial 
right to set fair prices, why wasn’t this stated clearly in the 
agreement, Madam Minister? The question is not whether free 
trade changes provincial law, the issues are the extent of the 
damage to provincial power and whether the impact is 
automatic or whether the federal government will be forced to 
strike down a provincial law that offends the treaty. 
 
Recently, federal Energy minister, Marcel Masse, admitted that 
the market, not the provinces, will be the key to determining 
price and policy in a free trade deal. While he doesn’t believe 
the deal impinges on provincial rights, he admitted that the 
matter might have to be decided by the courts, and he stated, 
and I quote, “If you have a disagreement of any kind about the 
constitution, the Supreme Court will decide who is right or 
wrong.” 
 
Technically, provincial powers to regulate the energy industry 
may remain intact under free trade. What isn’t clear is the extent 
to which the province will be able to exercise those rights, 
given the fact that the market will dictate the price, and the 
numerical superiority of the Americans will dictate the market. 
 
Is the minister not concerned with these developments? 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, provinces, to my 
knowledge, have never had the powers to set prices, as this 
member is suggesting, when it comes to minimum price. In fact, 
I think if he really thinks about it, he will think back to the time 
that the Blakeney government, back in the ’70s . . . Oh, I’m 
sorry. Perhaps it was before the ’70s . . . Oh, I’m sorry. Perhaps 
it was before the ’70s under Ross Thatcher, had in fact tried to 
set a price for potash at that time and it was struck down by the 
courts. 
 
I guess if I would have thought the member was really serious 
and really believed that he, as a politician in a government, 
should have a power to set a minimum price, I would wonder 
where his voice was in ’86 when the price of oil went so very 
low and had such a drastic effect, not only on provincial 
revenues but on jobs and people and families. I never heard a 
peep from the member then that minimum price should be there 
for the price of oil — not one word. And of course there is . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well, there was, there was. 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Well, he says there was, and I remain to 
be convinced that in fact that was the case. I don’t recall 
anybody from the NDP standing up and saying, it’s 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

669 
 

time for a minimum price on oil, Mr. Chairman, I can go back 
over the arguments again about lower prices, but I really don’t 
think that’s going to serve any purpose. 
 
We on this side of the House remember very clearly what 
happened back in the ’70s when the national energy program 
went into place and in fact there was this made-in-Canada price. 
And it was to the detriment and it was on the backs of the 
Saskatchewan government and Saskatchewan people at that 
time, and if there’s one thing we don’t want, Mr. Chairman, it is 
precisely that situation. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Madam Minister will recall that I said 
that provinces may impose, and that power is now gone, but the 
non-discriminatory pricing principle has other negative 
implications as well. For example, this suggests that Canadian 
governments can no longer offer special rebate programs which 
give farmers or small-business people a competitive edge on the 
price of energy. 
 
In addition, the agreement prevents the province from 
deliberately lowering energy prices to promote industrial 
growth, and that is a fact. Cheap energy has always been 
Saskatchewan’s hope for economic diversification. Under this 
so-called agreement, that hope would be lost because we’d no 
longer be able to sell our energy to ourselves for less than we 
charge Americans. The prohibition against discriminatory or 
preferential pricing is total. It covers even the special 
circumstances in which restrictions on quantity are possible. 
The regulated prices must be the same on both sides of the 
border in virtually every circumstance. 
 
Would the minister not agree that, in effect, the government has 
given up the right to establish a Canadian energy plan that 
would help build up the economy and resolve regional 
economic disparity by providing the option of cheaper energy 
for Canadian consumers and industries? 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — No, Mr. Chairman, I don’t agree at all. 
The member either has not read the entire agreement or he is 
reading between the lines at what he thinks should be there, but 
it’s not there. 
 
Mr. Chairman, and I use for example farmers and 
small-business rebate programs — governments can still do 
that. They can still put in incentives to ensure that new drilling, 
new exploration will take place. That is still possible. And 
through taxation, governments still retain the power to be able 
to provide incentives, incentives for economic development for 
other sectors too, like farmers and small businesses. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we can debate this . . . I 
say one thing that coincides with what this free trade agreement 
says and the minister says the opposite. This is the government 
of opposites. They promise a 10 per cent personal income tax 
cut and they give you a 30 per cent increase. They promise 
never to re-establish the gas tax in this province and they give 
you a 7 cent a litre gas tax increase. They promise to do away 
with the sales tax, Mr. Chairman, and instead they give us a 40 
per cent increase. That’s a government of opposites, when they 
say they are going to eliminate; they don’t eliminate, they 

increase. When they say there are going to do away with things 
like taxes and other things, they don’t do away with them, they 
expand them. When they say they are going to improve our 
health care, what do they do? They gut and privatize our drug 
plan and our dental plan, which is hurting thousands of families 
. . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order. I think we should get 
back on the topic of Energy and Mines. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I was just getting to that point, Mr. Chairman. 
I’m glad you reminded me. 
 
This government, Mr. Chairman, is a government of opposites. 
What they promise and what they say is the opposite of what 
they deliver and what they do. I’ll read out of The Globe and 
Mail on January 22, 1988, entitled: “Trade deal likely to hurt 
Canada on energy, official says.” Don’t believe me — although 
my credibility is still intact with respect to this issue — believe 
this Ontario official. Okay? And here it is: 
 

The proposed (and I quote, Mr. Chairman,) free-trade deal 
would probably force Canadians to pay more for oil, 
natural gas and electricity and make their supplies of these 
energy sources less secure while giving them very little in 
return, a senior official in Ontario’s Energy Ministry said 
yesterday. 

 
Perhaps the officials in this department, and perhaps the 
officials here, Mr. Chairman, have spoken to this official. The 
report was by Bruce MacOdrum, assistant deputy minister for 
policy and planning, and he goes on to say that: 
 

Producers who support the deal, which would reduce the 
ability of federal and provincial governments to regulate 
energy prices (in Canada) and supplies . . . (are the same 
guys) that want government to stay out of their business 
when times are good, but demand help when market forces 
drive prices down. 

 
And they go on to say, “ I resent the double standard they’re 
presenting.” 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Chairman, the United States is an energy-hungry nation, 
which can’t produce enough energy to meet its own needs. 
Canada is a relatively secure and friendly source of supply, at 
least it has been. The American market is there. 
 
We should be charging the Americans a premium price for our 
energy, a price which gives Canadian farmers and 
small-business people in our country a competitive advantage, 
and we should be developing our energy supplies in such a way 
as to guarantee our national, long-term prosperity. It must be 
emphasized that this approach is not an anti-American stance, 
but a straightforward, commonsensical business practice, and 
pro-Canadian. 
 
Every sovereign nation has the right to decide the price it 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

670 
 

will charge itself for its own resources. Other countries have 
consciously excluded energy resources from trade agreements, 
recognizing the strategic importance of maintaining an 
independent stance in this area. 
 
There are other areas of concern as well. For instance, there are 
grounds for concern that future Canadian requirements for oil 
and gas will be threatened. It is generally forecast that the 
demand for natural gas will outstrip supply within about 13 
years, thus undermining Canada’s future energy security. Oil 
reserves will also begin declining at an increasing rate between 
now and the year 2005. 
 
Given these circumstances, wouldn’t it have been more prudent 
for the government to be doubly vigilant to ensure that Canada 
obtained and retained domestic control of this vital industry? 
Instead it has turned its back on our long tradition of ensuring 
energy supplies and security through mandatory reserves. 
 
Finally in the area of ownership and control of our energy 
resources, we seem to have taken a step backward, Mr. 
Chairman. Canada now has a policy that foreign take-overs of 
financially healthy energy companies will not be allowed. 
 
The federal government argues that this policy remains in place 
under this trade agreement, yet it’s not mentioned in the 
agreement. On the contrary, a number of Canadian oil and gas 
companies are being or have been bought, in whole or in part, 
by foreign interests over the last number of months — Husky 
Oil and Dome Petroleum, Esso Petro and Bow Valley 
Industries. 
 
Industry analysts predict that trend is nowhere near being over; 
that is, there will be more take-over activity in 1988. There are 
even rumours that Petro-Canada, our national oil company and 
one of the largest, if not the largest oil company in Canada, is 
on the sell-off list of the federal Conservative government. 
 
This will put serious pressure on the goal of 50 per cent 
Canadian ownership of the oil and gas industry. As at least 
three royal commissions and task forces, Gordon, Watkins and 
Gray concluded the question is not one of being for or against 
foreign investment. The issue is setting sensible rules of the 
game where one could say a reasonable Canadian presence, 
especially in sectors which are important for future growth and 
prosperity, such as energy. 
 
The point is that some kind of policy is needed in this area, that 
it does matter whether a lot or most of the commanding 
positions in our industrial energy sectors are held by 
subsidiaries with headquarters elsewhere. 
 
We need a significant and competitive Canadian presence in the 
sector. This position is certainly not extreme, Mr. Chairman. All 
of our industrial trading partners go much further, including the 
U.S. — and I cite the furore of the U.S. over Robert Campeau’s 
bid for Federated Stores: 
 
This abandonment of Canadian responsibility, and authority can 
have detrimental consequences for our 

economic and energy future. And it must be added, it is not 
only the Canadian oil and gas companies that are put in 
jeopardy, but those hundreds of firms that supply and service 
the major developers and producers in the energy sector. 
 
Articles 1401 and 1402 of the services code of the final 
agreement ensure that American companies have the right to be 
treated in the same basis as Canadian companies and the right to 
establish businesses in Canada. 
 
Over 150 services are included in the annex to the services 
code, including oil and gas field services. With the crucial 
principles of right of establishment and right of national 
treatment now recognized by this trade agreement, U.S. firms 
will be able to challenge any Canadian practices that tend to 
inhibit their ability to compete here. And what did we get in 
return for this total capitulation? Even the Energy department 
and its own internal study concluded that Canada’s energy 
industry will make only modest economic gains in the short 
term under this agreement. 
 
Furthermore, even after the deal has been in place for 10 years, 
the most important benefits will be “intangible and indirect.” 
Specifically, the Americans agree not to impose any tax, duty or 
charge on the energy they send us. When was the last time the 
United States ever sent significant amounts of energy to 
Canada? To which region and under which circumstance? I’d 
like to know that, Minister. 
 
The Americans also agree not to introduce or increase any tariff 
on our energy going into the U.S. The only hard prediction in 
the Energy department report is an estimate that the Canadian 
industry could save $26 million annually by the elimination of 
existing U.S. tariffs or crude oil and refined petroleum products. 
There will be an additional saving of $10 million a year because 
U.S. customs user fees will be phased out. As industry analysts 
have commented, that’s peanuts in terms of the energy industry. 
Who seriously fears that the Americans would throw up a tariff 
against Canadian oil, the very oil they have coveted for years? 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — The member has . . . I thank him for his 
speech on free trade, as he so nicely puts it . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’ve got three or four more. 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — He’s got three or four more. Well, I 
should look forward to those, too. I doubt if they’re going to be 
any different, though, than the ones that I’ve heard from him so 
far. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we’re back to the made-in-Canada price issue, 
and I hate having to repeat myself all the time, but perhaps 
tonight I will do that more than once. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, but we love listening to you, Pat. 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — The member from Regina North East says 
he loves listening to me, and I would say that’s probably the 
first time that he in fact has. 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

671 
 

 
Mr. Chairman let’s go back to the made-in-Canada price. And 
the reason I call it the made-in-Canada price is because that’s in 
fact what we had under the old national energy program. And 
that is precisely what the member from Regina North West now 
says is wrong with the agreement — that we do not have a 
made-in-Canada price system. 
 
And I want to ask him when we had the made-in-Canada price 
system, who did it benefit? Now who did it benefit? All of 
Canada? He has suggested at least once tonight, if not twice, 
that in fact all Canadians had the benefit and saw the benefit of 
a made-in-Canada pricing system, Mr. Chairman. Well I believe 
the member is wrong. In fact, that benefit didn’t show up. But 
who does he think received it? All of Canada, he says, and I 
say, no. Was it western Canada? And I say, no, it wasn’t. In 
fact, Mr. Chairman, western Canada did not see a benefit. What 
they in fact did was paid for it, and in spades — millions of 
dollars. 
 
So if western Canada didn’t see a benefit, then it must be 
central or eastern Canada. Well it probably wasn’t eastern 
Canada because the Maritimes get most of their oil from other 
countries. The pipeline system stops, I believe, in Quebec. So 
that leaves central Canada. And did the consumers there 
benefit? And I would have to say to a large degree they did not 
benefit directly, not directly. And why not? Because all that 
happened when that pricing system was put into place and the 
National Energy Board brought their rules and their regulations 
into effect, was government moved in with the gasoline tax. 
There was room there, and so the gas tax went on. So in fact the 
consumer ended up paying government. 
 
Now you could put out the argument that all of that money was 
going for government revenue and government programs. Well 
that’s perhaps true in some cases. I would think if I take a look 
at Saskatchewan in particular — that was not the case in 
Saskatchewan — that perhaps it went to buy a couple of potash 
mines, or perhaps it was paying the debt on some loan taken out 
in order to put money into the Cornwall Centre in downtown 
Regina. So the benefit, Mr. Chairman . . . Well he is going to 
have to go some to convince me that there was a benefit to 
Canadians with a made-in-Canada price system. 
 
Mr. Chairman, this agreement in fact does allow provinces, 
Saskatchewan included, to do rebates to the various sectors for 
creation of economic development. The member has referred to, 
I believe it was a gentleman from Ottawa, a civil servant, and he 
has either read or quoted from an article. And this gentleman in 
question has said, the negative effects of this agreement — and 
I don’t doubt that for a minute — that he believes that there is a 
reduced ability for Canada to do some of the things as he sees 
them and as he thinks it is. That shouldn’t surprise us at all, 
coming from central Canada. 
 
We’ve already stated, Mr. Chairman . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . well he says always divide. That’s not the case. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Divide, divide, divide . . . 

 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — No, that’s not the case, Mr. Member. I’m 
going to tell you why it’s not the case. You know, I attended an 
Energy ministers’ meeting in Ottawa in 1987, January of 1987. 
All the provinces were there and the two territories, and it was 
the first meeting, the very first meeting of Energy ministers 
along with the federal government and all the others that had 
taken place since the mid-70s. 
 
Now you want to talk about dividing; who was doing the 
dividing back then? How come all those ministers of Energy 
and Mines were not meeting and talking and trying to come up 
with a Canadian policy? And how come the consuming 
provinces weren’t talking to the producing provinces to get an 
understanding of their needs? It didn’t happen, my friend, in the 
’70s, and guess who was in power? 
 
Mr. Chairman, it’s not a question of dividing. I am stating the 
facts tonight, and they’re factual. And I think if the member 
were to be realistic, he would probably agree. 
 
Mr. Chairman, this agreement on trade, it has some protection 
in there; it has a mechanism in order to deal with disputes as 
they arise. This province — and the members were around last 
year when we dealt with the issue of potash. The dispute 
mechanism that is in place or the consultation process is going 
to allow us an input before the disputes get to the pint such as 
the potash industry got to last year. Mr. Chairman, I see that as 
being very, very positive. 
 
(2115) 
 
The member is worried about foreign ownership, and I believe 
all members should give a consideration and look at the pros 
and cons of it. I think they should also take a wider perspective 
and look at where the world is going to be in 10 or 20 years. 
The world is getting to be a smaller place. Between travel, 
communications and technology, the world is going to be seen 
as being almost one community within 20 to 30 years. And if 
the member doubts that, I just ask him to watch over the next 30 
years as to what happens with trading patterns and government 
programming and various other aspects. And he in fact will 
know that it will become a very much smaller world. 
 
Foreign ownership, I think you have to take a look at it 
realistically. And I would ask the member: what was the 
positive aspect of Dome Petroleum in Saskatchewan holding a 
lot of land but never developing it? Tracts and tracts of land 
held under permits with Dome that never got developed because 
it was not in a financially healthy situation, didn’t have the 
money to develop those lands. 
 
Well it’s one thing, Mr. Chairman, to sit and hold the land, and 
quite another to give consideration of who is going to be 
developing it and, I believe, with some guide-lines. I don’t 
believe that you sell something with 100 per cent foreign 
ownership without looking at what you’re selling, the impact on 
the overall province or the overall country, and what that holds 
down the future. Of course you look at it and I believe that at 
the federal level that in fact has happened with companies like 
Dome Petroleum. 
 
You have talked about various companies going down, 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

672 
 

and I would suggest that part of the reason for that has been 
with the fundamental change in the structure of corporations, 
and of course, with the downturn in the oilfield, it didn’t 
surprise me. I don’t think anybody likes to see corporations or 
businesses go through that because that means it’s affecting 
people, and some very drastic changes take place in their lives. 
However, as it relates to foreign ownership, I don’t think you 
automatically dismiss it as being bad for the province to in fact 
have some foreign investment in the province to in fact have 
some foreign investment in the province that gives some return 
to the people of this province, if it’s done in a reasonable and a 
fair manner. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, the trade agreement . . . the NDP will 
continue to highlight what they see as the negatives, and I might 
add most of that is myth — and very similar to the medicare 
scare. And the member has raised several points tonight, and I 
can simply state that he is over-reacting. Yes — scare, fear. He 
wants to talk about divide; what I’d talk about is the planting of 
fear — a little bit of fertilizer here and there and it multiplies, 
and that’s what they’ve attempted to do when it comes to the 
trade agreement. It is simply not true, Mr. Chairman, that we 
are going to lose control, that we are not going to be able to 
develop our resources at our pace. We are going to be able to do 
that. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we will also be able to control exports. The pace 
of our development, all of that rests with the provincial 
governments when they look at exporting energy resources out 
of their province. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Mr. Chairman, time is quickly moving 
here. I’ve never seen a minister filibuster their own estimates in 
this House, at least I haven’t in a long time. But the last straw, 
in terms of this free trade agreement, under certain 
circumstances Canadian consumers could end up paying more 
for their energy than their American counterparts. 
 
For several years American legislators have been looking at a 
possible tax on imported oil as a means of raising revenue. Such 
a tax would ultimately raise the price of any energy sold in the 
U.S. The trade agreement would exempt Canadian energy from 
the tax so that Canada would become one of the cheapest 
energy sources in the entire U.S. market. 
 
If Canadian exporters wanted to profit from the U.S. import tax, 
they could raise their prices for U.S. customers. But to do that, 
they would have to increase domestic prices as well. Since U.S. 
consumers and industry would also have cheaper domestic 
supplies to fall back on, Canadians actually would end up 
paying somewhat more for their own oil and gas. No, Minister, 
under this agreement, how do you justify increasing prices to 
Canadians because of an American domestic oil policy? 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — The Deputy Premier has really expressed 
it the best. Mr. Chairman, there are rumours in the United States 
of what is called . . . I believe it’s an action related to oil and 
imports under section 201 of some legal document in the United 
States. It’s very similar to potash, if I can refer for the member 
to that, in that a company has this room to lay a complaint if 
they think  

their industry is being injured by cheap imports. 
 
So that is the rumour in the United States as it refers to the 
export tax. It can in no way affect Canada. In fact, what it 
would do, Mr. Chairman, is raise the price of oil going into the 
United States so that our producers would have a very difficult 
time in competing with oil from other countries and from the 
United States if, in fact, this export tax was put on top of the 
price. It would put them in a situation of eventually losing their 
contracts, losing those customers, and then the member would 
be quite happy because the oil would all stay in the ground for 
who knows when. 
 
It does not affect the price in Canada. It ups the price for those 
people buying it in the United States, and we would eventually 
lose the contract to sell in there because they would not be 
competitive with the rest of the world. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, just not to end the debate on the free 
trade arrangement as it applies to energy, Mr. Chairman, but to 
perhaps summarize: in the final analysis, in my view and the 
view of many Canadians and a growing number of Canadians, 
we have surrendered through this agreement, this free trade 
agreement, control of our resource. We have become the only 
country in the world that has given up without a fight, or 
without even public consultation, the right to set domestic oil 
price for industrial use in our own country, to serve economic 
policy if we desire. 
 
We may own our resources, but it’s a form of ownership where 
we don’t have the right to the selling price or to set the selling 
price of our product or the rate at which that product will enter 
the market-place. We have forfeited, surrendered our right to 
manage that resource without, I maintain, Mr. Chairman, 
without as much as even public consultation with the people of 
Canada. 
 
This secret deal has been signed without the public’s input. It’s 
been negotiated in the back rooms, in this country and in 
Washington, and for what purpose? Not for the purpose of 
Canadians, Mr. Chairman, but for the purpose of the Americans 
and their economic and energy policies. 
 
Members opposite talk about the Americans possibly opposing 
this in the Senate because it may not be a good enough deal for 
them. I suggest to you and the people of this province, Mr. 
Speaker, that legislators and oil people and major movers and 
shakers in the American economy are rubbing their hands with 
glee over this agreement in the back rooms because they can’t 
believe the deal that they got. We have surrendered our right to 
setting our own domestic oil price, and even the amount of oil 
we export; we have surrendered that with the signing of a 
document, without public consultation, without any kind of 
support from the public of Canada. And I maintain, Mr. 
Chairman, that that is something that will not go unchallenged 
in the coming federal election. 
 
The final point I want to make is that countries have gone to 
war for oil for their people, for energy for their people, and for 
their economies. Countries have defended their resources and 
the right to control those resources by mobilizing their people 
into military machines. But the 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

673 
 

Conservatives sister government in Ottawa has, without even 
public consultation, and for nothing in return, given our heritage 
and the heritage of our children and their children’s heritage 
away. And for what in return, Mr. Chairman? 
 
My final question is: how do you justify, Madam Minister, this 
action to the people of Saskatchewan? How do you justify this 
action to your children and to the children of people that are yet 
to be born? 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — That’s twice. That’s twice, Mr. Chairman. 
Last year one went, too. You’d think I’d learn, eh? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Was my speech that powerful? 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Yes, his speech was that powerful. 
Perhaps I can send the bill to my opposition critic. 
 
Mr. Chairman, domestic price, you want to talk domestic price? 
We’re actually talking about a made-in-Canada price again. 
That’s what the member is talking about, a domestic price is a 
made-in-Canada price. And to what, Mr. Chairman? To the 
detriment of western Canada. I maintain that, Mr. Member, and 
I believe that because I have seen that in the past. We’ve been 
that route. The member thinks he is going into the future, when 
in fact he is going back to the past. Back to the past, my friend. 
 
Mr. Chairman, in fact not only is it a detriment to western 
Canada, the producing provinces, but I would also suggest to 
the hon. member tonight that in fact if you really sit down and 
analyse it, it is a detriment to all of Canada. 
 
Now why do I say that, Mr. Chairman? It eventually creates a 
very unhealthy environment for the growth of an industry. If 
you do not have the proper environment, Mr. Chairman, what 
you in fact end up with is a depletion of your reserves. That 
eventually brings you to the situation of shortage. And that’s 
one point that the member and I agree on; we both are 
concerned about shortages, as all should be. But the best way, 
Mr. Chairman, to recognize that concern is to put in place the 
kind of an environment that in fact encourages growth of the 
industry and the resource itself. Then the member won’t have to 
worry so much about his shortages. 
 
The issue, Mr. Chairman, as it relates to the oil and gas industry 
and the trade agreement, comes down to being one of a secure 
access to one of our biggest markets. That’s the bottom line in 
terms of the oil and gas industry — a secure market to one of 
our biggest markets. It not only affects oil and gas . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I’m glad you said that. There is no 
guarantee, you’re absolutely right, as there is no guarantee on 
the other side that they can walk in and demand it as you have 
suggested. What it is, is a guarantee to negotiate between 
customer and producer. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It doesn’t say that. 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Well he says it doesn’t say that. Well, Mr. 
Chairman, I would ask, does it say what he thinks it does? and 
the obvious answer is no. 

 
Mr. Chairman, why do we want this secure access to our 
biggest market? The member only has to look at the benefits for 
Saskatchewan that are derived out of that. And it’s a human 
element which I would hope that he can appreciate, such as jobs 
for Saskatchewan men and women, the investment dollars that 
come with those jobs, the communities, whether it’s property 
tax, salaries that flow through the community and the indirect 
benefits that come from that, the small benefits. 
 
(2130) 
 
And if the member doesn’t believe there’s any small benefits 
that derive to communities, I invite him to communities like 
Swift Current, Gull Lake, Shaunavon, Weyburn, Estevan, 
Oxbow, Carlyle, various other communities; Kindersley, 
Lloydminster, Cut Knife. They’re scattered all along the west 
side, Mr. Chairman, and all down the south and up the east side 
into the Moosomin area. And he will find communities that do 
in fact benefit. And by communities, I’m talking about people. 
And of course, Mr. Chairman, one of the benefits is revenues, 
government revenues. The member wants more money for 
health and education. Well, Mr. Chairman, Energy and Mines, 
particularly oil and gas, is a big contributor to revenue within 
the government coffers, and that’s one consideration that one 
must have a look at. 
 
And last, but not least, in terms of the benefit, Mr. Chairman, is 
the resource development and the fact that reserves increase 
with that. All of that happens when you have some security of 
access to markets. And I think that the member would have to 
admit that that, in fact, is a fairly good balance. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, I won’t admit that, Madam Minister, 
because I have other questions to ask. 
 
What I’d like to know is, on another topic, what is the latest 
number you have for the reserve-to-production ratio for oil 
conventional in Canada and in Saskatchewan? And secondly, 
what do you believe as a government or a province or a country, 
should be an adequate reserve-to-production ratio with respect 
to securing energy supplies? 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — I’m going to give you one set of figures, 
because whether the oil well is in Manitoba or British 
Columbia, they operate more or less with the same figures. That 
is that for every 10 barrels of oil that you have in reserves you 
should be able to produce approximately one-tenth of that, and 
that is what the ratio is in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Madam Minister, how does that compare 
with 10 years ago, and do you think that ratio is sufficient right 
now? 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, at any point in time that’s 
approximately what it has been. So the more you have in 
reserve, the more you produce. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Getting into semantics here, but it seems to 
me that the reserve-to-production ratio has fluctuated depending 
on which company you talk to. Whether it’s 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

674 
 

the CPA (Canadian Petroleum Association) or IPAC 
(Independent Petroleum Association of Canada) or some of 
their member companies, the reserve production ratios I’ve 
heard of have been anywhere between 9:1 and 15:1. And I was 
wondering, who determines those reserve-to-production ratios? 
Is it the government or is it the industry? Where does the 
information come from? And do you believe that the formula, 
or the ratio we have now, is satisfactory to meet the needs of 
our people? 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — It could vary. If you’re dealing with 
specific companies, then it can vary. I’m dealing with the 
province . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I’m giving you 
the figures of the province out of the Department of Energy and 
Mines. I believe you asked where they come from? It comes 
from the monitoring of the wells, through the field offices, from 
the monthly reports that are done, and the monthly analyses that 
are done. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, I 
want to continue talking about oil and gas and that production 
because that’s the biggest part of your portfolio and because it’s 
so fundamentally important to Saskatchewan as a revenue base. 
 
My question to you, Madam Minister, is: what is the current 
mandate of Saskoil? 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, though Saskoil has nothing 
to do with the Department of Energy and Mines, I can simply 
say to the member, I will answer the question, and it is one of 
having the mandate of most oil companies, and that is for the 
development of the resources. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, you’ve made my point very 
concisely. It has the mandate of most oil companies, and therein 
lies the problem — therein lies the problem. 
 
There’s a fundamental difference between your government and 
the members of the opposition in why we would have Saskoil. 
Let me outline for you the mandate that Saskoil should have. It 
should be one of development of oilfields, of gas fields — 
develop — you punch the holes in the ground, find out where 
the oil and gas is, then put that land up for lease — highest 
bidder — with Saskoil also bidding on that then proven field, so 
that the oil companies would have to have their pencils 
reasonably sharp, otherwise they simply wouldn’t get that 
particular field. But Saskoil should be very much into the 
development of new fields. 
 
The second area that, because you have just simply no mandate 
under the privatized Saskoil, the second area of incredible 
importance to Saskatchewan is that of research, and I’m talking 
research into the heavy oil field. How is it that we could 
enhance the amount of oil that we get out of each well? I 
understand that there’s a fairly small percentage of oil that 
actually comes up when you drill an oil well into a heavy oil 
deposit, because the substance is so gooey and doesn’t want to 
flow that there’s actually a very small amount of oil that we get. 
 
Saskoil, as it is now, has no mandate to do anything other than 
behave like every other private oil company driven by 
shareholders’ need for profit. And I think it’s just a terrible 
waste that you threw away a perfect opportunity, 

you threw away a perfect company that could do those two 
things: one, find new deposits of oil; and secondly, spend a fair 
amount of time, effort, and money into the research for how we 
could get more heavy oil. 
 
I’d appreciate your comments, and it’ll be interesting for me to 
see how you can somehow say that Saskoil is doing those. How 
can you rationalize that Saskoil, which is like literally every 
other oil company, is somehow improved? 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Well I don’t know what the member 
thought Saskoil was before he got into government, or before 
1982, but I invite him to go down to Saskoil and ask them what 
they did previous to 1982, this government coming in, and 
previous to the privatization of Saskoil. 
 
If you think that it was a terrible waste of money to privatize 
Saskoil, I simply want to tell you it was a waste of my dollar 
back in the ’70s when you put my taxpayer’s dollar into a 
company, then went out and bought wells that were already 
there, that we were collecting royalties on, that you could have 
taxed the companies. It was all there. You could tax them. You 
could take royalties. 
 
And yet you took my dollar and you bought it, and for what? 
Do you remember for what? I’m going to tell you, Mr. 
Chairman. The member from Saskatoon South says that the 
NDP bought Saskoil, or created it, to give them a window of 
opportunity so they could know what’s going on in the oil 
patch. That was the reason for the nationalization of 
Saskatchewan’s oil industry. 
 
And what happened, and what happened? This member will 
remember. They left the province. The city of Swift Current 
alone, 200 families left that city — the taxation and everything 
that goes with it. And you talk about a terrible waste of money. 
You don’t even know the definition of it unless you go back 
and look at what you spent on Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I recognize that Saskoil . . . I apologize, Mr. 
Chairman, for getting into the Saskoil debate when it isn’t in on 
this estimates. Perhaps the good member from Regina should 
have been at the Crown Corporations Committee the last time it 
was there, because he would have had ample opportunity to ask 
the questions, as did some of his colleagues, but he didn’t. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you for the round of applause and, for 
your information, the good member for Regina North is on the 
Crown Corporations Committee, was last year, discussed 
Saskoil in Crown corporations, and will continue to discuss 
Saskoil right now where it should be in the public’s view. 
 
We purchased Saskoil in the 70s for . . . you’re right, part of it 
was to get a window on the oil industry; part of it, that is totally 
missed on the members opposite, was to develop new oil finds, 
new oil fields in the province so that we could turn around and 
sell those leases that the government owns —you have quarterly 
lease sales. If you look at the record of the amount of money 
you got from . . . we got from lease sales through the 70s, 
compared to what you get now, I think you’ll find that 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

675 
 

there is a major, major discrepancy. We also got it to do the 
research and development into the heavy oil. 
 
Madam Minister, in 1981 the value of oil production in 
Saskatchewan was $821 million. The revenue we got from 
provincial oil revenue in that same year, ’81, was $533 million. 
In 1986 the net value of oil production was $1.174 billion. The 
revenue dropped to $213 million. My question is: how do you 
explain that 320 million drop in the provincial oil revenue while 
the value of oil production went up nearly $400 million? 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Before I address the last question of the 
member, Mr. Chairman, I simply want to state for the House 
and for the record that what the member has said is not true. He 
said Saskoil was put into place to develop new pools, Mr. 
Chairman, the first thing that Saskoil did, the very first thing, 
was purchase, purchase, Atlantic Richfield — no development 
of new pools; they purchased Atlantic Richfield. 
 
And I invite you to go back and look at this development, to use 
your word, of new fields. Mr. Chairman, we didn’t see a lot of 
new development of new fields in this province until about 
1984 or 1985 with the exploration of the deep wells to the south 
here in the Weyburn-Estevan area. And that’s fact, Mr. 
Chairman, a fact that is on record. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Chairman, earlier tonight I went over the share argument, 
and I believe perhaps the member was not here from Regina 
North when I went over it with the member from Regina North 
West, and I will simply say that that has been explained tonight 
for my critic as it was last year for my critic. It is on record and 
it will be in Hansard tomorrow. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I didn’t believe you then, and we don’t 
believe you now. 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Well I know you don’t believe it, but it is 
there. And if you take the relative points to the argument, you 
will see that in fact it is true, and that’s what . . . You’ve made a 
lot of assumptions in your calculation. 
 
I will also state for the members from Regina North that the 
credibility gap on the figures that you use is widening. Tonight 
the member from Regina North West used the figure of two 
billion. The member from Regina North East uses the figure 1.7 
billion, and the member from Regina . . . Moose Jaw North uses 
2.8 billion. So I don’t know where you’re getting your figures, 
except to say that my critic was kind enough tonight to in fact 
tell me that it was based on some assumptions. We went over 
the assumptions; some of them are wrong, and he has not 
included all of the factors into the equation in arriving at the 
conclusion that he has, and that conclusion is wrong. 
 
Mr. Trew: — I thank you for pointing out to me and the people 
of Saskatchewan that the figures I use are wrong. Madam 
Minister. You may recognize the budget document from one 
Gary Lane, Estimates 1988-89 . . . 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Members are not to use other 
members’ names in the House. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I apologize to the 
member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden for using his name — heat of 
the moment. 
 
The member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, his Estimates, the actual 
revenue in oil, 1986-87, $212,926,000 — well I gave you a 
$74,000 benefit by calling it $213 million. But if you say that 
these numbers are indeed wrong, I guess maybe they are; you 
better talk to your Finance minister about that though. We’re 
using . . . that’s where we’re using the numbers from. 
 
Madam Minister, I wanted to get into a different area, but I see 
we’re zeroing in on 10:00, and the critic in this area informed 
me he has a few other questions, so I thank you for your 
attention. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thanks, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate this. I 
have looked, over the last number of months, with regard to 
some press reports about the Lloydminster heavy oil upgrader, 
Madam Minister. I noted that prior to the 1986 election 
campaign the Conservative Party in this province said they were 
going to bring forward this heavy oil upgrader, and it will be 
built on the Saskatchewan side near Lloydminster. 
 
And I note as I go through these news releases as late as 
November of ’87, the headline was that there is a pact for a $2 
billion heavy oil upgrader almost set for Lloydminster, the 
Premier of Alberta says. And he says it may be signed within 
two weeks. This was in November 7, 1987, of The Globe and 
Mail. And he goes on to talk about the location of the upgrader 
on the Saskatchewan side, that the province of Saskatchewan 
was acutely interested in being involved with it. 
 
And you go through them. November 9 in the Leader-Post, 
Getty is quoted again as saying this upgrader is coming. Husky 
officials, on November 12 in the Leader-Post, talk about how 
hopeful this Lloyd upgrader is and that the joint ownership 
option appears to be the favourite route. And the November 13 
Leader-Post says that the province’s study plan for Husky’s 
Lloyd upgrader . . . 
 
And it goes on, Madam Minister, about all of the news reports, 
right through saying, day after day, week after week, that the 
announcement is coming tomorrow; the announcement is 
coming tomorrow. 
 
There was actually a comment in late ’87, in anticipation of the 
federal election campaign being called, that there might be an 
upgrader built fairly soon. “We’re going to make an 
announcement within days.” That was coming from the mouth 
of the Energy minister, and the two cabinet ministers that 
represent Lloydminster, Mr. Mazankowski, who is Deputy 
Prime Minister of this country, and of course, on the 
Saskatchewan side of Lloydminster, Mr. McKnight, who is a 
member of the Mulroney cabinet as well. 
 
And it goes on daily, the reports are coming out that the 
announcement’s going to be made tomorrow. 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

676 
 

 
And I see on April 15, in the Star-Phoenix, that the Husky 
upgrader agreement is reached, finally. And I notice the date 
because there is now heated discussion about the federal 
election being called in this country. And the people of 
Lloydminster, in the view of almost everybody I spoke to up 
there, were telling me that the Conservative government of 
Saskatchewan, the Conservative government of Alberta, and the 
Conservative counterpart in Ottawa were playing cruel politics 
with this decision. 
 
And it says in this Star-Phoenix newspaper article, again, that 
the upgrader is being announced. The three governments and 
Husky Oil believe they have reached an agreement on a 
framework for the Husky upgrader to allow the project to 
proceed. And the estimated project is going to be $1.2 billion. 
And this was after Mr. Mulroney met with the Premier of 
Saskatchewan just last week in Saskatoon. So here we have 
another announcement. 
 
Madam Minister, is this playing cruel politics with the people of 
Lloydminster who are sick and tired of hearing promise after 
promise after promise? I was up in Lloydminster for four days 
in the oil patch and they don’t call it “Lloydminster”; they call 
Lloydminster, Madam Minister, “the promised land” because 
they’ve been promised this thing so often by all three levels of 
government, by the MLA for Cut Knife-Lloydminster, that 
they’re not going to believe it until they see it. 
 
Can you tell us this evening, with any kind of equivocation, 
whether this is another promise in anticipation of a federal 
election campaign or whether this is going to materialize? 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member from 
Regina North West and I agree on a few things. I agree with 
him on a few things that he has said, and that is that there has 
been a lot of speculation around for a long time. The people of 
Lloydminster are in fact feeling a great deal of frustration with 
this particular project. 
 
The project is a difficult one for a couple of reasons, Mr. 
Chairman. One has been the cost of it; the second factor has 
been that it involves more than two partners; and the third 
aspect of the difficulty, Mr. Chairman, has been the volatile 
situation of the price of oil. And it has created an environment 
that has been extremely difficult in coming to terms with the 
agreement, Mr. Chairman. Given all those difficulties — and 
this is what’s interesting about it — is that not one partner at the 
negotiating table has elected to back away and say: this is 
non-viable; this is “non-doable.” That in fact, Mr. Chairman, 
has not happened. 
 
As to when this is going to come to a completion for any kind 
of an announcement, I am not at liberty to say tonight, Mr. 
Chairman. But I would say this to the member from Regina 
North West who has seen the benefits finally of an upgrader in 
Regina — and he keeps talking about promises, promises, and 
you haven’t done this and you haven’t done that. 
 
Mr. Chairman, in 1982 the member and his party ate a little bit 
of crow, and in 1986 the member and his party went back for 
seconds. And I would say to the member, if 

he doesn’t want a third helping before the four-year term is up, 
that he have a little patience and a little trust, and perhaps we 
can get this done before that four-year term in fact is up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Chairman, the minister is again not really 
playing fair with the people in Lloydminster. The people in 
Lloydminster want to know whether this agreement is coming 
or whether it’s not. They want to know where the refinery’s 
going to be located, whether it’s going to be part of the Husky 
asphalt refinery in Lloydminster, whether it’s going to be a 
stand-alone. They want to know whether it’s going to be on the 
Saskatchewan side or on the Alberta side. They want to know 
when this thing is going to be built. 
 
They also want to know, and I think the taxpayers of this 
province want to know, what kind of financial arrangements the 
Government of Saskatchewan and the other government are 
committing with respect to this project in the long term, in the 
short term, and whether or not we are just going to be taking all 
the risk, or whether or not we’re going to be having some 
rewards on the upside as well. 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I am not about to 
raise expectations and put things out there that are not ready to 
be announced at this point in time. The agreement as such, if 
and when reached, Mr. Chairman, will contain the items that the 
member has referred to. I think the member is aware that in fact 
there has, previous to this, been the guide-lines put out as to 
what the respective provinces found in being in need of at the 
negotiating table, the federal government and the private sector. 
It has always been Saskatchewan’s position that it could not be 
the government, the Saskatchewan government, that took all the 
risk, that in fact there had to be a partnership. 
 
The negotiations, I could add for the member’s benefit, have 
always taken place within the framework of private sector risk 
and a partnership effect to it. And as to any kind of remaining 
details that the member would like, he is going to have to wait 
for the negotiations to be completed. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, I just . . . if the government House 
Leader will be patient, I’ve got a couple of more questions. 
Could the minister, on another topic, provide to me later in 
writing, the names of your staff people, their salaries, their 
ranges —whether they’ve had any salary increases over the past 
12 months. 
 
I wouldn’t mind having a list, as well, of out-of-province travel 
for the minister and staff, as well as any extra benefits such as a 
car, or use of a car, that the minister’s staff might have over that 
period. 
 
And I’d like to also know whether any polling was done by the 
department, who the polling . . . if it was done, who it was 
commissioned to do it, whether it was tendered or appointed, 
the amount of the contract. If the polling was done, could she 
table or provide me with a copy of the poll and the results? 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

677 
 

 
And finally, with regard to advertising, we wouldn’t mind 
having a cost of advertising in her budget with what the 
advertising was spent on, who the agency of record is, whether 
the agency was appointed or tendered. 
 
And I suppose the final question I have with regard to the 
estimates, and that would deal with perhaps some of the things 
that we’ve been talking about tonight, and of course some of the 
things we haven’t. If the free trade deal goes ahead unamended, 
and the energy responsibilities that we have are given up 
through that agreement in part, and SMDC (Saskatchewan 
Mining Development Corporation) is privatized, and Saskoil is 
privatized, what is going to be the department’s role in energy 
after all of this stuff is sold off at discount prices to your 
friends? 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Yes, I will send you the information. 
 
Your last question, the role of the department, is back to the 
very first question that you asked me. 
 
An Hon. Member: — But after you sell everything off, what’s 
there left? What’s left? 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Let me finish; you didn’t listen to my 
answer, then. If you think that there is nothing for the 
Department of Energy and Mines to do if you privatize Saskoil 
. . . 
An Hon. Member: — SMDC. 
 
(2200) 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Well, and then he says SMDC and various 
others. The province’s industries are much more than simply 
Saskoil, SMDC, Saskatchewan potash. I’m not sure what else is 
left, but it’s more than simply the Crown corporations. In fact, 
by far the majority of the industries in the respective resources, 
by far, are the private sector. 
 
Government must still look at their resource policies, have the 
ability to put a tax on, whether it’s the royalty system or some 
other system. Now in order to collect those royalties, the 
taxation, there must be a monitoring device, and that’s where 
the regulatory function comes in. That is the role of the 
Department of Energy and Mines, plus they play a very big part 
at the field level, particularly in oil and gas, on the environment 
and safety aspect. 
 
So I think the member is seeing things where there is nothing 
there to see, and perhaps not looking at in fact how broad those 
industries are. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I’ve just 
one or maybe, at the most, two questions to the minister. 
 
Madam Minister, there’s been a lot of talk and a lot of the 
Britain press lately in the province about the development of 
Saskatchewan’s gold reserves and the amount of gold which has 
been discovered in the province. The president of exploration 
for Royex Gold Corporation was quoted in this weekend’s 
Leader-Post, talking about Saskatchewan as being another 
Hemlo and the potential for the kind of 

gold finds. I wonder, would you outline to the House the 
findings of the Department of Energy and Mines — the total 
extent of the gold reserve, proven gold reserves in 
Saskatchewan, and also the estimated gold reserves controlled 
by Saskatchewan, SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation). 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the figures that I have here 
tonight are the annual production on an individual mine by 
mine basis. We would have to compile . . . that is not the 
reserves, which is what you’ve asked for. I only have the 
production. 
 
To address your next question on SMDC: SMDC has a major 
share in one of the mines as of now, that’s Star Lake gold mine, 
plus they have an interest in one of the developing operations 
which is not on stream yet. If you like, I can give you the mine 
by mine production figures, but that does not include the 
reserves. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Madam Minister, there’s no use taking the time 
of the House to read them out. If you would send them across, 
undertake to send the mine by mine production. 
 
Also, if you would undertake to send me the following: the 
estimate of reserves in Saskatchewan done by Energy and 
Mines, and also the estimate of reserves held by the 
Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation; and I know 
that Energy and Mines will have that inventory. If you will 
undertake to send those figures across to me, then I won’t have 
to ask any more questions or take up any more time of the 
House. 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — We can do that, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — May I have your undertaking to provide it 
within the next 14 days? 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, we will do our best to 
provide it within that 14. If I’m a little bit over, the member will 
have to allow some leniency. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I’m only too willing to provide a week’s 
leeway, Madam Minister. Thank you. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 6 
 
Mr. Solomon: — With respect to item 6, Mr. Chairman. 
Madam Minister, with regard to payments to the property 
management corporation of Saskatchewan, I note there is an 
increase from the ’87-88 estimate — or should I say ’88-89 
estimate from ’87-88. Could you give us a breakdown as to 
what that space paid for? Could you also perhaps give us in 
writing, later on, some indication as to where the space is 
leased; not only a breakdown but location, the size of offices at 
each location, and how much you paid per foot at each location, 
square foot? 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, we can provide the 
locations in the area, but we will not provide the prices, which 
has been a long-standing policy of government, 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

678 
 

 
regardless of which stripe of government. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Am I correct to assume then that you will not 
tell us what you’re paying for any particular office location in 
terms of a lease arrangement? 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — That’s right, Mr. Chairman. That 
information is confidential, and I believe that the member 
knows that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Madam Minister, are we hearing you say 
that you will provide information on the space where you are 
paying the property management corporation for leasing from, 
also the size of the space that you’re having the property 
management corporation lease to you, and the location? 
 
Item 6 agreed to. 
 
Item 7 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 23 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Economic Diversification and Investment Fund 

Vote 66 
 

Item 4 agreed to. 
 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Resources Division 
Energy and Mines 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 1 
 

Items 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 1 agreed to. 
 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Energy Security Division 

Energy and Mines 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 47 

 
Items 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 47 agreed to. 
 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund 
Loans, Advances and Investments 

Energy and Mines 
Vote 63 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 63 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates (No. 2) 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Energy and Mines 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 23 

 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you. With regard to Energy and 
Mines, ordinary expenditure in Supplementary Estimates 

(No. 2) 1988, administrative services, you’re requesting another 
$125,000. Can the minister tell us what the purpose of that 
$125,000 was for? What was it spent on specifically; if there 
were more people hired or salary increases or benefits? 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, this is a cost to our 
systems area for natural gas deregulation, $100,000, and the 
general expenses in updating the system was 25,000. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Madam Minister, is this going to be a cost 
that’s going to incur every year, or is this just an extra cost? 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — It’s a one-time cost because of 
deregulation. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 23 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates (No. 2) 
Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Resources Division 
Energy and Mines 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 1 
 

Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 1 agreed to. 
 
(2215) 
 

Supplementary Estimates (No. 2) 
Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Energy Security Division 
Energy and Mines 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 47 
 

Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 47 agreed to. 
 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund 
Loans, Advances and Investments 

Energy Security Division 
Energy and Mines 

Vote 63 
 

Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 63 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister’s officials. 
 
Hon Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I too would like to take 
this opportunity to thank the Department of Energy and Mines 
for the past year and the officials for getting both of us through 
estimates tonight. Also a special thank you to my critic, the hon. 
member from Regina North West. He’s only been in a short 
time and has done his homework. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to 
extend my appreciation to the officials for helping us 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

679 
 

out this evening. They’ve been very courteous and they have 
done an exceptional job in briefing the minister. I would have 
preferred they did a little more work on the free trade 
agreement, and I think they will do that having been notified of 
some of the startling revelations in article 904. 
 
I’d also like to thank the Minister of Energy. She’s been very 
pleasant, and I apologize for having giving that speech that 
blew her necklace all to pieces. Thank you. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:20 p.m. 


