




















































May 6, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 May 6, 1988 
 

1135 
 

 

 
The Assembly met at 9:30 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins:  Mr. Speaker, with leave 1 would ask to 
proceed to move first reading of An Act respecting By-elections 
in the Constituencies of Regina Elphinstone and Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 20  An Act respecting By-elections in the 
Constituencies of Regina Elphinstone and Saskatoon 

Eastview 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of An 
Act respecting By-elections in the Constituencies of Regina 
Elphinstone and Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill 
ordered to be read a second time later this day. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 20  An Act respecting By-elections in the 
constituencies of Regina Elphinstone and Saskatoon 

Eastview 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins:  Just very briefly, Mr. Speaker, I move 
second reading of An Act respecting By-elections. 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Just very briefly, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
thank the Premier and the government and the members 
opposite for expediting the passage of this legislation so that the 
two members can take their places. I think that’s in the spirit, 
obviously, of what the democratic decision was in Eastview and 
in Elphinstone. 
 
As well I’d like to thank the Chief Justice, the Administrator, in 
the absence of Lieutenant Governor, and all of the members of 
the Assembly, and you, sir, particularly for agreeing to start the 
House at 9:30 this morning in order to facilitate this. Thank you 
very much, sir. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, referred to a Committee of the whole later this day. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 20  An Act respecting the By-elections in the 
Constituencies of Regina Elphinstone and Saskatoon 

Eastview 
 
Clause 1 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 20  An Act respecting By-elections in the 
constituencies of Regina Elphinstone and Saskatoon 

Eastview 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins:  With leave, Mr. Speaker, I move that 
the Bill be now read a third time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 
 
At 9:45 His Honour the Administrator entered the Chamber, 
took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to the 
following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 20  An Act respecting By-elections in the 
Constituencies of Regina Elphinstone and Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 9:47 a.m. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBERS OF THE 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 

 
Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I have the honour to present to 
you, Mr. Dwain Lingenfelter, member for the constituency of 
Regina Elphinstone, who has taken the oath and signed the roll 
and now claims the right to take his seat. 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Let the hon. member take his seat. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I have the honour to present to 
you, Mr. Bob Pringle, member for the constituency of 
Saskatoon Eastview, who has taken the oath and signed the roll 
and now claims the right to take his seat. 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Let the hon. member take his seat. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to members of the 
Assembly, some distinguished visitors from my riding this 
morning: Mr. John Schock, the reeve of the R.M. of Maple 
Creek, and two councillors, Jack McDougald and Calvin Siegle, 
drove to Regina to meet with a number of ministers. 
 
I welcome you to the Assembly. I’m sure you have enjoyed the 
proceedings so far. This is not routine. It’s probably an historic 
occasion for the party opposite, but I do welcome you to Regina 
and wish you a safe trip home, and I trust you will have found 
the meetings this morning fruitful. I’d ask all members to please 
welcome these guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
May 6, 1988 

 

1136 
 

Mr. Sauder:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you, and through you to the other members of 
the Assembly, a group of students from my constituency from 
the town of Arborfield. There are 16 grade 9 students. They’re 
accompanied today by their teacher, Mr. Delmer Friesen; 
chaperons, Mrs. Emily Penman, Mr. Bruce Smith, Mr. John 
Thesen, Mrs. Gerald Schroepfer, and I believe there’s maybe 
some others with them that their names didn’t get on here. 
 
I would just hope that they will have an interesting and 
enjoyable time here watching the proceedings of the Assembly 
this morning. I would just ask all members to help me welcome 
them here to Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, 
pursuant to the ceremony which we had today in the passage of 
the legislation, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce 
the family members of the two new members. They obviously 
wish to share on this very momentous and important occasion, 
as I believe our Clerk described it in the swearing in service in 
his office. 
 
First of all, from Dwain Lingenfelter’s family, if I may be 
permitted to break the rules this one occasion, the member from 
Regina Elphinstone. Dwain’s children are with him, at least two 
of them are, Sacha, daughter in the east gallery; and Mathew, 
son. Are you there? If you could just stand. Yes. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Dwain’s wife, Marie, and Travis are on the 
farm seeding, so it’s a question of necessity both ways. 
 
With respect to Mr. Pringle’s family, Bob Pringle, the member 
from Eastview, I’ll introduce all of them and just have them 
stand at the end to speed . . . I should say also a special word of 
mention to a number of people from Elphinstone new 
Democratic Party Association who helped Dwain, too 
numerous to mention, but are present as well. 
 
With respect to the Pringle family, Mr. Speaker, present today 
are Bob’s wife Gwen, his sons Darren and Dean; Bob’s parents, 
Doug and Norma Duncombe from Carnduff; Gwen’s mother, 
Beatrice Gordon; Bob’s aunt, Kay McLean; Gwen’s brother, 
Neil Gordon, and his friend Pam Kreis. If the would please just 
stand so that they could be recognized by the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:  On behalf of all the members of the House, 
I welcome these family members, and thank you, Mr. Speaker, 
for permitting me to do so. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to all members of 
the Assembly, some guests seated in your gallery this morning, 
Mr. Speaker. We have with us 13 adult students from the 
Moose Jaw Job Development 

Program. They’re here this morning, accompanied by their 
instructor, Paula Green, who I note has with her the youngest 
observer in the galleries today; as well, counsellor Doreen 
Meadows, and program co-ordinator Bev Wenzel. 
 
Following question period today, Mr. Speaker, these students 
and their chaperons will be taking a tour of the Assembly. I’ll 
be meeting with them at 11 o’clock for pictures and drinks and 
to discuss the observations that they’ve made this morning. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in welcoming these guests 
to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

University Hospital Cardiology Department 
 
Ms. Simard:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for 
the Minister of health and it deals with the cardiology 
department at the University Hospital. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a letter here from Dr. Lopez, the head of 
the cardiology department at the University Hospital. It’s a 
letter that was written to Univoice, the University Hospital 
publication. And Dr. Lopez says in that letter that, without any 
doubt, the most poorly equipped cardiac department of any 
academic hospital in Canada is that of the University Hospital. 
He goes on to say: 
 

In certain areas we lack the minimum requirements to 
practise medicine at a standard comparable to other 
university hospitals in this country. 

 
Mr. Minister, will you now admit that your cut-backs are 
crippling Saskatchewan health care, and will you please tell us 
what you’re going to do to correct the situation at the 
cardiology department in Saskatoon? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod:  Mr. Speaker, first of all, while I won’t 
take at face value what the member says because we learned 
some time ago not to do that, but first of all . . . and the second 
thing, Mr. Speaker, is that the cardiology department at the . . . 
or this particular doctor that the member refers to has written 
this letter, as she says, to the university publication. 
 
They will say, many doctors in many of the units working 
across this country will say that they need better equipment, that 
they need more equipment, that as technology moves more 
quickly than medical schools or than governments are able to 
respond, that they won’t have the kind of equipment that they 
believe that they need, as quickly as they feel that they should 
have it. 
 
I will acknowledge that. I know that that’s the case. But I will 
also say that we are working very hard, as is the University 
Hospital, and as is the College of Medicine in Saskatoon, to be 
sure that the proper equipment is there to train the people in the 
specialties that are necessary to be 
  



 
May 6, 1988 

 

1137 
 

trained in here in the province, and cardiology is certainly one 
of those. 
 
Ms. Simard:  New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, one 
would think that the by-elections in Regina Elphinstone and 
Saskatoon Eastview would show you that you should take at 
face value what we say on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard:  The Saskatchewan Health Research Board has 
expressed to you in writing their grave concern about your lack 
of funding. Over 100,000 signatures were tabled in this 
legislature respecting your health care cut-backs and people 
who oppose your cut-backs. Now, Mr. Minister, when are you 
going to start listening? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod:  Mr. Speaker, we’ve been over this 
ground several times, as you will know, in the House. The 
increases in health care funding have gone up in a percentage 
term about 68 per cent. Mr. Speaker  68 per cent increases in 
health care funding. health care funding has gone up in this 
year’s budget over last. Health care funding in this province 
now is one-third of every government dollar that’s spent in 
spent in the health care field  $1.2 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member will raise this particular issue today, and another 
one on another day, and try to pick out one spot in a very large 
and very complex system. It is that, Mr. Speaker. No one in this 
House, no thinking person in this House or outside of this 
House will suggest that the health care system is not very large 
and is not very complex. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many people in that system, people in this 
Department of health, people in this government, are working 
extremely hard to be sure that the dollars that are spent, the very 
substantial dollars that are spent in health care, are spent as 
effectively as possible  a major challenge for all of us, all of 
us, I say, all of us who are elected to responsible positions. And 
we’re working very hard at that and that will continue, Mr. 
Speaker. You have may assurance. 
 

Pricing Structure for Sale of Canned Beer in Hotels 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
minister responsible for The Liquor Licensing Act, and it deals 
with some very serious concerns that have been expressed by 
rural hotels across Saskatchewan. You will know, Mr. Minister, 
that all across this province the hotel industry is experiencing 
some difficult times, and this is especially true in smaller rural 
hotels. And they’re especially concerned abut the changes 
you’re considering but have refused to announce. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell us what the pricing structure will be 
for canned beer sold through hotels? Can you tell us that today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Mr. Speaker, I can tell the member 

opposite that I’ve had ongoing consultations and discussions 
with the hotel association. We have not come to a final decision 
as to the price of canned beer, but I can assure the member and 
the people in the Hotel industry that those consultations will 
continue, and as soon as a price is arrived at, I would be more 
than pleased to share it with the member and the people of the 
province. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  Supplementary, same minister. Mr. 
Minister, the hoteliers appreciate the possibility of a 
competitive wholesale price on canned beer, and they haven’t 
had any clear answers from you, and they want some answers to 
these questions, Mr. Minister. Will you be allowing open 
pricing for canned beer in the same way that bottled beer is 
presently sold? I think you have a responsibility to answer these 
questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems rather strange 
that the people who were against canned beer seem now to be 
on the side of canned beer. 
 
Certainly I can indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that we have not 
made a decision yet as to the price of canned beer. I’ve said that 
previously. I have been in consultation with the hotels 
association as late as last week, and there will be more 
consultations with them, and I’m sure we will work out a price 
that is acceptable and that will have the interest of the hoteliers 
and the consuming public both looked after in the not too 
distant future. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch:  New question, same minister. Mr. 
Minister, first of all, let me point out that the members on this 
side have not been opposed to canned beer, as you’ve indicated. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Minister, that hoteliers have expressed 
concerns that the liquor consumption tax is becoming a burden 
to their businesses, and I’d like to know if you have any plans 
to move this tax from the retail price to the price that hoteliers 
pay for their beer and their liquor. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Well, Mr. Speaker, again we hear some 
strange things; certainly the NDP were on record opposing 
canned beer, but it looks like they’ve changed their position. 
 
Secondly, I’d like to indicate to the member  and he may not 
be aware of it  that the liquor consumption tax was imposed 
by the NDP government when they were in power. 
 
And thirdly, we are not looking at changing that tax at this time. 
 

Increased in Tuition Fees at the University of 
Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier, 
and it deals with this government’s chronic underfunding of 
education, particularly the universities. 
 
Mr. Premier, as a consequence of the persistent underfunding of 
education in this province, the University of Saskatchewan has 
been forced to depend 
  



 
May 6, 1988 

 

1138 
 

more and more on tuition fee increases placed on the backs of 
the students. You will know, sir, that the university has now 
been forced to resort to a tuition fee increase of 8 per cent for 
this coming year and a further increase of an additional 5 per 
cent for the following year. And that will only mean, sir, a 
heavier burden placed on the students. 
 
Now in Wednesday’s by-election, sir, the students of 
Saskatchewan and the educators overwhelmingly rejected your 
cut-backs to education. So will you reconsider, will you 
reconsider you budget cut-backs so that the U. of S. students 
will not have to bear the brunt of your misplaced priorities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, we know in both 
by-elections that approximately 40 per cent of the people didn’t 
vote at all, and I understand in Eastview that most of the 
students didn’t vote, and a very low turn-out with respect to 
young people, so you couldn’t say that at all with respect to the  
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Order, order I think when the Premier 
rises to respond, he should be given some opportunity to do so. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, I just responded to his 
observation with respect to students voting in Eastview or in 
Elphinstone. I just reiterated the point that there was a very low 
turn-out, and the probability of a lot of students voting was just 
simply not there. 
 
Secondly, the student union, I’m sure he knows, at the 
university thought that the tuition increase was reasonable. In 
fact they said they expected a much higher increase. 
 
Third, I would say to the hon. member that the increased 
funding for universities, and the increased funding generally 
with respect to education, has certainly had Saskatchewan 
ranking with other western Canadian universities any place that 
you’d want to find across western Canada. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky:  Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, 
it’s alibi after alibi, but you’ve really now got two messages. 
The first message was the faculty and administrative dispute 
which was caused by your underfunding. And now the second 
one was the student and the faculty and the people of Saskatoon 
Eastview voting against you in this by-election. 
 
The facts are plain and clear to see. Ten per cent student fee 
increase in the last two years; 8 per cent for the coming year; 5 
per cent for the year after. Your underfunding is hurting the 
universities and it’s hurting the students. In this by-election they 
tried to send you that message once again, Mr. Minister. Have 
you heard it? Will you now stop your cut-backs to education 
which are hurting the students of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, the average student 

pays about 15 per cent of the education cost, and the 
government pays about 84 or 85 per cent of that cost. and when 
you say that it’s cut, you obviously are not aware of the fact that 
we have increased the expenditures dramatically. The only way 
that you can find any reduction is on a per-student basis, 
because the number of students has increased dramatically. But 
the expenditure are up and we’re covering about 85 per cent of 
the expenditure for a university student. They cover about 15 
per cent. 
 
I’d also say, Mr. Chairman, the public probably does not know 
that the average full professor would run 62 to $65,000 a year in 
salary. And I know that about 50 per cent of the professors on 
campus are full professors. And being a tenured faculty member 
there, I can attest to the fact that a young faculty member 
coming in would receive something in the neighbourhood of 30 
to $34,000. 
 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, we are looking forward to the 
rejuvenation of the University of Saskatchewan with the funds 
that we’re providing and additional funds, a new agriculture 
facility, and a new administration building, the new geological 
sciences building, additions to hospitals and health care. All of 
those things will make a difference in the long run, as well as 
the increases we’ve provided for students now so we can cover 
up to 85 per cent of the costs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Transportation of RTM Houses to Northern 
Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Thompson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I direct my 
question to the minister responsible for Sask Housing. Mr. 
Minister, I understand that the government has approved a plan 
by the federal government CMHC (Canada Mortgage and 
Housing Corporation) to move as many as 30 houses form 
Calgary to northern communities, including Ile-a-la-Crosse, a 
distance of approximately 600 miles. 
 
By way of information, Mr. Minister, these are RTM (ready to 
move) houses completely built and ready to move. You will 
know, Mr. Minister, that there is a housing shortage in the 
North. Far more serious however is the shortage of jobs. In 
Beauval I am told that the houses will cost $75,000. We have 
contractors up North who are capable of constructing these 
houses and need the jobs. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: how can you justify 
such an expensive plan? Would you and your federal 
government and CMHC agree to build the same number of 
houses in northern communities using local materials, local 
contractors, and creating local jobs? would you consider that, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein:  Mr. Speaker, I suppose in response to the 
member, I can tell him that the unemployment figures were 
released today and we find Saskatchewan second in the country 
again. So I would suspect that  
  



 
May 6, 1988 

 

1139 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein:  I would suspect that our government is 
doing a reasonably good job in job creation, Mr. Speaker. Not 
only that, for northern jobs our uranium mines are open and 
they have a lot of jobs up there that are, in fact, keeping the 
people of the North occupied. 
 
As far as it relates to the question of the Olympic trailers, that is 
a federal program, Mr. Speaker. Our government has nothing to 
do with it. 
 
Mr. Thompson:  Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister 
talks about the figures that come out today, but I’ll tell you he’s 
not including the region of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, your political speeches and . . . supplementary, 
Mr. Speaker. Your speeches about the past don’t address the 
problem. The issue is northern housing today and northern jobs 
today. The issue, Mr. Minister, is the future. 
 
Will you agree that it would make far more sense both socially 
and economically for northern housing to be built in the North 
by northern residents instead of buying them in Calgary and 
moving them hundreds of miles up to northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson:  By way of information, Mr. Minister, the 
winners will be ATCO corporation and the movers, and the 
losers are going to be northern Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Mr. Minister, your plan makes no sense. Will you reconsider 
that plan now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein:  Mr. Speaker, I explained to the member 
that the movement of those trailers going in there, or the 
accommodation, is a federal policy. And it’s a federal area and 
they’re doing it. We as provincial government have nothing to 
do with it. 
 
So in response to his second concern about employment in the 
North, you bet we’re concerned about employment in the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Would you please allow the member to 
continue. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It seems that, you 
know the few questions that I receive in this Assembly, I have a 
lot of noise coming from the opposition ranks all the time, and I 
don’t know why. I appreciate you bringing them to order. 
 
But in event, we are concerned with employment in the North. 
And if you would pay some attention, and your seat mate beside 
you knows that, we have more exploration going on in mining 
in the North right now than has ever occurred in this province. 
Gold mines are opening  all kinds of mining activity and 
exploration 

going on up there that in fact the member and the member 
beside you employment for their people in the North. 
 
Of course we’re concerned. We always will be. And we do 
something about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson:  Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 
question I asked the minister was on housing. He is turning to 
exploration. And just to respond to that, you’re spending 
one-tenth of the money that we spent on exploration when we 
were in government. I tell you that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson:  Mr. Minister, today in Saskatchewan the 
unemployment rate is already far too high, and in northern 
Saskatchewan it is triple to what it is in the South. And in the 
North, as you know, there is a job crisis. I realize that your 
government policy is open for big business, but in case, 
wouldn’t it be better to be open for Saskatchewan people? 
 
Mr. Minister, northern people need housing and they need jobs. 
You have a responsibility to address those needs. Will you use 
your . . . My question is to you: will you use your good office to 
reverse the CMHC plan and have Saskatchewan Housing Build 
the 30 houses along with Saskatchewan Housing in northern 
Saskatchewan? I ask you again: and will you use your good 
offices and make sure that northern contractors and northern 
residents have an opportunity to build those homes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein:  Mr. Speaker, we have a federal-provincial 
housing agreement, and in that agreement the federal 
government has agreed to supply the housing in the North, 
which they are doing, and this is part of their program. 
 
Getting back to what the member said  and we’re speaking 
now about mining  he indicated that their prior 
administration, the NDP government, spent 10 times as much as 
this government on exploration and job creation in the north. 
And yet, that’s the difference between them and us, Mr. 
Speaker. We have $50 million, $50 million of private sector 
money going into the North on exploration, creating the jobs; 
we don’t have to do it at government expense. And that’s the 
difference between them and us. 
 

Computer Card System for Paying Prescription Drug 
Bills 

 
Mr. Goodale:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Health. The minister will know that he and this 
government have repeatedly put themselves into trouble with ad 
hoc changes to our health care system, one prime example, of 
course, being the changes with respect to the prescription drug 
plan. 
 
During the recent by-elections, and in the last panic 
  



 
May 6, 1988 

 

1140 
 

moments of those by-elections, the minister announced a credit 
card system for paying prescription drug bills. Mr. Minister, to 
demonstrate that this idea has been given some thought and is 
not just a by-election quick-fix or gimmick, will you today give 
us a clear and specific description of how this scheme is 
actually going to work? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod:  A couple of things, Mr. Speaker. First 
of all, when I announced, I believe it was a week ago now, the 
work that’s going on inside the department and outside the 
department in terms of negotiations with supplier companies 
who deal in computer-readable cards in various other sectors, 
and how that might be applied to the health care sector and the 
administration side of the health car sector, the reason I 
announced it then was because we were at the stage of going 
out to these supplier, companies, and because last week during 
that very week I had been speaking to the pharmacist’s 
association about some of the potentials it might hold as it 
relates to the administration of the drug plan. 
 
If the hon. member makes a suggestion it had something to do 
with the by-election, I would just say this much to him: he’s 
been around politics for quite some time, I’ve been around for 
quite some time, and if I was to do that as it related to the 
by-election, Mr. Speaker, I assure you and all of those 
members, I would have done it well before two or three days 
ahead of the by-election, you can rest assured of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we’re doing on this thing and these folks in 
opposition  and I guess it’s the nature of opposition to be 
obsessed with a by-election here and there. And that’s fair ball 
and do that. We must be in charge of and responsible for the 
administration of government over a longer period of time. and 
what I had announced to the public of Saskatchewan is what I 
will reiterate again today, is that . . . just that, that we are 
looking at this. We believe we can have a system, a 
computer-readable card that will be applied to the 
administration of health care programs. It has may application 
potentially. 
 
Mr. Goodale:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to know 
from the minister when all of this elaborate consultative work 
began? I’d like to know the details of how long the government 
has been working on this grand ideal? and if it has been 
working on this grand idea for such a long, long time, why is 
the government not in a position to provide greater detail at this 
point in time? And does the minister have any intention of 
referring this idea to the government’s task force on health care, 
which was announced seven weeks ago and has yet to get off 
the ground. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod:  Mr. Speaker, we’ve been working on 
this for over a year  the idea, the concept  for over a year. 
We will continue to. and when we have the technology in place 
. . . and when the technology is in place, Mr. Speaker, we will 
come forward with the card and with the various applications 
that it is able to do for the administration of health care 
programs and for the people of Saskatchewan to make it much 
easier for them. 
 
As it relates to the task force, the task force will be looking 

at the wider application of health programs and the way in 
which they serve people. Some of this kind of technology or 
other applications of this technology may be something that 
they can look at. 
 
But all I will say, Mr. Speaker, is we believe  and the people 
who have been consultants to the government, people in the 
department  believe that this new technology can be a leading 
edge and will be excellent programs for administration of health 
care in this province and indeed will be a leader for across this 
country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hospital Care in la Ronge 
 
Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
health. My question relates to the hospital in La Ronge. 
 
Many presentations have been made to you, Mr. Minister. The 
doctor recently, in The Northerner, stated that: 
 

The children, the new-born babies have to share the 
facilities with the chronically ill, with people with 
infectious diseases. 

 
We want to know from you, Mr. Minister, what are you going 
to do about the hospital? When are you going to start having 
compassion for people in northern Saskatchewan? When are 
you going to start working with the health question in northern 
Saskatchewan, and work with the community people from that 
area, and start moving on it immediately? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod:  Mr. Speaker, an interesting question 
from that member, Mr. Speaker, representing the NDP benches, 
when you think of this hospital in La Ronge. 
 
The people at the la Ronge hospital board, whom I have met 
with, know that the hospital in La Ronge will be built, and they 
know that the hospital in La Ronge will be built by this 
administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, think about La Ronge for a moment. When that 
administration was in power, that member from Cumberland 
House, that the members of the northern part would know that 
 what did they build in La Ronge? 
 
Everyone in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, should have the 
opportunity  and I’m just very sorry that they don’t  every 
person in Saskatchewan should have the opportunity to see the 
large government administration palace, Taj Mahal, that they 
built in La Ronge when requests were coming forward for a 
hospital, while they were making la Ronge the capital of the 
North, and all of that sort of thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they did not built it. Mr. Speaker, I have said to 
the people in La Ronge, this administration will be building 
their hospital, and they are on the list to be built. Mr. Speaker, 
there will be a hospital in La Ronge based on 
  



 
May 6, 1988 

 

1141 
 

the needs and based on the increasing activity, which we’ve 
heard some more about here today, and based on the increasing 
population in that area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Minister, the people in northern 
Saskatchewan recognize that the hospital . . . the planning 
budget was there when the NDP was there, 1982. 
 
The people  this is a new question, Mr. Speaker  the people 
want some action in northern Saskatchewan in relation  we 
have heard six years of your excuses, your plastic promises and 
excuses. We want to know . . . we want to see real action in 
northern Saskatchewan, that people are demanding real action. 
When are you going to start meeting with them right there in 
northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod:  Mr. Speaker, the former government 
even had their members, even had their candidates and 
members believing there was . . . planning had taken place for 
the La Ronge hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was no planning that had taken place for La 
Ronge Hospital, none. so it’s absolutely a falsehood that he 
said; there was no planning for La Ronge hospital. Any 
planning that has been done for the La Ronge hospital has been 
done under this new administration. This administration did the 
planning and is involved in the planning for the La Ronge 
hospital. Those folks have never been  
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. I’ll give the minister a 
few moments to wrap up, and I think this would be a fitting end 
to question period today. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod:  Let me wrap up by way of a comparison 
for those people who live in southern Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. They say that the La Ronge Hospital was to be built by 
them. I say that they built a Taj Mahal in a government 
administration building. 
 
The said that they were concerned about rehabilitative services 
in Saskatchewan. They built the T.C. Douglas Building in 
Regina; we’re building the Wascana Hospital in Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Public Service Commission 

Ordinary Expenditure  Vote 33 
 
Mr. Chairman:  I’d ask the minister to please introduce his 
officials. 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Mr. Speaker, the officials from the 
Public Service Commission her this morning: at my right is 
John McPhail who is the chairman; behind Mr. McPhail is Mr. 
Jim Graham, acting executive director, employment services; 
and directly behind me is Jane Eibner, director, administration 
information services. For the members of the House, minister 
responsible for Public Service Commission is Mr. Hepworth. 
He is . . . sorry, the Minster of Education. He is, unfortunately, 
not present today and so I will undertake to do his estimates for 
him. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, I’d like to make a few opening remarks, and there’s 
some standard questions I’ll get into, but I guess if there’s any 
one thing that concerns me about the Public Service 
Commission and public servant, civil servant, in the province of 
Saskatchewan, it’s the question of morale. Morale has been low 
for a number of years. It has been since 1982 for a number of 
reasons, and we need not go into all the details, but it’s a serious 
problem in so far as low morale begins to affect performance, 
begins to affect the ability of civil servants to provide the kinds 
o services that Saskatchewan people need and demand. 
 
I think that it’s fair to say, and even the minister of the Public 
Service Commission agreed last year, that morale had reached 
rock-bottom  rock-bottom because of the radical changes that 
you’ve made to the employment complement within the public 
service as a result of your government’s decisions. 
 
I would say at this time that there has been no improvement 
from the situation of last year. The morale problem that festered 
for a number of years, and as I’ve said, reached rock-bottom 
last year has simply not improved. I have a very strong sense 
from the civil servants that I’ve talked to that they are united, 
united in their hatred and dislike of your government, united in 
their hatred and dislike of the things that you’ve done to them. 
 
I would like to ask you: what measures have been undertaken in 
the last year to improve the question of morale, and can you tell 
us why these measures have failed, and why there has been no 
substantial improvement? 
 
I recognize, and I think it’s generally recognized, even on your 
side of the house, that morale would have been low last year 
because of the many drastic and radical changes that you made. 
One would also expect there to have been some improvement in 
that morale, yet there’s no one on this side of the House that 
senses any improvement in that morale. 
 
I’m wondering what it is that you might have tried to improve 
the morale of public servants, and why it has failed, and also if 
you can tell us: what kinds of things do you have in your budget 
that suggest an improvement in the coming year? I wait for your 
response on that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Mr. Chairman, with regard to that 
  



 
May 6, 1988 

 

1142 
 

question, let me make a couple of observations. The 
government, and like any government, obviously values its 
employees and continues to provide a wide variety of learning 
and staff development opportunities for its employees. 
 
We have offered triple the number of learning opportunities 
compared to the previous government. In 1987-88, 5,600 
employees participated in 310 events involved in learning 
opportunities. In 1981-82 that was 1,700 employees in 108 
events. 
 
We have created a unit on organizational change in our staff 
development division to provide consulting service to 
departments on team building, reorganization, leadership 
services, and other topics of assistance and interest to 
employees. We continue to offer programs such as job rotation, 
career leaves, secondment, interchange Canada programs, 
educational leave, variable work hours, and related programs to 
provide flexibility, interest and new experience for our 
employees. 
 
The commission has filed with the federal government a 
proposed deferred salary leave program which would be 
applicable to all employees and provide them with an 
opportunity to set a certain percentage of their wages aside over 
a five-year period so the employee can broaden their personal 
interests through education, travel, business interests while on 
authorized leave. Those are some of they types of programs 
relating to morale. 
 
Now I know the hon. member was a former member of the 
public service, or worked for the public service of 
Saskatchewan. He became rather high profiled, involved in the 
time when he was bringing actions to court that he is familiar 
with. I think the hon. member, when he talks about morale, I 
would pose a question as well to him, that sometimes he plays 
rather fast and loose with that word as well. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  I’m not sure what your question is, Mr. 
Minister, but you’ve listed a number of things that you say that 
you’re doing to improve in the public service. For example, you 
say that you’ve tripled learning opportunities. 
 
What I asked you is: how come none of these things seem to 
have worked? Why is it that your budget for these kinds of 
things  employee relations, staff development  in fact, staff 
development budget is less this year than it is last year. One 
would have thought, given the very low moral in the public 
service  and that’s not something that I’m making up, that’s 
not something I’m playing fast and loose with, Mr. Minister. 
 
Your colleague, the Minister of Education, stood in this place 
last year during these estimates and conceded that there was a 
significant problem  that there was one. I’m asking you: why 
is it that the things that you say that you’re doing haven’t 
worked? Whey have you reduced the budget for that? Why 
haven’t you increased the budget for that? What new ideas do 
you have to improve on the terrible morale that we see in the 
public service today? 

Hon. Mr. Andrew:  A couple of observations to the 
question. Number one is, some of the departments, a growing 
number of departments, are in fact doing the work on staff 
development as opposed to it simply being done through and 
only through the Public Service Commission. A number of 
departments  I can speak of my own in fact in justice or in 
trade and development. 
 
I think when you refer to the hon. member from Weyburn, 
clearly, last year was a difficult time for government. clearly, it 
was a difficult time where we had to contain the growth of 
expenditures, and nobody denies that. 
 
We believe that the corner has been turned on that, and for the 
hon. member to suggest somehow that everybody in the 
government is unhappy, there’s obviously 5,600 of those people 
who are participating in those staff development programs. I 
would suggest to the hon. member that all 56 of those people 
. . . 5,600 of those people are not unhappy with some of the new 
programs being offered to them. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Well, Mr. Minister, I think that you 
have a problem. I think, even more importantly, the people of 
Saskatchewan have a problem. If we have a Public Service 
Commission, we have public servants, civil servants, who are 
there to meet the needs of Saskatchewan people to deliver 
services and programs. And if those people delivering those 
services and programs are unhappy, have low morale, feel 
inhibited in doing their jobs, and otherwise are simply not able 
to respond to the challenges that are before them given the very 
serious situations that they’re in, you haven’t cut many 
programs, but you’ve cut staff in those programs. 
 
You haven’t been honest enough to simply say, we can’t afford 
to deliver this service or program, so therefore we’re going to 
cut it. No, you’ve cut out a number of civil servants, making it 
almost impossible to deliver those things. this is a problem not 
just for you but for all of the people of Saskatchewan. And I’m 
asking you: what extraordinary measures have you put into 
place to ensure that the morale will be improved in the coming 
year? 
 
You talk about staff development and that some of this work is 
being done now in other departments. that was the same case 
last year, but the budget on that item has gone down. If there 
was a shift of some of that expenditure to a different 
department, that would have been shown in the blue book; it’s 
not shown in the blue book. 
 
So when you say some of it’s being done within departments, 
that may well be the case; but that was also the case last year, 
yet you’ve cut the budget for this at a time that you should be 
increasing the budget for this to help improve the morale of 
civil servants in this province. Again I ask you: what are you 
planning to do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Well I think I indicated to the hon. 
member that the new programs that are being pursued  in 
1987-88, 52 per cent of those participating in seminars were 
in-scope employees. We have introduced a supervisory 
development program this year for in-scope employees, and that 
is as set out in the book by the Public Service Commission, 
Staff Development Needs Analysis 1988-1989. Perhaps the hon. 
member has seen this; 
  



 
May 6, 1988 

 

1143 
 

perhaps he has not seen this. It’s perhaps worthy of him to look 
at it. And that’s the type of programs that I can indicate to the 
hon. member that is being pursued by the Public Service 
Commission in this area. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Minister, I just want to go back to 
your ’86-87 annual report for the Public Service Commission. It 
says: 
 

The main challenge for the Commission will be to assist 
departments to maintain high employee morale and 
productivity throughout the organization during a period 
of economic restraint. 

 
Now you tell me, Mr. Minister, how cutting the budget for that 
helps to accomplish that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  I indicated to the hon. member, the Staff 
Development Needs Analysis 1988-1989 is something that we 
are doing. I think that the hon. member, when he somehow 
suggests that there are not people working both in scope and out 
of scope in government that are not encouraged by their 
opportunities, I would suggest the hon. member is wrong. 
 
Now I can speak for the two departments that I am responsible 
for, one being in the area of Trade and Investment. Small 
department, I grant you, but clearly the people there are very 
excited and interested in the new mandate and the new 
programs that they’re looking at, and there’s some good people 
working there. 
 
In the area of Justice you have a couple of different things: you 
have a large department in the government where obviously 
some are somewhat satisfied with their lot and some are not. I 
suspect that maybe some of them that are not tend to be more 
involved in the labour negotiations presently going on between 
the Public Service Commission and the various unions, and 
perhaps at this point in time that can lead to some lack of 
morale perhaps more than anything else. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Minister, you so typify this 
government. You so typify this government. This government is 
noted for saying one thing and doing another and always 
playing to a double standard. You say we’re doing all these 
wonderful things, but the reality is that you have a significant 
problem. It’s conceded in your annual reports. It’s conceded by 
your colleague, the minister, yet the budget for that is cut, it’s 
slashed, and you’re spending less money in addressing the 
problem. Yet you say we’re doing all these wonderful things. 
 
And again, I think that’s just so typical of your government that 
you’ve got this double standard about the wonderful things 
we’re going to do, a double standard of: here’s what the budget 
deficit’s going to be, but in reality it’s something entirely 
different  out by 200 per cent. That’s your government, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Let me deal with one specific aspect of employee morale, and 
that is the question . . . that is the matter of public servants, civil 
servants, having the right in a democratic society to express 
their opinions  to express their opinions on political matters 
outside of the work place   

outside of the work place. 
 
If there is any hallmark of this government  any hallmark of 
this government  it is the absolute climate of fear that you’ve 
instilled in civil servants in this province who, until 1982, 
believed that they had the right, the same as all Canadian 
citizens, to be able to express their political beliefs  to 
express those political beliefs the same as all Canadian citizens 
in a democratic society. The fear that is there is just simply 
horrendous. 
 
One might have thought that that might have abated, but in 
knocking on doors and saying “Saskatoon Eastview” and 
running into civil servants, the question just keeps coming up 
time and time again from people who are employed by the 
public service of this province who are just absolutely afraid to 
venture any opinion. They make that very clear, that I am afraid 
to venture an opinion on anything political for fear of the 
consequences that it might have for me in the job place; and I 
recognize that I’m outside the job and I should have that right 
but I tell you, I am afraid. 
 
(1045) 
 
Mr. Minister, I think that that particular question, that particular 
matter, the question of democratic right, the government. And 
in that sense you’re no different than Joe Stalin’s communist 
Russia, no different at all  no different. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, in light of that problem  and 
for once be honest and recognize that it is a problem  in light 
of that problem I want to ask you: what specific steps and 
measures are you undertaking to tell civil servants and to make 
it clear to them that they have democratic rights and 
responsibilities the same as any other citizen in this province 
and in this country? What specific steps are you taking to 
address that problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member 
from Regina Victoria speaks in terms of Joseph Stalin. I think 
that I will leave that. I don’t even think he believes that, Mr. 
Chairman, and we will leave that at that. 
 
With regard to The Public Service Act, as the hon. member 
knows, that Act has not been changed in this province for some 
40 years. Every employee of the government takes an oath of 
office. 
 
If the hon. member is talking about political activity within the 
civil service, I think that if he wants to be fair, if he wants to 
talk about history, then I think he will acknowledge that there 
has been intense politics in the Saskatchewan bureaucracy for a 
long period of time. 
 
I would suggest to the hon. member quite frankly and quite 
openly that he came to this province from Manitoba, a political 
activist. He became involved in the public service. I’m sure that 
he participated in politics both while his party was in office and 
when a new party was in office, or a new administration was in 
office. that’s a reality. 
  



 
May 6, 1988 

 

1144 
 

And so I say only to the hon. member, the Act clearly states that 
the civil servant has clearly the right to participate in the 
political process. The only condition put on it is that he should 
not do that, or she should not do that during the time of work. 
And I think that’s a valid rule. 
 
That rule has been in place for some period of time. My 
suspicion is that rule will stay in place for some period of time. 
I don’t think it’s inconsistent with the rules that are used in 
other jurisdictions, and that process has gone on for some time. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Just a brief question. Can you perhaps 
elaborate for me how my coming from Manitoba has anything 
to do with this, how this is germane to the issue at hand here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Well the hon. member was . . . I only 
indicated to the hon. member that if you’re going to stand there 
and be somewhat critical of political activity in the civil service, 
I ask you to look at yourself first. And can you honestly say that 
during you your tenure in the public service of Saskatchewan 
you were devoid of politics during all the time that you were 
working in the public service? I simply pose that question to 
you to address in an honest way. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Well that’s not the question. I think 
those rights were there. People no longer feel they have those 
rights. 
 
But again I want to ask you: how does my coming from 
Manitoba have anything to do with the issue at hand here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  I simply laid that out. I suppose it’s got 
no difference. If you came from podunk Saskatchewan it would 
be the same rule. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  I’m glad we’ve established that, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, you don’t believe that Saskatchewan, at least 
when it comes to democratic rights, is anything like Joe Stalin’s 
communist Russia; I don’t believe that it’s anything like Joe 
Stalin’s communist Russia. but I tell you, when you knock on 
the doors in the cities and you run across civil servants, that 
comment is offered. 
 
And I would commend to you some time knocking on doors to 
find out what it is that people are saying about your government 
so that you get a true appreciation of what your government is 
doing. You might not have lost two by-elections if you had 
been more in touch with people. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Act has not changed, but I tell you that the 
perception of what rights I have has certainly changed  and 
that there’s a great deal of fear out there about what rights I 
really have  that there’s a great deal of fear out there. 
 
And I’m wondering what it is that you’re doing to ensure that 
public servants, civil servants know exactly what their rights 
are, where those rights begin an end, and to let them know that 
their government stands behind them 

in exercising those rights regardless of what political persuasion 
they may happen to believe in. 
 
What are you doing to address the problem? The Act hasn’t 
changed, but I tell you the perception has changed very greatly. 
And I’m asking you: what are you doing to address that 
problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Mr. Chairman, I can simply say that the 
rights are set out in The Public Service Act. As the hon. 
member know, rights come from the law. The law clearly state 
that employees can participate in politics to the same extent of 
any other residents of the same extent of any other residents of 
the province provided that the political activity do not take 
place during work hours and do not impair an employee’s 
usefulness on the job. 
 
That right is there; that right has been there for 40 years. And 
what people do outside the work place is up to them. When they 
are at the work place through, we, and any other government 
across this country, expect their political activities to be 
curtailed because their job is to work for the public and carry on 
accordingly. 
 
I mean, if you want to get into the argument of and the question 
of the politicization, if you like, of the civil service. And I think 
every jurisdiction is different. I think if you looked at Great 
Britain as an example, the public service there would tend to be 
more of a long-standing type civil service and move from one 
administration to another administration much easier than 
perhaps we see in Canada. 
 
And I think then, within Canada, perhaps you see a difference 
in the civil service, perhaps in the larger jurisdictions, let’s say 
compared to the smaller jurisdictions. and I think that’s a 
reality. I think we both know that quite well. I think that you are 
likely to see some movement in  Manitoba is a good 
example, where there’s going to be some changes there. I don’t 
think anybody would deny that many of the senior people in 
Manitoba, whether one would say had political connections, 
certainly they had philosophical connections with the direction 
of government. Another government comes in and perhaps has 
a different philosophical approach, a different political approach 
to things, and you’re going to see changes in that. I mean, that’s 
a reality. And I suppose governments will continue to struggle 
with it, the balance between a purely professional civil service 
and some that are politically active. 
 
You have many in the civil service that really do not take a 
political position one way or the other. There are what w would 
call the purists within the civil service. And I suspect if you talk 
to them they . . . many of them would express the view that 
while the right is there, you can have it in two ways. There’s 
two counter-forces if you like. One being the fact that those that 
become very politically active and very strident politically 
reactive have an effect upon the larger body of public servants 
that wish not to take a political view, one side or the other. so I 
think that the hon. member would acknowledge that various 
civil servants take a different approach to that particular 
question. 
  



 
May 6, 1988 

 

1145 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Well, Mr. Minister, I think you’re being 
far too modest when you talk about make some changes in 
Saskatchewan. I don’t think that there’s any government 
anywhere that could take a back seat to the kind of drastic 
changes and the kind of misery that you wrought on people in 
this province, all in the name of politics, Mr. Minister. I would 
say that your government should not take a back seat to any 
government anywhere when it comes to that. 
 
You’re the ones that have totally politicized this public service. 
You’re the ones that made massive, just massive, changes 
following 1982, and I don’t think there’s anyone that’s going to 
take a back seat to what you’ve done, Mr. Minister. 
 
But I deduce from comments today that you simply have no 
interest in highlighting the question of just what the rights of 
civil servants might be, all civil servants, to participate in 
political activity to express their democratic beliefs and to act in 
a democratic manner that’s consistent with the legislation that’s 
in place and consistent with traditions in this country. I deduce 
from your remarks that you’re simply not going to do anything. 
You’re simply going to be content to stand in your place and 
say, well the Act is there and people can do what they can do. 
 
But I tell you, Mr. Minister, when you go to the doorsteps and 
you talk to people and they say, you know there is this person 
that I know that I work with in the civil service, they took a sign 
from one of the parties, and the next thing we know, they’re 
being transferred. And when you keep hearing that kind of story 
over and over again, I say that the reality is something different 
than what you’re saying here today. 
 
But I’m going to leave that, Mr. Minister, because I don’t 
expect to just get any answers from you. I don’t expect to get 
any truthfulness from you on that particular question. And let’s 
leave it at the fact that when it comes to politicizing the civil 
service and scaring the rest of them, and creating a climate of 
fear, that there is no government in this country that can take a 
back seat . . . or that you don’t have to take a back seat to any 
other government when it comes to doing that. 
 
You know what I think? That in Manitoba, in Manitoba in the 
’70s, before Sterling Lyon got elected, there was a group called 
the Great-West Life insurance company, right across the street 
from the Manitoba legislature  right across the street from the 
Manitoba legislature  that undertook to prepare a number of 
position papers for the conservative opposition at that time, the 
government in waiting if you like. 
 
And one of those papers prepared by the Great-West Life 
insurance company was on how you really grab effective 
control of the civil service, and their premise was that basically 
all civil servants are progressive people, and if you’re a 
Conservative government you can’t afford to have that. And 
what you really need to do is to weed out, everywhere that you 
can, anyone and everyone who you might think has some 
progressive thought and replace them with your own people. 
 
Now that particular document got a lot of publicity and, 

as a consequence, Sterling Lyon, when he got elected, was 
simply reluctant to act on it for fear of being caught out on 
following the lead of the Great-West insurance company. 
 
But you know what I think: I think that document found its way 
into the Executive Council here in Saskatchewan, and I think 
you people have been quietly implementing that. You’ve done 
everything that you could to get rid of any civil servant that you 
thought that might have some progressive thought, might have 
any kind of political thought outside of the work place that 
didn’t match with yours, and you’ve done everything that you 
could to get rid of those people and replace them with your own 
hacks and flacks and doughnut-hole punchers. That’s what I 
think, Mr. Minister. 
 
Do you deny that document from Great-West Life is on its way 
into the Executive Council in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Well I say to the hon. member the 
following: is during the . . . he talked about the rights. During 
the last election, 1986, the Public Service Commission had and 
received 10 inquiries with regards to what employees could or 
could not do during the election. And they, quite frankly, they 
indicated that the rules as they saw it were reasonably fair. 
 
Now to the hon. member who suggests somehow that the NDP 
has in no way politicized the public service, I mean, that is just 
absolutely not true, and you can read histories of Saskatchewan 
if you like; I can refer you to many of those historical analyses 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
(1100) 
 
Previous leaders of your party, previous premiers have 
indicated, NDP premiers, that we believe in recruiting and 
hiring people that are in tune with the views of our government, 
and you’re not going to deny that. 
 
I can, if you like, get into resolutions passed in your 
conventions of your party, saying that you wish to politicize the 
various levels of the government. So that’s the reality. if you 
want sit here and argue that the only government to ever exist in 
this province that is politicized or is involved in politics in the 
civil service is this one, I don’t think that you are being very 
fair to the history, and I think you fully believe that. 
 
With regards to . . . Let me tell you a story. When we first came 
into government in 1982  and this was told to me by various 
senior people, civil servants that were very professional  that 
they were strong-armed by several deputy ministers for 
contributions to the NDP, and that was not an uncommon thing 
to happen. And that had a significant influence on the way the 
Public Service Commission, or the public service, would see 
itself. 
 
So for the hon. member to stand up somehow and suggest that 
when they were in government politics did not have any play 
with regard to who was hired in various levels of government, I 
think that he is, quite frankly, not being very truthful with 
regard to that. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  We’ll let the people of 
  



 
May 6, 1988 

 

1146 
 

Saskatchewan decide that one. I think they made some decision 
on that few days ago in Saskatoon Eastview and Saskatoon 
Elphinstone. They made some decision on that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  But we’ll let the people of 
Saskatchewan decide on that particular question. They can 
decide who undertook the largest massive firings in 
Saskatchewan history to get rid of civil servants in this province 
so you could replace them with people of your own stripe; they 
can decide who’s been the real masters of intimidation in the 
history of this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to turn to another question here, and it 
deals with some statistics in the last couple of annual reports. 
And those statistics indicate that as of March 31, 1986 you had 
12,940 employees, and as of March 31, 1987 you had 11,957 
employees. are those figures correct? Can you just confirm 
those? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Those figures are correct, I’m advised. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, can you then 
also confirm that in breaking down those figures, that on March 
31, 1986 you had 2,594 out-of-scope employees and you had 
10,346 in-scope employees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  That’s correct. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Do you also agree then, sir, that in 
looking at the total, that the out-of-scope employees is 20 per 
cent of the total, and the in-scope employees is 80 per cent of 
the total? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  I’m advised that is approximately 
correct. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Well let’s turn to March of ’87. You 
agreed that the total number of employees is 11,957. Would you 
also agreed that 2,592 were out of scope and 9,365 were in 
scope? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Correct. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  The minister says that’s correct. Would 
you also agree, Mr. Minister, that the number of out-of-scope 
employees, relative to the total staff complement, rose from 20 
per cent in 1986 to 22 per cent in 1987, and that the number of 
in-scope employees was reduced from 80 per cent of the total to 
78 per cent of the total? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  That’s approximately true. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Well, Mr. Minister, can you please 
explain this anomaly; can you please explain that? You’re the 
people that stood here last year and said, well we have to 
down-size government; we really need to get rid of a lot of 
those highly paced people to provide opportunities for younger 
civil servants, and so on. 
 
Can you please explain that, given the fact that many of the 

out of scope are the senior people, how it is that the out of scope 
went from 2,594 to 2,592, a loss of two, but your in-scope 
employees dropped by a thousand? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Well I’m advised that the main reason 
for that is things like SPMC, the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation, of 1,300 employees were moved out 
of those numbers and therefore that explains the reduction 
down. Same of the assessment organization, the same thing 
happened there, and therefore those numbers go down 
accordingly. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Could you advise me when the move 
was made on the PMC (property management corporation)? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  March 1, 1987. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  I have some further questions that I 
want to  
 
Mr. Chairman:  Order, order. Order, please. Why is that 
member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Gerich:  To introduce some guests, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Gerich:  On behalf of the Premier of the province, I 
would like to introduce some guests that are touring from the 
Midale School grade four class. There are 16 students. Their 
teacher, Anne Field, is with them, and chaperones, Mrs. Bunse 
and Mr. Prawdzik. 
 
I hope that they find their morning here, or short stay, 
informative and educational. I will be meeting with them after 
in the rotunda for pictures, and later on for drinks in the 
members’ lounge. Please make welcome our guests. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund budgetary Expenditure 
Public Service Commission 

Ordinary Expenditure  Vote 33 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, you’re choosing to tell me that somehow, because of 
the creation of these new corporations out there, these new 
entities, that somehow we lost all these in-scope people, but 
we’ve retained all these out-of-scope people. I don’t for a 
minute believe you. I don’t believe you at all. 
 
You know what I think is happening here, Mr. Minister? That 
you’re choosing to fire and to get rid of the ordinary workers 
that work for the Public Service Commission, but that you’re 
choosing to keep all the big shots that you can. That’s what I 
believe. isn’t that the truth, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  I’m advised that when you talk 
  



 
May 6, 1988 

 

1147 
 

about the down-sizing and when you talk about the actual 
people who left the public service, whose jobs were abolished, 
it breaks down in the following way: those in scope, 327, out of 
scope, 87  that actually left government, did not find 
alternative employment within government  for a total of 
414. Now if you have an 80-20 ratio that you’re talking about, I 
think that’s probably better than being consistent with the 80-20 
ratio. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Well no matter how you choose to 
explain it, Mr. Minister, on March 31, ’86, 20 per cent of your 
staff complement was out of scope and one year later 22 per 
cent of your staff complement is out of scope. 
 
You know what I think is happening here, Mr. Minister? I think 
that at a time that you’re letting go of the ordinary people, the 
average citizens that work for the Public Service Commission, 
that you’re replacing vacant position, some of those positions, 
with out-of-scope people, and in particular you’re replacing 
them with your former colleagues, such as Louis Domotor, 
who’s a former PC MLA. 
 
Up until October ’86, this fiscal year, when we had the increase 
in the out-of-scope employees, you appointed people like Louis 
Domotor. You appointed people like Keith Parker, the former 
PC MLA for Moose Jaw North, and you appointed him to the 
Liquor Board. And you appoint people like Ralph Katzman, a 
former PC MLA, and you put him in the Highways department. 
And you take all your former PC MLAs and you give them 
jobs: Jack Sandberg at the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, 
and Gordon Dirks, you give him a study to do. 
 
I think that you people are just filling up wherever you can with 
political hacks, flacks and doughnut-hole punchers, to borrow a 
phrase from someone on the West Coast. That’s what I think 
that you’re doing. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  You know I looked through an annual 
report, I look at your annual report  
 
An Hon. Member:  What about Metro? Did he get 
something? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  The member says Metro. No, I’m not 
aware of Metro Rybchuk getting any favours from this 
government, and the people in Regina Victoria are asking why. 
 
But you look at your annual report, and you look at your 
approved mission statement and the goals that you set out, and 
one of the goals that you have is to ensure that appointment is 
based on merit. 
 
Now I want to point out some examples of meritorious 
appointments by your government. One is George Hill, past 
president of the PC Party of Saskatchewan, now president of the 
Saskatchewan Power corporation  a meritorious appointment. 
Rene Archambault, brother-in-law to the Premier, a 
$50,000-plus job with the Department of Education  another 
one of your meritorious appointments. Gordon Dirks, one-time 
and one-term PC MLA and cabinet minister, a $30,000 
contract, untendered. Merv Nidesh, chief of staff for the 

Minister of Finance, now in a senior position in the Department 
of Public Participation. And the list goes on. I mentioned 
Domotor and I mentioned Sandberg, and I forgot what’s his 
name, the member that was here earlier that sat behind the rail 
 Paul Schoenhals, a former one-time and one-term PC MLA 
and cabinet minister, appointed to be the president or the 
chairman of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 
 
(1115) 
 
You know, I think that there’s just a remarkable inconsistency 
between what you say your goals are, to ensure that 
appointment is based on merit, and what it is that you actually 
do. And what you actually do is appoint anyone, anyone that 
you can with any kind of connection with the Tory party, you 
appoint them to positions that seem to come available. you say 
that you’ve got to down-size government, but when it comes to 
appointments for your hacks and flacks, it’s up-sizing all the 
way, Mr. Minister. 
 
I just want to ask you in that vein too, if you can tell me, Mr. 
Minister, the names  and you can provide this information in 
writing later  but the names and salaries of each ministerial 
assistant to the minister as of December 31, 1987. and can you 
also provide me with the names and salaries for each one of 
those ministerial assistants as of March 31, 1988? Can you 
undertake to provide us with that information, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Relating to the second question first, I 
would indicate to the member I can provide him with regards to 
that, as it relates to  Public Service Commission. We’ve been 
through perhaps half the estimates now, and each minister has 
undertaken or has given to the members opposite their various 
staff, what they were paid, etc. 
 
Now I’ve heard the hon. member (a) to begin with, saying that 
this is the first time ever somebody that has a political 
connection has been hired in the Government of Saskatchewan. 
Now he went through a list of people. I can go through a list; I 
have it here in this book and I can read it to you. And I’ll 
perhaps start right now and read through it and then I guess we 
can sit and debate who hired the most if you like. So I’ll just 
take a minute to do that. 
 
First of all we have a Chris Banman, former NDP candidate for 
Rosthern, 1978; Saskatoon Nutana, April, 1982; appointed to 
the board, or commission, by NDP government; in 1981 
automatically terminated - B16. 
 
We got John Burton. We got John Burton, former NDP MP, 
appointed executive director of transportation, $5,000 a month; 
appointed associate deputy minister of Tourism; appointed 
administrative analysis, Department of Finance. he was 
terminated. 
 
We had Don Cody. He was an NDP MLA in Watrous, defeated 
in 1975. He was employed in a senior position with SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) after the election defeat 
of 1975. He then, of course, ran again in 1978. 
  



 
May 6, 1988 

 

1148 
 

We have Marjorie Cooper, one-time CCF MLA Regina. I’ll just 
keep going through these. 
 
Linda Dufour, executive director of the NDP, moved as 
Assistant Chief Electoral Officer. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Take it as read. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Take it as read, he says. I’m not done 
yet, Murray. 
 
Then you have Don Faris, who was a former NDP provincial 
cabinet minister. He was appointed director of communications 
and education, department of co-ops. He was getting $3,500 
back in 1981. 
 
Then you have Margaret Fern, appointed intergovernmental 
affairs officer III, September 1981; sought the NDP nomination 
prior to ’81; defeated in Regina South; received $9,700 
honorarium for special services. 
 
And you have Julius Friesen. He was a federal NDP candidate, 
Saskatoon Humboldt. he, as well, received employment. 
 
You had Ted Glover, appointed special assistant. He was a 
federal NDP candidate. 
 
You had Terry Hanson, former NDP MLA, elected 1971, 
Qu’Appelle-Wolseley; defeated 1975, Indian Head-Wolseley. 
He was given an honorarium and a job in the Department of 
Agriculture. 
 
You had Frank Hart who sought the nomination for the NDP in 
Swift Current in 1978. He was appointed to the department of 
tourism and renewable resources. 
 
You have Dave Hanley who was a NDP candidate in the federal 
election of Moose Jaw 1980. He was given a job with Saskoil 
after the 1980 election. he had also held various positions and 
was receiving well over $3,000 a month for that. 
 
Then you had Don Keith appointed general manager of 
Saskatchewan Development Fund. he was a defeated NDP 
candidate. 
 
You had Bill Knight, former NDP MP. He was appointed 
principal secretary to the premier, salary of almost $5,000 a 
month. 
 
Holly Ann Knott, who is solicitor for the potash corporation, is 
an EA (executive assistant) to your present leader, sought the 
NDP nomination in Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
You had Ted Koskie appointed executive assistant to the 
minister of consumer affairs. He had connections within the 
NDP Party, and I’ll leave that at that. 
 
Barbara Marie Kramer, appointed executive assistance to hon. 
Norm Vickar, minister of industry and commerce, daughter of 
Eiling Kramer. 
 
Alex Kuziak, former NDP cabinet minister, board and 
commission. 

Jim Liggett, defeated NDP candidate Bengough-Milestone. He 
was given a position at transportation agency. 
 
Howard Lucas, defeated NDP candidate 1978 provincial 
election, Rosthern, appointed senior industrial relations officer. 
 
Gordon McNeil, former NDP MLA from 1975 in Meadow 
Lake; defeated candidate in 1978, SMDC (Saskatchewan 
Mining Development Corporation), northern liaison officer  
$34,000 a year he received. 
 
Allan Oliver, former NDP MLA, elected ’71, Shaunavon, 
defeated, ’75; appointed to Highway Traffic Board. Hayden 
Owens. Louis Roy, was defeated NDP candidate, P.A.-Duck 
Lake, and given a job with DNS (department of northern 
Saskatchewan), tourism industry, at $4,000 a year. Martin 
Semchuk. 
 
Alex Taylor, who I’m familiar with. Alex Taylor was a former 
member from the constituency I now represent. He was 
defeated in 1975. He was employed at $48,000 a year with the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. 
 
And then I will avoid getting into names of people that are now 
serving in the House. If you would wish  I don’t think that 
will serve any further purpose. What this simply shows is that 
while you might say that we have hired some people that are 
politically in tune with us, I’m not denying that. And I would 
hope that when you were government, you would not deny that 
you hired people that were politically in tune with you and 
active politically with you. 
 
I can go through a whole lot more, but I will leave it at that for 
now. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  By the sounds of it, you’ve read the 
complete list, Mr. Minister. You’ve read the complete list. The 
question I have: why did you and your government choose to 
increase the opportunities for political appointments threefold? 
Why did you choose to do that? 
 
An Hon. Member:  How’s that again, Harry? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Why did you choose to increase the 
opportunities to make political appointments; why did you 
choose to increase those opportunities threefold, over and above 
what it has been? Why did you choose to do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  I don’t accept that. The names that you 
referred to, people like George Hill, they do not come under the 
Public Service Commission, or Paul Schoenhals or Jack 
Sandberg. So I, nor the officials, comprehend your question. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  A lot of those names that you read out 
earlier had nothing to do with the Public Service Commission 
either. I’m just simply asking . . . You say that the NDP hired 
people that had a political connection, and I don’t think there’s 
anyone who would deny that. I don’t think there’s anyone deny 
. . . I don’t think that anyone denies that you appoint people 
with political 
  



 
May 6, 1988 

 

1149 
 

backgrounds to be executive assistants or, as they’re now 
called, ministerial assistants. I don’t think anyone denies that, 
and I don’t think that anyone sees anything particularly wrong 
with that particular thing either. 
 
The question I have is: why did you feel it was necessary to 
increase the opportunities for that kind of hiring three-fold? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  I indicate to the hon. member that, while 
we might have taken lessons from the previous government, we 
certainly did not increase that three-fold. It would probably . . . 
If it was three-fold, it would be a decrease three-fold. 
 
Now you people were masters at hiring your own, I can assure 
you of that, and we have taken some lessons from you. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Minister, that’s your rhetoric, but 
the reality is something else because you can go through the 
government telephone directory, the government telephone 
directory, and you can look at 1981-82 and, whereas the 
minister might have had one executive assistant or ministerial 
assistant, now they’ve got three or four ministerial assistants. 
And tell you that the reality is something different than what 
you say, you know. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m going to leave this . . . Again, it seems like a 
fruitless exercise to get any concession from you that the 
out-of-scope employees, that the number of out-of-scope 
employees are something that you want to protect, recognizing 
that many out-of-scope employees are political. 
 
And I think that it’s just disgusting that you would go out of 
your way to fire and to lay off and to transfer hundreds, a 
thousand . . . at least in basing it on the two annual reports that I 
have, to do that to ordinary, average men and women who work 
for the civil service on the front line and provide services, to get 
rid of them, but to make sure that you hang on to all those 
out-of-scope employees  that’s where all the political 
appointments are made. 
 
I don’t see you making any cuts in that; I haven’t seen any cuts 
in your government in terms of ministerial assistants. I think it’s 
just disgraceful. 
 
I want to leave the chair at this point, Mr. Speaker, and turn 
over to my colleague for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Let me just read to the hon. member. In 
the year 1987-88, the number of OC (order in council) 
appointments was 43 in number. Now if you want to compare 
that to the last time the NDP were in government, that number 
was 250. So we hired 43 OC appointments prior to last election; 
in one year you hired 250. The number of OC positions in 
government today are 415. When you were in government, 627. 
Now that’s a decrease of 34 per cent. 
 
Now the hon. member knows that many of the OC 
appointments are in the area of Finance, in the area of Justice 
where you hire lawyers. And I think the hon. member would not 
do justice to his critic position to 

somehow suggestion that every one of those is a political 
appointment. So clearly there are fewer OCs today than when 
you were in government  fewer. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Minister, I’m not denying that for a 
second. I’m just simply saying that there are sure a lot more 
people in scope as well. You’re the ones that have chosen to cut 
drastically when it comes to in-scope employees, but you seem 
to be less than drastic when it comes to out-of-scope employees. 
Let’s just make that clear. 
 
You have no regard for the average men and women that work 
in the public service of this province, but when it comes to the 
big shots that are hired on the out-of-scope process, you know 
 yes, you’ve got a reduction of two in the year, but you lay 
off and get rid of 1,000 others. That’s the point that I’m making, 
and I think it is simply indefensible. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Well I indicated to the hon. member, the 
figures show that the number of people that lost their job in 
scope was 327, out of scope was 87. The hon. member was the 
one that was saying it’s an 80-20 split between in scope and out 
of scope. And what that means is that there was a 
proportionately higher, if you’re at 80-20, that came from the 
out-of-scope position than come from the in-scope position. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, in 
view of the fact that so many single mothers and working 
women are living under poverty, and in view of the fact  are 
living in poverty or under the poverty line  in view of the fact 
that what appears to be happening in Saskatchewan and across 
Canada is that we have a growing number of people living 
under the poverty line, and by far the vast majority of these 
people are women. In view of those facts, Mr. Minister, what is 
your government’s policy with respect to implementing a pay 
equity program in Saskatchewan? 
 
(1130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Two observations. First of all, with all 
classification systems within the public service are gendered 
neutral and do not discriminate on the basis of sex, one. 
 
And number two, as it relates to the vast majority of people 
working for government  the 80 per cent that are in scope, 
that is, as you are aware, part of the negotiations with regard to 
the SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union), and 
the bargaining there sets the rate of pay to be paid for any 
classification of employee. That negotiation is always gender 
neutral. So with regards to the program within the Public 
Service Commission as it relates to hiring people and their level 
of pay within the government, it is gender neutral. 
 
If you are asking the question further about people working in 
other areas than in government, that question is more 
appropriately addressed to the minister responsible for that 
which would be the Department of Human Resources, not the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Minister, your comments indicate a 
  



 
May 6, 1988 

 

1150 
 

total lack of understanding of why we need pay equity in the 
public service in Saskatchewan. The fact of the matter is that 
the jobs that are ordinarily filled by women are low-paying jobs 
in the public service, and right across society in general they 
tend to be low-paying jobs. 
 
Without a pay equity program  and it’s been demonstrated in 
many, many other jurisdictions, Mr. Minister. If you were 
familiar with the problem, you would know that it’s been 
demonstrated that a government has to take control of that 
situation and take a serious look at whether or not jobs are 
being paid equal for work of equal value because that’s really 
what we’re talking about. It means a commitment on your part, 
Mr. Minister, to look at the pay schedules, and determine the 
relative value of work being performed, and pay equally for 
work of equal value. 
 
It’s not good enough just to provide us with an argument that 
the . . . we don’t look at a person’s sex when we’re hiring. 
That’s not the issue; that’s an affirmative action question. The 
issue is: what are you going to do about jobs that primarily 
women fill in the public service that are low paying because 
jobs that women fill tend to be low paying even though they 
may be of a value equivalent to others. 
 
It’s not good enough to say that you simply bargain with the 
union on that. The union, as I understand, would like to look at 
pay equity being implemented in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And I want to know if you’ve sat down and talked to them 
about a pay equity program, and what you will be doing to 
ensure that there’s equality in wages between men and women 
in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Am I to interpret that what the hon. 
member is saying is that the pay equity issue is on the 
bargaining table right now between PSC (Public Service 
Commission) and the Public Service Commission . . . or Public 
Service Commission and SGEU? You’re suggesting that that is 
on the bargaining table? 
 
Ms. Simard:  I don’t know what’s on the bargaining table, 
but I have spoken to people in SGEU who indicate that they are 
prepared to look at  employees in the union  at a pay equity 
system. That is my understanding. I don’t know what’s on the 
bargaining table. 
 
But this has been . . . We had a discussion in the legislature last 
year on this issue, and the minister said he was going to look 
into it, and as far as I’m aware, there has been nothing done by 
this government. 
 
Then the government has to show leadership on this, Mr. 
Minister. The government has to show leadership on this pay 
equity question in the public service and right across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Well, with regard to the public service, 
if you have somebody . . . if you have a classification and there 
is several people that fall within that classification, some are 
women, some are men, then they’re paid exactly the same. 
 
With regards to negotiating the classifications and the pay 

for those classifications, clearly the union bargains that process 
for pay. Now are you saying that there are not enough women 
in higher jobs within government as opposed to only the lower 
jobs? 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Minister, I’m saying that you have to 
make a commitment to pay equity, and then you have to take a 
look at all your classifications and evaluate them with respect to 
implementing pay equity in the public service in the province of 
Saskatchewan. That’s what has to be done. 
 
It’s a cop-out, it’s a complete cop-out to say that, well we 
bargain with the union every year. That’s a cop-out, Mr. 
Minister. It shows no leadership and it shows no commitment 
and it shows an anti-woman and an anti-family attitude, because 
many women are heading single parent families. Most of single 
parent families are headed by women. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  With regards to the number of women in 
management, in March 31, 1981  that’s when your party was 
in office  7.7 per cent of the management group of 
government were women  7.7. 
 
In March of 1988 that has increased to 23 per cent. Now that’s 
maybe not right to 50 per cent, but I think even you would 
acknowledge that’s a significant increase. 
 
Between 1981 and 1988 the number of women in management 
positions of the public service has increased by some 187 per 
cent. And notwithstanding even last year where there were 
significant restraints within hirings within government in 
management positions, the number of women in those 
management positions increased from 17 to 23 per cent, which 
was a 32 per cent increase last year. 
 
So all I’m saying is that there is some progress being made 
there. I think the hon. member would have to acknowledge that. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Minister, that is not . . . it totally begs the 
question and it totally misses the point that I’m attempting to 
make. And I regret to say that it illustrates a total lack of 
understanding of what pay equity is about when you respond 
with that answer. You are talking affirmative action. 
Affirmative action is one thing; pay equity is another thing. Pay 
equity is being paid equally for work of equal value. And your 
response just indicates a total lack of understanding for the 
problem that women are being faced. 
 
We’re not talking about women in management now. We’re 
talking about women on the lower range of the pay scale, and 
the fact that many of these low-paying jobs are pink collar 
ghettos. That’s where we put women. And they continue to be 
paid less because their work is undervalued. And that’s what 
happens in society  society tends to undervalue the work that 
women do and pay less. And the government has to take a look 
at the Public Service Commission and your own positions in 
government to make sure that that’s not happening. It’s not 
good enough . . . you don’t do that just when you bargain with a 
union. You establish a pay equity program that looks at that. 
  



 
May 6, 1988 

 

1151 
 

Let me just give you an inkling of some of the problems that 
women are facing, Mr. Minister. Something like 53 per cent of 
women working for pay earned less than $10,000 in 1985  53 
per cent of them earned less than $10,000. Something like 60.2 
per cent of single mothers with dependants liked below the 
poverty line, Mr. Minister. Something like 9.4 per cent of 
male-headed households as opposed to 42 per cent of 
female-headed households lived in poverty, Mr. Minister. 
 
Those are the problems we’re talking about. And if you want to 
correct those problems, it has to start right here with the 
government. The government has to set an example with a pay 
equity program which will have spin-offs in society as a whole. 
 
Now I don’t want the rhetoric about women in management. 
That’s a different issue. Those aren’t the women we’re talking 
about; we’re talking about women on the lower scale. I don’t 
want to hear that rhetoric. I want to know what you’re going to 
do to set an example in this province with respect to paying 
women properly for their work and what you’re going to do 
about implementing a pay equity system in the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(1145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Well I can advise the hon. member, 
when she talks about . . . She doesn’t want to talk about women 
in management, but she was the one that raised that question. In 
the question specifically put to me, is there . . . there are fewer 
and fewer women that are working in the management level of 
government; they all have the low paying jobs. That’s exactly 
what you said. 
 
Number two. what you’re now trying to lead to the public is 
that there are many women working for the government making 
less than $10,000. That’s not true either. As I understand, the 
clerk 1, or some of the lowest positions on the contract now, are 
about $10 an hour  that’s around $10 an hour for the lowest 
paid employee of government. Clearly those are not all women. 
 
But even at $10 an hour, for an average year of 2,000 hours is 
$20,000 salary, which really becomes the minimum salary 
within government. And so I think the hon. member, leaving the 
impression . . . if she wishes to leave the impression that that’s 
not true outside of government, I’m not here to argue about that 
because, as I indicated earlier, that’s not the function of the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Minister, I didn’t talk about women in 
management, and I’m confident that Hansard will bear that out. 
That was your red herring, Mr. Minister. 
 
With respect to the $10,000, I was quoting statistics generally, 
not specifically saying it was the public service. So once again 
you are attempting to put words in my mouth. 
 
The fact of the matter is, the point I was making, and I’ll make 
it once again, is that we have to implement a pay equity system. 
We start by implementing it in the government and looking . . . 
It’s not good enough to say, 

well she’s getting 11,000 or 12,000 so that’s good enough, if 
the job isn’t being paid what it’s valued at or what it’s worth 
comparable to other traditionally held male jobs. 
 
That’s not good enough, Mr. Minister, and the women of this 
province won’t accept that. Well we’re paying her more than 
. . . she’s getting $10 an hour; that’s good enough if she’s 
working for less than jobs of equal value that are traditionally 
held by male persons. 
 
I wish to also point out with respect to my comments, that a pay 
equity system isn’t geared only to women, Mr. Minister, it’s 
also geared to all people in lower paying jobs. Whether the job 
is held by men or women, it would be pay equity for men and 
women. The reason I used women as an example is because 
women primarily hold the lower paying jobs; but if men happen 
to be holding them, they would benefit from a pay equity 
program as well. 
 
Mr. Minister, then if you wish now to talk about affirmative 
action, I will give you an opportunity. With respect to the 
affirmative action program that the government sought approval 
for from the Human Rights Commission, I want to bring to your 
attention: When you quote figures of 23 per cent of women in 
management, I say good; we want to see more women in 
management. But what about the women in the lower echelons 
of the public service? What about those women, Mr. Minister? 
 
Let’s look at the facts with respect to those women, as I have 
them, as of November 1987. The budget cuts  as a result of 
your budget cuts, Mr. Minister, your government’s cuts, 
something like the number of women in non-traditional, 
non-management positions dropped to 7.3 per cent from 16.2 
per cent and the Human Rights Commission called your record 
affirmative action in reverse. Now would you please tell me, 
Mr. Minister, what you’ve done to rectify that situation since 
November 1987? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Well I can only go back . . . Perhaps you 
could refer me to the Human Rights Commission statement. I 
have a difficult time commenting on that if I haven’t seen it. 
 
Let me simply say this: as I said before, there are 23 per cent of 
women now in management in the Government of 
Saskatchewan where that was 7.7 per cent before. There’s no 
numbers for women in non-traditional jobs from 1981  
there’s no statistics from that. But I can say from March ’87 to 
March ’88, that has increased from 13.2 to 15.8. And total 
women in government now is about 48.6 per cent. 
 
So if you could refer me to the Human Rights Commission 
statement, I would then refer to it. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Minister, when you were seeking approval 
for the affirmative action plan in the government, and I’m 
looking now at a November 12, 1987 Saskatoon Star-Phoenix 
article, and I’ll just quote from it for your information: 
 

The plan is supposed to cover government hiring 
  



 
May 6, 1988 

 

1152 
 

in the temporary, part-time entry level and non-union 
positions within the Public Service, a group that covers 34 
per cent of all civil servants. Within that group the number 
of women in non-traditional, non-management positions 
dropped to 7.3 per cent from 16.2 per cent in a 17-month 
period ending on August 31, 1987. 

 
It goes on to talk about natives and other natives and other . . . I 
can send you a copy of this, Mr. Minister, if you like. But the 
crucial point that I was referring to, or one of the points, is that 
the Saskatchewan Association of Human Rights told the 
commissioners the government’s record shows it wasn’t ready 
to implement an affirmative action plan when it sought 
approval. 
 
At calling the government’s record affirmative action in 
reverse, the association’s written brief to the commission set six 
conditions it said the province should be forced to meet before 
the approval is given. 
 
My next question to you, Mr. Minister, is: what conditions were 
attached to your approval for the Public Service Commission 
and what is the status of the fulfilment of these conditions at 
this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Well, I wonder perhaps if  Your initial 
statement was that the Human Rights Commission had said this. 
And I take it, from reading what you say there, it’s not the 
Human Rights Commission at all but the association, or 
Saskatchewan Association for Human Rights. 
 
An Hon. Member:  It’s the association. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  It’s the association. Some of the people 
from the Public Service Commission advise that they were in 
fact at that meeting and this is a statement made by he 
association, which as you know is an advocate group. No 
comment was in fact made by the Human Rights Commission 
at all with regards to that. So I think that we should make that 
clear so that it’s not being seen as the Human Rights 
Commission saying that, or necessarily even accepting the 
numbers as presented by the association. 
 
Ms. Simard:  What are the numbers, then, with respect to 
those groups? If you don’t accept the numbers  and this 
article isn’t clear as to who put the numbers out, whose 
numbers those were  but if you’re not accepting their 
numbers, what are they, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  The difficulty of trying to respond to 
that question, as I indicated to you, that we have and maintain 
statistical information as to the hirings and the number of 
women in various levels, and it’s difficult for us to know what 
the association of human rights were referring to there so that 
we can in fact compare apples to apples. 
 
I can say that statistic on the appointment of women, in 
1987-88, 52 per cent of all permanent positions were women. 
That is, 523 of the 1,006 new permanent positions appointed 
last year were in fact women. 
 
So I mean, what we can sit and argue about is various 

interpretations or statements on statistical information. Until we 
are able to analyse what the association of human rights were 
saying, not the Human Rights Commission, then it’s difficult 
for us to respond to those statistical comparisons. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Minister, I will send you a copy of this 
article. Will you undertake to look at the article and provide us 
with your interpretation of the figures or what the figures 
should be from your point of view. Would you give us that 
information please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  I will undertake to do that. With the 
caveat, as you know, that if the statistics are maintained in the 
department in one way, it might take some time to interpret 
them in a different way. So I’ll undertake to get that 
information  the Public Service Commission will get that 
information to you  but I can’t guarantee that it’ll be there 
tomorrow for you. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Mr. Minister, there were conditions attached to 
the approval of the affirmative action program with the 
government. What were those conditions and what are we doing 
about it  or what are you doing about it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  I wonder if that question might be more 
appropriately addressed to the Minister of Human Resources 
because it falls under that department. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Is it not the Public Service Commission that 
went for the approval, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  No, that was presented by the 
Department of Human Resources, not by the Public Service 
Commission. 
 
Ms. Simard:  Well I would still like the information right 
away, Mr. Minister, but I can understand your problem. 
 
Another point that I wish to make is the fact that 75.2 per cent 
of the public service positions cut by your Saskatchewan had 
been filled by women, Mr. Minister. I only have to think, for 
example, with respect to the dental therapists  over 400 dental 
workers, most of whom were women, by far the vast majority 
were women  totally fired and eliminated from their jobs by 
your government. 
 
Your budget cuts, Mr. Minister, have hurt women in this 
province very, very much. But it’s not only hurt women, Mr. 
Minister, it’s hurt heir families because many of these women 
were supplementing incomes in their families, or were heading 
families themselves and supporting the family as a single 
mother. 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. Minister, there’s no question that the public service cuts 
have attacked women in very large majority  75.2 per cent of 
the positions cut were formerly held by women, Mr. Minister. 
Now I would like to know what your government is going to do 
to correct that situation, and what you’re going to do for these 
women in order to ensure that they’re re-employed in 
Saskatchewan? 
  



 
May 6, 1988 

 

1153 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Well, I make two observations. What 
I’m saying is you asked what are we doing  52 per cent of all 
new permanent employments were women. Now, that is 
increasing the number of women in the public service. If there’s 
52 per cent of them are women, 48 per cent of them are men. So 
that is an increase. 
 
Now if there is a given group where a decision was taken and 
they lost their job, clearly that’s true. I don’t know or cannot 
confirm your figures, but they’re probably close to true, because 
the large number of people that ultimately lost the job were the 
dental therapists and they are predominantly women. 
 
Now the cuts should not be made according to whether they are 
men or women. Most governments are going to determine 
whether or not they make a cut and they make a decision to 
either move down here or move down here. If you’re going to 
eliminate a program now, obviously that will have a bearing, 
but there’s many other things that go into it. And so I don’t 
disagree with your figures necessarily. I indicate that permanent 
hirings are  4 per cent more are women than are men, a total 
of 52 per cent, so you have to constantly move. 
 
Ms. Simard:  I just wish to make the observation, Mr. 
Minister, that with respect to the dental therapists the advice 
that I have received is that out of those dental therapists there’s 
only been 50 that have found employment, and out of those 50 
only 30 of them, or less, have found permanent full-time 
employment, Mr. Minister. 
 
So your programs and your goodwill, if there is any, Mr. 
Minister  and I’m not sure that there is  is not working for 
those dental therapists. And many of those women who have 
lost their jobs as a result of your budget cut-backs, and their 
families, are suffering, and your anti-family government 
policies have hurt them severely, Mr. Minister. And I want an 
undertaking from the Public Service Commission and from you 
government that you will not be engaging on budget cuts that 
are direct attacks on the women and their families in this 
province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Well I responded to that question last 
time. The budget cuts are obviously going to be based on 
whether government decides that a program is going to continue 
or not continue, and that’s not based upon who fills the job as 
much as whether or not it’s this department or that department 
that’s going to be changed. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, your 
government has constantly said . . . whenever we’ve raised a 
concern with you in a general way, whether it’s people on 
social assistance or people who have been hurting from the drug 
plan or people who’ve been with hospital waiting lists, you’ve 
said, give us the names and we’ll do something about it. 
 
Now I’m standing here to ask you about a constituent of mine 
who is currently sitting in front of the office of the Premier on 
22nd Street in Saskatoon, concerned about the fact that he was 
dismissed from a probation job that he has as a fire-fighter. He 
alleges it’s because he was a diabetic, and he has in writing, and 
he’s shown it to me, 

the statement that it was a concern because of his diabetes. He’s 
very concerned about the affirmative action program which he 
understand is still under the Public Service Commission. 
 
Now he’s been in front of the office of the Premier for the last 
week and he is trying to get an inquiry in front of Hepworth . . . 
or the minister in charge of the Public Service Commission  
sorry to mention people’s names. he’s wanted this inquiry and 
he’s been asking for it, His name is Earle Mireau; it’s a public 
name. There’s been a description of his concerns in the 
Star-Phoenix, and he’s been on television in Saskatoon, and 
many people are aware of his protest. 
 
There’s a very particular individual person trying to get 
attention from your government. And as far as I know, no one 
has even come out to say to him that the affirmative action 
program is no longer under the Public Service Commission  
it’s under the Human Resources, Labour, Employment and 
everything else over the department. Now I want to know what 
your government is proposing to do about the case of Earle 
Mireau in Saskatoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Well I . . . the officials do not have all 
the details. If the hon. member would give me, as well, where 
he worked and when he was terminated, as you say, we can 
investigate it. I assume that h has grievance rights. Has he used 
those grievance rights? ha he taken the opportunity to do that? I 
don’t know. 
 
What I can undertake to do to you, if you . . . You’ve given the 
name; if you can say where he worked and when he worked, I 
will undertake to have the Public Service Commission 
investigate. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Mr. Minister, I’m sure that your government has 
a file on Earle Mireau that’s about this thick, because he sent 
the papers down to the government, he sent them to the minister 
in charge of the Public Service Commission, and he has sent 
them to the minister responsible for the Human Rights 
Commission, and he has been asking and asking for a public 
inquiry. 
 
Now if your officials know nothing about this, this is really 
shocking, because this case has been quite public and he’s been 
very persistent  extremely persistent. You better ask your 
officials again if they don’t have any information on Earle 
Mireau  M-i-r-e-a-u. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  I can only indicate to you that I have the 
name; I will do an investigation and find out. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Mr. Minister, I’m sorry that I was talking to a 
colleague and didn’t hear your response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  I said I had the name and I would have 
the Public Service Commission investigate it, bring that back to 
me, and I will personally send a letter to you explaining the 
position as we see it. 
 
Ms. Smart:  Well I thank you for that, and I’m sure that 
Earle Mireau will be pleased to hear that he will get some 
attention, and it will be much appreciated. 
  



 
May 6, 1988 

 

1154 
 

Before I sit down, I would like to just make a couple of 
comments about the pay-equity program that we’ve been 
talking about, because it’s been obvious to me in your responses 
that you’re not at all clear on what a pay-equity program is. And 
I would just like to take this opportunity to explain to you, from 
my own personal profession, just what that’s meant in terms of 
librarianship. 
 
Librarianship is a profession where 85 per cent of the people 
employed are women, and 94 per cent of the administrators in 
the library profession are men. And in the federal government 
there was also a classification called archivists. Those are the 
people who do the historical work in the archives of Canada. 
 
And at the federal level the librarians launched a grievance to 
the Human Rights Commission and they were found to be 
classified at a lower level . . . Mr. Chairman, the minister is not 
listening to my explanation. 
 
Mr. Minister, this is just one more example of why women are 
so frustrated with this government, that even when we’re trying 
to speak to you, you won’t have the courtesy to listen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart:  That is shameful. 
 
The government has an opportunity to show real leadership in 
making conditions better for women. In the federal government 
there’s a classification called archivists and a classification 
called librarians. They do exactly the same kind of work. The 
archivists were mostly men; the librarians were mostly women. 
The archivists were getting a lot more money than the 
librarians. There was an investigation on the pay equity scheme 
of making those jobs equal pay for work of equal value, and the 
librarians got an increase in pay because it was judged that they 
were doing the same work. 
 
That’s what we’re talking about when we’re talking about a pay 
equity scheme. We’re talking about looking at the job 
classifications and seeing if the jobs are done the same. 
 
Now again the minister is not taking the courtesy to listen to 
me, and I’m trying to explain a serious program for women. 
And I’m giving you an example from the federal government 
which you could look at, and I’m sure you could understand it 
because it’s fairly clear. 
 
When you look at the work done by librarians and the work 
done by archivists, the work is very similar. The pay at the 
federal government level was very different, and they won an 
increase in pay. 
 
In the provincial government in your various departments 
you’ve got people doing the same kinds of work, classified 
differently. By and large, women are classified lower. Even 
though they have the same education, the same skills, the same 
amount of training, etc., they don’t get the same pay. 
 
So I want to hear from you what your commitment is going to 
be to a pay equity program in the Public Service 

Commission for the government of Saskatchewan, based on my 
explanation of what it is that pay equity is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  To the specific question of the hon. 
member, the people from the commission will investigate. 
There is no classification of an archivist in the public service of 
Saskatchewan. They’re classified as a clerk. We will undertake 
to get the pay levels of the people that work in the archives and 
the librarians, and make that comparison for you. 
 
Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I want 
to continue in the affirmative action area and deal with two 
areas actually  the first in that of physical abilities  and 
wish to make a point that to move towards having employers 
recognizing abilities rather than seeing somebody in a 
wheelchair and saying, oh, they can’t do a job, they’re 
obviously physically disabled. To move towards recognizing 
potential abilities, we have to address the issue of accessibility. 
 
There are regulations in place, but I point out to you that my 
understanding is that the number of renovations and the amount 
of wheelchair lifts that have been purchased in this past year is 
roughly one-half of what it was in 1982. Clearly that’s not a 
move in the proper direction. We should be enforcing the 
regulations that are in place. 
 
(1215) 
 
I think it’s no surprise that we see this newspaper report 
showing the physically disabled employed in the government 
down 11 per cent last year over the year before. And it’s also no 
surprise that we see natives  12 per cent fewer natives 
employed by you than were employed simply one year earlier. 
 
That’s shocking, Minister, to see those statistics, that proof, and 
the proof is really in the pudding, just where your government 
stands in regards to helping people that have been put down, 
helping people that have no end of road-blocks put up to their 
employment. 
 
I urge you to get on with the accessibility standards, following 
through with those installation of wheelchair lifts, that type of 
thing. And also at the same time, I want you to take a good look 
at your affirmative action program. The two areas that I’m 
dealing with in tandem, I am simply because of the time 
running out and I want to turn this back to my colleague. 
 
But when are you going to get on with enforcing the building 
regulations and when are you going to get on with enforcing 
affirmative action program for people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Well let me first get into the question of 
access. That falls under SPMC as you are fully aware of, and so 
I don’t . . . Your statistics that you use, I can speak only for 
Department of Justice. When the Justice estimates were in, the 
question related to the court-houses, for example, and the 
member from Regina Centre in fact gave a bouquet to us, 
Department of Justice, for what we had in fact done in that 
particular field for access by handicapped people, wheelchair 
people, to get into various public buildings. 
  



 
May 6, 1988 

 

1155 
 

So I think that the hon. member to say that there is nothing 
being done relative to when you were in government, I don’t 
believe that’s true, but we’ll leave that for the estimates on the 
property management corporation because they’re the ones that 
co-ordinate that. 
 
I can say that the Public Service Commission is in the process 
right now of a study through all departments to see where those 
levels are, in fact, and have progressed to, to determine how the 
employees are faring within the provincial government. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Minister, I just want to ask you 
when you stopped using English as the only language in the 
Public Service Commission? 
 
An Hon. Member:  Say that again, Harry. I didn’t hear. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  I asked you when you stopped using 
English as the only language within the Public Service 
Commission itself. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  I don’t know what the basis of your 
question is. If your base of your question is, is there services 
provided for the public service to be able to learn another 
language than English, that has been going on for some time, 
and I would hope that you were not against that. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  No, what I’m talking about, Mr. 
Minister, is something called the non-permanent resourcing 
unit. Can you tell me what language that is and what it means? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  It is the unit that hires part-time and 
temporary employees. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Well, Mr. Minister, you have a couple 
or three university degrees, and you had to consult with your 
officials to give me an answer on that, and I’m assuming that 
this is in the English language. Can you tell us when you might 
get a grip on the bureaucracy and start using the English 
language again. I mean, if this is an office to hire temporary 
help, why don’t you call it that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Well I suppose we could all cite chapter 
and verse of the jargon of the public service. I mean, this is not 
the first time that has existed. They use the great buzz-words. 
I’ve often believed that very often the public service use those 
buzz-words to, in fact, confuse people, and not only just the 
public but also the politicians. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Well you’re right, Mr. Minister. It’s 
time to stop confusing the public. If you, with two or three 
university degrees, have to consult with your officials to explain 
to this House and the people of Saskatchewan what a 
non-permanent resourcing unit is, and that it’s in fact a 
temporary employment office, then pray tell what the average 
person out there is going to think about this. 
 
My colleague says it’s kind of a non-permanent resource on the 
other side, and I’d have to agree with him after the by-election 
results. 
 
Mr. Minister, just on student summer employment 

program, I not your budget is the same as last year. Can you tell 
me, the students that are being hired to process the fuel tax 
rebates, are they being paid from that particular vote in the 
estimates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  I’m advised they are. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  What you’re saying then is that even 
through you’re not hiring any extra people necessarily to 
process those fuel tax rebates, the budget’s the same and there 
are no additional jobs for students in this province to process 
those fuel tax rebates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  I guess they’re doing that rather than 
some other job. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Well that’s obvious, and you should 
pass that message along to your colleagues who somehow tried 
to leave the impression that additional jobs have been created in 
Saskatchewan to process those rebates, and as if it’s some great 
thing for students out there that additional jobs are being 
created. 
 
I just want to ask you: last year I received a letter from someone 
called Guy Chartier, head of the non-permanent resourcing unit, 
saying: the following students have been hired under the student 
summer employment program who happen to reside in your 
constituency. 
 
Can I just ask: were those letters sent out to all MLAs with 
respect to all the summer students that were hired under this 
program to advise them that this was taking place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  If you could send me a copy of the 
letter, I will take it back through and chase that letter down and 
respond to that question. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  You know, I don’t have his letter with 
me any more, but I got a letter from a Guy Chartier, saying, the 
following students have been hired on the student summer 
employment program, and they reside in your constituency. 
You may wish to send them a letter of congratulation. 
 
I’m just simply asking: was that a practice to advise all 
members of the Assembly that this was in fact happening, 
giving them the names of all those who have been hired from 
their constituency under the auspices of this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  I’m advised by the chairman that it is 
not his intention to do that, and he does not agree with that. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Was there a slip-up there somewhere? 
How do you explain then that I received this letter and others 
didn’t receive this letter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Well I asked the hon. member to please 
send me the letter and I will check it out. He asked the second 
question: is it the intention to send letters out? The chairman 
indicated that it was not his intention to do that. So please send 
me the letter and I will check it out. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Minister, I have here a list 
  



 
May 6, 1988 

 

1156 
 

provided by your colleague, the minister responsible for the 
Public Service Commission. This was sent last year, and the list 
indicates the number of students hired, by constituency, under 
the summer student employment program. 
 
I want to ask for your explanation as to why, in the city of 
Regina, Regina Elphinstone, 10 were hired; Regina Lakeview, 
44; Regina North, 15; Regina Centre, 24; Regina North West, 
19; Regina Rosemont, 19; Regina Victoria, 14  although only 
two names were sent to me  as contrasted to Regina South, 91 
students; and Regina Wascana, 75 students. How do you 
explain that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Well I guess . . . To the hon. member, I 
don’t know the breakdown like that. If he could, again, send a 
copy of that over to us, perhaps I can have the commission 
investigate that and respond to him. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Well I think the most appropriate 
comment on this one came from your seat mate, the Deputy 
Premier, who said it has to do with the MLA. 
 
Do you know what I think is happening here, Mr. Minister? 
That you’ve set up a cute little arrangement with the Public 
Service Commission to assure that students who come from the 
constituencies of Tory MLAs get the jobs, and that those 
students who come from the constituencies represented by New 
Democrats or the Liberal are simply not provided the same 
opportunity to get those jobs; that you’re playing politics with 
the students of this province. 
 
First you cut back on the amount of money to hire students and 
to give help to those kids that are returning to university. And 
the next thing you do is you play politics with that. I want you 
to deny that, Mr. Minister. I want you to say that that isn’t true. 
Do it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  I’m advised that the system of hiring 
students in the summer has not terribly changed in the last 25 
years. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  I think with all due respect, Mr. 
Minister, when you look at that list, I think that it’s terribly 
changed over the last number of years. I think it’s terribly 
changed. And I would submit to you that your government is 
just playing politics with the students of this province. You’ve 
got no heart. 
 
First you cut back on the opportunities, and the next thing you 
do is you play politics with those kids. That’s what you’re 
doing. I think it’s disgraceful, and the people of Saskatchewan 
will pass judgement on you for that. 
 
I want to just turn to employee relations for a few minutes, Mr. 
Minister, and I want to ask you: what kind of mandate does the 
PSC have to negotiate with the public sector unions, given the 
fact that the government is dictating a policy of zero and zero 
wage increases for the next two years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Two observations. The list that the hon. 
member sent over to me shows that from the constituency of 
Kindersley there’s nine people were 

hired; from the constituency of Regina Victoria there’s 14 
people hired. I’m not sure what the  
 
And number two, as the member obviously knows, that 
negotiations are ongoing between the Public Service 
Commission and the SGEU and other unions. I don’t think the 
hon. member would expect me to make any statements with 
regards to that negotiation. I have no intention of doing that. 
And that would not be a proper function for this Assembly to in 
fact negotiate or give signals with regard to negotiations. And I 
do not intend to do that. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Minister, doesn’t it make a mockery 
of good faith bargaining when you say there’s going to be zero 
and zero, and yet you should go negotiate. Doesn’t that make a 
mockery of the negotiating process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Well I know. But you said that a year 
ago with regards to the teachers or whatever. Negotiations are 
ongoing  negotiations are ongoing. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Well just about that, there’s also been a 
cut in the industrial relations area of the PSC, and as a result the 
PSC has been hard pressed to get people to bargaining sessions. 
And I would point out that bargainings have been delayed, and 
we’re informed that nothing has been happening since January 
or February. How do you explain that, and does that exemplify 
bargaining in good faith when you’re so understaffed that you 
can’t get people to the bargaining table? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  I will read this to you. Since August of 
1986, 24 meetings have been held. The parties last met January 
’88 when the Public Service Commission presented SGEU with 
the proposed package that includes revised economic positions. 
A further date was set for February 1988. The SGEU cancelled 
those dates and subsequently informed the Public Service 
Commission that they did not wish to meet until April 25, 1988. 
Bargaining dates have recently been set for May 16, 17, 26 and 
27, so your information is wrong. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Minister, isn’t it true that as a 
further consequence of the cuts that you’ve made in the 
industrial relations area, and the number of new people and 
people coming and going, that the processing of grievances 
have become very slow; that there are great delays; that there’s 
a huge pile of unprocessed grievances; that there’s 
dissatisfaction as a result of that; that there’s unhappiness; that 
there’s anger, and that there’s no serious attempt that has been 
made to make the grievance procedure work? 
 
(1230) 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Processed 135 this year. The number of 
grievances outstanding has not changed dramatically from last 
year. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 7 
  



 
May 6, 1988 

 

1157 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Just on item 7, with respect to payments 
to the property management corporation, can the minister 
explain for this House how it is that the payments to the 
property management corporation has increased? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  We are advised by SPMC that the last 
year when it was first introduced was an estimate  that the 
actual came out to this amount. This is the figure that has been 
given to us by SPMC and we pay it accordingly. You should 
address that question in SPMC estimates. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Here we go on the old merry-go-round 
again. Mr. Minister, I wonder if you can provide us with an 
itemized list of facilities, offices, compounds, parking lots 
provided to your department by the property management 
corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  You indicated now what you wanted  
the list of properties that Public Service Commission uses? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  That’s correct, Mr. Minister. If you 
could send that list over later, if I could have your undertaking 
on that, that would be satisfactory. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  We’ll provide that list to you. 
 
Item 7 agreed to. 
 
Vote 33 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman:  I’d like to thank the minister and his 
officials. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  If I just might thank the minister and 
thank the officials for attending today. I think the presence of 
the officials is probably far more important today, given the 
minister is in an acting capacity, and their presence has been 
very helpful to these proceedings, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the 
officials. Again, it’s unfortunate that the minister was not here, 
but times took him out of the city today, and so I think the 
officials should be commended for carrying these estimates 
through. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:36 p.m. 


