


















































March 21, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 March 21, 1988 
 

1 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I beg to inform the Assembly that I have 
received a communication from the private secretary to His 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor, stating that His Honour 
will open the second session of the twenty-first legislature at 
2 o’clock p.m. today, the 21st day of March, 1988. 
 

2:03 p.m. 
 
His Honour the Lieutenant Governor was then pleased to 
open the session with the following speech: 
 
Mr. Speaker, 
 
Members of the Legislature: 
 
It is my privilege to welcome you to the second session of 
the twenty-first legislature. 
 
It is appropriate that we are here today to begin deliberations 
of this legislative sitting as Saskatchewan shrugs off the last 
remnants of winter and prepares for its annual spring 
awakening. 
 
This is a time of hope and a time of optimism, despite the 
difficult economic times that continue to harass us all, and it 
is a time of commitment — of commitment to the land and to 
the people we love, and to the future and to the belief that we 
have passed through the darkest time and can now look 
forward to better days. 
 
There is no doubt the past year has been a difficult one for 
the people of this province. A world economy in the turmoil 
of transition has created hardship for each and everyone of 
us. My government’s revenues have fallen dramatically 
because of the sharp drops in commodity and resource prices. 
And incomes, particularly those in Saskatchewan’s key farm 
sector, have also fallen sharply because of unacceptably low 
international prices for grains. 
 
The world economic condition continues to be volatile and 
continues to be a cause for concern. But my government 
remains confident that the steps it has taken in the past year 
to improve the efficiency of its administration, and to 
diversity the economic base of the province, will enable the 
province to meet the new challenges on a firm and positive 
footing. 
 
Despite the uncertainties and the financial pressures on the 
provincial treasury, my government remains committed to 
protecting and improving essential services for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
My government will continue to consult with and assist those 
in need of help at home, and will continue its efforts to 
influence North American and overseas market conditions to 
ensure that Saskatchewan farmers and business men receive 
fair prices for their products and fair access to those markets 
in a time of increasing protectionist sentiment. 

Trade 
 
The fundamental restructuring of world economic conditions 
has led to a rise in protectionist trade policies in many 
countries. Punitive tariff and non-tariff barriers have created 
difficulty for Saskatchewan’s resource industries. Direct farm 
subsidies have contributed to downward pressures on 
international grain prices, thus hurting Saskatchewan 
agriculture producers. 
 
My government believes it to be an elementary fact of life 
that fair trade is essential to the economic well-being of this 
province. Over half of all the goods and services produced in 
Saskatchewan are shipped to markets outside our provincial 
borders. 
 
It is not by accident that Saskatchewan is known world-wide 
as the bread-basket of the nation. But it is simply not enough 
for us to only be able to ship our grain to world markets. Our 
farmers must also receive a fair price for their produce. If 
they don’t get it, they suffer financially, and that in turn puts 
additional stress on the provincial treasury at a time when we 
can ill afford it. 
 
No country operates in an economic vacuum, and it is no 
longer possible for any country to achieve long-term growth 
and prosperity by isolating itself from event beyond its 
borders. My government believes that world-wide prosperity 
depends on trade, so it will continue its efforts through 
GATT, and with trading blocs such as the European 
Economic Community, to improve the trading environment 
for Saskatchewan products. 
 
Our biggest trading partners remains the United States. My 
government believes it is absolutely essential that we 
maintain a stable trading relationship with the giant on our 
southern border. We must be able to take advantage of 
opportunities provided by access to that market. 
 
we must also expand the shared economic interests we have 
with our North American neighbour. We must get rid of the 
threat of protectionist retaliation that would curtail trade 
between us, and we must protect our common interest in 
bargaining with other world trading blocs such as the 
European Economic Community. 
 
But our ability to do this depends to a large measure on our 
own actions here in Saskatchewan. My government 
recognizes that our own producers must retain the 
competitive edge that they have worked so hard to gain over 
the years. We must continue the thrust to diversify our 
economy so we can continue to create jobs and provide a 
higher standard of living for the people of this province. 
 
Agriculture 
 
Despite the desirability of diversifying our economy, my 
government recognizes that agriculture remains the backbone 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Our farmers produced over 22 million tonnes of grains and 
oilseeds, down slightly from the record crop of 1986. 



 
March 21, 1988 

 

2 
 

And there can be no disputing that agriculture policies 
around the world have wreaked havoc on rural 
Saskatchewan. Farmers and ranchers in this province have 
paid a price simply for being good at their jobs. As a result, 
farm debt is of crisis proportions. 
 
But people in Saskatchewan have learned to live with 
adversity. The tough times come and the tough times pass, 
but the commitment to the land, and to what it gives and to 
what it demands, remains strong. And my government’s 
commitment to the protection of those who live in rural 
Saskatchewan remains as strong as the land. 
 
Internationally, the government will continue to exert 
whatever influence is possible to bring an end to the 
senseless policies that have threatened the very fabric of our 
rural society. 
 
Grain exports have been at record levels, but prices remain 
unacceptably low. 
 
And my government will continue to provide policies at 
home — both alone and in co-operation with the federal 
government — to preserve the way of life in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Measures will be introduced to provide greater protection for 
rural families when times are difficult. 
 
Measures also will be introduced to enable Saskatchewan’s 
industry to take advantage of opportunities that may arise 
through broadened trade with the United States. 
 
Resources 
 
Resource prices, and consequently revenues, remained 
unacceptably depressed and unsettled in t he past year, but 
my government sees reason for cautious optimism here as 
well. 
 
The potentially damaging potash dispute with the United 
States has been resolved, assuring Saskatchewan producers 
of fair market  value for their product — although the 
industry is likely to continue to operate below capacity. 
 
World oil prices remain low and volatile, but a modest 
recovery is expected to continue in this province. 
 
Natural gas continues to become more important in terms of 
employment and royalties, which are likely to reach a new 
high this year. 
 
Exploration and development in the gold industry continues 
to be strong, and there has been some increase in demand for 
uranium, although prices have softened somewhat. 
 
My government will continue to implement policies to 
promote continued development of the resource sector — 
providing jobs for Saskatchewan people and tax revenues to 
pay for public services such as health and education. 
 
Public Participation 

My government believes that all people in Saskatchewan 
have a right to the opportunity of participating in the 
province’s economic growth. It also believes public 
participation can make a major contribution to economic 
development by enabling Saskatchewan residents to invest 
skills and capital in areas that may not have been accessible 
to them.  
 
The foundation has already been laid for a strong program of 
public participation through programs such as SaskPower 
bond issues, Saskoil share offerings, the reorganized delivery 
of some government services, the establishment of rural 
development corporations, and the introduction of labour 
venture capital programs. 
 
Legislation will be introduced to mandate the new 
Department of Public Participation and to make it possible, 
as needed, for public investment in plans and programs of the 
department. The legislation will ensure that the quality of 
government services is retained and that the rights and 
privileges of public sector employees are fully respected. 
 
Diversification 
 
Economic diversification continues to be a major thrust in 
my government’s plans for combating the boom-and-bust 
cycles that continue to plague our development. Growth in 
the manufacturing and service sectors are key to the strategy. 
 
My government has previously launched significant 
initiatives to do with irrigation, paper manufacture, heavy oil, 
meat processing and production, poultry processing, steel 
fabrication, and the high-tech industry. 
 
New initiatives are being actively pursued in both the 
manufacturing and service sectors. 
 
Education and the Family 
 
My government believes that the single most important 
resource in the province is our people, and particularly our 
young people. They are the future of Saskatchewan. Their 
destiny is the destiny of this province. 
 
They must be given the opportunity to develop to their fullest 
potential, and they must be given the knowledge to enable 
them to adapt to the rapid technological changes that are so 
much a part of today’s environment. 
 
My government is absolutely committed to providing 
excellence in programs, in facilities, and in people to ensure 
that our youth are indeed able to take full advantage of the 
opportunities available to them in Saskatchewan’s tomorrow. 
 
My government also remains firmly committed to the belief 
that no institution is more important that the family. 
Government programs will continue to be modified to meet 
the changing needs of family life. 
 
Legislation will be introduced to: 
 

 improve the Saskatchewan Pension Plan; 



 
March 21, 1988 

 

3 
 

 improve The Labour Standards Act, particularly 
as it relates to part-time workers; 

 
 amend the Occupational Health and Safety Act 

to provide information on toxic chemicals used 
in the work place; 

 
 replace The Family Services Act with 

legislation to improve the role of the family in 
foster parent situations and to simplify 
adoption procedures; 

 
 provide the framework and standards for day 

care in both urban and rural areas of the 
province; 

 
 provide a new Homesteads Act that recognizes 

modern day arrangements concerning 
ownership and marital property; 

 
 amend The Urban Municipality Act to deal 

with such questions as store hours and 
dangerous dogs; 

 
 amend The Small Claims Act so that the courts 

are more accessible to our people; 
 

 improve the operation of the judicial system 
and the jury selection process; 

 
 provide for greater financial and personal 

security for mentally disable adults; 
 

 and to control and regulate all-terrain vehicles 
as a result of growing concern over accidents 
resulting from the increased used of such 
vehicles. 

 
My government also wishes to advise the development of the 
Whitespruce Youth Treatment Centre is proceeding on 
schedule. The centre, near Yorkton, will emphasize family 
involvement in the treatment of chemically dependent youth. 
It will be in operation in the very near future and has drawn 
considerable interest form provinces all across Canada. 
 
Health 
 
Health care represents the most difficult financial challenge 
facing my government and the people of Saskatchewan 
today. 
 
More tax dollars are spent on health care than on any other 
single budget item. At $1.3 billion, it represents one-third of 
total provincial expenditures, and there is no visible end in 
sight. Costs could rise as quickly as we can throw money into 
the system. 
 
But the government remains absolutely committed to 
ensuring that we continue to have a first-rate health care 
system, and our people are demanding that we do so. 
 
The challenge is straightforward. How do we maintain the 
system while, at the same time, controlling ever-increasing 
costs? 

Our primary goal over the next decade will be to ensure 
effective and relevant delivery of health care. It will require 
setting priorities to accurately forecast our needs so w can 
adequately fund the system. It will require drafting a 
blueprint for health care to the year 2000.  
 
It is a challenge for all of us. How we meet it will lay the 
foundation for the quality of life in Saskatchewan for the 
next generation. 
 
None of us can escape our share of the responsibility for the 
decisions that have to be made. We are all going to be asked 
to contribute our share, whether large or small, and we 
cannot hide from our individual responsibilities. The issue is 
simply too complex and too critical, and consumes too much 
of our financial resources, to be settled without the broadest 
possible support of the people of the province. 
 
The questions we must answer include those surrounding the 
specialization of services in major hospitals; regional health 
care services; the most effective use of nurses and other 
health care professionals; the role of home care in the 
system; services in rural Saskatchewan; life-style programs 
and preventative medicine; the special needs of seniors; and 
the urgent requirements of funding. 
 
Our system is now 25 years old. It needs major renovations. 
We must all get involved in making the changes. 
 
To ensure that the matter gets the broadest possible 
consideration and debate over the next several months, and to 
ensure the widest possible participation in the debate from 
both health care professionals and other concerned citizens, 
my government will establish a task force to hold hearings 
across the province. 
 
Members of the task force will be asked to collect input from 
as many sectors in our society as possible, and to submit a 
report with recommendations for future government action to 
meet this challenge. 
 
Conclusions 
 
It has been a difficult year in Saskatchewan. Tough decisions 
had to be made. There may yet be other difficult decision that 
have to be made. 
 
But members of my government, along with the people of 
Saskatchewan, remain optimistic that fairness and common 
sense will see us through. The benefits of co-operation and 
consultation will enable us to achieve our goals, and to 
continue to make this a better province in which to live and 
raise our families. 
 
My government remains committed to expanding its 
partnership with the people of this province — to providing 
the opportunities to enable our people to use their 
considerable talents and expertise to build Saskatchewan’s 
prosperity. 
 
I leave you not to the business of the session with full 
confidence that you will favourably discharge your duties 
and responsibilities. 
  



 
March 21, 1988 

 

4 
 

May Divine Providence continue to bless our province and 
guide this legislature in all its deliberations. 
 

2:24 p.m. 
Prayers  
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Pro Forma Bill 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 
respecting the administration of oaths of office be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that the 
pages for this session will be Kathy Assiniboine, Brian 
Beatty, Wendy Mak, Kari Osojnik, and Peter Tomsu. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I beg to inform the Assembly that in order 
to prevent mistakes I have obtained a copy of the Speech of 
His Honour the Lieutenant Governor, which I now lay on the 
Table. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Speech from the Throne 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Souris-Cannington: 
 

That the speech of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor 
be taken into consideration on Tuesday, March 22, 
1988. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Souris-Cannington: 
 

That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be 
printed after first having been perused by Mr. Speaker, 
that he do appoint the printing thereof, and that no 
person but such as he shall appoint do presume to print 
the same. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Before putting the question of the 
adjournment motion, I wish to acknowledge the band. The 
music you have been listening to this afternoon was  

provided to us by the Canadian Forces Voluntary Band from 
the Canadian Forces Base, Moose Jaw. Thar are playing 
under the direction of Sgt. Douglas MacLean. The band has 
appeared with the kind permission of Col G.E. Miller. I want 
to say how very much we enjoyed listening to the band and 
their music. Our thanks to Sgt. MacLean for his fine 
selections, and to the band on a fine performance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!  
 
Mr. Speaker: — I wish also to announce at this time that 
immediately following adjournment of the House, there will 
be the Speaker’s tea in room 218, to which all members and 
guests are invited. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 2:29 p.m. 
 
 


