


















































May 18, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 May 18, 1988 
 

1429 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you, and through you to all members of this Assembly, some 
55 young people from the constituency of Regina South, siting 
in the Speaker’s gallery. They are Grade 5 and 6 students from 
Grant Road School located in Whitmore Park, a fine 
subdivision in south Regina. They are accompanied here today 
by their teach Mrs. Friesen, as well as Mrs. Inglis. 
 
Hopefully they will find their visit to the legislature today both 
informational and education. And as they walk around the 
grounds on our beautiful Wascana Centre, they may have an 
opportunity to see our new crop of young Canada Geese 
goslings. And I look forward to joining them a little bit later and 
determining how they enjoyed question period. 
 
I therefore ask all members to be on their best behaviour today 
and now join me in a pleasant welcome to these young people. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege on behalf of the 
member from Rosthern to introduce to you, and through you to 
the members of the House, 27 students and their adult 
companions from Dalmeny, Saskatchewan — Prairie View 
Elementary School in Dalmeny, Saskatchewan — grade 4 
students, Mr. Speaker, in the west gallery. They are 
accompanied by Mervin Driedger, Mrs. Driedger and Liz 
Driedger, Miss Chomyn, Mrs. Polan and Mrs. Vance, along 
with Mr. Stubbs, who is the bus driver. 
 
As my colleague from Regina South said, I hope that you enjoy 
the beautiful Wascana Park area and see the young goslings. I 
know you are all interested in wildlife. I’ll be joining you at 3 
o’clock for pictures, in the absence of the member from 
Rosthern. 
 
On behalf of the member from Rosthern, will all the members 
here please welcome our fine students and our guests from 
Prairie View School in Dalmeny, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take the 
opportunity to introduce to you and other members of the 
Assembly, 30 Grade 4 students from Grenfell Elementary 
School that are seated in the west gallery. They’re here today 
with their teacher Gordon Warman, and chaperons Tim Taylor, 
Carol Piller and Gail Cole. 
 
I hope the students enjoy their time here in the Legislative 
Chamber and enjoy their visit to Regina. I’ll be meeting with 
you after for pictures and refreshments and answer your 
questions. So welcome here today. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have the 
honour of introducing to you, and through you, 31 students and 
two teachers from Fairview School in the constituency of Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Fairview School, in my six years in this House, 
has taken an active part, in terms of coming in every spring to 
view the proceedings. And I must admit that I find meeting with 
the students very refreshing, and their observations and 
questions often put one back into perspective in terms of the 
real world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have with them today their teachers, Lois 
Bailey and Donna Rezansoff. They have also allowed four 
observers to come along with them, Arlene Walker, Randy 
Beler, Alice Elias and Blair Froese. 
 
I would ask all members to give them the traditional welcome 
to this House. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Recommendations of Schwartz Report 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, my colleagues and I will 
spend some time today asking your government about your 
betrayal of services to rural Saskatchewan families, and of 
course it’s logical to start with your biggest betrayal, that of 
health. 
 
Mr. Minister, your government’s policies have betrayed rural 
families with the dismantling of the dental care program, 
cut-backs of public health nurses, cut-backs to mental health 
services and the prescription drug plan. And today we see that 
the Schwartz report, which you have hidden, Mr. Minister, from 
Saskatchewan people for almost five months, in effect 
recommends the closure of rural hospitals with 25 beds or fewer 
— 81 of this province’s 133 hospitals. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you accept or reject that recommendation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of things. The 
very first thing in terms of the preface to the hon. member’s 
question regarding the betrayal of this government — of rural 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this government represents rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government represents rural Saskatchewan; 
you look at the members on this side of the House and where 
are they from? We’re from rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
and we continue to represent rural Saskatchewan. it’s the 
Progressive Conservative government that represents them in 
all aspects of their lives in the rural parts of this province, 
number one. 
 
  



 
May 18, 1988 

 

1430 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: The second thing, Mr. Speaker, the member 
makes specific reference to a report done by Mr. Elmer 
Schwartz, who is president of the Saskatoon City Hospital and 
who was asked to do a report regarding the role, the role of 
rural hospitals in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a report on the changing role of rural hospitals is 
certainly a far cry from anything that has been reported in the 
press, or anything about closure of rural hospitals. The report on 
the changing role dealt with . . . and I challenge that member or 
any one on that side of the House or any one in that press 
gallery anywhere to find a word in that report which says that 
rural hospitals should be closed. There is nothing in that report 
that says that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one more point as it relates to rural 
Saskatchewan and the rural hospitals. This government, this 
Progressive Conservative government, in the last six years has 
been building integrated facilities; they integrated facilities by 
building nursing home beds, long-term, heavy-care beds on to 
— they’re actually building them on to the small rural hospitals 
that have been in existence for some time . . . speaks directly to 
the viability of those rural hospitals and the continued viability 
of those rural hospitals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, I didn’t ask for a bunch of 
rhetoric from you and further attacks on the press. Your 
government commissioned a special report, and that report in 
effect outlines massive closure of rural hospitals, and you 
cannot deny that, Mr. Minister. 
 
I want to know whether you favour that approach. I’m simply 
asking you whether you favour that approach, and if so, which 
hospitals you’re intending to close. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I forget the word that the 
member used, but I deny clearly, on behalf of all members in 
this Progressive Conservative government and all members of 
our party, I deny clearly any intention — any intention — any 
intention to close rural hospitals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we will do, and what we do in a responsible 
way, is when we said to Mr. Schwartz, do a report on the role of 
those hospitals; when we said, look at the changing role of 
those hospitals, given all of the demographics and all of the 
things that have been changing, we said, what is the role now in 
terms of the ageing population? Can we increase the number of 
special care home beds, which is what the pressure is in the 
delivery of health care in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
If they don’t know that, Mr. Speaker, they are a long way out of 
touch with rural Saskatchewan, a lot more out of touch that 
what I even thought they were. The pressure in rural 
Saskatchewan is for more and more special care home beds. 
 

This government is delivering more and more special care home 
beds, and through the avenue of integrated facilities this 
government is providing viability for existing rural hospitals in 
their changing role, and at the same time providing nursing 
home beds for special care needs of elderly rural residents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you 
sat on that report for nine months and you refused to make it 
public. and I want to quote from that report. It says: 
 

If we had a health system similar to the United States, 
many of these hospitals would not survive. The market 
would have dictated their closure. 

 
Now that’s a direct quote from the report, Mr. Minister. And I 
suggest to you that that’s what it’s all about, Mr. Minister — 
your government’s privatization and free-market ideology run 
wild. And the health care of rural Saskatchewan families are 
being sacrificed because of your blind adherence to the free 
market system. Isn’t that what it’s all about, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Two points, Mr. Speaker. Two points, 
Mr. Speaker, and this is a word to the hon. Health critic of the 
NDP opposite. Mr. Elmer Schwartz who did this report and, as 
we talked about, gave the whole analysis of this report last fall 
at the Saskatchewan Health-Care Association, which the 
member . . . I should have suggested she or her colleagues or 
somebody should have attended and listened publicly, at the 
SASH (Saskatchewan Association of Special-Care Homes). 
 
The health care associations in this province have had copies of 
this report for a number of months. This member raises this 
question on the day in which the Leader-Post has a story about 
it. Now, Mr. Speaker, this is the Health critic; this is the Health 
critic they’re talking about. 
 
And the second point, Mr. Speaker, is that the member asks the 
question about Mr. Schwartz’s economic analysis. What I will 
portray is this: an economic analysis of a social problem as it 
relates to his discussion about market forces, etc., and if you 
take that whole . . . the comment that she quotes is somewhat 
out of context — I invite people to read it all — and that when 
she takes that sort of economic analysis of a social problem, I 
don’t buy it. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, I say very clearly, I dismiss that kind 
of analysis of a social problem, number two. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I say once again very, very clearly, this government represents 
rural Saskatchewan; this government will ensure the viability of 
rural hospitals in this province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we will ensure that viability not by burying 
our heads in the sands and leave the status quo necessarily, we 
will address rural Saskatchewan and rural Saskatchewan’s 
health care needs and, more specifically, rural Saskatchewan’s 
hospitals by ensuring the viability of  
  



 
May 18, 1988 

 

1431 
 

those hospitals with continuing care or long-term care facilities 
built right on to them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Services to Rural Communities 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
also to the Minister of Health, Mr. Minister, if you had released 
that document in December, we would have asked the question 
in December. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — And I want to say, Mr. Minister, the 
people of rural Saskatchewan have been victimized by your 
government’s gutting of the dental program. They’ve been 
victimized by the privatization of that same program. And prior 
to last June, there were 330 rural communities that were 
services by that program; now there are only 71. I ask you, Mr. 
Minister, how can you say that that’s providing better health 
service to the rural communities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, just one more 
comment as it relates to rural Saskatchewan and the record of 
this group on rural Saskatchewan, as opposed to their record on 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
In 1976, Mr. Speaker, they had a moratorium. They had the gall 
to put a moratorium on the building of nursing home beds for 
the most senior of our generations, the senior citizens in this 
province. They put a moratorium on. They built no nursing 
home beds anywhere in rural Saskatchewan until we came to 
government. My colleague, the former minister of Health from 
Indian Head-Wolseley, began that process and we continue it 
today. That’s one thing as it relate to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
As it relates to the dental plan the member speaks about, I 
challenge any of those members over there to find communities 
in this province, to find citizens in this province, who will now 
have to drive more than about 50 miles or 30 . . . 50 kilometres, 
I’m sorry, 50 kilometres or 35 miles to a dentist in this province 
— 35 miles, 50 kilometres to a dentist, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I tell them this: there won’t be a student in 
this province who won’t be able to go to the dentist during the 
summer months. They will be this year. they will be going to 
the dentist during the summer months. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
have dental services in community after community that did not 
have dental services in the past, and they now have dental 
services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, that’s contrary to the facts and you know it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Let me list you some figures, Mr. 
Minister. In the constituency of Arm River, before there  

were a dozen places; now there are two. In the constituency of 
Thunder Creek there were 10; now there’s zero. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want you to stand up in this House and tell the 
people of rural Saskatchewan how that’s an improvement to 
health care in Saskatchewan. it isn’t, and you know it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The member uses the typical NDP 
approach. He says, delivery of health care services, and he 
relates it to the House and to the public on the basis of 
constituency boundaries — on the basis of constituency 
boundaries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re relating the delivery of health care services 
on the basis of need in the communities, and that’s where it is, 
and that’s where the health care . . . and he also says there were 
12 communities in Arm River, I believe, that had dental 
services. 
 
Let’s just be sure that we understand clearly what those dental 
services were. Perhaps a one visit a year to the particular school 
in Simpson or in Holdfast or in Liberty or whatever; perhaps 
two visits — I’ll give them that — maybe two visits a year to 
the particular school. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly dental services provided by dentists in the 
communities across Saskatchewan, where there were no 
dentists before, provide services not only to children whose 
dental services are paid for by the public purse but also to their 
parents and their grandparents and others in the communities. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that speaks directly to the viability of rural 
communities, something that we stand for in every department 
that we administer, the viability of rural communities. And we 
stand proudly on that record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the same 
minister, Mr. Minister, it’s very clear that you disagree with 
your own Premier because at your November convention, your 
party’s convention, your Premier recognized that the dental 
program has ill-served the people of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: how much longer do the 
residents of rural Saskatchewan have to wait before you 
reinstate the program that you scrapped, that you damaged, that 
you tore apart? How much longer do the people of this province 
have to wait for you to open your eyes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the member . . . there’s an 
interesting point here, Mr. Speaker, and it speaks . . . and I want 
to make it very clear here today. 
 
  



 
May 18, 1988 

 

1432 
 

The members opposite, the members opposite speak of the lack 
of dental services in rural Saskatchewan, and it’s always from 
these urban folks who say that. And I say that very clearly, 
because in rural Saskatchewan, in rural Saskatchewan people 
are not saying we have a lack of dental services. they don’t say 
we have a lack of dental services. Urban Saskatchewan people 
are saying rural Saskatchewan people need services. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Allow the minister to continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — And the second point, Mr. Speaker, as 
I’ve said and as the Premier has said, it is our intention, and we 
continue to improve on the dental program with the location of 
more and more dentists in the rural Saskatchewan, more and 
more satellite clinics in rural Saskatchewan, to the point, Mr. 
Speaker, where I believe that there isn’t a citizen in this 
province — with perhaps one exception in some parts of my 
own constituency and near the Goodsoil area — where people 
will have to drive more than 35 miles to a dentist in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I’m sure the minister doesn’t recognize that 
Edam, Turtleford, Porcupine Plain, Paradise Hill, and many 
others no longer have dental services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Post Offices in Rural Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Anguish: — My question, Mr. Minister, is to the Minister 
of Rural Development, and it has to do with post offices in rural 
Saskatchewan. The minister would have to recognize that since 
the Mulroney government came into place in Ottawa there’ve 
been many closures of rural post offices and studies of closures 
for more rural post offices. 
 
Mr. Minister, today there were two trucks that started a 
cross-Canada journey to pick up names and petitions to present 
to the Mulroney government in Ottawa to ask them to stop this 
insane policy of closing rural post offices. I would ask the 
minister: can we count on you, that when the trucks pass 
through this city, that we can count on your support to be there 
and show support; that we don’t want rural post offices 
decimated in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in regards to rural post 
offices, I met with the postal union, two of the members here 
about a month ago, and we discussed rural post office in 
Saskatchewan. They had a concern as raised by the hon. 
member opposite in regards to the closure of post offices, more 
so in regards to the service to the people of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We have talked with the federal government in regards to the 
retaining of services in rural Saskatchewan as far as post offices 
go, and to retaining of post offices. And in regards to the 
petition, when it comes through, I’d be happy to sign it to 
support rural post offices. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well we’re very happy to hear that, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’ll be looking forward to the minister being 
there with the names of all your colleagues on the  

petition to tell Mulroney that we don’t want the post offices 
closed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Since you’re in such a co-operative mood this 
afternoon, I have a new question to the minister, and that is that 
recently some provinces have passed resolutions to be passed 
on to the federal government. For example, and I would quote 
from the Alberta Hansard: 
 

Be it resolved that the Legislative Assembly is of the 
opinion that post offices provide valuable services to rural 
Albertans and is therefore concerned about the negative 
social and economic effects caused by the closing of post 
offices in many rural communities across Alberta. 

 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: will you and your 
colleagues give unanimous support to a resolution from this 
legislature to be presented to the Mulroney government in 
Ottawa so that there’s no more deterioration of post offices in 
rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Speaker, we would certainly be 
happy to support a resolution that would help in any way retain 
a rural post office and service to rural Saskatchewan. so if 
there’s a resolution that we could bring forward that we would 
have their agreement and their support on it, that would help us 
preserve the service of post office services to rural 
Saskatchewan, we’d be very, very happy to do so. 
 

Summer Employment for Students 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to the Minister of Human Resources and Labour. 
Mr. Minister, local governments have long been major 
employers of students looking for summer work, particularly in 
rural Saskatchewan. In fact the Opportunities ’86 program 
created 1,952 jobs with local governments. In view of the fact 
that there are some 15,000 young people between the age of 15 
and 24 unemployed in this province, will you now make a 
commitment to local governments to provide them with the 
money needed to create necessary summer employment for 
students? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Department of 
Urban Affairs grants, to my knowledge, approximately $61 
million annually for the support of urban and rural 
governments, and it’s not the mandate of my department to shift 
money to urban and rural governments. We have a program for 
student summer jobs which is the same as last year which 
provides for incentives for business and farmers to hire 
students. 
 
This is the part of the economy that produces the revenue that 
generates the income on which this province operates. And this 
is the part of the economy we have chosen in the last two years 
to generate jobs for students.  
  



 
May 18, 1988 

 

1433 
 

In a lot of cases it builds those farms and businesses into 
long-term jobs. 
 
So no, we’re not going to reconsider and have my department 
under job creation for students supporting local governments. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — New question to the same minister, Mr. 
Minister, you should really be called the minister of 
unemployment, insensitivity, and deception because that’s your 
normal . . .(inaudible). . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — And you did not answer my question, as usual, 
Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, for many students in small towns, 
local governments are their best chance of getting a summer 
job, yet your government is denying them that opportunity this 
summer by unilaterally, which is your usual practice, of 
restricting the funding criteria. 
 
Mr. Minister, why are you eliminating hundreds of jobs, 
opportunities for young people in small rural towns? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, over the past three years 
small rural towns, rural municipalities have participated in 
welfare reform creating hundreds of jobs for young people who 
had no jobs at all and never had any jobs. What we’re talking 
about here is a program for student summer employment. When 
we include farmers and small business, that includes a large part 
of rural Saskatchewan and means that under this program jobs 
in rural Saskatchewan are more plentiful than they were under 
the NDP. I was a student under the NDP, and I recall how 
plentiful jobs were under your programs, and so do my 
neighbours and their children. 
 
We have a program to spend $4 million; the federal government 
has a program. I said this is not a program of transferring 
money from the provincial government to local government, 
this is a summer job-creation program. Last year we had a 
record number of jobs, and I anticipate this year we will match 
that record. 
 

Police Services for Rural Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Shillington: — My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the 
Minister of Justice. During the most severe periods of restraint 
in the past, the justice system was thought to be beyond that, 
but not so with this government. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is apparent that police services in many 
communities have gone the way of good roads and good health 
services with the election of this government. 
 
Mr. Minister, last spring, during your budget, by press release it 
became apparent that about 40 RCMP officers were being lost, 
primarily to rural Saskatchewan. The full impact of that is now 
being felt as a number of communities are doing without police 
services. They’re complaining vociferously to us. I assume, as 
useless as it is, they still talk to you. Will you, Mr. Minister, 
reconsider this and reinstate these men? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I would hope that the hon. 
member, being a former EA (executive assistant) to an attorney 
general, would understand that the allocation of men to rural 
Saskatchewan through the RCMP is a responsibility and a 
prerogative of the RCMP. I can say to the hon. member that last 
year the budget increased some 17 per cent for the Department 
of Justice; that this year there was a significant increase again, 
Mr. Speaker, and the largest increase, the largest increase in the 
budget for the Department of Justice this year was to pay 
additional money to the RCMP, some significant increase in the 
dollars paid to the RCMP, Mr. Speaker. That continues to 
escalate, pursuant to the contract negotiated by the Leader of 
the Opposition, that says we have to pay more and more and 
more each year. 
 
The RCMP have indicated that the payment levels are in fact 
appropriate; that they can certainly handle the service, the 
policing service in rural Saskatchewan. Clearly they would like 
to have more, Mr. Speaker, but the reality is that the budget is 
adequate for them. It is the issue has been the RCMP. We are 
committed to the RCMP; the RCMP is doing an excellent job in 
rural Saskatchewan, and we will be there to continue to support 
that service for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, if your . . . new question, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Minister, if your budget, if your departmental 
budget increased by 17 per cent, then I think the communities 
of Biggar, Melfort, Lanigan, Humboldt, and Gull Lake, just to 
name a few, who lost two-man detachments, they’re going to 
wonder why there wasn’t a little left over for policing in their 
communities. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, will you stop playing games with the 
Saskatchewan public and stop playing games with numbers and 
reinstate the people and the RCMP who serve these 
communities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from 
Regina Centre would have us believe that the town of Biggar 
lost its detachment — there was a two-member detachment — I 
say to the hon. member of Regina Centre, go to the town of 
Biggar and you’ll find that the detachment in Biggar is a lot 
larger than two members. And I’ll advise the member from 
Regina Centre, if he has an opportunity, go to the town of 
Biggar; he’ll find that the detachment is still there, that there’s 
police officers still there, that they’re still patrolling the town of 
Biggar, and they’re patrolling the rural area around the town of 
Biggar, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, they are doing so with two 
fewer members, and that’s what I said. My question, Mr. 
Minister, is very simple: when will you stand up for rural 
Saskatchewan, the people who gave you a vote in  
  



 
May 18, 1988 

 

1434 
 

the last election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, one could 
take advice from the members opposite, from virtually all 
members opposite, and clearly we do. But when it comes to the 
member from Regina Centre, who probably seldom ever gets 
out of the city of Regina into rural Saskatchewan. I very much 
doubt that he knows what’s going on in rural Saskatchewan, let 
alone what’s going on with the RCMP detachments in rural 
Saskatchewan that are providing the service to our 
communities, that are doing an excellent job for our 
communities, and who are properly funded by this government, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Preservation of Rural Post Offices 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, prior to orders of the day, I 
would beg leave of the Assembly to introduce a motion this 
afternoon concerning rural post offices; it would be very brief 
and to the point. And since the minister agreed in question 
period this afternoon that he would give unanimous consent to a 
motion concerning rural post offices in Saskatchewan, I would 
beg leave of the Assembly to introduce this motion now, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I would ask the hon. member to perhaps read 
the actual motion and then we can decide. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — The actual motion that I would move, Mr. 
Speaker, is: 
 

Be it resolved that the Legislative Assembly is of the 
opinion that post offices provide valuable services to rural 
Saskatchewan, and it is therefore concerned about the 
negative social and economic effects caused by the closing 
of post offices in many rural communities across 
Saskatchewan. 

 
And that’s seconded by the hon. member from Regina North 
East, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The member has asked for leave, is leave 
granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. I’d like to 
thank the members opposite for allowing the motion to be put 
before the Assembly here this afternoon. 
 
Many rural communities have had devastating effects over 
recent years as they see rail lines being abandoned and elevators 
being closed. And when the post offices and elevators being 
closed. And when the post offices start to go, it really means the 
death to many, many rural communities. And the people who 
live there, I’m sure it saddens them deeply to see their 
community deteriorate  

to such an extent that the post office actually leave. Although 
they stay and they fight, they want the support of groups such as 
the Legislative Assembly in the province of Saskatchewan to 
support their cause. 
 
And the cause that we’re talking about here this afternoon, Mr. 
Speaker, is to tell the federal government very clearly and very 
loudly that we do not want any more closures of rural post 
offices in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many post offices, as I have said, have closed. In 
some cases — I would take the community of Aylesbury, for 
example, where Aylesbury no longer has a post office. They 
have to drive in to the community of Chamberlain to pick up 
their mail. And although someone who writes to them from 
central Canada or some other place in the province can address 
it to a specific person at the community of Aylesbury and 
maybe even use that postal code, the letter might have the 
perception of going to the Aylesbury community but does not 
actually go there. It would go to the community of 
Chamberlain, where the residents who used to pick up 
Chamberlain, where the residents who used to pick up their 
mail at the Aylesbury post office must drive in some 
considerable distance in many cases, to pick up that mail. 
 
And this is not an isolated case in the province, Mr. Speaker. It 
is a case that is recurring all too often in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The other concern that we do have, Mr. Speaker, is Canada Post 
and their policy of a movement towards privatization, and we 
have deep concern about that. But I suppose the thrust of the 
motion here this afternoon is very specific. It’s to be sent on to 
the federal government to give the federal government a very 
clear and a very strong indication that the Legislative Assembly 
in the province of Saskatchewan does not want any more rural 
post offices being closed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again, I want to be very brief because I don’t want 
to unduly delay the proceedings here this afternoon. 
 
In closing, I would like to thank the members of the 
government and the members on this side of the House for 
giving unanimous consent and allowing the rules to be bent a 
little bit and having this motion brought in whereby we’re 
making our attempt to save post office in rural Saskatchewan. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Does the hon. member have a seconder? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, I mentioned when I had first 
read the motion that the motion had been seconded by the 
member from Regina North East, sir. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I simply want 
to get up and briefly add my words to those of the member from 
The Battlefords who has moved this motion. 
 
And I want to say, first of all, my word of appreciation to all the 
members of this House, including the members opposite, for 
allowing leave so that this motion could be  
  



 
May 18, 1988 

 

1435 
 

brought to this legislature at this time so that we can say in no 
uncertain terms to Canada Post and to the federal government, 
that we in Saskatchewan believe very firmly that the policies of 
Canada Post with regard to the closure of rural post offices in 
wrong. It is contrary to all of those things that we all know have 
developed the very social structure as well as the community 
and economic structure of Saskatchewan. 
 
I say this not unkindly, Mr. Speaker, but I simply say it because 
I think it’s true. People who make decisions in the — I think 
Canada Post headquarters is in Montreal — fail to understand 
that the social structure and economic structure here in 
Saskatchewan is far different and unique, far different than it is 
in the central part of Canada or the eastern part of Canada or the 
west coast. 
 
There is something here that has made us unique and special. 
We’ve been able to accomplish things in this province that 
would not have been able to be accomplished unless we had 
used the techniques and the strategies that we employed. The 
policy in the closure of rural post offices is completely contrary 
to those efforts and that tradition. 
 
And I could list you, because I know much of rural 
Saskatchewan, many communities that have been severely 
negatively impacted upon when certain important institutions 
have been removed, whether it’s the closure of an elevator, or 
whether it’s the closure of a school. Or whether it’s the shutting 
down of a post office in those communities. There immediately 
becomes a trend of movement of traffic and commerce to 
another community, leading to the downgrading and, in some 
cases, eventual destruction of that particular rural community. 
 
I appreciate the fact that we’re going to be able to say here 
today, clearly, and I’m sure unanimously, to the Government of 
Canada, that they are not following the correct path, that they 
ought to change their policy or that they ought to tell Canada 
Post that Canada Post should change its policy and provide the 
kind of support that will continue to develop rural communities 
in Saskatchewan as we have known them, and so that we can 
build on that strength and make this province even a better 
place to live in than we have known it to be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join in 
supporting this motion in regards to the need for the existence 
of post offices in rural Saskatchewan. I believe that the motion 
itself which says that the Legislative Assembly has as opinion 
that post offices provide variable services to rural 
Saskatchewan, and therefore concerned about the impact it will 
have on rural Saskatchewan. 
 
But I want to make a couple comments about not only the post 
office but the importance how it relates to the rest of the 
services of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
There’s much more to rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, than 
our postal services alone. They are part of the network that’s 
needed out there to maintain a service and 

 a quality of life that we’ve been used to as people of rural 
Saskatchewan. How to maintain these services, and how to 
maintain the small business, the structure that we’re used to, to 
get our services from, how to maintain our ways of life out 
there, and how to maintain young people in rural Saskatchewan 
— all are part of this network that relates not only to post 
offices, as the member said a moment ago, but also to our 
schools, our elevator, our delivery points. The points that we 
service from, they all relate to. 
 
And we have been facing over many, many years, Mr. Speaker, 
not only the closure of post offices, I can go back many years 
when we . . . where I lived out in the country, where there was a 
post office every four or five miles. I’m sure each one of us here 
that’s lived in rural Saskatchewan can related to that. They 
moved from that into a smaller area, and now they’ve moved 
again into some of the large areas. 
 
I think the concerns that most rural folks have is that we must 
maintain a service there and it must be available to us. And I 
think it’s recognized in some of the areas where the post offices 
went over the years, that it just didn’t meet the days . . . we 
went from the horse and buggy days to the small car, and then 
to better roads and different types of delivery service, of our 
postal delivery services. 
 
But I believe it is important now, if we are to maintain a system 
out there in rural Saskatchewan the way that we’ve been used 
to, rural way of life, that post offices are a very, very important 
part of it. 
 
There’s much more to the overall maintaining of that system, 
Mr. Speaker, besides post offices. We’ve been dealing, as you 
know, in this province with drought in the South, and up in the 
north-east corner of the province, I believe, there’s one R.M. 
has 23 bridges washed out. They all become part of a system 
out there that we as government, and we as part of the 
Legislative Assembly, must deal with. 
 
So I guess, in closing, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say to the 
members of the Assembly: yes, post offices are very, very 
important; yes, we would support this motion and forward to 
the federal government. 
 
But more important, to maintain the way of rural life that we’ve 
known for many, many years, we’d have to do much more than 
that. We’ll have to work together in a more cohesive way. We 
must do such things that we’re doing — the rural development 
corporations which gets communities working together to 
maintain that postal service and to give opportunities to young 
people to stay there. So we’ll need those post office for years to 
come. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting this motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to spend a few moments 
this afternoon in this debate to express my support for the 
motion that has been moved and to applaud the rather 
remarkable process that seems to be taking place in the House 
this afternoon, where there’s a large degree of unanimity on a 
very important point for  
  



 
May 18, 1988 

 

1436 
 

Saskatchewan, a very important point for rural Saskatchewan in 
particular, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some months ago, I’m not exactly sure of the date, 
but some months ago a plan was circulating in some place 
across this country that was described as the Canada Post 
master plan or corporate plan for the future shape of the postal 
system in our country. 
 
It was difficult, Mr. Speaker, for the ordinary citizen to get their 
hands on a copy of that plan, so it’s very difficult to say what 
was actually in the Canada Post master plan for postal service in 
this country in any great detail. But I’m given to understand that 
if that Canada Post mast plan, as it was originally drafted, if that 
master plan were to be implemented in its entirety, then much 
of rural postal service in Saskatchewan as we have known it in 
the last number of years, would quite literally be decimated, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(1445) 
 
And to give you just a tangible example of what that might 
mean, one specific example from the area that I know best, the 
general Assiniboia-Gravelbourg part of our province. I’m told 
that the original Canada Post master plan for that area would 
leave in that area., if the plan were to be implemented, only 
three full-fledged and functioning post offices between 
Weyburn on one side and Shaunavon on the other. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure you understand what a broad stretch 
of rural Saskatchewan that is from Weyburn to Shaunavon, and 
can you imagine the type of non-service the people of that area 
would receive if they were reduced to three fully functioning 
post offices in that incredibly large territory. Obviously, Mr. 
Speaker, that would be unacceptable. Obviously, this legislature 
must take a strong and unanimous stand against what the 
Canada Post plan seems to be. 
 
I fully support the motion that is before the House this 
afternoon. Mr. Speaker, I think, though, more than just 
supporting this motion as I’m sure we all will do in strong and 
unanimous terms, I think we ought to take some steps to spread 
and expand the pressure that we’re talking about on the 
Government of Canada this afternoon to alter the course that 
Canada Post seems to be on and to retain the kind of service 
that we want in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And in order to spread that effort, Mr. Speaker, for members in 
the Assembly this afternoon, I would just make two additional 
suggestions. First of all, I understand from the minister 
responsible for rural Saskatchewan that he will be sending a 
copy of this resolution to the federal government, and that’s all 
well and good. 
 
But I think in addition to that, we ought to immediately telex 
the substance o f this resolution to the four western premiers 
who are meeting at this moment in British Columbia, telex to 
them the substance of this resolution, and invite the four 
western premiers at their meeting to endorse what we are now 
doing in this Assembly and which I understand the Alberta 
Assembly has already done. 
 

Let’s have the four western premiers go on record at their 
conference that they support the gist of this resolution. And in 
addition to that, Mr. Speaker, might I suggest to the minister 
that he invite all of his counterparts, or the other appropriate 
ministers in the other 10 provinces, to join with him and join in 
the spirit of this resolution. 
 
And let’s make it unanimous, from every Legislative Assembly 
in Canada, that we reject the course that Canada Post is taking, 
and that we want rural mail service retained as we have come to 
know it in rural Saskatchewan. And let’s have Saskatchewan 
lead that crusade to get all the provinces on side, and then 
maybe, just maybe, we may have some chance in turning 
around the ill-advised course that Canada Post seems to be on. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased that the 
government has saw fit to agree to this motion. I’m a little bit 
surprised, or not surprised, I suppose, that the government 
didn’t take the initiative themselves. But, you know, we’re 
standing up for the people of rural Saskatchewan, and I’m glad 
to see that they’ve jumped on our bandwagon to show support 
for rural provinces. 
 
I hope this continues in the future because, I’ll tell you, the 
problems out there in this post office business is just one of 
them. we are seeing a greater cost to rural people because of the 
closures to post offices. This cost is coming out from the 
mandate the federal government has put forward to make the 
post office more efficient and more profitable. Unfortunately, 
we’re seeing that the rural people are having to pay for that. 
 
And what it does, Mr. Speaker, it leads to a deterioration of the 
quality of rural life, and that is a major part of what’s happening 
in rural Saskatchewan today — a deterioration of the quality of 
life. And this is, as I say, adding to it. 
 
We see the federal government now showing support, not 
showing support to the rural areas, and I don’t understand why. 
They have seen a ground swell of opposition to their policy of 
closing rural post offices. They have not reacted to that. 
 
People in Saskatchewan at least, and across Canada, are saying 
no to these closures for a number of reasons. first of all, the post 
office employees a large number of women in rural areas. I 
mean, women can find jobs in post offices and do very, very 
well and it’s another opportunity for them. but sometimes in 
rural areas they don’t have that opportunity. 
 
We see a number of other jobs, from the janitorial services 
which would be eliminated, from the mail delivery vans that 
deliver mail to every post office across the country — these 
jobs would be lost in the rural areas. And we just can’t afford, 
in rural Saskatchewan, to see those jobs being lost and that 
money not coming in to the rural areas. 
 
So the ground swell of opposition, Mr. Minister, must show the 
federal government that there has to be a change. They have to 
turn around their policy. We have  
  



 
May 18, 1988 

 

1437 
 

something here that’s very, very critical. And I can relate to 
that, because nine miles down the road from my home town, the 
town of Zelma lost their post office. And they lost their post 
office after a large fight. 
 
The process that they went through when that post office was 
lost was despicable. The people went around the area talking to 
people, and they would say that everybody else was in favour 
except you, which was not true. The process was wrong. 
 
But what came out of that, Mr. Speaker, and the tragedy that 
came out of that was the loss of identify of those people. Those 
people now say that they’re no longer from Zelma, 
Saskatchewan, they’re from another town, because that’s what 
their post office address says. And that to them is a very, very 
major part of their identity in the rural aspect of Saskatchewan 
and their rural life. 
 
And what happens if this post office closure trend continues? 
Will their post office address then again change? We see the 
general deterioration of quality of life, the loss of identity, and 
all because the federal government is putting forward a proposal 
to make the post office profitable basically on the backs of rural 
people. 
 
So I’m very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to support this motion, and 
I’m glad to see the government has come on side and help 
support the quality of rural life through the post offices. And I 
hope that they send a strong message to Ottawa that this must 
stop. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to make a 
few comments in respect to the motion that has been put 
forward by my colleague from North Battleford, and I think it’s 
a motion that we should be consistently putting forward to 
Ottawa. Not only is the rural postal system under attack, Mr. 
Speaker, but we have seen rural Saskatchewan being 
continuously — and the way of life in rural Saskatchewan — 
being attacked by the actions of the federal government. 
 
First of all, if you take a look at the rail line abandonment that is 
in process which is helping to destroy many of the rural 
communities, and we have not had a strong, strong position put 
forward by the government. We have seen the freight rates have 
increased in respect to the farmers, and there’s been no 
opposition put forward by the government opposite. We have 
seen, when the moratorium on farm credit foreclosures had been 
lifted on the . . . allowing the foreclosure, and we say no action. 
 
And what I’m saying here is that rural Saskatchewan is a unique 
way of life. I think it’s a place where people can raise their 
families, where they can grow up knowing their neighbour, 
where there’s the intercommunication in rural Saskatchewan, 
and I think it’s a way of life that should not be determined by 
the market-place. And the Tories federally, and to some extent 
in Saskatchewan, are governed by the market-place rather than 
a way of life in supporting that which we value. 
 

Any rural community is dependent upon certain services for its 
existence, and certainly you require your local elevator for the 
farmers can deliver their grain, and we have fought for the 
retention of that. We also need the postal system where people 
can come to deliver their mail and receive their mail. It gives 
them, as you say, a focus point of the community — necessary 
services. 
 
But more than that, it decentralizes and brings some form of 
employment into many of our rural communities. And I think 
only of the community that I am from, from the community of 
Muenster, a very small community. But there we had a postal 
. . . a postmaster, and worked throughout the years, raised a 
large family, a lovely family of 11 children, and what a 
contribution he was able to make to that community. 
 
And so what we are saying here is that we were against the 
right-wing governments that say that a way of life has to be 
measured in dollars and cents. We’re saying that the 
market-place is not going to decide the face of Saskatchewan. 
And accordingly, what we’re going to do on this side of the 
House is to start standing up for the rural way of life and for 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I think it would be fitting here in the unanimity of the House 
here today, Mr. Speaker, and I would recommend and I would 
ask the consent of the members here — I would think it’d be 
fitting, Mr. Speaker, that if this resolution were in fact sent by 
Mr. Speaker representing the unanimous support of all members 
here. And I would suggest that it should be sent by Mr. Speaker, 
that it should be sent to the Canada Post, it should be sent to the 
federal government, and as one member indicated, to the 
western premiers. I think that would be the proper way of doing 
it. I think we shouldn’t make this partisan because all of us 
together want to join in helping to guarantee a post office 
throughout rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And so at the conclusion, I would be asking the legislature, the 
consent of the legislature, that it be sent under your name, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
too would like to join in support of this motion. And I find it a 
very good motion; I find it an interesting motion. 
 
But I think, Mr. Speaker, what is most interesting about the 
resolution is the real motives behind the NDP in bringing this to 
the legislature today. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP 
bringing this resolution before the legislature today is 
absolutely nothing short, nothing short of a desperate attempt, a 
very desperate attempt to gain some semblance of support in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And firstly, Mr. Speaker, let us understand where the NDP 
members come from. Where do they come from, Mr. Speaker? 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there are but two single rural members on 
the NDP opposition benches, but only two of them. It is very 
interesting, Mr. Speaker, that this resolution was introduced, 
introduced by the member from the city of North Battleford, 
seconded by the  
  



 
May 18, 1988 

 

1438 
 

member from the city of Regina — very interesting, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let us face the facts. Let us fact the facts, Mr. 
Speaker. this is nothing but a desperate move by the NDP to 
gain some support in rural Saskatchewan. And I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that we all know, and all of rural Saskatchewan knows 
when we speak of the post office and the NDP, that the NDP 
support in rural Saskatchewan is nothing to write home about, 
nothing to write home about at all. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP has not supported our 
programs and policies for rural Saskatchewan. The question to 
be asked, Mr. Speaker, is, has the NDP supported such things as 
the deficiency payments, the deficiency payments from the 
federal government, supported by this provincial government? 
Has the NDP supported such services in rural Saskatchewan as 
individual line service? The answer is no. 
 
Has the NDP supported such things in rural Saskatchewan as 
the farm purchase program? The answer is no. Has the NDP 
supported such things as 8 per cent money, the farm purchase 
program advances, advances on livestock to rural 
Saskatchewan, and on and on and on? Mr. Speaker, the fact is 
that the only thing that these people on the NDP benches have 
supported when it comes to post offices is the eastern union 
bosses who strong arm our local post office workers here in 
Saskatchewan. That’s as close as the support has come to post 
offices. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — So, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that 
although this resolution is a very good one, I question the 
sincerity of the NDP. 
 
I want to say that the record of this government with respect to 
this subject is a good one. I am very proud to have a Premier 
who has made strong and firm representations to Ottawa on this 
matter. I am very pleased to have a colleague such as the 
Minister of Rural Development who has fought on behalf of 
rural Saskatchewan on many issues, and on this one in specific. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I strongly, firmly support this resolution. My 
closing comments are, once again, I find it very interesting the 
real, true motives of the NDP for bringing this up in the 
legislature today. 
 
(1500) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1506) 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 54 
 
Muller Kopelchuk 
Duncan 
McLeod 

Britton 
Romanow 

 
 
  

Andrew 
Berntson 

Prebble 
Rolfes 

Lane 
Taylor 

Lingenelter 
Shillington 

Smith 
Muirhead 

Tchorzewski 
Koskie 

Maxwell 
Schmidt 

Brockelbank 
Mitchell 

Hodgins 
Gerich 

Upshall 
Simard 

Hepworth 
Hardy 

Kowalsky 
Solomon 

Klein 
Meiklejohn 

Atkinson 
Anguish 

Pickering 
Martin 

Goulet 
Hagel 

Toth 
McLaren 

Pringle 
Lyons 

Hopfner 
Petersen 

Calvert 
Lautermilch 

Swenson 
Martens 

Trew 
Smart 

Baker 
Gleim 

Koenker 
Goodale 

  
  

Nays — 00 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I ask you to seek 
unanimous consent of the House, apropos of the suggestion that 
was made, that the resolution just passed be sent under the title 
of your high office to the Canada Post, the Government of 
Canada, and other bodies that were suggested. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I understand that in order for this to happened 
we must have a separate motion. If you would so move. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve quickly drafted a 
motion, moved by myself, seconded by the member from Quill 
Lakes: 
 

That the Speaker’s Office send the resolution just passed, 
to Canada Post, the Government of Canada and the 
western premiers. 

 
I do so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Education 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, the 
other day when we started with the estimates on  
  



 
May 18, 1988 

 

1439 
 

Education, I had made a few brief remarks concerning the 
welfare of education since you became the minister. And I 
would like to, for the edification of the people of Saskatchewan, 
reiterate a few of those things and indicate to them exactly why 
we are in the state that we are in today. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I have indicated the other day, in order to 
appreciate how far we had come in Saskatchewan and how well 
we had done, one had to understand the process that we have 
accepted in this province. And my accusations, I guess, were 
that the reason we have had so much trouble in the last few 
years is that you simply didn’t understand or appreciate that 
process, and that you simply — as some of the people out there 
have said, the practitioners have said, that the minister feels that 
he knows best what is good for Saskatchewan. and therefore he 
unilaterally makes decisions, and his deputy and his department 
make decisions without any consultation, without any 
appreciation of what has gone on in the past and how this 
process has worked. 
 
And we saw that, Mr. Minister, in the total transformation of 
the post-secondary education system in the technical schools, 
without any consultation whatsoever, either with the trustees of 
this province or with the teacher of this province or with the 
people concerned in the technical schools. This was simply 
something that you had conceived, or that the cabinet had 
conceived, and unilaterally you went about changing the 
structure and firing, without any consultation or without any 
notice, hundreds of people who had served this province well. 
 
Mr. Minister, I believe if we are going to put the education back 
on the right track again, you have to assume and become 
knowledgeable about the process of what has gone on in the 
past and appreciate that process. 
 
There was a co-operative approach between the trustees, 
parents, and the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation), and 
the Department of Education. There was always a process of 
co-operation, collaboration, and through that process we 
developed what some people have recognized as probably the 
best educational system in North America and possibly even in 
the world. It was very, very successful, and it was very 
progressive in that as the times changed and as the needs 
changed, the policies changed, the program changed, and the 
process changed. But it always remained a co-operative process. 
 
When you took over as minister, as I said, you abolished that 
process and you started making decisions unilaterally. 
 
(1515) 
 
I’m saying to you today, Mr. Minister, that you and certainly 
your top official, your deputy, will have to start appreciating the 
work that practitioners are doing out there, and that they have 
something to contribute, that the people of LEADS (League of 
Educational Administrators, Directors and Superintendents) and 
our directors and our teachers and our principals have 
something to contribute and they want to be consulted. 
 
Consultation, Mr. Minister, is not to go and tell . . . go to a  

meeting, call them together and say: here is what I’m going to 
do; this is what I think needs to be done in order for us to meet 
the objectives or the needs and demands of the 21st century. 
That is not consultation. That’s not consultation at all, and 
people out there resent it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think it’s the first time in the history of this 
province that a minister, when he spoke to Easter council, was 
booed by the teachers of this province. I think that was the first 
time . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That wasn’t the first time. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Yes, that’s true, the first time. You were not 
very much appreciated, and I think you should have learned 
from that. I hope you have learned from that, that you simply 
can’t bypass those people. you simply can’t ignore them. they 
won’t accept that. They have a vital role to play — always have. 
 
You do it at your own peril, as I think one of the former 
ministers of Education, the Hon. Cliff McIsaac, found out in 
1969, 1970 and 1971. I was around at that time as a practitioner 
in the field. And when again they were dictating to us . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — So was I. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Yes, the member from Meadow Lake was 
certainly around too, and unilateral decisions made then by the 
Premier of the province and dictated by him to the Minister of 
Education did not go across well. 
 
I don’t know who instruct you, Mr. Minister. If it was on your 
own, if you did it on your own, I’d say you better have a quick 
conversion if you wish to remain in that portfolio and be 
successful. You simply can’t ignore the trustees, you can’t 
ignore the teachers, and you can’t ignore the parents of this 
province. If you want to make some changes, than do it in 
consultation and in a co-operative manner with everyone 
involved. 
 
Mr. Minister, not only did you not consult in making those 
major changes, not only did you not consult when you 
devastated the Department of Education and fired or let go — 
whatever — you terminated — or whatever the term you use — 
about 20 or 25 people in the department who had dedicated 
their lives to education, who had a lot of knowledge in helping 
you to implement the new core curriculum, and for some reason 
you felt that you had to get rid of those people. There was a lot 
of resentment out there, a lot of resentment. And again I’m 
saying, if you want to get the confidence of the people in 
education, you’ll have to do some sweet-talking out there. 
 
And I think you’re going to have to get out there and show the 
people that look, maybe I don’t know best; yes, maybe I do 
know some things, and I have some ideas where education is 
going to go, but I am willing to go out there and consult with 
you, and consult with the parents, and consult with the students, 
and consult with the trustees; and I’ll do that, and together we’ll 
work towards the 21st century to meet those demands. You 
can’t do it on your own, and your deputy can’t do it on his own. 
Simply not possible. 
 
  



 
May 18, 1988 

 

1440 
 

Mr. Minister, those weren’t the only things that you did. And 
consequently, because of that, if you went out in the teaching 
profession today, the morale is extremely low, that teachers are 
frustrated. They don’t believe that you appreciate the work that 
they are doing. They believe that maybe it would have been 
better if they could get out of the teaching profession — many, 
many good teaches — and look somewhere else for work. And 
some are doing that. 
 
I was talking to a couple of teachers the other day — and thank 
goodness they can now receive their pension at 50 — who are 
very, very . . . and that, by the way, I want to compliment your 
government on. It was an excellent bargaining concession that 
you made . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Are you going to take it? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — No, I don’t have to take it because the people 
are going to re-elect me in Saskatoon South for another term 
after this to present their views in the legislature on that side of 
the House. I may even be sitting in your chair and be consulting 
with teachers and trustees and parents to devise a new 
educational program for the 21st century. 
 
And I will tell the teacher, I will teach the teachers today, and 
the parents and the trustees, that when that happens there will 
be real consultation, and there won’t be interference in the 
bargaining, in the collective bargaining procedure. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the worst things that your government did, 
the Minister of Finance — and I don’t know whether you 
instructed him or whether he did it on his own — was to 
interfere in the collective bargaining procedure, virtually doing 
away with collective bargaining. When he said that for two 
years there will be no increases, that was a slap in the fact of the 
teachers of this province. 
 
That wouldn’t have been so bad, Mr. Minister, to have restraint. 
And I have your brief with me, and I want to talk about that 
some time later in these estimates. Where you say that all 
department shad to undergo restraint, that’s simply not true. 
That’s simply not true because many departments didn’t 
undergo restraint; many of your own people didn’t undergo 
restraint. I mean, you have people in your department that 
received fairly liberal and generous increases in their salaries. I 
don’t know whether your deputy got an increase or whether 
your associate deputy got an increase, but I do know your 
political staff did. 
 
Mr. Minister, I did a fairly rough calculation. When I was the 
minister of Health and sat on treasury board, as I said the other 
day, I basically had four people in my office: two executive 
assistants, two secretaries. Sometimes because of the 
Department of Health, which is one of the largest departments, 
we had a lot of mail coming in and we would temporarily hire a 
secretary to come in and d some extra work. A quick 
calculation, Mr. Minister, meant that we spent, in my office to 
run my office, excluding my own salary, approximately 
$10,000 a month; maybe a little bit more some months, 
probably a little bit less; approximately $10,000 a month. 
 

Mr. Minister, do you know what you’re paying for your 
political staff per month in your office? You’re paying $19,065. 
One of your ministerial assistants is getting about half, a little 
over half, of what I paid four people in my office to do their job 
— four people got twice as much as one of your individuals is 
getting today. 
 
So some people, Mr. Minister, weren’t under restraint. Some 
people are doing very well, as was shown in question period 
here a few weeks ago. Some of your executive assistants 
received up to 22 per cent increases. Oh, you say, well we gave 
them a different job. They stayed in the same office; they 
basically did the same job. You simply redefined the job in 
order to justify a substantial increase in salary. 
 
I don’t object to that, Mr. Minister, but you can’t have two 
standards. You can’t say to the teachers of this province that a 
starting teacher, for example, in this province who gets less than 
a starting fireman, gets less than a starting policeman, gets less 
than some of the janitors paid in the school — and maybe the 
janitors are being underpaid — but that, Mr. Minister, will not 
attract the most intelligent and the talented people to the 
profession. 
 
If we are not going to compete with some of the other 
occupations and some of the other professions where they don’t 
need any formal training whatsoever, and you’re asking 
teachers to take at least four years of training, of professional 
training, maybe to the extent of putting themselves into debt of 
25 or $30,000 because of the changes that you’ve made to the 
bursary program, and yet you’re saying to them that no, you 
don’t deserve an increase in your salary; no, we’re not going to 
be competitive with some of the other occupations that a person 
go into right after high school without any formal training. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m sure that you must be aware that Ontario has 
predicted, and B.C. has predicted, that they will be short of 
teachers in the next five to 10 years, Ontario, I believe, 
predicting of being short about 800 teachers. B.C. are predicting 
that they’ll be short about 700 teachers. If we’re not going to be 
competitive here in Saskatchewan with some of those 
provinces, we’re going to lose, we’re going to lose some of our 
best teachers, our best practitioners in this province. 
 
That is not, Mr. Minister, going to meet the objectives that you 
put before this House when you said that we have to have the 
best education system that money can buy. We must have the 
best in order to meet the needs and demands of the 21st century. 
That’s not the way to do it. 
 
And if you don’t recognize that, if you don’t recognize that you 
have to meet those demands, and if you don’t appreciate that 
the work that the teachers are doing in this province, then, Mr. 
Minister, you are out of touch with the reality out there — 
you’re out of touch. And it’s a very, very short-term approach, 
and we’re going to pay the price of that 5, 6, or 7 or 8 or 9 years 
from now. 
 
We’ve got to do something to entice our young people into 
education. The role of teachers has changed very dramatically 
from what it was 20 or 25 years ago. It is  
  



 
May 18, 1988 

 

1441 
 

much tougher today to be a teacher in the classroom. The 
demands are much greater. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, many of the teachers were extremely 
insulted, and I want to say again, insulted by an action taken by 
yourself around December or January of ’87 or ’88. And I want 
to ask you, Mr. Minister . . .(inaudible interjection). . . ’87, 
December of ’87, January of ’88, and that, Mr. Minister, was a 
decision that you made to do a little survey in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Although I’ve tried to get a copy of the survey, I’m not able to 
get one, but some of the teachers, some of the teachers who 
were smart enough after a while to maybe not be entirely honest 
with the caller . . . The phone call went something like this. The 
person would phone the individual and say that we want your 
opinion on a survey that we are doing. First of all they were 
asked if they were a teacher. If the teacher said yes, of if the 
person said yes, that was the end of the conversation. 
 
If the person said . . . of if they said, are you a teacher, and the 
person said no, then the next question was: are you related to a 
teacher, or is your husband or your wife a teacher? If the answer 
again was positive, that was the end of the telephone 
conversation. 
 
However, if the individual said no, I’m not a teacher, then the 
conversation went on: are you related to a teacher? Again, if 
you were not, then the next question was: do you realize that 
teachers make, on the average, $35,000 a year, and do you 
realize that teachers only work four of five hours a day? This, 
Mr. Minister, was done during a period of time when there were 
very delicate negotiations going on between the government 
trustee team and the teachers of this province. 
 
(1530) 
 
I can only assume, Mr. Minister, that the reason for this survey 
was to undermine the collective bargaining position of the 
teachers and to try and put in the minds of the public, that look 
out, what do these teachers want? They’re only working four or 
five hours a day — which was a falsehood — a falsehood to 
begin with, and then saying that the teachers earn 30 . . . do you 
realize they are making $35,000 a day . . . 30, pardon me, a 
year, I’m sorry — $35,000 a year; trying to leave the 
implication that hey, they’re being overpaid and here they’re 
asking for some increase in salaries. 
 
Mr. Minister, that is not the way to get the confidence of the 
teachers. And is it any wonder that you were booed at the Easter 
council . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ask him what happened in Eastview 
with the teachers. They were working against them. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Exactly. The member was saying, what 
happened in Eastview? I remember full well when I was 
knocking on doors. The very first door that I knocked on, I 
didn’t know the individual; I introduced myself and told him I 
was here on behalf of our candidate, and I asked him if he had 
any questions or concerns. he said to me: I’m a teacher; does 
that answer your question? That  

happened over and over and over. And there are close to 400 
teachers in that constituency, and I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, you 
paid the price for your government. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you now: have you any plans afoot 
at all in the very near future to try and se aright the relationships 
that you have destroyed in this province? Have you . . . and I 
say destroyed because you destroyed them. I want to ask you: 
what are your plans in the very near future to try and set up that 
co-operative process again, and involving the STF, the SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association), LEADS and 
parents, and everyone else, instead of making unilateral 
decisions because you think you know best. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The 
member has raised a number of points. I think . . . I mean, the 
one that maybe bears some discussion is the whole business of 
consultation with the major partners in education, and indeed 
with the parents themselves and the grass roots teachers, even 
probably the students. 
 
The reality of what we’re facing today in education, not unlike 
in so many other areas of society, is that society is facing 
changes like it’s never faced before, and probably never so 
rapidly as the children are going to face them now and in the 
future. The issue then becomes one of — whether it’s the 
educational system or the health care system or any other 
system — how do you manage those changes in a reasonable 
and humane and compassionate and sensible manner? And I’ll 
be the first to concede that making change is never easy. 
 
I’ll also be the first to concede that the NDP have become the 
establishment party. You are now the change registers. Once 
you were the progressive element in Saskatchewan politics; 
now you are the change resisters because by every measure, by 
every measure . . . All of those in education recognize the need 
for change, and that was why they embarked on an exercise 
called Directions long before I came along, spearheaded by my 
colleague, the Minister of Energy and Mines, the member for 
Swift Current. 
 
The system, teaches, educators, trustees, parents, administrators 
all recognized that we hadn’t had, for example, a major 
curriculum overhaul for something in the order of 25 years. A 
lot had changed in that time, if you look at the science 
curriculum particularly. And so there was a need for change, 
Mr. Chairman, and I use that as just but one example. 
 
The hon. member tried to draw the analogy that there was no 
support for the changes we made in post-secondary education, 
and that somehow there was no public support for what we have 
done, and yet if you look at some of the headlines over the last 
year as it relates to the changes we did make, albeit that once 
again your party were the change resisters, one of the headlines 
in November of ’87 in the Star-Phoenix: “College 
amalgamation applauded by trustees.” “Local governance best, 
Kelsey faculty told,” was another headline. And yet another 
headline was, “More independence for technical schools 
urged.” And yet another headline was, “Governance should 
apply to technical institutes.” And that’s exactly what we did, 
Mr.  
  



 
May 18, 1988 

 

1442 
 

Chairman. 
 
And finally — and this is what is so ludicrous, Mr. Chairman 
— a year ago . . . a year and two months ago now, the NDP 
themselves put out a press release and held a press conference 
suggesting that our technical institutes should have autonomy. 
And the headline in the Prince Albert Daily Herald, the 
member who today is the opposition critic for advanced 
education, the headline went like this, “Autonomous technical 
school board suggested by New Democratic Party.” We did 
that, Mr. Speaker, as one of many things that we did in the 
post-secondary education reorganization. And now, somehow 
they’re . . . for some reason or another they’re against it now, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let’s move to my speech at Easter council of the STF, Mr. 
Speaker. let’s move to that speech. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why did you get booed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — And the hon. member from Regina 
Elphinstone now, asked the question: why did I get booed? I 
went into that council . . . and I must say that I have nothing but 
the utmost of respect for the teachers, the education, because 
they are the front line, they are the front line in the education 
system. And I went into that, and I knew that some of the 
material in the speech was contentious — I knew that. 
 
Now maybe the NDP approach would be to not speak directly 
to the subject, to try and sweep it under the carpet, to avoid the 
issues. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s not true. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — That is true. That is the NDP 
approach, Mr. Speaker, to sort of turn a blind eye to the 
changed process that we’re having to deal with; to be change 
resisters — that is the NDP approach. 
 
I knew that when I said to the council that we must examine 
questions like standardized exams, I knew that that is not 
popular with the teacher’s federation. 
 
But the thing is, are we elected, are we elected merely to be 
populous legislators? Are we elected merely to turn a blind eye 
to the tough issues that face society? Is that what being elected 
to this legislature is all about? If so, I would suggest to you we 
would be letting down our constituents, our children, our 
society, our future. 
 
It’s easy, it’s easy just to take the easy road out every time. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What is the easy road? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The easy road is to not raise the 
difficult questions that society must face; somehow pretend that 
they do not exist; somehow pretend that the world is not 
changing; somehow pretend that there isn’t a greater 
expectation of our young people in a highly competitive world; 
not a matter of whether will the students in Regina be able to 
compete successfully against those in the job market or in 
university from Saskatoon or from Meadow Lake or from 
Weyburn or from Nipawin. The question isn’t even will they be 
able to  

compete with those in Ontario or Quebec, or B.C., the question 
is: will they be able to compete in this global village of the 
future? That is the question. 
 
The NDP may want to ignore those questions; they may want to 
ignore the issues, but I tell you that virtually every western 
economy is addressing these questions. And that is all I have 
said to the teachers is we must examine the questions. I don’t go 
in there was preconceived notions, because that is a policy 
that’s foreign to our government and to our Premier and to our 
party. We want to work with them together, and we will 
continue to work with them as we look t the answers and how 
we manage this change. And the hon. member had the audacity, 
Mr. Chairman, to say that somehow I, as a minister, or my 
officials, don’t get into the schools, and we don’t consult, we 
don’t talk. 
 
I would ask the hon. member opposite, the critic, I would ask 
him this: how many schools has he been into in the last year? 
How many? Tell us. put it on the record, because I’ll put mine 
on the record again, as I did in the throne speech debate. 
 
I’ve been very proud to go into dozens of schools across this 
province. I’ve now had a chance to visit with some 8 or 10,000 
young people in that setting, some several hundred teachers and 
something in the order of one out of six or one out of every 
seven boards in this province. And I’ll continue to do that. And 
I’ll tell you, I wish everybody could see what I have seen. 
 
Now the hon. member suggested somehow what I said that 
speech was — to the spring council, to the teachers’ federation 
— was highly inflammatory, was misguided, etc., etc. What I 
said is we must examine some questions. 
 
And the question that I would put to him is this — this is the 
question that he must answer: the speech that I gave, the speech 
that I gave at spring council was virtually identical to the speech 
that he listened to in the throne speech debate in this House two 
or three months ago. And there was somehow nothing wrong 
with what was said in that speech then because he raised not 
one question. 
 
Not one member of the opposition raised one question, 
including the member from Saskatoon who speaks from her seat 
this very moment. She was in the House that night and she 
listened to that speech, and she knew that that speech was right 
on the money., that we must examine these questions. The hon. 
member from Saskatoon South sat and listened to that speech. 
Now somehow it wasn’t until there was a teach reaction to that 
speech that it became an issue. 
 
Now I ask: why was that speech quite good material here — no 
major flaws in it apparently, because he raised not one question 
— why was it that after the Leader-Post reported on it and the 
television cameras reported on it that it became as issue? I ask 
that question. I ask that question. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You gave a different speech. 
 
  



 
May 18, 1988 

 

1443 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — It was the same speech. 
 
The other issue he raises is the question of the survey, and the 
hon. member, Mr. Chairman, used the word, falsehood. I would 
suggest to you that the survey he is referring to, with the 
question he referred to specifically — talking about four and 
five hours, that that’s all a teacher talks — if he is suggesting 
for one moment that that question was asked by this 
government, any arm of it, including the Education department, 
if he is suggesting that, then that is a falsehood. That is a 
falsehood. And I dare not . . . I say that without fear of 
anything, Mr. Chairman. That would be a falsehood if he is 
suggesting that. 
 
If he’s asking me, have we done surveys? Yes, we have. Will 
we likely do surveys in the future? Yes, we probably will. Have 
we even bought surveys from other companies? Yes, we have. 
Will we continue to? Yes, we will. Has the STF and indeed the 
Canadian Teachers’ Federation done surveys? My understand 
is, yes. 
 
And perhaps he has some of our questions confused with them. 
but certainly any question that would suggest that teachers only 
work four to five hours, Mr. Speaker, and that somehow we 
would put that information out, that is an absolute falsehood. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, there was some question about the 
$35,000 a year, the salary. The numbers that I’ve seen relative 
to the average teacher’s salary that were published in the STF 
bulletin about a year and three months ago now, for that last 
year that they had numbers for, which was I think 1986 — and 
I’m working from memory, but I think they showed in there 
they had the average salary of teachers going back over 10 or 15 
years. And the ’86 average salary — and I said I’m working 
from memory, but I think I’m fairly close — that they had in 
their own bulletin was something in the order of 36,800. 
 
So, I suppose if there was a survey using that number, then it 
probably wouldn’t be all that far off the money based on this 
STF’s own numbers in the bulletin. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, you have demonstrated exactly 
my point and you’ve reinforced it — that you don’t listen. You 
just don’t listen. You know best. You close your ears to 
everything that is said, and you say, I’m the one that knows 
best; I will go in and tell the STF what has to be done. 
 
You made a public statement saying that parents were 
dissatisfied with the evaluation process. I ask you time and time 
again, give me the evidence; give me the evidence. Where is the 
evidence that parents want standardized tests? Where is the 
evidence that we should have merit rating? 
 
You may go to a few people who might have some axe to grind 
with the school system. We have people who don’t like 
everything that happens in the public school system and 
therefore draw their kids out and put them into private schools. 
Does that mean, therefore, we need to do away with public 
schools? 
 
(1545) 
 

Mr. Minister, you talk to a few people and then you make a 
generalization and have the audacity to go before the teachers 
and say that the parents out there don’t like what you’re doing. 
 
What you should have done, Mr. Minister, you should have had 
the trustees in, you should have had the teachers in, 
representatives, and should have said to them, hey, look, I’m 
getting some representation maybe we ought to examine these 
things together so that we can meet the needs and demands of 
the 21st century. 
 
You don’t go out there and make accusations without any 
substantiation whatsoever, and then say to teachers, oh, I didn’t 
mean to accuse you people just because you happen to be the 
ones that are the practitioners; don’t take it personally. 
 
Well that’s ludicrous, Mr. Minister. And I’m saying to you 
again that if that’s the kind of attitude that you’re going to have, 
then you can’t rebuild that good relationship that we’ve had in 
this province, and the co-operative approach. 
 
Mr. Minster, you said that the NDP is the change resister, and 
that it was your former colleague who put in the Directions 
report. Mr. Minister, in the Directions report, let me just read to 
you how outdated you are, how out of touch you are. In the 
report it says: 
 

The committee (that means the Directions committee) was 
to assess the quality of education in this province and to 
establish some directions for the future. In fulfilling our 
mandate, we have identified the need for change while still 
respecting the stability and previous growth of our 
education system. 

 
This was signed by Karen Rongve, chairperson. 
 
Now it want to read to you the first sentence of his report: 
 
 Dear Mrs. Smith: In May of 1981 . . . 
 
May of 1981 we were the government. We commissioned the 
report. The former minister of Education, the hon. Doug 
McArthur, was the one that recognized that we needed to 
re-examine the goals of education and the process and the 
programs. They made 16 recommendations, out of which has 
come the core curriculum. 
 
Surely, Mr. Minister, you’re not going to say that you initiated 
this report, which it was established in May of 1981 by the hon. 
Doug McArthur. We weren’t change resisters; we’ve 
recognized that there had to be some changes made in order to 
meet the demands of the 21st century. 
 
But what we objected to when we came back here was the way 
you went about it. Not even your former colleague, the member 
from Swift Current, because she appreciated the process. She 
knew what it meant to have to be co-operative and to work 
through a program and a process in togetherness with the STF 
and the trustees’  
  



 
May 18, 1988 

 

1444 
 

association and the parents of this province. 
 
But when you took over, when you took over, you changed that. 
You changed that. That is when your trouble started, because 
you said, I’m going to do this unilaterally because I know what 
is best. 
 
It is not that people out there were resistant to change, because 
this Directions report recommended 16 . . . or made 16 
recommendations on which we now are building the core 
curriculum. Not all of them, because you haven’t accepted all of 
them. And that’s fair enough. But don’t tell the people of 
Saskatchewan that you initiated this and that we were resistant 
to change. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you again, why did you commission 
the survey that was done in either December or January this 
past year? and would you tell me who did the survey and what 
did it cost, and could I have a copy of the survey that was done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Twenty-five thousand dollars was the 
cost, and Tanka was the firm that did the survey, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Minister, you didn’t listen again. Why was it 
done, and could I have a copy of the survey? And if not, why 
not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — This particular survey was done to get 
some sense of the public, some sense of the parents, some sense 
of society relative to our educational system. Obviously we’re 
into some major changes with the introduction of a new core 
curriculum. 
 
And as well, we have bought some other survey material 
relative to illiteracy, specifically. I suspect we’ll even be doing 
some more of that to help us make sure that parent particularly, 
understand the changes that education is going through. 
Because as you I think can appreciate certainly we as legislators 
on this side understand that when you’re making these kinds of 
major changes it’s never easy, and having the people 
understand what those changes are is critically important in that 
process. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, you didn’t listen again. Could I 
have the copy of the survey? If you’re doing it to reassess what 
has . . . and by the way, Mr. Minister, you are just about three 
years too late. 
 
First of all, if you find out, I mean, it’s rather strange . . . first of 
all, the former government commissioned Directions; the 
former Education minister, the member from Swift Current, 
then set up another committee to re-examine it further and came 
up with core. Core was then presented to the government. 
 
And then after all that is done, then you have a survey 
commissioned by Tanka. For what? All of this consultation had 
been done. Teachers had made their recommendations, trustees 
had made their recommendations, parents had made their 
recommendations, students had made their recommendations, in 
Directions and in the core curriculum proposal. 
 

Why did you need a survey now to find out what they thought 
about education? Or was it, Mr. Speaker, because at that time 
you were trying to embarrass the teachers of this province when 
very delicate negotiations were going on. And you wanted to 
say to the people and some of the parents, particularly in rural 
Saskatchewan, do you know what these greedy teachers want 
when they’re already making 35 or 36,000? That’s what you 
were trying to tell. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you again, and please come clean 
because you already had all the answers: why did you 
commission that survey at that time? At that particular time 
when you had the Directions report, you had the core 
curriculum, you knew what the response of the parents were, 
you didn’t have to ask again. 
 
Thousands of people were asked in core curriculum. Thousands 
of people were asked in the Directions report. You had the 
recommendation. Why, at a time when there was collective 
bargaining going on, and there was a stalemate, why did you 
think you had to do a survey which was embarrassing to the 
teachers of this province? 
 
If you are not ashamed of the questions that were asked, why 
won’t you let me have a copy of the survey now so we can 
discuss it in this Assembly and let the people of the province 
decide, let the people of the province decide whether or not you 
were justified in that particular time to have that survey. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’ve already given the hon. member 
the reasons for the survey. And if I was to amplify on that I 
would say our reasons are probably no different than those that 
. . . our reasons would be not dissimilar to the reasons that the 
school trustees had when they conducted their survey, the 
teachers’ federation had when they conducted their survey, that 
the Canadian Teachers’ Federation had when they conducted 
their survey. 
 
And I will tell you . . . I will tell you, and I will tell you clearly, 
because I don’t want you leaving this legislature and saying to 
the teachers or to the public, that this government did a survey 
to discredit teachers and to interfere with the collective 
bargaining process, or any of those things, because if you do so 
you will be not being truthful. Because I will tell you here, I 
will tell you, as a man of honour, I say to you that there was 
nothing in that . . . first of all, it had nothing to do with the 
collective bargaining process. And secondly, it wasn’t there to 
discredit teachers, or anything like that. 
 
Having said all of that, a report on the findings will be available 
to you after I have discussed it and put together the report and 
taken it to the major players first. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, that is simply being hypocritical. 
If I could use a stronger word in this Assembly I’d do so, but 
I’d get thrown out. Mr. Minister, you are just simply . . . now I 
can’t use the word. You are falsifying the situation. Take it for 
. . . You know exactly what I mean. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Is he doing it intentionally, Herman, 
that’s what . . . 
 
  



 
May 18, 1988 

 

1445 
 

Mr. Rolfes: — Well I would have to agree with your 
suggestion that he probably is. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to say to you, if you have nothing to hide 
on that, if you want to consult now . . . What’s the sense of 
consulting now when you’ve done the survey? Why do you 
want to say to the teachers now: hey, lookit, I’ve done this 
survey; now I want to consult with you people if you think this 
is all right? That doesn’t make sense. 
 
Mr. Minister, what you’re saying to me is that those teachers 
who contacted me and asked me if I knew anything about the 
survey . . . They asked me, why is somebody asking us how 
much teachers are making? Why are they then stating: do you 
realize, or do you know that teachers are making $35,000 a 
year, or 36,000, you say. I was told 35. I’m not going to quibble 
about a thousand dollars. 
 
It’s not that; it’s why was the question asked, at the time when 
there was very delicate negotiations going on, if you didn’t 
intend to embarrass the teachers of this province? And you did 
it because you felt at that time that rural Saskatchewan people 
were suffering and you wanted to set again a rift between rural 
people and the teachers so that the rural teachers would have no 
choice but to accept your demands of zero and zero increase. 
That’s why you did it. And if you were honest, you’d come 
forward and say that. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you think for one moment that I will believe 
that you hesitated or wouldn’t interfere with collective 
bargaining, then I have to say to you also that you have very 
little influence in cabinet, because surely, as Minister of 
Education, you would have said to the Minister of Finance: no, 
I will not condone or I will not accept and I will not stand by 
while you destroy the collective bargaining process of 
Saskatchewan. That’s exactly what he did when he said that 
there will be zero-zero increase. So don’t try and convince me 
that you hold the collective bargaining process sacred when you 
did nothing to stop the Minister of finance — nothing! 
 
Mr. Minister, if you have nothing to hide, why will you not 
show me that survey? 
 
And I will give you an ironclad guarantee, Mr. Minister, an 
ironclad guarantee . . . You show me that survey in confidence. 
I will not show it to anyone on this side of the House. I will not 
show it to anybody if there is not in that survey, if there is not in 
that survey anything that would be of some embarrassment to 
the teachers during the process of collective bargaining. I will 
give you that guarantee. And if I break that guarantee, Mr. 
Minister, I will resign my seat. I will resign it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — In writing. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Yes, I’ll give that in writing. 
 
Because I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, if you have nothing to hide, 
then you will give me that survey. And let’s discuss it here. And 
if you have nothing . . . 
 

An Hon. Member: — Send over the letter. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Yes . . . Oh, I’ll give you the letter. I’ll give you 
the letter if you’ll give me the survey. Agreed? If you agree, 
Mr. Minister, if you have nothing to hide, I’ll put my seat on the 
line. All right? Will you do that? 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ve asked you if you would do that. 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member, Mr. Chairman, 
tries to suggest that somehow this survey was done because of 
the collective bargaining process; that it was somehow done, 
the results of which would be used to discredit teachers during 
this bargaining process and this negotiating process. 
 
The reality is, Mr. Speaker, that there was nothing . . . it was not 
done for any of those reasons. Secondly, there was nothing 
made public during the negotiations about salaries, or for that 
matter there was nothing made public by myself or my 
government colleagues about any aspect of the negotiation — 
what was on the table, what wasn’t on the table — despite the 
fact that that hon. member in this House in question period one 
day asked questions about that, knowing full well that the usual 
procedure and the gentlemanly and the professional way of 
handling these things is for us not to comment. 
 
He said, Mr. Speaker, he said at that time, Mr. Chairman, that 
we were interfering in the collective bargaining process, that we 
weren’t sincere in negotiating a contract. The reality is, Mr. 
Speaker, as I said, and the Premier said on more than one 
occasion and to the STF executive, that we were sincere in our 
belief that the collective bargaining process could work again. 
 
The reality, Mr. Chairman, is that the teachers and the 
government trustee bargaining team did successfully negotiate a 
settlement. It was ratified and not one word was said throughout 
about any offer on the table, about salaries. There was no 
attempt to discredit any part, not one. And if he suggest other 
wise, then maybe he should resign. Maybe he should resign for 
misleading the legislature, if that’s what he’s saying, Mr. 
Chairman. Maybe he should, because there was not one whiff 
of what was going on at that table, not one whiff to the public. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the reality is that teachers ratified that contract 
and they ratified it in spades. And I’m happy that it’s been 
ratified. I’m happy that it’s behind us. We have a busy agenda 
ahead of us, as all the teachers know, and it was very useful for 
them and for us to get that behind us and a successful 
negotiation behind us. 
 
History, Mr. Chairman, has proven that we were right and he 
was was wrong. We did successfully conclude a negotiated 
settlement with the teachers of this province; collective 
bargaining worked again. He said we were interfering. We did 
not interfere; we delivered with the teachers in a successfully 
concluded contract, Mr. Chairman. 
 
I give to you again, relative to this survey, now that you  
  



 
May 18, 1988 

 

1446 
 

have been discredited on the arguments that you have made, I 
give to you the commitment that I said earlier . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . Yes, a report on the findings will be made 
available to you after I’ve made them available to and have 
discussed them with the major players in education, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, can’t weasel your way out of that 
one. I’ve made you a challenge. I will, on my word of honour 
here, I will give it to you in writing; I will give it to you in 
writing. If you have nothing to hide, make that survey available 
to me. Make it available to me. I will give you my assurance, as 
I said before, that I will not make it public to anyone here, but I 
want to have the option of discussing it in this House, if I 
believed that it was a direct interference with the collective 
bargaining and that one of your objectives was t insult the 
teachers of this province, to make sure that the rural people 
knew how much teachers were making relative to their 
economic problems that they were having. 
 
Otherwise, why would you ask the question? Why would you 
ask the question? You knew that, you know, what the average 
teach was making. Why did you want to task those teachers, or 
why did you want to ask those people — other than teachers — 
do you know that teachers are making on average $35,000 a 
year . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . or 36, I won’t quibble about 
it. 
 
Why would you ask that during delicate negotiations if it wasn’t 
because you were hoping by the survey — and, Mr. Minister, 
you said nothing publicly was said. You make a thousand phone 
calls to each individual, individually; you don’t have to make a 
public statement. No public statement has to be made. It will 
become public very shortly because people will be asking: hey, 
did you get a call like this? They had a number of questions 
they wanted to know. It was all over Saskatchewan that 
someone was doing a survey, that someone was doing a survey. 
You didn’t have to make a public statement. 
 
You accomplished exactly what you wanted. The whisper 
campaign started, and it didn’t take very long and everybody 
knew exactly — they got the message — exactly what you 
wanted them to get: here were those greedy teachers, who on 
average were making 35,000, who were only working four or 
five hours a day, and here was the poor farmer who couldn’t 
make ends meet. That’s what you are trying to do. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you didn’t have that in mind, and if that wasn’t 
part of the survey — I haven’t seen it; I can only go by what 
people have told me — if you didn’t have . . . if that wasn’t in 
the survey, then why wouldn’t you make it available to me so 
we can discuss it in this House? 
 
Mr. Minister, I will leave that because I have many other things 
that I want to discuss. One of the things, Mr. Minister, that I do 
want to talk about and spend some time on this afternoon is the 
black of funding for education by your government. I started 
last time by talking about operating grants, and that’s what I 
want to talk about. 
 
Capital funding, Mr. Minister, is absolutely necessary. You 
have no choice, you have no choice but to make  

schools available so that education can take place. And in some 
areas like Saskatoon where there has been substantial growth, 
there have been a number of schools built by your government, 
as they were by our government. And if schools are worn out 
and they need replacement, you have to make those things 
available. And as inflation continues, more and more money has 
t be spent on schools, on maintenance and on operating of the 
schools. 
 
Mr. Minister, what I want to talk to you about this afternoon is 
on the operating portion of your budget. In the 1970s the 
province picked up, in many instances, about 60 per cent, about 
60 per cent of the financing of education, and the people at the 
local level picked up about 40 per cent, varying, as you know, 
through the foundation grant program. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to read to you from the chairman of the 
finance committee of the Saskatchewan School Division No. 13 
— just a few excerpts from his statement that he made to the 
board. And it says: 
 

Mr. Chairman (and he’s making this to his own board just 
recently), I am pleased to present to the board of education 
the 1988 budget proposals prepared by the finance 
committee. 

 
And I’ll skip a lot of this — I know you have it — but on the 
bottom part he says: 
 

We regret to advise you, Mr. Chairman, and members of 
the board, that the Saskatoon School Division did not 
receive additional funding from provincial sources. In fact 
provincial grants declined by $295,127 from last year’s 
estimates, and the foundation grants are projected to be 
$631,247 below the actual grants received in 1987. 
 

Later on in his presentation he says this: 
 

In 1988 provincial grants payable to the board of 
education are projected to be $28,583,783 — 295,000 
below the 1987 budget estimates, and 513,492 below 
grants actually received in 1987. 

 
Mr. Minister, I want to continue. A little later in his 
presentation, he says: 
 

Your committee (the finance committee) is deeply 
concerned . . . 

 
And, Mr. Minister, listen to these words: 
 

Your committee is deeply concerned about the ongoing 
trend to rely more heavily on property taxes to finance 
schools. Ten years ago provincial grants accounted for 
43.4 per cent of total revenues. Today only 33.9 per cent 
of total revenues come from provincial coffers. The gap 
between local contributions and provincial grants has 
widened far to much. 

 
The last thing I want to read from here is this; he says: 
 
  



 
May 18, 1988 

 

1447 
 

In all honesty we were very disappointed with the level of 
provincial funding afforded our school division. Even our 
most modest expectations in this regard were not met. 

 
Mr. Minister, as I pointed out to you the other day, your 
operating grants have increased about 12.5 per cent over the last 
six years. That’s an average of 2.1 per cent when inflation 
actually was over, I think, over 5 per cent, or 4.9 to 5 per cent, 
maybe a little higher. 
 
So that, in effect, in effect the school boards have lost when you 
take the real dollars into consideration. When you take inflation 
in consideration, the school boards have lost and they’ve had to, 
they’ve had to go to the only source they have and that is 
property taxes. And you have shifted, you have shifted the 
burden of financing education very dramatically from the 
provincial government to the local level. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, if you take into consideration what your 
government did, you also cancelled about $80 million of the 
property improvement grants which people at the local level 
and small businesses received. Those were also cancelled. 
 
Mr. Minister, is it any wonder, is it any wonder that we have 
today a real frustration of the people out in rural Saskatchewan 
and urban Saskatchewan? You have shifted it and you’re saying 
— and I read your brief, and you say in your brief, but 
everybody has to undergo restraint. I pointed out to you before 
that that is not true. There are some people who have done 
extremely well in the last six years under your government — 
extremely well. 
 
And I don’t have to, and I’m not going to repeat, but I’ll simply 
say in all the patronage appointments that have been made and 
the huge salaries that you are paying to those people, those 
people have done very well. In your own office, you increased 
your own office expenditures to your political appointments, 
and every cabinet minister needs those, but you have increased 
your total expenditure in your office by over 100 per cent — 
pardon me, by about 90 per cent to what they were in my office 
when I was minister. Those people haven’t suffered. 
 
Your top ministerial assistant, Mr. Minister, your top ministerial 
assistant is receiving, under contract $5,290 — $5,290 for a 
ministerial assistant. That, Mr. Minister, is about two and a half 
times what I paid my top ministerial assistant when I was in 
cabinet. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You never had a smart one. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Oh the member from Meadow Lake says, you 
never had a smart one. I’ll tell the member from Meadow Lake 
maybe that was the reason why the former premier of this 
province, Allan Blakeney, was able to put in 11 balanced 
budgets and you people have put in six deficit budgets. Maybe 
because you don’t know how to administer; maybe you are so 
lavish and so generous with your own friends that, you know, 
you haven’t got sufficient money for education and for other 
departments. 
 
I ask the minister again, am I correct in saying that you  

have dramatically shifted the cost of education, particularly 
operating grants, particularly operating grants from the province 
to the local level, and the only choice that the people at the local 
level had was to increase property taxes or reduce programs and 
cut staff. 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, and hon. member, I 
want to take up your last question first, and if I could get the 
hon. member’s attention for a minute, because I think . . . and I 
say that sincerely, because I think you’re being unfair to a 
professional, I would hate for you to continue to discredit him. 
 
And you raised the case of the person in my office who’s 
making the largest salary. Well I want to tell you why, because 
I think it’s not useful for you to discredit a member of the 
teaching profession. Here is why he is making that salary. He 
was a principal at Marion Graham High, and I hired him 
straight away from that job and I’m paying him the same salary 
as he was making when he was principal there. And that’s the 
reason for the salary. 
 
And he asks, why didn’t I hire Lee Iacocca at 18 million, or 
whatever is. Because what I wanted for my office was not 
somebody who made cars; what I wanted for my office was 
somebody who has a great deal of understanding of the 
educational system, and particularly of teachers and teaching 
administration and school administration. 
 
And I might say, Mr. Chairman . . . he says it is 62 grand. Well 
if that’s what he was making as principal of Marion Graham 
High, I am quite prepared to pay him that where he is now 
working on behalf of the 200,000 children in the school system. 
 
But let’s get back to the hon. member’s question. And his 
question was this, Mr. Chairman: he wanted me to tell him 
whether he was correct or not in his assessment that the 
provincial government has off-loaded or has decreased its share 
of funding for education. Do you want me to tell him if he’s 
correct or not? Well he is not correct, and in fact, his analysis is 
rather simplistic. And I want him to listen to this carefully 
because your arguments are in two categories. 
 
You first of all say that we haven’t kept up with inflation, that 
inflation has gone like this, and government spending has been 
something less than inflation. Well you are wrong. You are 
wrong. We are staying up with inflation. In fact the numbers are 
like this, Mr. Chairman: our grants are up 58 per cent; inflation 
is up 40 per cent — a real increase of 18 per cent. Now by every 
measure, that’s an increase over and above the rate of inflation, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
I say that, and I say that proudly, Mr. Chairman, and that’s over 
a six-year period, I think it is, since we took office. And I say 
that, and I say that in the face of the fact that during that time 
provincial revenues from oil, wheat, potash, have been flat or 
substantially down. And I think that’s a pretty fair commitment 
to education in the face of what our resource economy has 
faced, Mr. Chairman. 
 
  



 
May 18, 1988 

 

1448 
 

So his first argument, Mr. Chairman, and members of this 
legislature, is the government grants have not kept pace with 
inflation. He is wrong. The government grants have more than 
kept pace with inflation. So on your first argument you are 
incorrect. 
 
The second one, he says, is that we have somehow shifted to the 
local boards a greater responsibility for the cost of education. 
He says that in 1970, or whatever year you used, the provincial 
portion of education then was 60 per cent or something, okay, 
and that somehow today it’s substantively less. I think, perhaps 
what he was using was one board example as opposed to the 
whole province, and I would suggest that he might have been 
trying to fool the people of Saskatchewan with his example, as 
opposed to give the real picture. 
 
The numbers that I will read into the record, I think have 
probably been read into the record by every minister of 
Education, including those under his government when they 
were in power, the NDP in the ‘70s, because the same argument 
was made by oppositions then. And the reality is, if you look at, 
for example, our administration — I won’t try and defend yours 
— over the last six years, the change has been minimal. The per 
cent of the total education expenditure, provincial share, was 
52.6 six years ago. Now it’s 51.3 — a minimal change, still 
over 50 per cent. So your argument that somehow we’ve 
off-loaded onto local jurisdictions is untrue. 
 
Now let’s not just confine ourselves to that argument, because 
he could say, well you’ve got your numbers and I’ve got my 
numbers. So let’s look at some other data that would either 
refute or back up his claim. 
 
If we were off-loading onto local jurisdictions a greater burden, 
the way they would respond is by having to raise the mill rates. 
If it isn’t going to be forthcoming from the provincial 
government, then what they would do is they would say, well if 
they’re not going to give it to us I guess we’ll raise the mill 
rates on our property assessment so we can get more money. 
 
Well the question is: what’s happened to the mill rate over the 
last three or four years? Have we seen it go up dramatically? 
The answer is no. last year the average mill rate increase over 
the province was a zero per cent increase — or decrease, 
depending on how you like it. There was virtually no increase 
the year before that it was .25, and the year before that it was 
level at zero. The year before that was five and a half, I admit. 
But you can compare those to some of the changes in the ‘70s 
of six and a half, and 3 and 3.9 and 6. 
 
In fact, Mr. Chairman, if one was to look at the NDP record of 
mill rate . . . or increases in mill rates under the NDP years and 
the Conservative years, you will find that they were 
substantially larger under the NDP. That is to say the NDP put 
more pressure on school boards to raise taxes locally than this 
government has ever done, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Now if he doesn’t like that index, if he doesn’t like that index, 
let’s look at another one. If we were off-loading our 
responsibilities to the local board, you can bet your bottom 
dollar that they wouldn’t have one penny in the  

bank, Mr. Chairman. They wouldn’t have an ounce of surplus 
sitting around. There wouldn’t be an ounce of fat, there 
wouldn’t be an ounce of reserve for them to draw on. They 
would have used it up, rather than raise mill rates. If the money 
wasn’t forthcoming from the provincial government, if they 
didn’t want to raise mill rates, they would go to the bank, the 
savings that they might have built up, the reserves. 
 
So what you would expect to see then, Mr. Chairman, is the 
reserves either very small or having declined rapidly, while this 
awful Conservative administration was to power. 
 
Well what do we find? What do we find? Have the reserves of 
local school boards gone down dramatically since this 
Progressive Conservative government was in power because we 
were forcing them to go to their local taxpayer and their bank to 
get the money to run education? 
 
Well has that happened, Mr. Chairman? Once again the answer 
is no. In fact we see the exact opposite. The reserves have 
climbed dramatically over the last six years. 
 
Now if a system was going somehow bankrupt out there, like 
they would suggest, the reserve would not have gone up. In fact 
in 1980 the reserves were 30.9 million. This is the accumulation 
of . . . Some had deficits, some had surpluses, Mr. Chairman. 
But he balance it out; there was $30.9 million sitting around in 
surpluses somewhere in the school boards of this province. The 
next year it was 34.7, up to 41, 45, 53, 57. And for 1987 we had 
$56 million sitting in reserves, in surplus accounts, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So once again, by whatever measure you use, have we kept up 
with inflation? Has the provincial local ratio changed? The 
answer is no. Have the mill rates gone up dramatically? The 
answer is no. Have the surpluses ceased to exist or become 
non-existent or decreased? The answer is no. 
 
So then the only thing he can use is some examples across the 
province where, for example, in Saskatoon — whatever the 
example he used — the provincial share went from 60 per cent 
to 40 per cent, or whatever the example was he used. 
 
So then what he has to be saying to the people of Saskatchewan, 
the trustees of Saskatchewan, is that he doesn’t like the formula. 
And just for your information, Mr. Chairman, and some others 
in this legislature, or perhaps some who are watching this 
afternoon, there is an equalization formula in education. That is 
to say, the provincial government decides we shall — and I’ll 
use for example, $400 million — we shall make available $400 
million to the school boards of Saskatchewan to run the schools. 
Based on the fact that it’s about 50-50 for both sources, the 
property tax base also raises about $400 million. 
 
Now one way that a guy could . . . or an administration could 
divide that money up, Mr. Chairman, is say, we’ll just give a 
cheque. There’s 200,000 students in the system, roughly. So if 
you had $800 million, 200,000  
  



 
May 18, 1988 

 

1449 
 

students, you could say to all the boards, well we’ll just send a 
cheque to every board based on the number of students — 
$4,000 per student. If you’ve got 100 students, well you 
multiply 100 by 4,000. And that would be a simple way. 
 
But the trustees and the government, in their wisdom some 
years ago — in fact I think it might have even been an NDP 
government — decided that that might not necessarily be fair, 
because some property tax bases had the ability to raise a lot 
more than some other school boards. 
 
For example, if you lived in a part of the country where you had 
a lot of richly-assessed land, or very rich productive land, or 
maybe that land had oil wells on it, or a city that has factories 
and upgraders and lots of businesses and high-rises, well the 
ability of the local school board to raise taxes or to raise money, 
if you like, might be a lot easier there than it would be, for 
example, in an area of the country I come from where there’s a 
lot of range land, and mostly what we have is a lot of dry 
sloughs and gopher holes. 
 
So they put in place an equalization formula. And what that 
means is that if you’re a richer assessment, you get a little less 
from the government because your own base will raise more. If 
you’re not so well off, you’ll get more from the government. So 
now the hon. member has to come clean with the public. 
because all of his other arguments are incorrect, then the only 
one he is left with is: does he not like that equalization formula 
that is based on the ability to pay, that says we will help those 
who have less resources? 
 
Because you see, Mr. Chairman, the example he has not used, 
not have any of his colleagues every brought into this 
legislature — you see, they can find an example where a city 
that maybe has upgraders being built in its backyard, that has a 
great ability to raise money locally; or in Saskatoon, that has a 
large assessment; but what examples has he not brought into 
this legislature, Mr. Speaker? 
 
He says over 10 years the provincial share has declined. Well I 
say, rightly so, if their local tax base has increased that greatly. 
You’re saying that we shouldn’t help those who have less 
chance to raise it locally. You’re saying, give it to those rich 
urbans that perhaps do have every opportunity to raise money a 
lot easier than some of the rurals. Is that what you’re saying? 
Come clean with the people. tell them that you’re not happy 
with the equalization formula, if that’s what you’re saying. Or 
other wise acknowledge what has happened with the 
equalization formula. 
 
Let’s compare some other jurisdictions that you don’t care to 
bring in, because this equalization formula is working. In Prince 
Albert, for example — the hon. member from Prince Albert is 
sitting next to the critic — over the last six years this awful 
formula saw their provincial share go from 52 to 55. Do they 
want the formula changed? Or what about Leader in some of 
that ranch country? It went from 31 to 39. Or what about 
Battleford? Or what about Battleford, it went from 50 from to 
56. Do you think they want the formula changed? Yes,  

Saskatoon might like to. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What about Lanigan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — And he says what about Lanigan? 
Well I don’t know about Lanigan, but I suspect that because 
they have potash mines and some of the kind of development 
that goes with it, that they are probably a pretty rich little board. 
Okay. 
 
Or what about Northern Lights? Or what about Northern Lights, 
they’ve gone from 66 to 80 per cent. So what I’m trying to say, 
Mr. Chairman, is ether you believe in a formula that tries to 
provide some fairness and equity, tries to reflect the ability of a 
local board to raise its own money. It’s based on need, Mr. 
Chairman. And so on that basis, it’s a formula that has served 
us and served us well over the years. 
 
And so it seems to me then that if you’re going to take the 
approach the hon. member has taken, that of being simplistic, at 
best that’s all I can say about it, it’s incorrect. It’s incorrect. If 
you do analyse it in some detail — because no matter which of 
his arguments he wants to use: inflation, the ratio is changing; 
the mill rates are going up locally — there’s no surplus. Or that 
the formula is somehow bad, his arguments are flawed and 
flawed seriously on every one of those, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Now we could debate that for some good long time, and he’ll 
say I’m not talking about operating, or I’m not talking about 
this. I’m telling you, I’m talking the same way that every 
Minister of Education has analysed this data for I don’t know 
how many years. 
 
Now he will say, he will say: well that’s not quite true. And I 
will say, well yes you’re right because the one thing that was 
missing when the NDP were in, Mr. Chairman, is there was no 
education development fund to help excellence and to help 
school boards buy computers and help build new libraries and 
put books in those libraries. There was no fund in those days 
when they were in, Mr. Chairman. 
 
(1630) 
 
So I suppose one could argue that you were not really 
comparing apples to apples and oranges to oranges, because 
they didn’t provide that kind of fund for school boards to draw 
on, Mr. Chairman. 
 
So I rest our case. If he wants to get into a simplistic analysis, 
let him so do, but he should clearly state for all the boards of 
Saskatchewan, clearly state whether you like the formula or you 
do not. Because if you do not like the formula, then you must 
go and tell just a handful of the boards I read off here that they 
have had unfair advantage because their share of provincial 
funding has gone up as opposed to down. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, I want to come back to the 
point that was raised very much originally before you went on 
and brought in all the other extraneous arguments, and that is 
the argument that there is a tax shift taking place, a shift in 
funding from the provincial to the local tax base. And 
specifying it more specifically, we’re  
  



 
May 18, 1988 

 

1450 
 

talking about the revenue provided by the provincial 
government in terms of operating grants and in capital 
construction grants. 
 
I want to bring to your attention, specifically in the last three 
years — because what you just said, if I believed what you just 
said, I’d have to go back to my school boards in my particular 
area — I’m talking about the P.A. public and the P.A. separate 
and the P.A. rural boards — and I’d have to tell them that, look, 
your calculations are all wrong, because the minister told me 
that there is no switch. 
 
Now the information that I have been provided, by the members 
of the board, is that in the Prince Albert public board in 1986 
they were at 54.9 per cent, that is 54.9 per cent of the revenue, 
of their revenue, was received from the department; this year 
it’s 52.8. Now they did go up last year, but you brought in the 
figure from 1985. I would expect you compared ’85 and ’87, 
but we’re talking about the current year and which way we’re 
going. 
 
Now if you take the public . . . the rural board, and you talked 
about areas which perhaps need a little money. And a rural 
board in Prince Albert certainly isn’t regarded as one of the rich 
boards, and it’s gone from 67.8 in ’86 to 65.1 to 63.9. So there’s 
a definite funding shift there. And the Catholic board is seeing a 
very similar shift — 47.9, 45.8, 43.9; again down from 47 to 43. 
 
Now the concern of the boards is that this kind of a tax shift 
will eventually result in a decrease of services to the students, 
because what is happening is that there is a tremendous 
pressure, a tremendous pressure from the public not to see 
property taxes increase. They just . . . they can barely . . . they 
feel that the property taxes have been pushed to the limit, and 
there’s a tremendous attempt on the part of city councils and 
town councils and R.M.s not . . . to keep tax increases below the 
inflation rate, particularly in these years. 
 
So not only are school boards faced with this particular problem 
of being squeezed from both ends, but we also have parents of 
school-age children who have a particular reason to be 
concerned about this trend. Because they know if the provincial 
funding continues to shrink, that the boards will not be able to 
provide the necessary programs that the students have been 
starting to receive in a better and a better fashion every year. 
 
Because what’s happened in our schools is, as our teachers have 
become more and more proficient, they’ve been able to deal 
more and more with students’ individual needs. And if school 
boards are forced to cut back on staff and increase ratios, then 
these needs, which teachers know how to meet, will not be met 
simply because there is a decrease in educational funding. 
 
Now there was one other figure that I thought I should look at 
to see just whether or not your government is shifting its 
priority or is not shifting its priority from education to some 
other areas. And what I did is, I did a little calculation to see 
just what per cent of the total budget of this province is now 
given to education operating grants and to capital construction 
grants for public schools. 
 

And if you take that figure and do a little calculation, my 
calculation, and I would like you to check this out, showed that 
there was a slight decrease from 10.64 per cent to 10.17 per cent 
of the total budget. Now, slight decrease, but it shows that your 
priority is not increasing, but it is . . . for K to 12 schools, it is 
actually decreasing. 
 
And my question, Mr. Minister, my question to you is: do you 
agree that if this tax shift continues, that this will not result . . . 
that this will result in decreased offerings to our students? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — First of all, I do not accept the notion 
that there’s been a tax shift, and the hon. member didn’t bring 
forth one shred of evidence to suggest there has been. 
 
I have the numbers here for a P.A. board — I don’t know which 
ones they’re for, it’s a xeroxed copy and I can’t see, except I 
know it’s a Prince Albert board — and let’s use that as an 
example, okay? And these are, I suspect, from audited 
statements, these numbers. 
 
The total revenue in the year 1981, okay 10,854,384 — 10.8 
million, roughly; 1987, same number — 18.650279 millions. 
Now, by my arithmetic, that’s an 80 per cent increase over 
those six years, and inflation during that time was 40 per cent. 
So how does the hon. member square that with the allegation 
that somehow we haven’t kept up with (a) inflation or indeed, 
there’s been — I would suggest to you that that’s been far 
outstripped, the inflation, and maybe so it should. 
 
It shows that there’s been a tremendous commitment by that 
board and this provincial government on education. What is 
even more incredulous, Mr. Chairman, is the member from P.A. 
asking about shifts between the local tax base and the provincial 
contribution. 
 
Now the last time I checked, it was the NDP Party, the member 
from Prince Albert and his colleagues from Prince Albert, that 
at every turn criticized an expanding tax base. They criticized, 
at every turn, the development of an industry that I don’t know 
how many hundreds of thousands of dollars they’re going to 
pay in education tax. 
 
I’ll bet you there’s 30-some of my colleagues in this room, 
given that they had trees in their constituencies, that would give 
their eye-teeth to have a paper mill built that would expand their 
tax base for schools and for municipalities, that would tax . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You guys lost on that one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the hon. members from Prince 
Albert says we’ve lost on that. You go and ask the school board 
in Prince Albert, do they or do they not like having that 
revenue? You go and ask them. I challenge you to stand before 
them and ask them if they don’t like that revenue — you ask 
them, as I am sure that they are very happy to have that revenue 
from a diversify. But I can understand the hon. member’s a bit 
sensitive because they have consistently been against 
Weyerhaeuser, they’ve consistently been against economic 
development and diversification, and that is the way that we 
shall,  
  



 
May 18, 1988 

 

1451 
 

indeed, see education and other municipal services developed. 
It’s by diversifying our economy, expanding the tax base. 
 
Now the hon. member says, he says that nobody out there likes 
to pay more property taxes. Well I think he’s right. That’s one 
of the firs sensible things he’s said in this legislature. Nobody 
likes to pay more taxes, particularly. They don’t mind paying 
more taxes if they think it’s for a good purpose. But he’s right; 
nobody likes to pay more property taxes. I think everybody 
comes from that essential starting position. 
 
And yet at the same time, when we raise taxes on behalf of all 
the people of this province so that we can spend more on health 
and education, the members are against that too, Mr. Chairman. 
Now you can’t have it both ways. You can’t say that we don’t 
want property taxes to go up, that more money should come 
from the provincial coffers. Then when we go to the provincial 
coffers and raise taxes and spend four out of every five dollars 
in this last budget, four out of every five new dollars on 
education, they’re against that too. 
 
They say we don’t . . . don’t raise the sales tax, don’t raise the 
flat tax, don’t raise the tax on cigarettes, don’t put a tax on the 
CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What about the oil companies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — And the hon. member from 
Shaunavon, or now from Elphinstone, says what about the oil 
companies. Well, what about the oil companies? In this last 
budget big resource companies contributed 30 million new 
dollars to this tax base of this province, and I’ll tell you, it was a 
very shrewd budget that was put together by that Finance 
minister. 
 
And I’ll tell you about the oil companies in my riding, now that 
you don’t represent one that has oil companies. I’ll tell you, the 
school boards in my province just see that as windfall revenue. 
I’ve seen the numbers, Mr. Chairman, and I forget them, but I 
think in the R.M. of Weyburn, I think one oil well brings in the 
same revenue as five quarters of land. Now you ask me if the 
R.M. councillors of the R.M. of Weyburn and the school board 
at Weyburn if they don’t like that. Because what that means is 
they can reduce the taxes on the property because those big, 
rotten oil companies, as the member from Elphinstone would 
have us believe, are paying a pretty handsome share. In fact, it 
equals one farm; five quarters in about the average size of a 
farm in Saskatchewan. So in Weyburn, unlike Regina 
Elphinstone, they kind of like those big, bad, rotten oil 
companies. Let me tell you, they like them. 
 
So I say to the hon. members, if you’re going to be consistent in 
your logic, if you’re going to be consistent in your logic and 
somehow say that we ought not have the local jurisdictions 
raise their taxes to get increased funding for education and you 
want the provincial government to pick up a larger share, than I 
say to you, you better get behind us and support us when indeed 
we do raise taxes and take more out of the resource corporations 
and, indeed, the CBC, because four out of those five dollars 
went to health and education. Four out  

of five new dollars that were raised this year went to health and 
education. So I say, wither you support that or you don’t. come 
clean with the people of Saskatchewan; get rid of this 
convoluted, simplistic logic that you seem to engage in. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, you might remember that the 
question that I asked originally had to deal with the tax shift, 
and I dealt with it and I gave you figures relating to Prince 
Albert and the tax shift, percentage wise — the percentage of 
money that the province now provides compared to the local tax 
base compared to what the province used to provide two years 
ago — and I asked you the question whether or not, whether or 
not you feel that if this kind of a tax shift continues, whether 
that will not be harmful to the students who are entering our 
schools in this particular decade. 
 
Now that’s the question that I would leave with you, and I’ll ask 
you to direct it. But you brought up several other issues, and I 
think it’s only incumbent on me to answer, because when you 
start talking about the Weyerhaeuser mill, you know, I would 
sooner have, I would quite sooner have right now the $80 
million in revenue that that particular mill is making, than 
having nothing on revenue, having a $248 million thing sole 
with nothing down and no payments to date except that from 
the goodwill of the people of Weyerhaeuser, who have 
contributed $30 million, having foregone a . . . given us 
concession on gasoline on the natural gas tax, which they no 
longer have to pay, $475,000 annually which the city no longer 
gets. And your government went and even relieved them of 
paying an electrical surtax of a half a million dollars every year, 
which the city no longer gets. 
 
So the problem here is, Mr. Minister, is that the deal that you 
made simply doesn’t stack up, and it didn’t stack up, and the 
people of Prince Albert knew it. You made up a little story 
about it losing $90,000 a day. And nobody buys that story 
because the people who work at the mill know darn well that 
the mill never lost that kind of money. 
 
But let’s go back. Let’s go back to the original question which 
was, once again: what’s going to happen to our students if this 
tax shift continues? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Okay, I want to make . . . in response 
to his question, I want to make three points, Mr. Chairman. The 
first is he’s using a specific example of a school board that he 
says it’s . . . the provincial share has gone down. Now in doing 
that, he has to either acknowledge that the equalization formula 
is a good one or it is not a good one. Okay? He’s got to 
acknowledge that because globally the percentage of provincial 
funding has stayed roughly the same — 51.52 per cent over the 
last six years. 
 
You see, because that formula is, Mr. Chairman, based on if 
you’re a rich community in terms of an assessment base, you 
get less help from the provincial treasury. If you’re a less rich 
community, you get more help. So it balances out so everybody 
has equity. 
 
  



 
May 18, 1988 

 

1452 
 

An Hon. Member: — And Weyerhaeuser made P.A. rich. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well that’s true. The Deputy Premier 
says Weyerhaeuser made P.A. rich. So the question then 
becomes one of, well, if their grant went down, did their 
assessment go up? Because that would be the offsetting factor. 
 
And I just happen to have the numbers for the last two years for 
both Prince Albert public and Prince Albert separate. Now if 
they got less money from the government because of the 
formula, it was either because their assessments went way up or 
that their enrolments went way down. Now if we assume that 
the enrolment’s essentially stable, does that mean then that their 
assessments went up? 
 
Well what do we find when we look at the numbers? P.A. 
public — their assessment base, just be being that much 
broader, went up by $3.6 million. That’s how much more 
money it brought in, Mr. Chairman — 3.6 million. What about 
Prince Albert separate? An even larger increase, a 5.87 — 
nearly 6 per cent increase of 4.17 million. 
 
Now by everybody’s measure, a 5.87 increase even outstrips 
inflation of the worst kind for last year, of the worst kind, 
because in that year there was no teachers’ salary increases, and 
80 per cent of the cost of the average school board are teachers’ 
salaries. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 75. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Okay, 75, I stand corrected. But the 
reality is, those school boards, without having one other thing 
happen, because of pulp mills and paper mills saw their 
revenues go up, between the two of them, to the tune of nearly 
$8 million. 
 
I’ll tell you, I bet there’s a lot of people, a lot of constituencies 
in this province, Mr. Chairman, who wish they had a paper mill 
in their constituency to help contribute to that kind of a school 
base. And I’ll bet the member from North Battleford with that 
hog plant there, I’ll bet those people are kind of happy that 
they’ve got one, eh? 
 
I’ll bet they are kind of happy about that and I’ll bet . . . You 
know, I asked my official the other day to get me the numbers 
for Regina, for that upgrader. How much was that going to 
contribute by way of school tax? I’ll bet it’s a handsome sum. 
They couldn’t find it for me — perhaps I’ll have it for next year 
— but I’ll bet it’s a handsome sum. And I’ll bet you, that one 
that they’re going to build in Lloydminster, that Husky 
upgrader, I’ll bet you that’ll pay a handsome sum in school 
taxes. 
 
And yet the hon. members are against diversification of our 
economy; they’re against development of our economy. All 
they can think of is: give me something more from the public 
purse. Well I’ll tell you, because of this kind of development in 
those local cities, Mr. Chairman, they are getting substantial 
increases as seen in revenue from their broadened assessment 
basis. 
 
And that doesn’t mean to say that we have lessened our 
commitment at all, because in fact we increased the  

amount of moneys available to the entire province. The formula 
distributes it fairly. If some get less, it’s because their 
assessments rose locally for the most part, Mr. Chairman. And 
we’ll stand by that development strategy and that diversification 
strategy over the next few years as well, because it’s good for 
Saskatchewan people. it’s good for Saskatchewan children, and 
above all, the school boards like it, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve been listening to the . . . that 
member amazes me. I’ll tell you, I thought I had an agreement 
from him that he wouldn’t get on this wild rhetoric of his and 
go on for 15 or 20 minutes. Now we’re going to address the 
problems of education . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Yes, well 
I’ll get to you too a little bit later. I’ve got some information on 
you that I want to ask the minister about — where you were on 
holidays. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just want to ask you very simply before 5 
o’clock, could you tell me, from 1982 to 1983 to the present 
day 1988-89, those six years, did operating grants go up by 12.5 
or 12.57 per cent? Would you agree with that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The number that you asked for, or the 
confirmation of it, it really proves nothing because what you’re 
asking me is to ignore things like the educational development 
fund. You’re asking us to ignore the $19.3 million that we put 
into teachers’ pensions as a result of the stock market collapse. 
You’re asking us to ignore what we put into teachers’ pensions 
in generally, which is unilateral and not the school boards. 
You’re asking us to ignore what we do in terms of dental 
benefits. You’re asking us to ignore an awful lot of what is 
important to me, and I think to a lot of people in Saskatchewan, 
relative to the commitment of this government and this 
province’s people to education. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, if I asked you very simply, you 
were 38 years old last year; one year hence, how old would you 
be? You don’t have to tell me how old your member from 
Wascana is or somebody else. The answer simply would be, 
I’m 39 years old. 
 
Mr. Minister, very, very simply, in 1982 the operating grants 
were approximately $299 million. They’d gone up 
approximately 12.57 per cent operating. I don’t care what 
you’ve done with all the others. And that’s great about the EDF 
(educational development fund). I told you that the other day. It 
was appreciated by the teachers. Didn’t like it when you cut it 
back; after the election you changed your mind. It was great 
before the election and a lot of teachers liked it. 
 
And I had to go out when I was on the doorsteps and say yes, 
but don’t you worry, when this election is over, that’ll be 
cancelled. Now I was wrong, it wasn’t cancelled, it was reduced 
— cut in half. But it was good political strategy, and I’ve got to 
give you credit for that. It was dishonest but it was good 
political strategy . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Dishonest, I can 
use in this House, but I can’t use the other. 
 
Mr. Minister, what I really . . . Look, can you at least tell me — 
look let’s stick with the operating grants. Would you not agree 
with me according to the estimates that  
  



 
May 18, 1988 

 

1453 
 

operating grants — forget about all the others — operating 
grants increased over the last six years by 12.5 per cent. Can 
you agree with that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I can only agree with your 
simplistic analysis. If you’re prepared to as well, then take away 
all of the things that would contribute to inflation and somehow 
say that that is an acceptable analysis situation . . . well you and 
I both know, because I respect your intellectual capacity, and 
I’ll say . . .(inaudible interjection). . . I didn’t say how large it 
was, I just said I respect it. And that you and I both know that 
that would be indeed a simplistic analysis. 
 
And I know that you don’t care about what we’re spending in 
conjunction with school boards on buying computers for those 
schools. And I know you don’t care about the books that have 
been bought for libraries, and the resource centres that have 
been built and opened up, or the energy efficiency that has been 
put in some schools. I know you don’t like talking about those 
things because they are initiatives of a Progressive Conservative 
government, and you are a little bit . . . that’s like touching a 
nerve when you discuss those kinds of things. 
 
I want to leave you with one final comment. I want to leave you 
with one final comment, you and all of your colleagues. We’re 
going to . . . whether it’s post-secondary education or the 
kindergarten to grade 12 system in this province, both of which 
are embarked on a very exciting, new adventure, if you like, as 
they head towards the 21st century, new directions, new 
curriculums, all of the people — the 200,000 children, the 
12,000 teachers, the 2 or 3,000 professors in this province, 
regional college instructors, technical institute instructors — 
they all are excited, to a person, about this new agenda. 
 
And I want to leave this with you: we are going to bring the 
NDP opposition into the 21st century, whether you like it or 
not, and we’ll bring you in kicking and screaming if we have to, 
but we’re going to go into the 21st century when it comes to our 
education; and I say, come with us. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:56 p.m. 
 
 


