


















































April 13, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 13, 1988 
 
 

531 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, It gives me great pleasure to 
introduce to you, and to members of the Assembly, 10 special 
people. They’re a group of special needs people. That, in fact, is 
the name of the class; they’re in your gallery, accompanied by 
their instructor, William Spenst, and Betty Nyhus. I know all 
members will want to join me in welcoming these people to the 
Assembly, and I hope your visit here is educational. I look 
forward to discussing these matters with you after the question 
period. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to members of the 
House, two visitors in your gallery this afternoon. One, Mrs. 
Christine Johnson, who’s a member of the Regina Day Care 
Coalition, president of the Co-operative Day Care Association 
in Regina, and a Saskatchewan representative for the Canadian 
Child Day Care Federation. Our second visitor, Mr. Speaker, is 
Nancy Talsness-Hordern, who’s very involved in the Canadian 
Association for Young Children here in Regina, and I ask both 
members to stand and be recognized by all members in the 
Assembly and welcomed by them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to rise in the House today to introduce some guests that we 
have visiting us that represent the National Doukhobor Heritage 
Village from Veregin, Saskatchewan, and I would like to 
introduce them to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly. 
 
Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is Mr. Peter W. Kabatoff, 
who is a board executive member, and also the mayor of the 
village of Veregin; Peter W. Fofonoff, who’s the chairman of 
the board; and Mike Shkuratoff, who’s the treasurer of the 
board. These three gentlemen are in today on some government 
business and meetings to do with the heritage society. It’s 
indeed an honour to have them here inasmuch as they’ve taken 
a lot of time out of their lives to keep that museum and that 
society intact and running out there, and it was also one of the 
stops the Queen made when she was here earlier in the year. 
 
I’d like to welcome them here this afternoon, wish them indeed 
a safe trip home, and hope that they enjoy themselves. And I 
hope that everybody will welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the opposition, 
I too would like to extend greetings to the representatives from 
Veregin and the Doukhobor community. They are people who 
represent one of the many important groups in our multicultural  

Saskatchewan which has made this province unique and great. 
We want to wish them well in all of their endeavours. 
 
I know that the project that they are here to speak about is a 
very significant one. I have been there, and I know my children 
were there last summer as a part of a dance group at the 
anniversary, and they have fond memories. And we want to 
extend them our greetings and wish them the very best in their 
efforts. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Minority Language Rights in Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question was to the Premier who regrettably is absent. He may 
have felt he needed a little more practice in talking out of both 
sides of his mouth before attempting it in the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. My question therefore, in his absence, is to the Deputy 
Premier. 
 
The question concerns the Premier’s tendency to make wild, 
irresponsible statements whenever he gets into a difficult 
situation. In Saskatchewan he hasn’t a nickel to spend in the 
field of French language translation, a field of vital importance 
to Canada. However, when he gets talking to a senior reporter 
from the Toronto Globe and Mail, he gushes with tens of 
millions — no, hundreds of millions of dollars. You seem to 
have one policy in Saskatchewan and one policy for the 
Toronto press, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what’s the real one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, first of all the minister . . . 
the hon. member, referred to the absence of the Premier. The 
Premier is in Saskatoon at this time meeting with Premier 
Bourassa of the province of Quebec. Mr. Speaker, that meeting 
started at 12 o’clock, for the information of the hon. member 
opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the hon. 
member’s question, let me make it very clear that the 
Government of Saskatchewan has introduced Bill 2. We have 
made it clear that under and pursuant to Bill 2 that we will be 
translating some statutes. They will be introduced into this 
House. That will obviously cost us some money. 
 
The Premier has also indicated on many occasions that the true 
way by which we can accomplish bilingualism in this country is 
not through statutes in the legislature but through the education 
system. 
 
For the hon. member from Regina Centre, I can advise him that 
right now this province is spending a goodly sum of money, in 
the millions of dollars, in that field of education. In the area of 
French immersion classes alone, the number of people taking 
French immersion in our school system has increased almost 
five-fold since 1982. That costs money, and that will continue 
to cost money. And as more and more people seek French 
immersion,  
  



 
April 13, 1988 

532 
 
 

more and more dollars will be spent. 
 
That’s the type of thing that we see and believe should be 
expended by our province. We have that included in our budget, 
and we would hope that the hon. member would accept that as a 
proper way to move towards the area of bilingualism, and also 
that the hon. member would accept Bill 2 and support us in Bill 
2 in our drive to pass Bill 2 as it exists today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. That 
tortured, three-minute explanation still begs the question: which 
is your policy — the one you gave to the Toronto Globe and 
Mail, or the one he has found convenient to use in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the policy of this 
government as it relates to the Supreme Court decision, of 
Mercure decision, has been consistent and will continue to be 
consistent, Mr. Speaker. We introduced Bill 2; we believe Bill 2 
is a proper response in the Saskatchewan way as to how we deal 
with the Mercure decision. 
 
We have also made it clear, and I would hope the members 
opposite would believe also, that as we move towards a 
bilingual country, which we support, and I would hope the 
members opposite support, that is going to take some money. It 
is also going to take some time. And we would hope that 
members opposite would support the initiative being taken by 
this government to respond to that very difficult issue and that 
decision of the Supreme Court of Canada. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. In this 
morning’s The Globe and Mail, the Premier says the province 
could spend hundreds of millions of new dollars on French 
language education, and that largesse is piled on top of tens of 
millions of dollars he’s going to spend, apparently, assisting 
bureaucrats in Saskatchewan to learn to speak French. Two 
days ago you didn’t have $15 million, if anyone believed that 
figure, to translate the laws. Now you have hundreds of millions 
of dollars. 
 
I wonder if there’s any possibility that in light of the fact that 
we have a multicultural province, multicultural organizations 
which serve large and vital communities and who have had 
their budget cut by a quarter of a million dollars — it struck me, 
Mr. Minister, that it might be worthwhile for us to have 
Geoffrey York call the Premier a second time and ask him 
about multicultural grants, and maybe you’d treat them with the 
same generosity as you’re now apparently treating the 
French-language issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — If I had any advice for the Premier, or 
for any other of my colleagues, it would be to not spend a lot of 
time talking with Geoffrey York, because he has a habit of 
getting things wrong and twisting them in the wrong direction. 
 
Let me carry on from the earlier part of that question advanced 
by the hon. member. What the Premier has indicated is 
Saskatchewan would be interested in a language institute, and 
the basis of that would be the  

following, Mr. Speaker. Twenty years ago when Mr. Trudeau 
put on the push for more and more bilingualism in this country, 
what he did was put an institute in the province of Quebec, 
wherein people in Quebec could participate in French 
immersion so that they could qualify to go . . . or English 
immersion, pardon me, so they could qualify for positions in the 
civil service, or positions in the RCMP, or positions in the 
Canadian military. 
 
What we find ourselves with today is many people in rural 
Saskatchewan, who do not have access to French immersion 
programs, find themselves effectively prevented from 
participating or going into the RCMP, or going into the 
military, or qualifying for a job in the Canadian public service. 
 
We believe that the federal government has a responsibility to 
provide that type of service in the province of Saskatchewan, or 
a part of western Canada. That is what we are asking for. That 
is not going to cost us money; that is going to cost the people of 
Canada money, and that’s the proper person, that’s the proper 
group that should be paying for it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. We are getting questions which are 
somewhat long again. However, on the other hand, we are 
getting . . . answers rather. I’m sorry. On the other hand we are 
getting questions which will provoke long answers, so I ask 
questioners and those answering to once again be conscious of 
the type of question you ask and the type of answer you give, 
regarding length especially. 
 

Surcharge on Vehicle Registrations 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — My question is to the minister responsible for 
SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), and it has to do 
with your plan to introduce a $25 dollar surcharge on all 
Saskatchewan vehicles. This plan was first revealed in a leaked 
cabinet document in January, and at that time you said that the 
document . . . or the idea was being discussed. Can the Minister 
assure Saskatchewan vehicle owners today that that $25 
surcharge has been eliminated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, the member well knows that 
I indicated that we would be looking at various aspects of SGI 
if there is certain concerns about regulations pertaining to 
windshield, bumper height, things of this nature. Certainly there 
may have to be some increase in rates, but those are under 
consideration, and when decisions have been made I’d be more 
than pleased to share them with the member opposite. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary. You’re hedging, Mr. 
Minister, and you’re hedging, I believe, because we have two 
by-elections going on in this province. If that’s not the case, if 
that’s not the case that that surcharge will be introduced after 
those by-elections, let us know today. Let the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers know today that there will not be a $25 surcharge. 
And if you are going to introduce a $25 surcharge, let us know 
before those by-elections take place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, again we see the  
  



 
April 13, 1988 

533 
 
 

member opposite trying to mislead and confuse and pull figures 
out of the air. I just want to make this assurance to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that we are looking at various aspects of the 
administration of SGI. When those things are figured out, I will 
be forthcoming with the answer, but I can assure you that the 
rates and the increases of SGI and the auto fund will be 
nowhere near the increases under the NDP government in 
Manitoba that brought abut their defeat. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — New question. The minister obviously will 
not answer and the people of this province should realize that, 
that this minister won’t answer. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, when are you people going to get your 
hands out of the pockets of Saskatchewan drivers? Last October 
there were increases in license and registration fees, and on 
January 1 your government said that insurance premiums 
jumped an average of 10 per cent. I have here a registration and 
insurance premium for a 1977 Plymouth Volare which in one 
year increased from $250 to $300 — a 20 per cent increase. Can 
you explain that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I can explain, Mr. Speaker, that there are 
several types of car models in Saskatchewan, and they all 
change in different amounts of registration. I can assure the 
member opposite that when the details of the increases, if there 
are to be increases, are worked out, they will be brought to this 
House, and the member opposite can react to them then. 
Anything other than that right now is just pure speculation on 
her part — again, an attempt by that member and that side 
opposite to pull figures out of the air to try and mislead and 
confuse the public of this province. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Further supplementary. Mr. Minister, what 
you’ve just told this House is that you’ll be announcing further 
increases after the by-election. That’s what you just told us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — I have another registration and insurance 
premium here for a 1979 Honda Prelude which increased from 
$325 to $373, up 15 per cent. And then I have a registration for 
a utility trailer which increased from $27 to $48, or a 78 per 
cent increase. How do you explain that to the people of this 
province? Explain that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, I’ve long since 
learned not to believe the figures that the member opposite 
often quotes and tries to mislead with. I have indicated that 
when the changes regard many aspects. . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. The hon. member is attempting to 
answer, but we’re having difficulty hearing him. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — When those changes regarding many 
aspects of the administration of SGI are finalized, they will be 
forthcoming and subject to concern and discussion and debate 
and whatever may come forward in this Chamber, which 
correctly it should be. But until that time, any attempt to pull 
forward figures and confuse  

the people, I think is misleading, not in the best interest of this 
legislature by the member opposite. 
 

Accessibility of Day Care 
 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question was going to be to the Minister of Social 
Services, but he’s taken a sudden unexplained leave from the 
Assembly, I suspect in light of representatives from the day care 
community being here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well the minister is back, Mr. Speaker, so I 
will address my question to the minister who I’m happy has 
returned. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Social Services, and it 
concerns his government’s very inadequate day care budget. 
 
Mr. Minister, there’s a serious lack of accessible and affordable 
day care to working families in this province, and that’s a major 
obstacle to low-income families and single parent families 
seeking to work. 
 
Can the minister confirm that the new provincial budget fails to 
increase the monthly day-care subsidy paid to low- and 
middle-income families? That subsidy, for the sixth straight 
year, Mr. Minister, has been frozen at a maximum of $235 a 
month when the cost to families of getting day care is averaging 
$340 per month per child. 
 
Now my question to you is this, sir: can you tell the low- and 
middle-income working families of this province when the 
six-year freeze on day-care subsidies is going to be lifted by 
your government, and will you explain why you did not 
increase that subsidy this year as a means of providing support 
to the working families of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first of all I 
apologize for stepping out briefly. I just received a report that 
the president of the Melville NDP had resigned due to his 
party’s policies on certain moral issues, and I stepped out to get 
the details. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I might say, Mr. Speaker, that it takes a 
brave man to follow his convictions and stand for what he 
believes in. 
 
On the question here . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — On the question here, Mr. Speaker, on 
the question before us on day care: it is clear that there is a 
major change under way in day care in Canada. 
 
The federal Progressive Conservative government is 
implementing a national day-care program. We have been 
trying to adjust our program to fit into that program.  
  



 
April 13, 1988 

534 
 
 

I’m busy preparing a day care Act, because this province has 
never had a day-care Act. 
 
And while we are preparing this day-care Act, we will examine 
all of the subsidies, 80 per cent of which go to single mothers 
right now, I might say. We’ll examine all of those subsidies, 
and Saskatchewan will have a new day-care act with a 
comprehensive program that will be fair, will give people a 
choice, and will help those people in need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, we look forward to the 
day, on this side of the House, when the member for Melville 
himself chooses to resign as a result of the destruction that he’s 
caused to the lives of so many people in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order, please. I 
think that we have a . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why didn’t you call him to order? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Is the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland challenging the ruling of the Chair? 
 
I think here is an excellent example of a member that has 
referred to another member leaving the House and then 
returning, and then when that member has the opportunity, 
commenting on why he had to leave, and then that again 
causing members to take exception to it. The reality is that if we 
apply the strict rules of the House, no doubt both members are 
not exactly following the guide-lines. And I think if we just 
follow the guide-lines, then we don’t have these problems. 
 
Now the hon. member for Saskatoon University stood up and 
was again commenting on the same issue, the member, the 
comment he made. So just stick to the guide-lines, we don’t 
have these problems. 
 
Order, order. I’d like to ask the member for Quill Lake to please 
be quiet while the question’s being asked. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll be happy to abide by your 
ruling. I have a new question to the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Mr. Minister, the throne speech states that the government 
intends to introduce new standards for day care in 
Saskatchewan. Yet your day-care budget, Mr. Minister, is so 
inadequate that there is no money in the budget to improve 
standards. In fact, Mr. Minister, the budget for staff who 
monitor the quality of day care has been reduced by $70,000 in 
the current fiscal year, and your underfunding, Mr. Minister, is 
leading to a situation where staff salaries in day cares are 
intolerably low, and there’s no new money for programs like 
hot lunches for children. 
 
Now my question to you is this, sir: which day-care standards 
does your government propose to change; and more 
importantly, why is there no money and no staff in  

your budget to implement urgently needed improvements in 
day-care standards and day-care quality? When are you going to 
start making children a priority and provide the necessary 
funding for decent staff salaries and decent support for those 
children in day-care centres around this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems that the 
member opposite has dusted off his standard NDP speech on 
day care — hasn’t changed in 20 or 30 or 50 years. And what 
we are concerned here about is children and how they are cared 
for. And the federal government and the provincial government 
are co-operating so that children can be cared for in different 
ways, either in the home through choice and through the tax 
system, or in day-care centres. 
 
This province has never had a day-care Act. We will be 
introducing such an Act and when we introduce the Act, then 
we will be debating the Act. But I’m not prepared to debate the 
Act today. I can say that we have increased the number of 
spaces considerably from when the NDP were government and 
that the improvement in the whole situation is general progress. 
And so there’s no need for their rhetoric. The Act will come 
before the House, and they will see what will be done. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, last year you promised that you were going to create 
220 new spaces, and yet we haven’t seen a single one of those 
yet, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, when you talk about changing standards, do 
you have in mind changes to the rules and regulations which 
will make it easier for large, profit-oriented day-care centres to 
open up in Saskatchewan. Is that what you have in mind? 
 
If not, will you give a clear commitment here today that your 
government will continue Saskatchewan’s day-care system as a 
non-profit and as a parent-controlled system. Because that, Mr. 
Minister, is the only way that you can assure that meeting the 
children’s needs will be the first priority of the day-care system, 
rather than one of private profit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, we will not continue the 
day-care system as the NDP had it. They had 3,900 spaces, we 
have 5,700 spaces, so we don’t ever want to go back to that 
situation. 
 
We will have more spaces as time goes on, and we will give 
parents a choice. And if parents do not choose a certain type of 
day care, then we won’t have that kind of day care. And if 
parents choose that day care, that’s the kinds of day care we 
will have. 
 

Tabling of Public Accounts for 1986-87 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, you will know that one of 
the main functions of this Assembly is to review the  
  



 
April 13, 1988 

535 
 
 

spending of the government of the day. You will admit that it’s 
difficult for this Assembly to do that when it does not have the 
Public Accounts to work with. 
 
My question is: can you tell this House when you will be 
tabling these accounts, and specifically the Public Accounts for 
the 1986-87 fiscal year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I would hope the tabling of 
the Public Accounts will improve the opposition’s ability to 
judge the expenditures of the province, because to date their 
ability has been found woefully wanting, Mr. Speaker. And 
their voting against the latest budget and its increase in 
expenditures for day care and increasing the number of spaces 
is an example of the inadequacy of the opposition. 
 
I’ll give the answer to the hon. member soon. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well I won’t thank the . . . 
Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I won’t thank the minister for the 
specificity of his response, but I wonder if he can enlighten us 
just a little bit more. What does he mean by “soon”? Does he 
mean sooner or later? Does he mean this spring? Does he mean 
this fall, or some time in between? Will he set a new record, the 
record that he set last year for late tabling of the Public 
Accounts, or will it be May 5, the day after the by-elections? 
When, Mr. Minister, when? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I urge the hon. member to calm down a bit. 
I know the difficulties that the members opposite have been 
under in this session. And their inability to deal with the issues 
of the day, like French language and issues of that nature, I 
think — I’m sure indicates the difficulties they have and the 
pressures that they’re facing internally, of which the public is 
becoming increasingly aware. 
 
I’ve indicated to the hon. member that I will be tabling the 
Public Accounts soon, and the hon. member will have ample 
opportunity, if he bothers to read them. And secondly, Mr. 
Premier, because this is a very important change for the 
opposition, if they are prepared to read them correctly, they 
should be able to enhance modestly their ability to scrutinize 
public spending. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Every 
Finance minister in the last 44 years has tabled those in decent 
time until you came along. Isn’t it true that these Public 
Accounts are complete, that you’re simply sitting on them for 
political reasons? How do you justify playing politics with the 
public’s right to know how you spent their money? How? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the 
hon. member asking the question and the supplementary today 
about government expenditures is one of the many members on 
that side of the House that just voted against a budget increasing 
day care spaces; increasing spaces for rural day care, Mr. 
Speaker; increasing expenditures for health care; increasing  

expenditures for hospital; increasing expenditures for 
education; increasing expenditures for seniors, and say, Mr. 
Speaker, that they’re now concerned about public expenditures. 
 
They voted against the budget, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s the 
biggest example of their concern. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Trade and Investment 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 19 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I’d first of all like 
to introduce our officials. Don Wright is the deputy minister 
sitting here. Paul Haddow was on the trade negotiations 
secretariat; Terry Tarowski director of administration, and 
Gerry Adamson, trade development. 
 
Perhaps the committee would permit a short statement by me 
only in the sense that today a significant report did come down 
from the Economic Council of Canada on the final evaluation 
of the free trade agreement. As you know, many have been 
waiting for the Economic Council of Canada’s report. 
Originally the Economic Council of Canada had completed a 
report, a simulation, a computer simulation as to the impact of 
the free trade agreement on Canada. That was done well in 
advance of the actual agreement being signed and, therefore, the 
details of the agreement. And there was some debate between 
academics and I suppose . . . and between politicians, as to the 
value of the Economic Council of Canada’s report, given that 
premise. 
 
Today, however, the Economic Council of Canada has released 
its final evaluation of the Canada-U.S. free trade agreement. 
And this is putting into their model the agreement as initialled 
by the two countries. 
 
The conclusion is the following: the Economic Council of 
Canada is highly supportive of the Canada-U.S. trade 
agreement. The free trade agreement will provide significant 
benefits to Canada in the form of lower prices, higher 
productivity, more efficient allocation of resources, more stable 
business climate, higher levels of earning and investment. 
 
It goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, that likely result of the 
agreement will be 250,000 additional jobs for Canadians, a 5 
per cent decrease in the consumer price index, 5 per cent 
increase in investment, 29 or 36 industries will benefit from it. 
 
They also ran a model in the event that there was not a free 
trade agreement and in fact that either country said no to the 
free trade agreement. The impact of that scenario, in the view of 
the Economic Council of Canada, would be a net loss of jobs in 
this country of 22,000, a 0.5 per cent decrease in investment, 
and a small decline in  
  



 
April 13, 1988 

536 
 
 

economic growth and real disposable income. 
 
The economic council goes on further to say that all provinces 
will experience an increased output and increased employment. 
What it does say, though, that I think is . . . certainly 
substantiates the view held by the Government of Saskatchewan 
throughout this process, is in fact that Saskatchewan stands to 
gain higher than the national average, stands to gain greater 
than the province of Ontario and the province of Quebec. 
 
If I could go on further in the report, it shows where agriculture, 
mining will be two of the largest benefactors of this particular 
agreement, and I think again that speaks very, very good for a 
province like Saskatchewan. 
 
What it projects, the final thing, and then I will sit down and 
take questions . . . (inaudible) . . . the base case and the 
simulation of the Canada-U.S. trade agreement will show 
Saskatchewan gaining 2.71; Prince Edward Island’s 2.89; Nova 
Scotia’s 2.61; New Brunswick, 2.57; Quebec, 2.46; Ontario, 
2.31; Manitoba, 2.63; Alberta, 2.74; British Columbia, 2.64. 
The long and the short, the three provinces that will stand to 
gain the most according to this model would be the province of 
Alberta, the province of Saskatchewan, and the province of 
Prince Edward Island. 
 
I think that this does reflect, certainly I think people across the 
country recognize the Economic Council of Canada, recognize 
the work of the Economic Council of Canada, and today’s 
report is a testimony to the view that we have taken all along, 
that the free trade agreement will have a positive impact upon 
Canadians, upon the creation of jobs, and upon the growth of 
our economy. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, that was an extraordinary way 
to start the estimates of this department, something quite 
beyond my experience in my year-and-some in this House, to 
see the minister get up before any questions are asked, 
immediately after introducing his officials, and launches into a 
defence of the free trade agreement, based upon a report issued 
this morning by the Economic Council of Canada. 
 
That certainly puts a new meaning on the term “defensiveness.” 
One wonders why the minister is so extremely sensitive about 
this issue that he would take the extraordinary step of not 
waiting for questions to come from this side of the House about 
the free trade agreement. I mean, what makes the minister think 
that we intended to ask any? He laughs, he says, ironically. 
 
Minister, I heard the news reports on the report of the Economic 
Council of Canada this morning. I do not know what document 
you were referring to, but the CBC reported it this morning on 
their newscasts all morning. They said two things, Minister, that 
you did not mention. One thing that the CBC report said is that 
the Economic Council of Canada was divided — was divided 
within itself — on whether or not the impacts of the free trade 
agreement were going to be beneficial to Canada. 
 
The second thing that they said, Mr. Minister, the second  

thing they said, is while there would be 250,000 jobs created in 
Canada under the free trade agreement each year for 10 years, 
that was not any more than would have been created in Canada 
if there were no free trade agreement. 
 
Now as I say, I don’t know what document you’re referring to 
there. I assume you’re referring to briefing notes. But the 
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation was quite explicit on that, 
on newscasts all through the morning, and I’ll repeat the point 
to make sure that you get it. While their computer print-outs 
showed that 250,000 jobs a year would be created in Canada if 
there was a free trade agreement, that was no more than the jobs 
that would be created in Canada in without a free trade 
agreement. 
 
Now you’ve raised the subject of this economic council report, 
and I’d like you to respond to the two points that I’ve made 
before I get into some general remarks about your department 
in general and about this trade agreement in particular. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — With regards to the opening statement, 
one would look at this particular issue of free trade between 
Canada and the United States as a significant economic political 
issue in this country. The announcement today by the Economic 
Council of Canada, I think, is a significant announcement. 
 
Now the hon. member asks why I stood and responded to that. I 
was anticipating questions in question period today, but I’ve 
been anticipating questions on this subject for the last three 
weeks since the House has been in, and I have not yet received 
a question on free trade, which I thought was a fairly 
fundamental and fairly pressing issue. Now perhaps the 
members opposite do not see it that way, but certainly their 
utterings outside the House would tend to be of the view that 
they would take a completely opposite position than does the 
government, and does most provinces across this country, and 
that’s the reason for the response. 
 
With regard to the second part of your question, the Economic 
Council of Canada said today the following: that under their 
simulation and their model, that the free trade agreement will 
have the effect of creating 250,000 additional jobs in Canada 
through the time of the agreement. Without an agreement there 
would be 22,000 fewer jobs in Canada. 
 
Now I think what you have to understand is this, and the view 
that perhaps a lot of times is not properly advanced by many of 
the people commenting with regard to the trade agreement, jobs 
are going to be created in this country with or without a trade 
agreement — we all know that — as we’re going to be a 
growing economy and a growing country. 
 
Now the projections are that still the vast number of jobs in this 
country — and that would be true of this province as well — 
are still going to go as our economy grows. So the majority of 
jobs are going to be created with or without a trade agreement. 
There has been a debate as to whether it’s going to have a 
positive impact or a negative impact. Whether you listed to the 
Premier of  
  



 
April 13, 1988 

537 
 
 

Saskatchewan or to Bob White of United Auto Workers, you 
would have two different views of that. 
 
The Economic Council of Canada said in its report today — 
clearly said in its report today, whether CBC read that or not — 
that with the trade agreement there will be an additional 
250,000 jobs created in this country. Without it, their model 
would say there would be a minus 22,000 jobs created because 
of the — I suspect, without having gone into the model myself 
— but because of the growing protectionism within United 
States. And so that’s where, I think, the long and the short of 
the statement today by the Economic Council of Canada. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Are you saying, Minister, that in the 
document that you were reading from or in the briefing from 
your officials, that the economic council did not say what the 
CBC said, in other words, that normal growth would have 
produced the same number of jobs anyway? And secondly, does 
your briefing not also disclose that the economic council within 
itself was sharply divided as to the impact of this agreement in 
terms of whether or not it had economic benefits for Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Let me try again. There are going to be, 
in the estimation of the Economic Council of Canada, 
approximately — I’ll give you their exact projection — the 
annual yearly increase of jobs in this country over the last few 
years has been between 250 and 350,000 created each year, all 
right? Now that will depend on whether we are in a growth 
period nationally, like we are now, or whether we’re in a 
recession period, like we were back in 1980, 1981, 1982-83, 
where there was a significant reduction from that. That’s what 
is going to continue, has traditionally happened, and certainly 
under the existing federal government, that’s the type of job 
numbers that have been created. 
 
What this says is that on top of that with the trade agreement 
and during the time of the phase –in of the trade agreement, that 
there will be an additional 250,000 jobs created — all right? — 
on top of what is normally to be created. That’s what the 
economic council said. Now you can disagree with the 
economic council, but that’s clearly what the economic council 
said. 
 
Now your second question is, was there a unanimous view 
within the economic council? There was not, nor has there ever 
been. And that is because, as you are aware of, that there is a 
variety of people within the Economic Council of Canada 
representing a variety of industries or a variety of people. 
 
I’m advised that the only ones that disagreed with the 
simulation was those representing organized labour. And I 
guess the question to be asked is whether they disagree with it 
on academic technical grounds, or whether they disagree with it 
because their superiors are telling them to disagree with it. But 
that’s the one that disagreed with it, which was the labour 
representatives on the economic council. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Well then, Minister, it certainly appears that 
the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation got it all wrong, 
because their newscasts this morning were quite to the opposite 
effect of what you’ve said. But you have  

the advantage over me because you have a document in front of 
you which, I take it, is a copy of the release from the council. 
And I’ll have an opportunity overnight to get a copy of that 
release, and we may come back to that tomorrow or in the days 
ahead. 
 
I want to address some general remarks to the House and to you 
and your officials about the department and about the free trade 
agreement and other issues that arise within the mandate of 
your department. 
 
It has been our observation from this side of the House for 
many years now that this government has failed to develop and 
implement a comprehensive, long-range, economic 
development strategy for this province. That is particularly true 
with respect to the subjects of trade and investment which both 
fall within the purview of your department. 
 
When this subject was raised last year, about all that you could 
say was that we will build upon our natural strengths, and I 
pointed out to you at that time, as did another of my colleagues, 
that that has been the policy of governments with respect to 
development in western Canada for about the last 20 years. 
 
It was the basis for the department of regional economic 
expansion’s programs since the early 1970s. It was the theory 
upon which the Thatcher government said that it was 
proceeding in the 1960s. It was the stated policy of the 
Blakeney government during the ’70s. It is the stated policy of 
the federal Conservative government now, as it was the Liberal 
government before them. And I would hope that this year we 
would be able to hear from you a more imaginative and 
comprehensive and a bit more specific notion than that we will 
simply do the obvious thing, which is to build upon our natural 
strengths. 
 
We’ve been doing that in Saskatchewan for a long time, and I 
submit, and we have submitted over and over again, that it’s 
incumbent upon the government of this province to do more 
than just think in terms of building upon our natural strengths. It 
is time that we had a comprehensive development strategy 
which took into account all of the factors in Saskatchewan and 
moved us beyond simply a matter of doing the obvious, and 
starting to do some things that would really get this economy 
going. 
 
There was a hey-day in this province in the 1970s during which 
all kinds of things happened, all kinds of development took 
place, where all kinds of wealth was created, and 
unemployment fell to its lowest levels ever — records that your 
government has never been able to equal in the six years that 
you’ve been trying . . . not to equal; you’re not even able to 
come close to it. 
 
Now Canada is facing problems of growth, as is the world. 
Canada’s also facing problems of adjustment, and this is 
common also to other industrialized countries. And it is true, 
and you’ll agree with this, that the modern economic world is 
an interdependent world tied together in many important 
respects, and it is becoming an increasingly competitive world. 
You and I have spoken about these matters in the past. 
 
There are a number of nations, however, Mr. Minister,  
  



 
April 13, 1988 

538 
 
 

who appear to be doing better than others. And if you haven’t 
already done so, I would recommend to you that you consider 
some of the literature about how some of the countries, how 
some of the industrialized countries of the world have been 
moving in the economic sphere, and in particular in the 
international economic sphere. I have in mind countries in 
Europe, of which West Germany is perhaps the outstanding 
example. 
 
One thing that — one strain, one feature of these countries that 
becomes immediately obvious in looking at them is the role that 
their governments play in the economy, in the development of 
the economy, in the encouragement of the economy, and in 
particular, the role that they play in export industries. 
 
It is no accident that Japan has the trade record that it has. It is 
no accident that Japan enjoys the trade surplus with the rest of 
the world which it enjoys. It is a result of deliberate government 
policy pursued since that country began to recover from the 
Second World War, and which it pursues right down to the 
present time. And I assume that you know the details of it, 
Minister. I assume that you know the way in which the 
government co-operates with the private sector and assists the 
private sector in identifying market opportunities; in 
encouraging research and development; in assisting the 
manufacturer in the start-up phase of manufacturing; in the 
protection of the local economy while providing a protected 
market while that industry is gearing up. 
 
By the way, I’m not recommending that, I’m just noting that 
Japan has been doing that over the years. And on, to assist 
industry in identifying the market opportunities and actually 
marketing the — assisting in the marketing of the product in the 
importing countries. These are things that Japan has been doing 
for years. These may or may not be appropriate in the Canadian 
context in that precise form, but that’s not what I’m arguing. 
I’m making the point, a more general point, that there is an 
example of a country that sees government as having an 
important role to play in the economy, and in particular, in the 
export economy. 
 
And I look at our country and our province, Minister, and I hear 
the rhetoric of your Premier and other ministers, and I see you 
and your counterparts in Ottawa trying to head in exactly the 
opposite direction — trying to pull government out of the 
affairs, the economic affairs of the nation; trying to create in 
this country something similar to what has been created in the 
United States, which is a market-driven economy in which the 
government is supposed to play a minor role and a decreasing 
role. And that’s what I mean when I say that you appear to be 
headed in exactly the wrong direction, in exactly the opposite 
direction. 
 
Now I’ll be interested in your comments to that, because I have 
heard ministers on that side of the House say that your party 
believes in a market-driven economy, and anyone who’s 
familiar with the literature on international trade knows all too 
well what that means. 
 
The Americans have been trying to persuade the countries of 
Europe and the countries of Asia to adopt a market-driven 
approach themselves, and they’ve not  

been able to do that. Countries like Japan have said no; that may 
work very well in California or Alabama or in New York, but it 
will not work in Japan. In Japan something else is required, and 
they have, as I indicated, done something else. 
 
They’ve been an active, a proactive government — not bound 
by any right-wing ideology that sees the government as being 
pulled entirely out of the affairs, the economic affairs of a 
country, but governments that are prepared to assist the private 
sector to do what is necessary in order for the economy of the 
country to succeed. 
 
And this is what we’ve been arguing on this side of the House. 
We’ve been criticizing your approach to economic affairs, 
including international trade, as being an ideological, right-wing 
approach. You seem to feel that somehow you can just sort of 
sit back and watch the private sector and hope and pray that 
somebody in the private sector will somehow get it all right and 
make it happen in a way that benefits our country. 
 
That’s what the political leaders and the economic leaders in the 
United States are talking about all the time, and we hear, to our 
alarm, Canadian politicians parroting those words in Canada. 
 
If you read, as I know you do, the literature from the Fraser 
Institute in British Columbia, you’ll know exactly what I mean 
when I talk about a market-driven economy and their idea of the 
role of government. And it is disconcerting, to say the least, for 
us on this side of the House and for all progressive Canadians, 
to note the Fraser Institute advocating a position at a particular 
point in time and to hear some two or three or four years later 
representatives of your party starting to spout those lines as the 
public policy of this country. 
 
Now, Minister, what I’m saying is that you’re headed in the 
wrong direction. I don’t advocate for a moment that we convert 
the Canadian economy into the Japanese economy. We couldn’t 
do that if we wanted to. Cultural differences and certain other 
differences in our country make that impossible. 
 
But at least we can learn the principle. And the principle is that 
the private sector, as important as it is — and we acknowledge 
that — can’t do it all by itself. And you abdicate your 
responsibilities by pulling government back and pulling it out of 
the equation and pulling out the services that it can offer to the 
private sector in order to assist it and encourage it and help it 
along in the tough international domestic . . . or international 
competitive market that we see out there. 
 
(1500) 
 
And your free trade agreement, Minister — and I say you, 
because you’ve been one of the strong advocates of this 
agreement across this province — this agreement and the 
philosophy underlying it prove the things that I’ve been saying 
to you. This is a document which is written on the assumption 
that government is doing exactly what I said: is pulling back 
and getting out and allowing the market to operate unhindered 
and unchecked. And this is a  
  



 
April 13, 1988 

539 
 
 

wrong-headed approach. It’s the wrong prescription at the 
wrong time. The cure is worse than the disease. 
 
As I said, we on this side of the House have argued for years 
that we require a mixed approach, a co-operative approach, 
where government doing what it can will assist the private 
sector doing what it can and the co-operative sector doing what 
it can. And everybody pitches in and makes the whole system 
work better. 
 
And we do that because we were born and raised in this 
province and we’ve seen it done and we know that it can be 
done. And we want to continue doing it that way. 
 
The business community in this province has always been small 
and has always been struggling and has always needed help. 
We’ve been criticized in the past for not helping it enough. And 
I don’t know, maybe we did, maybe we didn’t. But I do know, 
and I know you’d admit, Minister, that the 1970s showed an era 
of prosperity in this province never before equalled before or 
since. So it did work, and we know that. 
 
And this is consistent with the roots of this province, the 
traditions of this province. The co-operative movement has 
been the backbone of the development of the agricultural 
industry in this province. Much of this province was built by 
co-operatives as a result of people working together to address 
their needs. And per capita we have more co-operatives 
operating in this province than any other part of Canada. 
 
And we also have a strong tradition of public ownership as a 
vehicle for economic development within the province. It’s a 
tradition that has evolved over time to meet our distinctive 
economic circumstances. And the whole of Saskatchewan, 
Minister, cringes at the radical, right-wing rhetoric that we hear 
from members opposite with respect to this question of public 
ownership. 
 
We see privatization cutting through the whole fabric of our 
society, from government services through Crown corporations 
to agencies. And the rhetoric would make us believe that you 
intend to divest government entirely of any meaningful role in 
this economy. And this is wrong, Minister. Generations of 
Saskatchewan people will tell you that it’s wrong. And what 
you’re doing is quite out of step with the way people in this 
province see this province, see themselves, and see their future. 
 
I suggest that you have in that respect committed a cardinal 
error. You cannot succeed in your attempt to impose on this 
province, to superimpose on this province, your ideology of a 
market-oriented economy, systematically ignoring the traditions 
that I’ve talked about. What we need here is a deliberate plan 
that balances all of these factors, that carefully balances these 
factors and co-ordinates all sectors of the economy. 
 
Now I had intended in my opening remarks to get into the free 
trade agreement, Minister, but I don’t want to . . . you’ve 
already got a page full of things that I’m sure you want to 
respond to, and this agreement is going to occupy the lion’s 
share of our time during this estimates, and I’m just going to 
save those remarks for now and give you an opportunity to 
respond to the points I’ve made to this  

point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Let me try to get at your questions in a 
variety of ways. The main gist of your question, I think, was 
this: that you do not agree with the policies of the provincial 
government or the federal government as it relates to economic 
policies; that it’s causing Canada to lose ground relative to the 
rest of the world. 
 
Now I think the hon. member would agree with me that the best 
measure of growth in an economy is the gross domestic 
product. Would you agree with that? I think the member 
acknowledges that. 
 
Now if you look at the various countries of the world, and let 
me list them . . . and this is not my . . . I’ll refer you to the 
Economist, page . . . March 25, 1988 edition of the Economist, 
the back pages where you will normally find the statistics for 
world growth. Now let me read off the countries that are 
measured: Australia, Belgium, Canada, France, West Germany, 
Holland, Italy, Japan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United 
Kingdom, United States. 
 
Now if you’re to look at all of those major, economic developed 
countries of the world, guess which one has the highest gross 
domestic product. And the answer is Canada. And I think that’s 
something that we as Canadians should quite be proud of. Too 
often we sit and say to ourselves, well, the Germans or the 
Japanese are miles ahead of us. Perhaps in some areas they are, 
but in gross domestic product, in the amount of growth in our 
economy, Canada stands at 5.7, and that is ahead of all those 
other countries of the world. Now it seems to me that says 
something for Canadians. That says to me that Canadians are 
not doing all that badly, thank you very much. 
 
The member refers to West Germany as the ideal-type 
economy. Now if you look at and ask yourself how many new 
jobs, net new jobs, have been created in West Germany over the 
last five years, and the answer would be very, very skimpy, 
because they are one of the lower countries that produce the 
fewest number of additional jobs relative to all the other 
countries of the world. So while it might look nice in some 
magazines, etc., they are not in fact performing that well. 
 
If you look at the unemployment rate today in Canada versus 
the unemployment rate today in West Germany, you will find 
that the Canadian rate is lower than the rate in West Germany. 
And that was not the case for probably five, six, seven years, 
but it is now. Canadian rate is 7.8 per cent; West German rate is 
8.7 per cent. 
 
So quite frankly, if you look at those numbers — and I referred 
you to that magazine which you can get from the library — you 
will find that Canadians are doing very well with regards to 
that. 
 
Now you make some reference to: should we be doing . . . Let 
me make one other point. If you were to look at the European 
economies over the last five years — and you can go to any 
area of measurement that you want, any statistical institute that 
measures growth in economies — which economy in western 
Europe, or all of Europe for that matter, has had the most 
significant growth in the last  
  



 
April 13, 1988 

540 
 
 

five years? And the answer is Great Britain. The United 
Kingdom’s growth rate has been stronger than that of West 
Germany, stronger than that of France, Sweden, any of those 
other countries. 
 
So I think that you have to, if you’re going to look at that 
measurement, you should look at in fact the details and the 
statistics that are coming out of that. 
 
Now you also made a question — you’re doing nothing as a 
country with regard to trade matters. Well I think when you 
look at the fact that Canada trades — about 77 per cent of all its 
exports goes to the United States, 77 per cent. And that’s driven 
primarily by the province of Ontario where 90 per cent of all 
their exports goes to the U.S. market. And Ontario obviously is 
the largest exporter in Canada; they export much more than do 
any other provinces. They rely upon the U.S. market. 
 
And while we all know that the U.S. are somewhat grouchy 
these days, and you see much more protectionism and 
protectionist Bills than we normally would, free trade 
agreement obviously sets about to try to come to grips with that. 
And I think if you look at the Economic Council of Canada’s 
numbers alone, indicates a positive in that area. 
 
Now you can say, what initiatives have you taken in trade? 
Clearly the Government of Canada supported by — what is it, 
eight provinces now, soon to be nine provinces with regards to 
the trade agreement? And I would suggest that that is in fact a 
significant initiative taken by any government. I don’t think the 
hon. member would suggest, whether he agrees or does not 
agree, that it’s not a significant initiative being taken by 
governments in Canada. 
 
On the second front, with regards to the trade and other 
products around the world, we in Saskatchewan have a very 
significant interest in the current round of the GATT (General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) negotiation because that 
GATT negotiation is primarily dealing with agriculture. It’s 
referred to as the agriculture round of the GATT. And there is 
no doubt that the solution to our agriculture crisis today lies in 
the GATT. 
 
And I think Saskatchewan has a great deal to gain by that 
initiative by the federal government supported by all provincial 
governments with regards to the way we approach the GATT 
negotiation. So I think that that is another initiative being taken 
by levels of government working in co-operation with each 
other with regards to that. 
 
Now you asked the question, can we improve our numbers of 
trade around the world or into the United States? In other words 
your first question was, what initiatives are you doing in the 
field of international trade? That was your first question. 
 
What we have done is obviously put a lot of effort into the free 
trade agreement, we’re putting a lot of effort into the GATT 
negotiations, and we have identified three prime areas where we 
should be able to increase our trade. Obviously one is United 
States, number two is the Pacific Rim region, and number three 
is the European market. 

Now that can be increased in two ways, in two significant areas. 
We have traditionally sold into those markets out of 
Saskatchewan, one, agriculture products. And for the most part 
that tended to go to the Pacific Rim regions and Europe, 
although the European market is quickly dissipating on us and 
everybody else with the common agricultural policy of the EEC 
(European Economic Community). That’s number one. 
 
Number two is in the area of resources. And we have 
traditionally sold as well to the rest of the world, and we are 
seeking further markets obviously for each of those. 
 
We would see now our new area that we have to concentrate 
more and more on, is further processing of our goods here, 
finding some place or access into markets that would accept our 
further process markets. And so that’s the further initiative 
being taken in the agriculture sector. 
 
You also made reference then to the Japanese, and why the 
Japanese has shown the world that they can do things so much 
better because their surplus, their world trade surplus is so much 
better, whether it’s with Canada, whether with United States, or 
the EEC, or whoever with. That’s a double-edged sword when 
you look at your surpluses or deficits in the whole trade area. 
The Japanese I think, by anybody’s measurement, have one of 
the most protective import markets in the world. 
 
Canada for example has sold a fair degree of product to Japan. 
We take, let’s say, our canola that is produced in this province, 
and it can be exported to Japan but canola oil cannot be. We 
could not further process any of that canola here in Canada and 
send it into the United States, perhaps like we could into United 
States, but we couldn’t do that into Japan — very, very 
protective. 
 
And what happens in Japan, you send your canola to Japan, 
they must process it there. They in fact do process it there 
because of firm import restrictions. They increase the price five 
times before they sell it to their consumer. 
 
The same is true with their beef. If you try to access into that 
Japanese market with beef the best you could do would be raw 
beef. You could not put in packaged meats or you could not put 
in processed bacon or any of that other processed food into the 
Japanese market — very, very restricted. 
 
And that’s, quite frankly, one of the significant issues being 
debated today at the GATT, it’s one, on the one hand, to get rid 
of subsidies that all countries are providing now to their 
agricultural sector. But number two, and why Japan is such a 
key player at the GATT round, is for Japan to start reducing 
some of those barriers that they have. They are clearly one of 
the most protected markets in the entire world, and I think it’s 
not just Canadians, not the United . . . it’s the other 
industrialized world that is saying exactly the same thing. 
 
With regards to the development of the economy, and I don’t 
want to get into a great deal of this because that is not a big part 
of my department any more, but if you’re to look at, how do 
you build on your strengths, and you say,  
  



 
April 13, 1988 

541 
 
 

you’ve done none of that . . . Well let’s take the paper plant in 
P.A., for example, the Weyerhaeuser project. What we used to 
do there, or what the industry did there, it used to take the 
softwoods and make it into pulp and sell that pulp at a far lower 
price, perhaps in a fluctuating market, primarily into the United 
States. And we’ve been doing that for quite a while. 
 
(1515) 
 
With regards to the hardwoods, or the aspen, for the most part 
that aspen was used for fence posts. With this new technology 
and new process, what they’re doing is blending the hardwood, 
the aspen that normally would make fence posts, into the pulp, 
end product being paper. And that paper product, of course, is 
in some demand around the world. So that strikes me as a value 
added being done here that was not being done before. 
 
Let’s take the whole area of the heavy oil. As you know — 
perhaps some of the other members of your caucus don’t — but 
heavy oil has no place in Canada to be refined. So what we 
sought, in conjunction with the co-ops that you say that we are 
not prepared to deal with, have now expanded that process to 
the point where we can use our heavy oils that we produce in 
Saskatchewan, refine it here in Saskatchewan to be used by 
people of Saskatchewan and other people of Canada. Now that 
is adding value to something that we otherwise simply had to 
export out of this country through a pipeline. 
 
The list can go on if we want to get into that. I’m simply saying, 
that’s less to do with my department, with the reorganization. I 
will continue with that if you so desire. But that handles, I 
think, the bulk of the questions that you posed, with the 
following exception with regard to Japan. Let me add a couple 
things on Japan. 
 
The Japanese . . . and you say we should be looking at the 
Japanese model for Canada. I wonder if you would subscribe to 
the Japanese model that says, our children should go to school 
250 days a year, because that’s what they do in Japan — 250 
days a year as opposed to 190. I don’t think it takes a wizard to 
figure out that if a student goes to school 25 per cent more of 
his time, he probably learns more. All right. That’s number one. 
 
Number two with regard to the Japanese economy, I wonder if 
you subscribe to their theory that says they shall really not have 
strikes. And if you’re going to have a strike, first of all they 
don’t have as many trade unions as we do. But if they have 
strikes, for the most part their strikes are conducted after work 
hours. So they work from, let’s say, 8 o’clock in the morning 
till 5 o’clock at night. Then if they want a strike they can have a 
strike from, let’s say, 5 or 6 to 9 o’clock or something like that. 
You don’t see shut-downs like you would see perhaps in much 
of the other westernized world. 
 
So I mean, those are two areas that I think Japan is much 
different than we, and I doubt you would be one that would 
subscribe to that view and similar views on how to run the 
economy. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — We could of course get into a long discussion 
about the Japanese system and what we could  

or couldn’t learn. I could just throw in the fact that most 
Japanese workers are secure in their employment for life, and 
they know that barring any major, major development, they’ve 
got a job there for all of their life. So they approach the 
employment situation with a great deal of security, which is 
something that we in this country do not enjoy. 
 
But I don’t want to get side-tracked on the Japanese point. I 
merely raised it as I tried to make clear to give you an 
illustration of a county where a government faces up to its 
responsibilities with respect to the economy. 
 
They do some things that you don’t agree with. They build a 
high tariff wall around their country. You don’t agree with that; 
I don’t agree with that, in the sense that I don’t think Canada 
should do that; I never have. 
 
But my point is simply that there is a government that is not 
timid, that is not shy, and that is not ideological as your 
government is, and as the federal government is on this question 
about the role of government in the economy. 
 
On that point, Minister, you really make us wonder over here 
because while we hear the right-wing rhetoric of the Premier 
and other ministers opposite about the government involvement 
in the economy, particular as regards the government ownership 
and that sort of thing, and while we see you strongly supporting 
an agreement which minimizes, which practically eliminates the 
role of government as regards economic matters that touch trade 
between the two countries, that when it comes down to practice, 
you do something different. 
 
Your involvement in the Co-op upgrader, for example, is the 
kind of an action that a New Democratic government would 
take because we believe that in appropriate circumstances 
governments should co-operate with the co-operative sector in 
order to make a project go, and so we think the Co-op upgrader 
is a good idea. 
 
But it’s interesting to notice that the government involvement in 
that project is absolutely crucial, and I don’t know how you can 
possibly reconcile that with the approach and the attitude and 
the philosophy towards economics that is daily being spoken 
about from your side of the House and which is reflected so 
accurately in this free trade agreement. 
 
Similarly in the Weyerhaeuser situation, you know they’re 
building the paper mill, and I think that the paper mill is a good 
thing for Saskatchewan. We’ve always said that on this side of 
the House. We’ve attacked that deal because you practically 
gave away the plant to Weyerhaeuser. The pulp mill up there 
was practically given to Weyerhaeuser, along with all those 
timber rights and that sort of thing. That’s the objection we took 
to that deal. 
 
There has never been a major transaction in Canada with terms 
similar to the ones extended to Weyerhaeuser. No one has ever 
gotten such a sweetheart deal as the Weyerhaeuser corporation. 
 
Imagine a deal, Minister, with nothing down and with  
  



 
April 13, 1988 

542 
 
 

annual payments only if that pulp mill makes a profit which any 
pulp mill in the country would envy, an extremely high profit. 
Only then do they have to make a payment. And if they don’t 
make the profit, they don’t make the payment. And at the end of 
the payment period, whatever is left over as owing, because it 
wasn’t paid on an annual basis, is not paid then either but is 
converted into some weird kind of a stock. And the Government 
of Saskatchewan, it’s just difficult to see how it’s ever going to 
get paid. That’s the objection we took to that deal. 
 
But we like the idea of the paper mill, we like the idea of an 
appropriate use of the poplar resource and the production of 
paper. That involved a considerable amount of government 
effort, and we agree with that. That’s what we need in this 
province. We need the government working with the private 
sector and with the co-operative sector to make things go. And 
your government is looking in exactly the opposite direction 
with these exceptions of the upgrader and Weyerhaeuser. 
 
And this trade agreement, this trade agreement, I repeat, stares 
exactly in the opposite direction from that kind of approach that 
I’ve been outlining. This agreement buys totally into the 
American market-oriented system, where government sits in a 
chair at the side of the room as a bystander without the tools to 
protect the people of Canada, having been divested of very 
important sovereign powers, having bargained away sovereign 
powers for nothing, for no return at all — just given them away 
and exposed this country to a foreign ideology. 
 
And when we talk about a market-driven economy, we’re 
talking about a foreign ideology. Whether you like it or not, 
Minister, it’s a foreign ideology. 
 
Canada was built upon the notion of the public and the private 
sector working together to get the job done. The national 
railway systems were built with that kind of a philosophy. Air 
Canada was established with that kind of a philosophy. The 
national radio and broadcasting systems were built on the basis 
of that kind of a philosophy, and our province was built on the 
basis of that kind of a policy. Petro-Canada is another good 
example of government involvement to the great benefit of 
Canada in an important industry. And yet this agreement goes 
in exactly the opposite direction. 
 
Minister, I want to talk about this agreement for a while now. I 
want to say for the umpteenth time, for at least the third or 
fourth time by me in this House, and any number of times 
outside of this House, that my party on this side of the House 
has always favoured the reduction and eventual elimination of 
tariffs. In our view of the history of this province tariffs have 
cost the people of this province a lot of money and they should 
have been reduced and eliminated years ago. We go further than 
this agreement and say that they should be reduced on a 
multilateral basis, including Japan and the example that you’ve 
just given to us. And if that’s all that this agreement were about, 
Minister, I’d be the first one to speak in favour of it. 
 
Now I want to make that clear to you, we are in favour of trade 
and we are in favour of the reduction and elimination of tariffs. 
And this agreement does that. It takes the few small tariffs 
remaining between Canada and  

the United States and identifies them and phases them out, for 
the most part, over a period of 10 years. That’s a long time but I 
don’t think it’s an unduly long time, and we would favour that 
part of the agreement. 
 
It’s when you get beyond the tariff provisions into the other 
horrendous parts of this document that this agreement runs into 
trouble with people on this side of the House and with all kinds 
of Canadians — all kinds of people out there. 
 
The federal government was quite right, Minister, in its 
communication strategy that was leaked to the Toronto Star 
when it observed that the more people find out about this 
agreement, the less likely they are to support it. And we’re 
seeing that happen daily in this country, and we know it’s 
happening in Saskatchewan, Minister. Our polling tells us so. 
Yours must be telling you so, because why else in this province 
in the course of a little more than a month do we see the 
massive conference in Saskatoon, do we see these travelling 
road shows coming in with Simon Reisman and now Premier 
Bourassa, all trying to persuade us that this agreement is really 
a good deal. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan don’t buy it, Minister, and the 
more they find out about it the less they buy it. Every crowd 
that I’ve spoken to has by the end of my discussion of this 
agreement, come up to me and expressed surprise . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Some of them in Maple Creek too, Leader last 
night — Leader last night, for the minister from Maple Creek 
— have come up to me and expressed surprise that there would 
be something in this agreement that allowed Americans to come 
in and buy up our economy without us having any say about the 
matter at all. Real surprise. Surprise that the energy provisions 
contain the kinds of clauses that they contain. Surprise that all 
kinds of other things that are in this agreement are there, 
because they haven’t heard that. 
 
Especially they haven’t heard it from you and your Premier. 
You’ve been walking around this province telling our people 
about the benefits that this agreement might confer upon them. I 
might say that I think that many of your statements about the 
benefits are wild exaggerations at best — wild exaggerations. 
But that’s what you’ve been doing. You haven’t been walking 
around this province meeting with people, telling them what’s 
in the agreement. 
 
I seriously doubt, Minister, whether you have ever, in front of 
any group, sat down and taken them through the investment 
provisions clause by clause; or taken them through the chapter 
on services clause by clause, and explained to them what are the 
possible implications for our country with respect to the chapter 
on services. 
 
I think I can understand why you wouldn’t do it. The 
Macdonald commission recommended that although they liked 
and recommended the idea of comprehensive trade negotiations, 
specifically recommended that services not be included. They 
came to that conclusion for two reasons. The first one was that 
no country in the world has ever entered into an agreement for 
the free trade in services. 
 
But the second reason is even more alarming, Minister,  
  



 
April 13, 1988 

543 
 
 

because the second reason was that no adequate research has 
been done anywhere on the impact of an agreement for the free 
trade in services such as appears in this agreement. 
 
You must know that the Americans have been peddling the idea 
of a free trade agreement in services all around the world — all 
around the world, and nobody buys it. Israel says no. Mexico 
says no. The European community and Japan dismiss it out of 
hand, absolutely out of the question, and yet Canada goes for it 
in spite of the fact that the Macdonald Commission did not 
recommend it. 
 
(1530) 
 
What I’m saying to you, Minister, is that your party — and I 
include your colleagues in Ottawa, the Prime Minister and 
members of his cabinet and members of parliament on the 
government side of the House, as well as members of this 
government — have gone around this country and this province 
selling this agreement as though it were some marvellous new 
remedy, some marvellous Dr. Bondooloo’s new . . . a 
marvellous new product for curing all kinds of things: pimples, 
boils, warts and trade problems. You’ve been selling it. 
 
You’ve been doing a sales job on the people, and that’s not 
what they need and that’s not what they want. They don’t want 
to be handed a bunch of hookum on what benefits they might 
achieve from this; they want to know what’s in it. And the 
Conservative Party in this province have not been telling people 
what’s in it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It will give people choices. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — The minister who is talking to me from across 
the aisle doesn’t know what’s in this agreement because she has 
never read it. She has never read it. I’ll go further, Minister, and 
say, with the possible exception of you, nobody on that side of 
the House has read this agreement — nobody, and yet they’ve 
been going around this province trying to talk the Saskatchewan 
people into supporting it. And that’s disgraceful, Minister. 
That’s disgraceful. That’s not the obligation; that’s not fulfilling 
the duties of a minister of the Crown. 
 
This is one of — this is the most important single document 
that’s come along in our lifetime. This document has more 
potential for doing harm to our country than any document we 
have ever seen. And it is irreparable harm, as my colleague 
says, irreparable in the sense that the things that are going down 
in this agreement, these are things of controversial . . . these are 
controversial issues of public policy that have been debated in 
this country for years. But instead of putting them in the form of 
legislation in parliament where a subsequent government might 
amend them or might repeal them or might take a different 
view, the federal government is writing them as sort of add-ons 
to a trade agreement. 
 
Imagine a chapter on the American buy-out of Canadian 
industries called . . . under the heading “Investment.” Imagine 
that going into a trade agreement, a trade agreement, not into a 
piece of legislation which can be amended but into a trade 
agreement where you can’t  

amend it without the consent of the other side. So it becomes 
written in stone. 
 
Where does Mulroney get the nerve to dispose of an important 
issue of public policy in that way — in that way? What are the 
precedents in Canada for disposing of an important issue of 
public policy, like foreign investment in Canada, by adding it 
into a trade agreement, a binding international agreement, and 
thereby binding the hands, tying the hands of successive 
governments for ever, for ever on that important point of public 
policy? 
 
Now let me just add more observation to that, Minister. Not 
only is that an important issue of public policy, but it is one on 
which Canadians have expressed their views for at least the last 
25 years. They’ve been asked in poll after poll how they react to 
the idea that about 36 per cent of the Canadian economy is 
owned by non-Canadians. And they’re asked questions like 
whether they favour steps by government in order to at least 
screen, at least to screen applications for foreign companies 
taking over Canadian businesses. 
 
And on every one of those polls a strong percentage of 
Canadians — most often a majority — but in any event, in the 
worst polls at least a strong number, a high number have 
expressed their concern about foreign investment. And this 
agreement seeks to dispose of that important issue of public 
policy for ever by adding it on to a trade agreement and thereby 
locking us in on this question for all time. 
 
Now I think that’s ridiculous. I think that’s irresponsible and 
wholly inappropriate. And when Canadians find out about that, 
Minister, as you would know if you ever took the time to 
explain that to them, Canadians’ and Saskatchewan people’s 
reaction to that is one of shock, surprise, horror. Even your own 
supporters are surprised to find that it’s there — they can hardly 
believe it. 
 
And so it is through this agreement, Minister . . . and you ask, 
why is the NDP opposed to this? The member from Shaunavon 
asked that question yesterday in a speech which he made in this 
House. And that . . . the answer, Minister, has nothing to do 
with the tariff provisions. We even like some of the attempts to 
decrease the border hassles. But what we’re opposed to are 
these many, many provisions in the agreement which strips 
Canada, which strips Canadian governments of their ability to 
care for the crucial, the crucial public interest of Canadians in 
the future. 
 
Now I could go on for hours. I mean, I could make a speech 
that goes for three or four hours on these very themes, but I 
won’t take your time, at least at this point in these estimates. 
But I’d like your response to that because . . . and in particular, 
Minister, I would like to know why the two levels of 
government are pursuing the communication strategy that 
they’ve been pursuing where they emphasize only the benefits, 
but choose not to tell Canadians in detail what is included in 
this agreement. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on his feet? 
  



 
April 13, 1988 

544 
 
 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, before our minister 
clarifies many of the misconceptions of the member opposite, 
I’d like to have some leave to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to introduce to 
you, and to other members of the legislature, some friends of 
mine from the fine town of Naicam, just 30 miles to the south 
of Melfort within my constituency. 
 
We have with us in the west gallery, the mayor of Naicam, Mr. 
Bob Davis. As well, with him is his town administrator, Ruby 
Lindsay. And in addition we have some other members of the 
community who were in to visit with me this afternoon. We 
have Eric Hutchison, Earl Durant, and Danny Parker, and I’ll be 
pleased to be meeting with that group a little later in the day. 
And I would ask all members of the legislature to join with me 
in giving a big welcome to these fine people from the town of 
Naicam. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Trade and Investment 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 19 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The hon. member again has asked a 
series of perhaps 10 or 12 questions, and I will get to that in a 
minute. With regards to . . . And I will try to go through some 
of the key ones that you raised, and deal with them in order, if I 
could. 
 
First of all, you said your party always supports free trade. We 
understand that. The Premier, a day or two, showed a document 
of the NDP in fact supporting free trade and supporting free 
trade with the United States, among other countries. And so I 
haven’t heard that, quite frankly though, from a lot of NDP that 
were really, quite frankly, are not in favour of free trade. So you 
say now that you are in favour of free trade. I’m glad to hear 
that. Now you should tell that to some of the other members of 
your caucus and we could get that straight. 
 
Now you also say that you see the GATT as the solution; you 
see the GATT as a solution. Now in 1979 the last round of the 
GATT concluded with an agreement, an agreement in a variety 
of areas. One of those areas was the area of liquor, beer, and 
wine. All right? Recently the GATT has come down and said, 
Canadians are cheating on their wine and the way they 
distribute wine, or beer and the way they distribute beer, and on 
spirits and the way they distribute spirits. 
 
Now the members of your party, the NDP at the national party, 
has said we must not accept that GATT ruling. Canadians 
agreed to that under the GATT; we agreed to it as a country. 
 

You were in Government in Saskatchewan, or your party was; 
Trudeau was in government in Canada when they signed and 
were a signatory to the GATT round. Now the GATT comes 
down and says Canadians are cheating. And the response by the 
NDP is that we must not accept that ruling. So I would like to 
hear your views on that if you say that you support that. 
 
And then I would go further and ask you that the second GATT 
panel said that we are also cheating on the processing of fish. 
And the NDP has been very strong and says, we don’t want to 
buy into that GATT ruling either. 
 
So while it’s nice for you to stand up and say, I support the 
GATT and all this stuff, every time a GATT ruling comes 
down, you’re against it. So that either you accept GATT, the 
concept of GATT, or you don’t accept the concept of GATT. 
 
Now would the hon. member — also he refers to the fact that 
you give away sovereignty if you sign an agreement. One, he 
says, you give away sovereignty if you sign an agreement; and 
two, he says, what right does the Government of Canada have 
of signing an agreement, as if this free trade agreement was the 
first agreement on trade that this country has ever entered into. 
 
It’s been a member of the GATT since the very inception of the 
GATT, and it’s signed each of those agreements as a sovereign 
nation. I don’t think the member opposite says that he wants to 
throw away the GATT. 
 
The Government of Canada also some 22 years ago entered into 
a trade agreement between Canada and United States in the auto 
pact. Again the Government of Canada signed that. 
 
Now you say the government does not have the right to do that. 
Well they’ve done it many, many, many times before, and each 
time you ever enter into an agreement, a trade agreement, you 
give up a little bit. Each country does because it’s no different 
than you enter into a contract between yourself and myself. We 
both give something up, I would assume, to enter into that 
contract. And that’s exactly what we’re talking about here. 
 
If the hon. member can only quote the Toronto Star as his 
source of information on this trade agreement, that is clearly the 
most biased — that is clearly by anybody’s standards the most 
biased paper as it relates to trade. The Toronto Star is against 
this agreement; it always has been against the agreement. It is 
against every aspect of the agreement and reports accordingly, 
and that’s not true of virtually all other newspapers across this 
country. 
 
Now the member also says, you should look at the polls. Well I 
say two things to that. Number one, I don’t think governments 
should govern, nor political parties determine their policy, only 
by polls, and I think that’s what we’re seeing out of you in the 
last short while of time, number one. 
 
Number two, if you want to look at polls and ask me if I’ve 
seen polls on free trade, I have seen many polls on free trade. 
And if you’re suggesting somehow that the Canadian 
population does not accept this, clearly they  
  



 
April 13, 1988 

545 
 
 

do. And right now every province of Canada is in favour, a 
majority of the people in each province is in favour of free 
trade, including Ontario — Ontario has the lowest support level 
— but everybody else, including Ontario, supports free trade. In 
Saskatchewan . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Except for the NDP. Except Manitoba. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — No, even Manitoba, where Manitoba . . . 
In fact, Manitoba government has been the strongest 
government against free trade, and the strongest support right 
now for free trade is in Manitoba, followed by Saskatchewan at 
some 67 per cent of the people. Now we can fight about all the 
polls that you can see in the newspapers or whatever. 
 
You say that you are also in favour of small business. Well 
what about a month ago, the Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business, by and away the largest representative of 
small business in Canada, conducted interviews with their 
members across Canada, conducted interviews with their 
members across Canada, and what they found in Saskatchewan, 
for every business that was against the trade agreement, there 
was 12 in favour of it. Twelve times more small businesses 
supporting the agreement than against it. Now whether you 
think that is relevant or not, that is significant. And in Manitoba 
it was 15 times, and across the country it was what? — 10 
times. For every one against it, there was 10 in favour of it, and 
that was universal across all provinces. Every province came 
out positive on trade, and that was small businesses, people that 
that are actually involved in trade. And so we can get into 
debate on polls; clearly the polls favour it. I don’t think that 
serves us with much of a purpose. 
 
(1545) 
 
You then asked, you never talked to anybody in the industry. 
Well I can tell you, we talked to virtually every person who 
would be . . . or every industry that is directly affected by the 
trade agreement. We talked to the — and some of them, all of 
them were in favour of it. We talked to the cultural industry; I 
mean they wouldn’t have been in favour of it regardless of what 
it said. We talked to the trade unions; they wouldn’t have been 
in favour of it no matter what it said. 
 
We talked to the high-tech sector in Saskatoon, your city, and 
they supported it. We talked to the uranium sector — something 
that you know something about — they supported it. We talked 
to the oil and technical services — they supported it; to the 
forestry sector — they supported it; to the breweries, to the 
breweries who are not affected by the agreement, and they 
supported it — manufacturing sectors of all kinds across 
Saskatchewan. Intercontinental Packers in Saskatoon which is 
. . . probably lots of people in your riding that work there, and 
they believe it’s a good deal, and they believe that they will 
benefit from it, and they will be able to grow as a result of it 
and have better and more access into the U.S. market. 
 
We talked to the agriculture sector across the province. They 
supported it, with the exception of the National Farmers Union, 
who wouldn’t support it regardless of  

what it said. If you look at the oil and gas sector, they support 
— the high-tech sector, the potash sector. So that we have met 
with all of those groups with regards to this agreement. 
 
Let me throw this challenge to you. If you’re serious about 
dealing with this agreement — as you say, let’s deal with the 
specifics — then I challenge you to deal with specifics, and 
let’s deal with it on a . . . let’s deal with it one at a time. We will 
go through this agreement sector by sector, item by item. You 
give me your question or your concern; I will give you my 
response, and I will be as brief and as short as you. If you’re 
genuinely interested in the details of the agreement and the 
impact it will have, rather than ask in 15 or 20 questions, that 
we simply both stand up and make 15- or 20-minute speeches 
on it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Well I would welcome that, Minister, and we 
may well do that. It depends on, you know . . . we can probably 
have some discussion about that as time goes on to see whether 
it’s appropriate to do it in this forum, or whether there’s another 
forum, but I would love to do that. 
 
Let me say, though, that there’s something wrong in this House 
today, because I’m standing up here making statements in 
which I raise, as you say, 10 or 12 points. I’m not counting, so I 
don’t know. Presumably you’re counting. And then you’re 
getting up . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not answering them. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — And you’re . . . well he’s not only not 
answering them, he’s misstating my question. You’re answering 
questions I didn’t ask. Now I’m awfully glad to get the 
information, but I got this feeling like we’re ships passing in the 
night, and we’re not coming to grips with some of the issue. I 
didn’t say you didn’t talk to anyone in the industry; what I said 
is that you’re not telling the people of Saskatchewan what’s in 
this agreement. 
 
You meet with a group, any one of the producer groups that you 
mention, and you review with them the provisions that relate 
directly to their industry — that relate directly to their industry. 
Usually it has to do with a tariff. With the uranium industry it 
would have to do with the provision, the specific provision 
relating to uranium. And I can understand why they would like 
that provision. I can quite understand that. 
 
But you don’t sit with that group of men and women and talk to 
them about the other parts of this agreement, the ones I’ve 
mentioned today, or the many other ones that exist in here. And 
when you come out of those meetings and you trumpet the idea 
that this group is supporting the free trade agreement, what you 
are saying, or what you should be saying, what they are saying 
to you is that they can live with — some of them even support 
— the specific provisions which relate to their industry, which 
usually has to do with a tariff-related matter. And it’s quite 
wrong for you to be suggesting that that is informed support 
about all of the elements of this agreement. 
 
You know, Minister, that I’ve met with many of those  
  



 
April 13, 1988 

546 
 
 

groups, with many of the ones that you’ve met with. And by the 
time I finish, I expect to have met with them all. No one has 
said no, yet. And those groups are making clear to me, Minister, 
exactly what I just told you. 
 
When they say, when they say that they support the agreement, 
if that’s in fact what they’ve said, they are saying that they 
support the provisions that relate directly to them. Like the beef 
producers support those parts of chapter — of the agriculture 
chapter, chapter 7 — that relate to the production of beef and to 
the import of beef into the United States and to trade in beef 
both ways. That’s what they’re saying. They’re not saying they 
support the chapter on energy, or they support the chapter on 
investment, or they support the way in which the cultural 
industries are handled, or they support the other dozens of bad 
news items that occur in this agreement. 
 
So I didn’t ask the question about whether or not you had talked 
to anyone in the industry, but now that you raise it I just make 
the point that their support, so far as it exists for this agreement, 
is a very qualified support. And too much ought not to be made 
of that by you. 
 
Now nor did I raise the question of the GATT. I said that 
Canada ought to be reducing the tariff barriers to trade 
internationally. But now that you mention GATT, I don’t know 
what I think about the provision with respect to liquor or fish. 
But in general I support the GATT arrangements; Canada 
supports the GATT arrangement. 
 
Our approach to the GATT process has always been a 
bi-partisan, non-political approach to the issues of the day 
relating to international trade, and I would hope that they 
remain that way. I would hope that they remain that way. 
 
We say that when we talk about trade questions in this 
province, we have to look at the world. We have to look at the 
United States certainly, but we have to look at the world. And 
what we’ve been urging you for a long time is to broaden your 
focus, broaden your focus — think beyond just the United 
States, think in terms of the international community. 
 
Now sometimes you respond as though you understood what 
that meant. Sometimes you don’t respond that way, Minister. 
 
Nor did I say that Canada had no right to sign this agreement. 
Of course the Canadian government is the Government of 
Canada. It can sign whatever it pleases in a legal sense. What I 
was questioning was its moral right to dispose of controversial 
issues of public policy in this way. And that you did not 
respond to. 
 
They deal with many issues of importance to the public by 
adding it on as chapters to a trade agreement, and by doing that 
they give these provisions a status far above that of any piece of 
legislation from parliament or from the legislature. They 
literally write it in stone, write it in stone, Minister, because 
they can’t be changed without the consent of the United States. 
 
And when you take chapters like investment and energy  

and services . . . I seem to be amusing some of your officials, 
Mr. Minister, and I’m glad for that. But I do want to make my 
point. 
 
When we’re dealing with questions of investment and energy 
and services, it is important to deal with those in a responsible 
way. Now because they are as controversial as they are, 
Minister, they ought not to be disposed of in the way that this 
agreement disposes of them. They should be dealt with in a way 
which is sensitive to the fact that they are so controversial, that 
they are important public issues on which public opinion is 
often divided, and sometimes divided against the positions 
taken in this agreement. 
 
And they ought to be handled in such a way that when public 
opinion in this country swings or changes or the public view is 
different than it is, that governments are free to act in that 
respect. And that’s my quarrel with the approach taken by this 
agreement. It disposes of these issues in such a way that we 
Canadians cannot retrieve them. 
 
Now your answer may be, your answer may be that we can 
terminate this agreement. If your answer is that, I would say in 
response that that’s easier said than done, that if this agreement 
is implemented and becomes a binding agreement between our 
two countries, then it will be a very, very serious matter 
internationally and diplomatically and at international law to try 
and walk away from it. A very, very serious matter indeed. 
 
The international community would expect that the United 
States would take action in retribution for the abrogation of a 
treaty of the size and the weight of this. And in addition to that, 
the longer this agreement remains in effect, the more difficult it 
will be to terminate it. So terminating it is really not an answer. 
 
And to think if we in this country wanted to get out of the 
investment provisions of this agreement, we have to put 
ourselves through all of the hassle of abrogating an international 
treaty. A ridiculous proposition, Minister, a ridiculous 
proposition. 
 
We ought to be able to deal with issues of public policy like that 
in the traditional way in this country, which is to say, through 
our parliaments and through our legislature, and through the 
political process to respond to those issues in ways which the 
Canadian people consider to be appropriate. What they’re 
doing, what we’re doing, what the government in Ottawa is 
doing in entering this agreement is seeking to dispose of these 
controversial issues in a way which will put them beyond our 
reach, beyond our retrieval. And that’s what I say is wrong. 
And in that sense, the Canadian government has no right to 
dispose of these issues in that way. 
 
I want to make it clear yet again, Minister, my position with 
respect to free trade. I am saying that tariff barriers between 
Canada and the United States, and Canada and the world, ought 
to come down, ought to come down. They ought to be 
eliminated, in my view. And if that’s what this agreement was 
about, an overwhelming majority of the people in this province 
would support the agreement. 
  



 
April 13, 1988 

547 
 
 

But, Minister, that’s the problem. That’s not what this 
agreement is about. And I’m sorry to belabour that point, but I 
seem to have difficulty penetrating. I seem to have difficulty 
getting that idea across to you. And I can’t stand still and have 
you stand up and say that I favour free trade in the sense that I 
would ever favour an agreement such as this. I do not, and I will 
not. 
 
Now let me talk about culture, because you raised the question 
of culture. You said that the culture groups would never accept 
this agreement. And I put it to you, Minister, that they shouldn’t 
be expected to. And I want to deal with that point before I sit 
down and listen to your response. 
 
Article 2005 of this agreement deals with cultural industries, 
and it says: “Cultural industries are exempt from the provisions 
of this Agreement . . .” Exempt — exempt, and that . . . those 
are interesting words because that’s what the Prime Minister 
was telling us for a long time, culture was going to be exempt. 
And that’s what Reisman and others said, culture is going to be 
exempt. 
 
Imagine the shock of the cultural community when they went 
on and read subsection 2 or Article 2005. And imagine how 
they felt about that exemption after they had finished reading 
subsection 2. And I’ll read it to you because it’s a short 
subsection. It says: 
 

Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, a 
Party may take measures of equivalent, commercial effect 
in response to actions that would have been inconsistent 
with this Agreement but for paragraph 1. 

 
In other words, the exemption doesn’t apply the moment 
Canada first does something which is inconsistent with this 
agreement. And when it talks about the agreement, it’s talking 
about all 315 pages of it. 
 
So the first time that we take any action that might interfere 
with the flow of American magazines or American records or 
what have you in the cultural field, the first time we take that 
kind of action we invite action from the United States of 
equivalent commercial effect. 
 
(1600) 
 
Now they’re also concerned about that, Minister, because it was 
televised in Canada. One of the hearings of one of the senate 
committees, and I think it was the finance committee of the 
American Senate, in which this precise point came up. And 
Clayton Yeutter, who is the American trade representative, 
specifically said that that section was included in order to guard 
against the kind of action that I’ve just described to you. 
 
So no wonder the cultural industry is opposed to this agreement. 
All Canada ought to be concerned about that, because at stake, 
at stake may well be the preservation of the Canadian culture. 
Certainly what’s at stake are all of the things that we’ve been 
able to do in this country to protect our culture from incursions 
from our very large  

and very dominant neighbour. 
 
We all love to watch American television, read American 
books, but Canada has always taken measures, and strong 
measures, in order to preserve the Canadian identity, in order to 
preserve Canadian culture. And I know all members on that side 
of the House want those measures to continue, but Article 2005 
flies directly in the face of that. 
 
Now while we’re on the subject, there is a specific question for 
you, Minister, in which our discussion to the agreement may 
start, and I know that there are a lot of people connected with 
one or the other of the cultural industries who would be glad to 
hear your answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Let me try to deal with perhaps three 
points that you raised this time, and specifically with the 
cultural question. You made the observation that when we 
spoke at these various meetings that we didn’t give an overview 
but only dealt specifically with a given area, and that’s not true. 
We in fact, as we’ve pursued these meetings, gave an overview 
of the entire agreement and then concentrated specifically on 
their industry and anything else that they wished to talk about 
with regards to the agreement. 
 
I can tell you when we gave the overview the cultural industry 
people were primarily interested in the culture. When we gave 
an overview on the hog sector, how it impacted on the hog 
sector, there was no questions on culture, even though we 
touched culture. The hog guys were not terribly interested in the 
cultural issue — okay? — and on it goes. 
 
With regards to the second point you raise and that is, is that 
they had no right to sign this agreement. The federal 
government entered into this agreement along with and in 
co-operation with the provinces. Now the two provinces that 
took a strong anti-trade position on this issue was the province 
of Ontario and the province of Manitoba. 
 
Now I don’t know whether to believe in polls or not, but if 
we’re to believe in polls the Government of Manitoba is not 
long for the world, in which case you’re going to have a 
government in Manitoba that in fact does support this trade 
agreement. That means now nine provinces will support the 
agreement. Only Ontario will be opposed to it. 
 
Now that is more than simply the federal government; that is 
involving the provinces — of different political stripes — 
across the country, and it’s not all one political party. Premier 
McKenna of New Brunswick supports this agreement, and he’s 
not of our party, as does Premier Bourassa, and he’s not of our 
party, as does Premier Bourassa, and he’s not of our party. So 
you can go through that. Or Premier Vander Zalm. So it’s a 
pretty widespread approach to this particular agreement. 
 
Now you say that it’s very, very difficult to get rid of this 
agreement, and it’s ink and stone. Now both your leader, Mr. 
Broadbent, and John Turner are not of that view. They say, 
elect me and I’ll simply tear this agreement up. No problem. 
Tear it up. No problem. Just rip her apart. 
 
  



 
April 13, 1988 

548 
 
 

Now you’re the first time I’ve heard somebody say, ah, ah yes, 
but that won’t be able to be done. Well you should convince . . . 
you convince your national leader about that and convince John 
Turner about that, because they see no problem with that 
whatsoever. 
 
With regards to the cultural industries — the cultural industries 
are exempted from this agreement. That was what we heard, 
that’s what we communicated to the federal government, and 
that’s the way this agreement was negotiated. End of story. 
Cultural industries are exempted. 
 
Now the member goes on and says, but there’s a clause 2. Read 
clause 2. I ask you to read clause 2. What clause 2 says is the 
following: “Canada can continue to subsidize its cultural 
industries.” That’s sovereignty. It can continue to subsidize its 
cultural industries, and nothing can be done about it. If the 
Americans don’t like it and it’s being used to . . . in the unlikely 
event of helping subsidize Canadian culture in the U.S. market, 
then they can retaliate, as we can against theirs. And that’s a 
normal type process. 
 
But what the hon. member tries to confuse the public with is: 
can Canada continue to pump a billion dollars into the CBC 
pursuant to this agreement? Now you might think that we 
should continue to do that. I think a billion dollars is too much 
for the CBC. But we can still do it. Canada still has the right to 
spend a billion dollars a year on the CBC. Can we still make 
grants to the Canada Council? Clearly, we can still make grants 
to the Canada Council. Can we, as a provincial government, 
make grants to any multicultural society or organization within 
Saskatchewan? Yes, we can. Can you make grants to the arts 
groups? Yes, you can. 
 
Now you also leave the impression, you . . . to a lesser degree 
publishing, I’ll come to publishing when we get to your friend 
Mel Hurtig, but let me deal with the second part that you raise, 
because the implications of what you raise, I think, are wrong. 
And that is: we must have in Canada, you say, a right to exclude 
American literature from coming into our country. Now if that 
literature falls under our proceedings of criminality or whatever, 
sure, we can exclude it. But why would we, as a nation, want to 
say we cannot have American writers put their magazines or put 
their books into this country? Why should we exclude any 
writings from around the world to our country? And why 
should we exclude, why should we exclude American movies? 
People want to see American movies. They see them here, they 
see them in Europe, they see them in Japan, in South America, 
and the entire world. Why would we want to say: no American 
movies; we have to have a way to stop them from coming into 
our country. Or American writing or books. We should not stop 
their literature coming in here or their movies coming in here 
any more than we should stop European movies or Japanese 
movies or movies from any other part of the world, provided 
that they’re not seditious or treasonous or whatever. 
 
And that should be our standards that we set. But if you’re 
suggesting somehow that we should exclude American books 
from Canada, I think that’s a shameful approach to be taking 
with regards to this. We can subsidize our  

cultural industries every bit as much as we can today. 
 
Canadian culture, this is where you’re coming to next. Canadian 
culture will be gone because somehow the Americans will 
simply take our culture over. And when you talk that way it 
strikes me that you put down Canadians; that our culture 
somehow is not strong enough to survive against United States 
culture or any other culture of the world. And I believe we can. 
And I think that really describes how you look at this agreement 
versus how I look at this agreement. 
 
I have great confidence in the Canadian people; I have 
confidence in our culture. Our culture means more than United 
States. Our culture is something that is fundamental to us and is 
defined by us. And for you to somehow suggest if we get a few 
more American books, or a few more American movies, or we 
enter into this trade agreement, then we will lose our culture — 
we will lose our culture. 
 
And I think that is a terrible curse on the Canadians and how 
they stand up as a distinct group in a distinct society and a 
distinct culture. And what you’re basically saying is you have 
no confidence in them being able to stand for themselves, being 
proud of themselves, and being able to preserve their culture. 
 
This agreement does nothing to take away from that. What you 
are basically saying is that you are afraid, as a Canadian, to be 
proud, as a Canadian, to move forward, as a Canadian. And 
that’s really the long and the short of what you’re saying. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Oh, that is neither the long nor the short of 
what I am saying. That’s just the interpretation you chose to put 
upon it for your own particular purposes. I’m not saying any 
such thing. I used that as an example. I don’t believe in 
censorship except in the most extreme cases, Minister, nor does 
my caucus. And when I used the example of American books, it 
was a for instance. 
 
There’s a better for instance, I think, and that is the situation 
with respect to movies. And your party in Ottawa is considering 
legislation that will deal with that situation, where we find 
American companies practically controlling all of the places 
where you and I can go to watch movies, and the movies that 
are played there are American movies, and it’s hurting the 
Canadian movie industry. 
 
And there are many of us, and I think you’re among them, who 
feel that something should be done about that so that we can 
continue to have a viable movie industry in this country in the 
future, and that’s an example. 
 
There are many such things, Minister, where . . . many 
possibilities where Canada may want to do something in the 
future to do what we have always done, and that is to try and 
protect our culture. That’s taken different forms over the years. 
It’s taken the form, for example, of Canadian content on AM 
radio broadcasts, for example. Will we be able to do that under 
Article 2005? I’ve mentioned the case of the movie houses. I do 
that as not a considered example, but one that occurs to me just 
as I speak to you. 
  



 
April 13, 1988 

549 
 
 

But I speak really, Minister, on behalf of . . . or having read a 
great deal of material from the cultural industries across this 
country. And whether you can understand their concern or not, 
they are deeply distressed about the threat posed to culture in 
this country by subsection 2 of Article 2005. 
 
Now you would have us believe in that House that that 
provision is of no consequence at all, that it is something which 
could never be used, and that the cultural industries have 
nothing to fear. And yet I just don’t know of anybody in the 
cultural industries that agrees with you. They read 2005, 
subsection 2, in a much different way than you do. 
 
Now I want to just deal with another point that you have, so I 
don’t leave any loose . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Can I respond to your question first . . . 
(inaudible) . . . 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Well just one more point here . . . loose ends 
in the debate. 
 
I think that after the next election this agreement will be . . . 
something will happen to it. It’ll either be torn up or it’ll be set 
aside, or something will be done about it. That will be Canada’s 
chance. That will be Canada’s chance to get out of this 
agreement. That chance will only occur once, and that’s at the 
next election, and that must be the central issue. And we want 
an election as soon as possible on that precise issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Because I, horror of horrors, Mulroney is 
re-elected as the Prime Minister of this country, then this 
agreement is going to be implemented. And when it is 
implemented, when it goes into effect, it becomes very, very 
difficult to get out of it. In fact, I argue that after the passage of 
a few years it becomes practically impossible to get out of it. 
 
Now the Deputy Premier from his place is asking me questions. 
If he had been here earlier, he would know the answer to those 
questions. Now Canada just simply can’t walk away from this 
agreement by giving six months’ notice after it is implemented. 
We’re only going to have one chance, and that’s with the next 
election. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, I would agree with you that the 
next election, I would hope that the central issue is free trade. 
But I noticed your leader, Ed Broadbent, saying, oh, there’s 
going to be much more issues than free trade. So he’s doing a 
fast song and dance side-step away from not wanting to fight 
the election on this fundamental issue. 
 
Now let me go back to the definition of culture. You’ve got 
your book there that you’ve been referring to. Let me read it 
clearly to you so you understand: “Cultural industries are 
exempt from the provisions of this agreement,” — fairly clear. 
What does cultural industries mean? They mean the following: 
they mean publication, distribution, or the sale of books, 
magazines, periodicals,  

or newspapers. All right? 
 
(1615) 
 
Now that’s cultural industry. They are excluded. The hon. 
member from Rosemont, he asks the question for his friend, 
Mel Hurtig, about publications. Yes, they are. They’re a part of 
culture. 
 
Number two: the production, distribution, sale, and exhibition 
of films or video recordings; you asked about that. They are 
included in the cultural industries. 
 
Three: the production, distribution, sale, exhibition of 
audio-video music recordings; you asked about that. They are 
included in culture. The publication, distribution, sale of music 
in print or machine readable form — that’s included. 
 
Now what you were asking about is the films, specifically the 
production and distribution. That’s what you were concerned 
about — the distribution of films. That is included in the 
culture. The question you’re asking about is the Bill presently 
before parliament being spearheaded by Flora MacDonald. That 
is perfectly consistent with this agreement. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Exactly. We’re right on point here. Those are 
the cultural industries by definition. Subsection 1 of Article 
2005 says they’re exempt. But subsection 2 comes along and 
says — and I’m now talking like an American — you do one 
thing, you do one thing with respect to those industries that’s 
inconsistent with this agreement and the Americans, we 
Americans can take measures of equivalent commercial effect. 
That, Minister, is what the industry’s worried about. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — What the agreement says . . . to the hon. 
member, what the agreement says, if we would do and 
subsidize — let’s say subsidy, which is the most likely — if we 
were to subsidize our cultural industries to the degree that it 
distorts trade between us and United States, distorts trade, okay 
. . . 
 
Now let’s look at trade and culture between . . . Canada’s 
culture that we export to the United States, first of all, is not a 
great deal, all right? So if we distort trade, then they can bring 
action against us just as we could bring action against them. If 
they were to subsidize something very strongly to push it into 
our market, we could also respond to them, they to us. 
 
So what we’re talking about that you should not confuse is, as it 
distorts trade. So if we are giving money to the cultural 
industries in Canada, for the most part it is not for to subsidize 
their trade, it’s really to keep them going. Right? And therefore 
there is nothing inconsistent in this agreement for us to 
subsidize our cultural sector so they can do that. 
 
Now with regards to your concern about the movie-houses and 
how all the Americans are dominating the movie-houses. 
Cineplex Odeon, which is one of the largest movie houses in 
Canada or United States, is owned by a Canadian located in 
Toronto. So very often we get into this view that somehow the 
Americans own  
  



 
April 13, 1988 

550 
 
 

all the movie theatres. That’s not true, and that’s somewhat of a 
distortion by you. But the other question, as it relates to culture, 
I hope that I’ve described it to you in a way distorting of trade. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Before I 
get into the main substance of a couple of questions I’d ask the 
Minister on the agreement and its effect on the economy and the 
policies of the Government of Saskatchewan, I just want to ask 
the Minister a point of clarification to the statement he made in 
regards to the statement released today by the Economic 
Council of Canada. 
 
Did I understand the Minister correctly to say that the 
Economic Council of Canada is predicting that 250,000 new 
jobs will be built on top, on top of any jobs which will be 
created over the length of the agreement, over the length of the 
implementation of the agreement — that is 250,000 jobs over a 
10-year period of time? Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — That’s exactly what I said. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — In other words, Mr. Minister, what you are 
saying has just again clarified that the Economic Council of 
Canada is saying that there will be, on average, 25,000 new jobs 
in each year; is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The Economic Council of Canada says, 
is that there will be 250,000 jobs over the 10-year 
implementation phase. That means, 25,000 jobs a year, and that 
is on top of the jobs that are normally created in Canada. And 
that’s exactly what I said to the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I thank the minister for that point of 
clarification, because I think it underlines to everybody in this 
country, in this province, precisely the kind of terrible price 
we’re paying for your government’s support for this Mulroney 
deal. 
 
If those jobs, which you have just said are 25,000 jobs a year 
across Canada, if prorated over the strength of each of the 
individual provincial economies, I believe it will add up to 
something — and I’m being quite generous — that it would add 
up to something as 100 to 150 new jobs in Saskatchewan each 
year alone. And that, sir, I submit, is not worth a candle. The 
price that we’re paying for this agreement is not worth a candle, 
given the numbers that you’ve just quoted. However, that’s not 
the intent of my question. 
 
The question I want to ask regards government economic policy 
and the development of this Mulroney-Reagan trade deal. As 
part of the economic strategy of this government — and you’ve 
consistently, consistently harped on this boosterism — one of 
the primary programs to develop and diversify the economy in 
this province is a program called “Buy Saskatchewan.” It’s a 
program which, by the way, that I can support, because it 
encourages the kind of development of a manufacturing in the 
secondary and tertiary sector in the economy in Saskatchewan. 
It’s an initiative, I think, that all members on this side can 
support. 
 

In most tendering agreements — and I’ve just had the 
opportunity to look at some of the tendering agreements related 
to the Shand-Rafferty-Alameda project — in the tendering 
agreements, in the tendering agreements is a provision . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . And, Mr. Chairman, I’m quite sure 
the Deputy Premier will have his opportunity to speak in this 
debate, should he have the courage to rise in his seat at some 
future point in time. 
 
That in these tendering agreements, there is a provision that 
those who tender and those who act as general contractors must 
buy Saskatchewan. They must give . . . and the Minister of 
Economic Development is shaking his head, yes. I wonder how 
this “Buy Saskatchewan” program will fare when section 14, 
section 14 of this agreement comes into play. 
 
It’s the part — part 4, called “Services, investment and 
temporary entry.” And what it does say, and I’ll not bore the 
people of this province by reading out the legalese, in Article 
1402(1), rights and obligations, and 1402(2), which says that: 
 

The treatment accorded by a Party under paragraph 1 shall 
mean, with respect to a province or state (and that means 
the province of Saskatchewan), treatment no less 
favourable than the most favourable treatment accorded by 
such province or state in like circumstances to persons of 
the Party of which it forms a part. 

 
All of which means to say is that we here in Saskatchewan, 
when it comes to treating those who bid on services, must treat 
everybody in North America alike — pardon me, everybody in 
the United States and Canada alike, under those covered 
services. 
 
It goes on to say, Mr. Minister: Services Covered by this 
Chapter. And under Services Covered by this Chapter, includes: 
Construction services: Building, developing and general 
contracting services, Special trade contracting services — it’s 
my understanding that the definition of building, developing 
and general contracting services means that any general 
contractor of any point in North America has to be treated 
equally when bidding on government contract work. That’s 
Annex 1408 on page 201 of this agreement. 
 
Could the minister please explain to the House how business 
people here in Saskatchewan who, under the government policy 
of Buy Saskatchewan, are being urged to produce goods in 
Saskatchewan, now have to compete on equal terms with every 
other firm in that particular service sector. And how you can go 
before the Americans and justify a Buy Saskatchewan policy 
which discriminates, and your tender documents which 
discriminates, and which are discriminatory to anybody else 
outside Saskatchewan — and there may be nothing wrong with 
that — but how can you square off this discriminatory treatment 
of contractors in Saskatchewan, through the Buy Saskatchewan 
policy, with your support for an agreement which basically does 
away with that policy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I would refer the hon. member to  
  



 
April 13, 1988 

551 
 
 

Article 1304: Coverage. And I will read it for him so he can 
understand it and I will read it clearly: 
 

The obligations of this Chapter (that’s the chapter on 
procurement) shall apply only to procurements specified in 
Code Annex 1 . . . 

 
Now then you move down two or three pages to Code Annex 1, 
all right, and each of the things that are in that code are the 
federal government departments. So what the agreement means 
and what we have said and what everybody else associated with 
the agreement have said, is the agreement under this trade 
agreement relates to procurement by the federal government of 
Canada and the federal government in the United States. It does 
not apply to provincial governments and it does not apply to 
state governments. That’s what the agreement says in bold-face 
print. I would simply ask the hon. member to read the 
agreement. 
 
Can the Buy Saskatchewan program of this government 
continue under this agreement? Yes, it most definitely can. And 
that is in black and white, if you are to read it. 
 
Now the first question you asked is with regard to the Economic 
Council of Canada study. And what does the Economic Council 
of Canada study say with regard to the number of jobs that will 
be created in Saskatchewan pursuant to this trade agreement? 
 
It says that in Saskatchewan there will be an additional 8,579 
new jobs created in the province of Saskatchewan — not a 
hundred jobs, as you say, but 8,579. That’s not me speaking, 
that’s the Economic Council of Canada. So I simply ask the 
hon. member, read the agreement before you get off on a 
tangent with regard to what it means. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, having read the agreement 
and having read chapter 14, and having read the specific 
reference to the province and to a state, and to the specific 
references of equal treatment and the fact that it can be 
non-discriminatory, I stand by what I say. 
 
Certainly, certainly chapter 13, chapter 13 outlines those things 
under the federal classification code. Right? Those things under 
the federal classification code. But it doesn’t specifically, it 
doesn’t specifically . . . and here I think that we’re seeing a little 
bit of flimflammery from this side of the House . . . from that 
side of the House, when it comes to dealing with the contracting 
of service on a provincial basis. 
 
You say, you say that the provinces are allowed to discriminate 
— are allowed to discriminate against foreign bidders, to put it 
plainly. That’s what you’re saying. 
 
And that’s not what the interpretation of this agreement by 
other people, in terms of international law, are saying. In fact, 
the Prime Minister himself has said that there will be legislation 
introduced into the House to ensure that all provinces conform, 
that all provinces conform to this trade agreement. And when 
the Premier of Ontario challenged him on that, the Prime 
Minister made it clear that Ontario was going to fall in line 
along with everybody else through this legislation. 
 

(1630) 
 
I submit, sir, that you’re confusing, and deliberately confusing, 
the whole issue of classification codes, which we’ll grant . . . 
readily admit, is a federal provision, to the question of 
government and the ability of a provincial government to 
develop an economic policy which flies in the face of this free 
trade agreement, like the Buy Saskatchewan program. 
 
Are you trying to tell the House, are you trying to tell the House 
that each and every province in Canada will be able to 
discriminate against foreign competition in the service sector? 
Are you saying that this agreement allows each and every 
province to go ahead and discriminate against that foreign 
competition? And if that’s true, if that’s true, then what 
precisely do the provisions of chapter 14 really mean? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, the hon. member is confused, and 
he’s asking two questions. Go to chapter 13, and the heading of 
chapter 13 says “Government Procurement.” What government 
procurement means is the right of government to buy. That 
means that every province in the country can set up its own 
policies on procurement or its purchasing policy. A 
government, if we so desire, could say you could only purchase 
from the province. Or another province could say exactly the 
same thing. 
 
The hon. member then moves to a statement he alleges to the 
Prime Minister that provinces must go along with this 
agreement. There is only one element of this agreement that 
would affect provincial jurisdiction, and that is in the area of 
wine and spirits. As it relates to the province of Saskatchewan, 
wine and spirits do not now violate any rules that would be 
changed under the trade agreement. And let me go into that and 
explain it to you. 
 
In the province of Saskatchewan, the mark-up of wines from 
Ontario, from B.C., from United States, and from Europe are all 
the same. We mark them up exactly the same. 
 
What happens in Ontario, who are the offending province, they 
mark up their Ontario wines 1 per cent; they mark up all other 
wines 66 per cent. And that’s the concern that is raised in this 
agreement. And that is the one where there is dispute between 
the Prime Minister, the Premier of Ontario. It’s very narrow and 
it’s specifically related to wines and spirits. 
 
Saskatchewan does not violate it, Manitoba and Alberta do not 
violate it. Ontario is the primary person that violates this 
particular element. 
 
But go to chapter 13 — Government Procurement. Government 
procurement involves all provincial governments, except they 
are not involved in the trade agreement, and they’re not 
contained in the Annex attached I referred to earlier. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, earlier you were talking about 
the Weyerhaeuser paper mill, which is a follow-up in the 
manufacturing from the pulp industry. And I want to follow that 
a step further. 
 
  



 
April 13, 1988 

552 
 
 

In the northern forest belt, of course one of the objectives has 
long been to get an increasing amount of manufacturing done 
from paper products. And of course when the pulp mill was first 
built 20 years ago, we heard a lot of talk and speculation and 
hope on the part of people and business persons and certainly in 
Prince Albert, and I am certain in other parts of the North, 
northern Saskatchewan, that we could get some manufacturing 
industry into the province, built on the forest industry. 
 
Now we know what it cost to get a paper mill into this province. 
The province had to provide a heavy subsidy and a heavy 
guarantee. Now let’s go a step further. Is there any way that you 
can see that a private industry, after this agreement is signed, 
will be able to be helped out by government so that we can 
eventually perhaps get a small business that might be able to 
manufacture, say, business forms to compete with somebody 
maybe as big as Moore, but a small company that would do the 
local market — maybe duplicating paper, maybe tissue or 
towels — something that could be made from that product right 
here and sold here. Because you know what the disadvantages 
are — the disadvantage of distance from major market centres. 
So we have to be in a position to be able to subsidize either the 
transportation end of it or the energy of it. 
 
And what I see happening in this trade deal is that it prevents 
the government of being able to regulate some of those 
industries in order to provide a base where they can compete 
against all the geographical and population disadvantages that 
we have in this province, so that we actually can work together 
and get that industry moving. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Under the trade agreement what is in 
place today in Canada will be in place tomorrow in Canada 
after the trade agreement. We were one of the provinces along 
with, I would suggest, other provinces, perhaps with the 
exception of Ontario, that said we have to have and maintain 
regional development policies of the federal government. 
 
So for your specific question, can government subsidies by way 
of federal government or provincial government be given to a 
company in Prince Albert — is what you referred to — that 
could take some of the paper, the finished paper, from the paper 
mill, go a step further and make it into, let’s say, computer 
forms or whatever kind of forms, and distribute it into the 
Saskatchewan market — absolutely no problem with that. 
 
Where you would get in agreement now or get into difficulty 
now, or potentially could get into difficulty now and could get 
into it following the trade agreement, is that if you were to set 
up a business in, let’s say, Prince Albert to do specifically 
forms, and looked for the U.S. as your big export market, and 
you made a great deal of subsidy to that industry that would 
then unfairly compete with a U.S. industry, you could be 
subject to countervail. But we all believe that countervail laws 
. . . I mean every country has countervail laws, including us. 
 
So under your specific question, under this agreement, subsidies 
are still allowed to be given to those industries to give them a 
kick start. And that’s why we’ve wanted to  

preserve regional development, regional development policies 
within Canada. Those are preserved; they remain unchanged 
pursuant to this agreement. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I want to get this straight. What about the 
case of energy supply? The problem that I see here is that you 
might get an industry which needs energy at a lower price and 
yet the agreement here says that we can’t sell our energy to heat 
our factories here at any cheaper price than we could, say, sell 
to the Americans. We have to sell it at the same rate according 
to this agreement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Do you want to get in then to the overall 
question of the energy sector of this particular agreement? 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — No, I just want to get into the energy sector 
as it would apply to a manufacture industry that wanted to set 
up, say, in the forest industry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’ll deal with that question specifically 
then. You’re talking, let’s say, can we give a preferred price to 
an industry, let’s say, for natural gas. What happens in Canada 
as we look at energy prices, all right, part of your price for 
energy is what is called your price for crude oil, your price for 
natural gas. On top of that we add a significant tax, both federal 
and provincial. If you were to go to the pumps today, for 
example, a fair amount of the tax is or the cost of gasoline or 
diesel fuel or natural gas is in fact a tax. Can we subsidize by 
reducing the price? Yes, we can. We can pull the tax part of it 
off, which is a goodly part of it, number one. 
 
Number two, what we can do is allow those industries to buy 
directly from source under deregulation. So if a large, let’s say 
another pulp mill was to be established in Prince Albert, they 
could buy directly from source and receive their natural gas 
therefore cheaper than perhaps you and I would, as we’re part 
of the infrastructure system of SaskPower. All right. So they 
could do that and therefore could receive a lower price for their 
energy cost. Clearly, that can be done. 
 
Can you then subsidize beyond that? You can subsidize beyond 
that if you wish, but you do at your peril if you are going to be 
accessing greatly into the U.S. market because it becomes a 
countervailable action. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — In the event that you want to buy directly 
from the source, can that source sell to a Canadian company, to 
a Saskatchewan company, any cheaper than that same source 
would sell to an American company, or to an American 
customer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The real answer to the question is: could 
you sell natural gas, let’s say out of the Meadow Lake field to 
Iowa or Denver? Yes, you could. And the reason you could is 
there’s a significant cost of transporting that natural gas down 
to Denver that would not be part of the cost that you would pay 
here, so the Prince Albert consumer could buy it cheaper. 
 
You also, under the energy agreement, can enter into long-term 
contracts. You sell oil or natural gas in a variety of ways. You 
can sell it on an ongoing spot price, or you  
  



 
April 13, 1988 

553 
 
 

can sell it, let’s say, on a five-year contract. They could go out 
and negotiate, let’s say, with . . . as the Co-op upgrader has, for 
example. They can go out and negotiate with a producer of 
natural gas and say, we want your natural gas over the next 10 
years, and we’re prepared to take it on a take-or-pay contract, 
and here’s what the price is going to be; or they could go out 
and do exactly the same thing with regard to heavy oil. 
 
They could go out and strike a far better deal, and Co-op in fact 
are going to be doing that, where they would go out into the oil 
field and say, I want this much heavy oil or sour crude or 
medium crude for the upgrader in Regina, and I’m prepared to 
pay you this much money, and we will buy it over a 10-year 
contract price at this amount. That is a legitimate deal. Now do 
you sell that into the United States on that basis? No, you don’t. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Okay, I just want to reiterate then. Now my 
understanding is, of what you said is, that a Saskatchewan 
company can buy gas, make an agreement to buy it at X, say, 
cents per unit and after that, of course, a transportation cost is 
put on top of that. But that base rate, X, if it sells it to the — 
this company sells gas to the Saskatchewan company at X cents 
per unit, it has to also be able to offer that same price to an 
American company, or an American-based company. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I take it you go this way: if you are 
Weyerhaeuser or another pulp mill in Prince Albert and you go 
directly to the source person to buy natural gas from, then you 
are contracting with another business entity, and that business 
entity obviously is going to sell his product for the best price he 
can get. 
 
Now the price might vary if you say, well it doesn’t have to go 
as far, or I’m going to take this much quantity, or I would like 
to have a contract that runs for five years versus one year. 
You’re going to get some price variations. But yes, what you 
would do is buy it directly from the producer, and that producer 
will sell to you in Saskatchewan or to somebody in the United 
States or to somebody in Ontario at the fair market price. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — In light of the answers that you’ve given to 
my colleague from Prince Albert, I’d like to refer you to Article 
904 of the agreement and particularly to clause (b). Explain to 
us what these words mean, because it is quite clear from my 
reading of paragraph (b) that Canada will not impose a higher 
price for exports of natural gas to the United States than the 
price charged for such natural gas when consumed 
domestically. What in the world can those words mean? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — What that means is that, pursuant to this 
agreement, Canada cannot superimpose another national energy 
program system, and as you know, as you were deputy minister 
in the previous NDP government at the time, what that meant is 
that we were not getting fair market value or world price for our 
oil that we produced in Saskatchewan, sold to the United States, 
or sold to eastern Canada. 
 
As you know, during that time we exported still 66 per  

cent of our oil, crude oil, to the United States. What happened is 
the federal government said, if this is the fair market value or 
world price, we’re not going to take that in Canada, and we’re 
going to artificially say the price is half that amount for 
Canadians. Then they went and superimposed an export tax as it 
crossed the border to get world price. All right? This agreement 
says we should not be able to do that again, and we agree with 
that. And so did Allan Blakeney in 1981 in a front-page article 
in the Regina Leader-Post, March 26, 1981: “Premier says 
energy policies are insane.” And we agreed with them on that. 
 

Federal energy policies amount to mass insanity (speaking 
about the national energy program, where you had two 
different prices). Blakeney told economic conference 
sponsored by Financial Times in London, England, the 
benefits of the federal policy flow largely to Ontario at the 
expense of Saskatchewan. 

 
He criticized the federal government for regulating the price at 
which oil and gas was to be sold, but not electric power; the 
major benefits of the lower price flow to Ontario, a province 
very much richer than the oil-producing Saskatchewan. 
 
What has been done under this agreement is to prevent the 
reoccurrence of the very thing that Allan Blakeney criticized in 
1981, which we criticized as opposition, which the premier of 
Alberta criticized with much more vigour, and pretty much all 
of western Canada criticized as a rape and plunder of our 
rightful revenues in the western Canada, particularly Alberta 
and Saskatchewan, by Ontario and the federal government. 
 
What this says is, that can not be done again. And I would hope 
that you would also support that and would not want to see a 
reintroduction of such a policy of insanity, that Allan Blakeney 
said was insanity, and I believe was insanity as well. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — What’s at issue here is the right of a sovereign 
nation to control its own energy resources. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Yes, it is. What’s at issue here is Canada’s 
right as a sovereign nation to manage and control its energy 
resources. 
 
And when you have provisions like article 904, which says that 
we will not impose a higher price for exports to the United 
States than the price charged for that good, that oil, or that gas 
when it’s sold in Canada, you are taking away from this country 
a very important power. We may or may not choose to exercise 
it, but we should have the right to choose to exercise it. 
 
This provision was written by the oil industry. I think you agree 
with that. I think it was in consultation probably with the 
government of Alberta, and perhaps also with the consultation 
with you people who are known to be close to the oil industry, 
but this provision reflects precisely the position of the oil 
industry in this country. 
 
  



 
April 13, 1988 

554 
 
 

And I go on to just go a clause up in clause (a) where we agree, 
where Canada agrees, that we will not reduce the proportion of 
the total export shipments of oil or of natural gas made 
available to the United States relative to the total supply of oil 
and natural gas, as compared to the proportion prevailing over 
the previous three years. 
 
So we’ve not only guaranteed the . . . or taken the pricing 
mechanism out of our hands, or substantial elements of the 
pricing mechanism, but we’ve also taken out of our own hands 
the ability to control the flow. And how else can these 
provisions be read? I mean, anybody who reads them in another 
way is just dreaming in Technicolor. 
 
This is a classic example of provisions that lace through this 
entire agreement where Canada has surrendered large amounts 
of its sovereignty — just given it away — and affected our right 
to behave as any independent nation in the world would behave 
to control our futures, to control our resources for the benefit of 
our children and our grandchildren. And these provisions, 
Minister, are inexcusable, and they’re the very provisions that 
have the country so upset. 
 
Just while I’m looking at that, which is page 146 of the 
agreement, I can’t help but notice — page 147. As we’ve 
observed, and I think you agree, this agreement is generally not 
very sympathetic to the idea of government subsidies. It 
recognizes quite clearly the appropriateness of countervailing 
measures, and maintains intact the whole web of America trade 
law that we in this province, and in this country, have had so 
much trouble with. But this agreement, that turns its face so 
firmly against subsidies throughout, contains in article 906 a 
specific provision which makes subsidies okay for the oil and 
gas industry. And let me read these provisions into the record of 
this House. The heading is, and I quote: “Government 
Incentives for Energy Resource Development,” and a specific 
provision reads as follows: 
 

Both parties have agreed to allow existing or future 
incentives for oil and gas exploration, development and 
related activities in order to maintain the reserve base for 
these energy resources. 

 
Now that’s a stunning provision to find in an agreement which, 
by and large, turns its face against subsidies and agrees with the 
Americans that subsidies are a bad thing. Subsidies coming 
from government are a bad thing. Now I address both of those 
points to you, Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Let me deal with the two questions you 
raise. With regards number one, to the ability to manage our 
resources. Read the agreement. There is the right, under that 
agreement, for provinces who constitutionally have the power 
to regulate the rate of production. That remains the same under 
this agreement. In other words, the province of Saskatchewan 
can say, our production rates this year are going to be a, b or c, 
and that’s the sovereign right of a province to do that and 
continue to do that. 
 
With regards to the pricing agreement, it says that we must 
effectively sell oil at world price, which is what we fought for 
in the agreement, because that’s exactly what  

we want. We must sell oil at world price to ourselves, to 
Ontario, and to the United States. In Saskatchewan, of the oil 
that we produce, 5 per cent of it is used in the province of 
Saskatchewan — 5 per cent. Sixty-five per cent goes to the 
United States, and 30 per cent goes east to Manitoba and to 
Ontario. All right. 
 
Now we sell to the United States 66 per cent. The main reason 
we export 66 per cent of our oil to the United States is because 
no Canadian refiners have the capacity to refine it. And that’s 
been the case for 25 years in this province. Even during the 
energy crisis and the energy scare, Saskatchewan still continued 
to export approximately 66 per cent of its production into the 
United States. That will change with the Co-op upgrader, or if 
other upgraders are built here or in other parts of the country 
where we can then enter into agreements that they can handle 
that. But as of now we’re still reliant upon that U.S. market. 
 
The agreement says that we must get world price and that we 
will not put an export tax, and the Americans will not impose an 
import tax, which is what their oil industry in United States 
wishes them to do . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If you want to 
read, read what’s going on in the United States. The oil lobby 
before the U.S. Senate on the trade agreement it says: throw the 
agreement out; we don’t want it, and the reason we don’t want 
it is we want a 10 per cent import tax on all oil coming into the 
United States. It’s exactly what the American oil industry is 
saying. Read it. Phone somebody in Congress and ask them, 
and that’s exactly the response that you will get. 
 
Now do we want to have . . . You say we must have the 
sovereign right to set our own oil price in Canada. That means 
we want to have the right for central Canada, should the price of 
oil increase, to come back out here and steal our oil the way 
they did back in the ’70s and the 1980s. 
 
Let me read again from that article I referred to you, a quotation 
by Allan Blakeney. He also attacked the federal government’s 
policy of keeping domestic oil prices at less than half the world 
level. Put boldly, for Canadians to refuse to develop oil 
resources at 25 or $30 a barrel, and instead of importing foreign 
oil at $40 a barrel, must be some form of mass insanity. 
 
Those are not my words; those are the words of your former 
leader who said that we do not want this right to come back 
upon us, superimposed by the province of Ontario, which 
happened back in the oil crisis. We do not want that 
superimposed upon us again. 
 
With regards to the question then, the next question you raised, 
with regards to subsidies, and why it was important to have that 
in. The three areas of the country that wished for that was the 
following: Newfoundland, so that they could have their 
program as it relates to the Hibernia field; and Sable Island 
around Nova Scotia; the people in the North in the Beaufort Sea 
development; and of course us here in Saskatchewan, 
particularly as it relates to heavy oil. 
 
Without that clause in the agreement, what could in fact happen 
would be the following. The Americans would  
  



 
April 13, 1988 

555 
 
 

say, you cannot export oil into the United States because your 
taxing regime amounts and is tantamount to a subsidy, and 
therefore we would lose access to the U.S. market because of 
our royalty process as it relates to heavy oils or other oils. So 
clearly we wanted that, otherwise they would be able to do 
through the back door what they could not do through the front 
door of a free trade in energy between the two countries. And 
that’s exactly why that was done. 
 
And so I think if you were to read the agreement as it relates to 
energy, you are left with only one thing and that is: preserve the 
right for me, please, federal government, to keep for yourself 
the right to come out and rape and pillage the western provinces 
should the price of oil go up again. And I think that is 
inconsistent with the policy of the NDP government from 1971 
to 1982, clearly stated by Allan Blakeney on that particular 
point in time, and clearly contrary to the interests of western 
Canada and the oil provinces. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:01 p.m. 
 


	ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
	ORAL QUESTIONS
	Surcharge on Vehicle Registrations

