


















































June 20, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 20, 1988 
 

2233 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 of this 
Assembly to present a petition signed by approximately 1,700 
people on behalf of the potash miners who will be laid off at the 
Cory potash mine. These petitions are expressing their opposition 
to the announcement, and asking the Government of 
Saskatchewan to reverse the decision to stop production at the 
Cory mine and to lay off 200 workers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — For the benefit of our guests today, I would like 
to remind them that customarily guests in our galleries do not 
participate in the debate. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery this 
afternoon are potash miners from that same Cory mine I was 
mentioning a few minutes ago, and their families, including their 
wives and children. There are approximately 50 of them in the 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to introduce them to you, and 
through you to members of the House. And I’d ask that they be 
welcomed to this House in the customary way. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 
the Assembly, and to you this afternoon, a group of 52 students 
from Caswell School in Saskatoon Westmount constituency. They 
are grade 7 students and are located in the gallery facing me, the 
east gallery. Caswell School, I might say, Mr. Speaker, is a very 
old school in the city of Saskatoon, fairly central in Westmount 
constituency, has a good reputation and a good community 
organization surrounding the school of Caswell. 
 
These students today are accompanied by Alicia Klopoushak, 
Patricia Jamison, Alan Reichert, Kevin Tootoosis, and also by Mr. 
Clifford. I know all members will join me in giving the usual 
round of welcome to these students from Saskatoon Caswell 
School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour and a 
pleasure for me to introduce — on behalf of the member from 
Melville who couldn’t attend the Assembly this afternoon — to 
introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, 19 students, grade 8 and 9 from the Goodeve School in 
Goodeve, Saskatchewan. They’re seated in the west gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. They have their teacher Dave Petlak with them this 
afternoon, as well as their bus driver Cyril Denesiuk. 
 
We hope that you enjoy the question period in the  

Assembly this afternoon and that you find it interesting and 
educational. I will meet with them at 2:30 on the main stairs for 
pictures and out on the lawn to have some refreshments and to 
answer any questions that you might have. So I would ask all 
members to please introduce these students from Goodeve. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
welcome some students, and I do so on behalf of the member for 
Humboldt who is not able to be here today yet, and I want to bring 
greetings on his behalf, and welcome to the Assembly on all of our 
behalf, a group of 19 students from the Viscount Elementary 
School, grade 7 and 8. They are here with their teacher Mr. Fettis, 
and with their bus driver Loa Titman. 
 
I would hope that they will have an interesting, educational, and 
enjoyable visit here, and on behalf of the member for Humboldt I 
say, welcome. May you have an enjoyable time and a safe trip 
home. I know that my colleague, the member for Quill Lakes, will 
be meeting with them later for pictures and some refreshments. 
And I ask the members, then, to join with me in welcoming these 
students and their chaperons to the Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to introduce to you, and to all members of the House, a 
group that are sitting in your gallery, sir. You can see them in 
uniform for the most part. They are representatives of the certified 
nursing assistants’ association. They’re here to observe the second 
reading debate today for professional legislation for their 
association, something that they’ve worked on for a good long 
time, and I must say now, Mr. Speaker, we’ll have a little more to 
say about it in the second reading debate. But they’ve worked hard 
and they’ve approached this whole process with a very 
professional way. 
 
I would just introduce them by name, Mr. Speaker, if I might: Jo 
Sandberg, Leanne Facca, Mike Wonsul, Barb Carriere, Agnes 
Howland, Norene Reid, and their executive director Ede Leason. 
They’re here and I’d ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming them here to the House today for question period, 
certainly, and then for the debate, which they’re looking forward 
to, following that. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the official 
opposition, I, too, would like to welcome the certified nursing 
assistants to the legislature and to compliment them on the fine job 
that they have done in bringing this legislation forth. We have 
been working with them for a long time on it, and we’re pleased to 
see them here today, and we’re pleased that we’re going to be 
dealing with the Bill in second reading. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2234 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Changes to Ward System 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, in the absence of 
the Minister of Urban Affairs I direct the question to the Deputy 
Premier. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, as you know, this last weekend just past, the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association board had an 
emergency meeting. One of the purposes of this emergency 
meeting was to discuss the government’s proposals with regard to 
the ward system. And during this meeting, SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association), representing over 500 urban 
municipalities in Saskatchewan, very definitely said that this 
government should not proceed with the arbitrary amendments to 
The Urban Municipality Act, which would do away with the ward 
system in our cities. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister: in view of this compelling argument from 
these elected officials representing over 500 municipalities in 
Saskatchewan, will you now say to this House that you will 
withdraw this legislation and not proceed with it until the 
municipalities have had a chance to have a plebiscite on this issue 
at these forthcoming fall elections? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the answer is no. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that kind of a response 
tells you something about the attitude of this government with 
regard to public opinion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — A new question to the minister, Mr. 
Speaker. Clearly, Mr. Minister, if you had been paying attention to 
the arguments that your minister, the Minister of Urban Affairs 
has been using, he has been saying that only people who are 
elected under the ward system are opposed to it. This resolution 
from the SUMA board of directors clearly states that the 
opposition is widespread and it’s strong, and they’ve taken the 
trouble to relay that information to you. 
 
I ask you then, Mr. Minister: in view of this growing opposition 
and strong concern to your arbitrary doing away with the ward 
system, will you therefore direct your Minister of Urban Affairs to 
at least include in that legislation the option of the ward system so 
that the municipalities have that to choose from, as well as the 
other option which he proposes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, there are some members on 
that side of the House that could advance those arguments with 
some degree of credibility. But that particular member, Mr. 
Speaker, was, I think, part of the government that imposed the 
ward system back at the time that it was brought in, in the face of 
all kinds  

of opposition from SUMA, city council, and others, Mr. Speaker. 
So from that particular member, I have a little difficulty with the 
question. 
 
The second point, Mr. Speaker, that should be made is that the Bill 
is now before the House. There will be ample opportunity for 
debate, and the member knows how this place works. When a Bill 
is tabled, you . . . As a matter of fact, it’s going to be dealt with 
this very afternoon, I understand. It’s on the agenda, The Urban 
Municipality Act, Bill No. 60, in adjourned debates. 
 
And I’m sure that all of these compelling arguments that members 
opposite have can be put on the record at that time, and he may 
even be able to persuade the Minister of Urban Affairs to make 
some adjustment. I don’t know, and I can’t speak for him, but 
that’s the way the system works, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. House 
Leader, there may very well be debate on this Bill, and we 
welcome that, surprised that it hasn’t been called for weeks 
running now by the members opposite. 
 
But I ask you, Mr. Minister, to speak on behalf of government 
policy, not the Bill. And on behalf of government policy, 
representing the Premier who is not here today, will you state in 
this House that you are prepared to include in that legislation the 
option of the ward system, as well as the other options that are 
being proposed by the Minister of Urban Affairs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, in order to bring a little 
balance to this, I’d just like to point out that the Leader of the 
Opposition isn’t here either. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite — just a bit 
of a refresher, Mr. Speaker, members opposite brought in the ward 
system after the people of Saskatoon and Regina, I believe, voted 
against the imposition of such a ward system. They brought it in in 
the face of opposition from the cities, both through plebiscite and 
the city councils and SUMA and anyone else that could speak at 
that time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We believe that the modified ward system, as presented by the 
Minister of Urban Affairs, Mr. Speaker, is an eminently 
reasonable course of action. And I can’t speak for the minister, 
Mr. Speaker, but I’m sure that he will be here to hear all of the 
compelling arguments that members opposite will advance during 
the course of this debate. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I ask . . . would like to ask the 
minister why all of the opinion of SUMA and the people that those 
elected officials represent is not important enough for the minister 
to pay attention to as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, if that action in 1973 was so 
wrong, how then do you justify your present action which will 
remove any possibility of  
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2235 
 

municipalities choosing the ward system if they so choose? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the only thing that I was 
trying to point out in earlier . . . answering earlier questions, Mr. 
Speaker, was the hypocrisy of members opposite. 
 
We have been, and do continue to consult with SUMA, with 
business, with city councils; some former councillors from time to 
time get a word in. And, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to consult 
with those people — people involved in local government, the 
business community, and so on. 
 
As you might expect, we don’t have 100 per cent agreement on all 
issues. But, Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s fair to say that the 
relationship between SUMA and this particular Minister of Urban 
Affairs has been a good one all along. 
 

Store Closing Hours 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — A question to the same minister, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Minister, at the same emergency meeting — and the 
fact that it was an emergency meeting tells you something about 
the strength of the feeling that is held by municipalities around the 
province, elected officials in our municipalities — at this same 
meeting, there was a discussion of your proposed legislation to 
abdicate provincial responsibility from the regulation of store 
hours and store openings. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, in view of the fact that the SUMA board 
decided to advise you and the legislators here that your proposals 
to abdicate that responsibility and leave it to local option, which is 
corporate option, in view of that advice, will you now commit to 
this House that you will not proceed with that legislation and 
therefore threaten small businesses and family businesses in 
Saskatchewan and further undermine rural businesses throughout 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, this question is not an easy 
one to deal with, as I’m sure members opposite know. We’re tried 
in the past to deal with this particular question and . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Easy for us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — He says easy for them. I’m not quite sure 
what they would do, Mr. Speaker, because they have two different 
stories, one for the rural community and one for the urban 
community. 
 
What they should do is go out and tell the urban community that 
they intend to close down Superstore, that there won’t be no 
evening shopping, that there will be no weekend shopping, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No Bi-Rites. 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — No Bi-Rite. None of them. All of them 
will be . . . And that’s the hypocrisy of members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This is not an easy question to deal with, and I wish someone had 
a nice clean, simple, easy answer for this one. We have tried 
others. They ended up in the courts, Mr. Speaker, and were found 
wanting. We are trying another option now, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Lay-offs at Cory Potash Mine 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question today is to the minister in charge of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. The minister will know, I think the 
members of the gallery and the Assembly know, that today in the 
gallery we have several families, workers, laid off workers, as a 
result of the government’s decision opposite to close down and 
shut down the Cory mines, which the government justifies or 
attempts to justify on the basis that there’s a world over-supply of 
potash. 
 
My question to the minister is this: if that is the case, that there is a 
world over-supply of potash, how is it that the minister can 
explain, either the minister in charge of PCS (Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan) or the minister in charge of The Potash 
Resources Act, how is it that the government can explain the two 
played-out mines in New Mexico are now reopening, that Kalium 
Chemicals is preparing to announce a new solution mine in 
Michigan, and why the Dead Sea Works, the Jordanian potash 
company is planning to spend $10 million on new expansion and 
production? Why is that so? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, that the hon. 
member’s information is as usual totally wrong; and secondly, Mr. 
Speaker, I would not be at all surprised that somewhere in the 
world today there is a politician that has convinced someone that 
there is a political need for a potash mine, as the former minister 
responsible for the potash corporation did in 1980 and 1979, 
which resulted in the tremendous over-capacity here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me correct the hon. member, Mr. Speaker. there are not tow 
new mines in New Mexico that are opening. We have been 
through this debate now on, I believe, three different occasions. 
There is one mine, which is a farmer’s co-operative, which chose, 
when prices were at disastrously low prices, to shut down 
production, Mr. Speaker, and buy on the open market. And I’m 
advised that most of their purchases were from Dead Sea 
producing countries, not from Canada. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, there has been speculation about new 
mines for the last five years, led, Mr. Speaker, by a former NDP 
cabinet minister, Mr. Messer, who is trying to encourage the 
Government of Manitoba to build a new potash mine. 
 
The simple facts of this, Mr. Speaker — and we have now been 
through this debate several times — because of the decision of the 
New Democratic government in 1979 to  
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2236 
 

have dramatic expansion to the potash industry in this province, 
today the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan can produce twice 
as much potash as it has sold in a record year, last year being a 
record year, Mr. Speaker, and each year our market share has 
increased. 
 
We just simply, unfortunately, have twice as much as capacity in 
the potash corporation through the actions of that individual, Mr. 
Speaker, the now Leader of the Opposition, than we can possibly 
sell even in record years. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister in 
charge of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan who says that 
we don’t have our facts correct. I suggest to the hon. minister that 
it’s him and his government that is totally out of touch with the 
facts in the potash world . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And I’ll tell you why. In 1982 and 1983 you 
reconfirmed the Lanigan potash mine, having the option to shut it 
down if you wanted. And I’ll tell you more specifically — yes, it’s 
in your annual report — and I’ll tell you more specifically, I have 
here Green Markets publication, June, 1988, quote: 
 

Dead Sea Works is currently investing $10 million ($10 
million) to expand production to 2.3 million tonnes metric 
tonnes . . . A further expansion to a 2.7 . . . A further 
expansion of 2.7 million metric tonne level is being 
considered and to be approved for 1988. 

 
Green Markets also talks about the two played-out mines in New 
Mexico. The facts are they’re expanding; the facts are that the 
inventory level is at low since 1981. How in the world can you 
continue to hide behind that false and phoney excuse for 
penalizing all of these families and workers by shutting down 
Cory mine. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. members don’t want to 
hear this, Mr. Speaker, but let me tell the people of this province 
that if there was ever any one and any government that ever 
looked at the potash industry through rose-coloured glasses, it was 
the New Democratic Party and that individual, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They announced planned expansions in 1975 . . . or ’79 of $2.5 
billion, Mr. Speaker, saying that Saskatchewan alone, the potash 
corporation would have expansions to produce 12 million tonnes 
of potash by 1990, Mr. Speaker. Now yes, all of the other 
expansions were cancelled, Mr. Speaker. And in 1982 when we 
took office and there was a steel framework up in Lanigan and 
nearly $200 million already had been spent of our taxpayers’ 
money, Mr. Speaker, yes, there was a fundamental question, do 
you throw away 200 or $50 million, or do you try and recover, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s the typical question we have put in this 
position, and the taxpayers eventually lost $500 million because of 
the New Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Again, Mr. Speaker, quite simply, decisions made in 1979 resulted 
in the potash corporation of this province and the taxpayers of this 
province, Mr. Speaker, having a company that can produce twice 
as much potash as it has sold in record years, and last year was a 
record year. There were wrong decisions made by the New 
Democratic Party, difficult decisions, Mr. Speaker, that have to be 
made now, and certainly not easy decisions. 
 
But fundamentally, Mr. Speaker, the potash corporation of this 
province, owned by the people of this province, has twice as much 
productive capacity and ability to produce potash as it can sell 
even in record years with increasing market share, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister of 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, whose answer, quite 
frankly, flies in the face of the facts and logic. Why is it, with all 
the world over-supply, that New Mexico can open up, Israel can 
open up, the Soviet Union can open up. They’re moving into the 
North American markets, they’re taking away our production and 
sales market share in the United States, and yet you and PCS can’t 
do it. 
 
I ask the minister: isn’t it correct to say that inventory levels today 
are as low if not lower than 1981? The inventory levels are that 
low, and as a result, because of those low inventories, there is a 
demand for potash. But because of your short-sighted, 
mismanaged policy, it’s the Americans and the Israelis who are 
benefiting and our families who are going broke and starving 
because of your approach. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the people of this province 
should know — they don’t want to hear it, Mr. Speaker. They 
want to shout down the answers, Mr. Speaker, because they were 
so wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, hear what they’ve said. This man, the Leader of the 
Opposition — minister responsible for the potash corporation in 
1979, member responsible for the disastrous over-expansion in 
1980 — made the decision himself, Mr. Speaker, to produce for 
inventories, Mr. Speaker, because there was an election coming. 
And he ballooned up inventories, he over-produced, he 
over-expanded potash, Mr. Speaker, because there was an election 
coming, Mr. Speaker, to the extent that inventories were so 
expanded, that had helped deflate and depress the price, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And now he wants that wrong-headed, foolish, financially 
unsound, Mr. Speaker, disastrous policy to be continued. He was 
wrong, Mr. Speaker, in 1978; he was wrong in 1979; he was 
wrong in 1980; he was wrong in 1981, Mr. Speaker; and he was 
wrong in 1982 and cost the people of this province $800 million 
and disastrous potash prices, Mr. Speaker. He was wrong then, 
he’s wrong again, and he’s wrong today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Minister of Finance. If that accusation of being wrong  
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2237 
 

had come from anybody other than the man who missed the 
budget deficit prediction by nearly a billion dollars, I might be 
worried — I might be worried. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: —By my new question to the minister is this, Mr. 
Minister: I have here The Potash Letter, put out by your own 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, spring of 1988, by your Mr. 
Chuck Childers. It says this: 
 

The price premium in U.S. markets over offshore markets, 
now at about U.S. $25 per short tonne, has clearly attracted 
offshore material, (has clearly attracted offshore material) to 
the detriment of Canadian and U.S. producers. 

 
Now they’ve got the material — to whose detriment, according to 
your president? Our detriment. We’ve got the capacity in Lanigan; 
we’ve got the capacity in Cory. What do you do? You shut it 
down. Are you reneging and disputing the very words of your 
president? Why don’t you admit that your corporation and you 
simply don’t know where you’re going on potash policy? You’ve 
bungled this badly as the budget of four or five years ago that 
you’ve introduced. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: Well, I always like the Leader of the Opposition, 
Mr. Speaker, talking about . . . (inaudible) . . . because I happen to 
have in my hand, Mr. Speaker, a report done by the New 
Democratic Party in 1980 where they said that the Heritage Fund 
was going to have $6.4 billion in it by 1990; that the revenues 
were going to increase tenfold, Mr. Speaker, to $13.4 billion in the 
Heritage Fund by 1990, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They didn’t miss it by $1 billion, Mr. Speaker; they didn’t miss it 
by $2 billion, Mr. Speaker; the NDP didn’t miss it by $3 billion, 
Mr. Speaker; they missed it by $10 billion, Mr. Speaker. Ten 
billion dollars they were out, Mr. Speaker, in 1978, ’79, and ’80, 
and here’s the documents, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is little doubt, when potash prices are up, Mr. 
Speaker, there will be some countries around that will want to 
have new mines. Manitoba will want to try and have a new mine, 
Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, its the same wrong-headed 
thinking, that when prices are up you increase production, that led 
to the disastrous potash policies of the mid 1980s, Mr. Speaker; 
that led to $899 million in losses for the taxpayers of this province, 
Mr. Speaker; that led to potash industry losses throughout the 
world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is the wrong track, Mr. Speaker. We have to try and bring 
productive capacity in line with sales. We have to try and hope 
that prices stay up, Mr. Speaker, so that the industry world-wide 
. . . The Leader of the Opposition is promoting the NDP policy of 
depressed prices and a bankrupt industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to  

the minister of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, who I 
wish would try to get to 1988 . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Yes, I 
do. I do, because the chairman of the potash corporation in 
1982-83, your own chairman right there who was fired by the 
Premier, said the following quote right from your report: 
 

. . . is our firm believe that a new and stronger PCS can 
emerge. With this belief in mind, the board of directors 
supported management’s recommendation to continue with 
one of our major projects in Saskatchewan. I refer to the PCS 
mining Lanigan phase 2 expansion which is now under way. 
Although the uncertainty in the market forced us to look at 
the extension of the construction schedule, the corporation 
will spend $80 million on this project in 1983. This clearly 
illustrates our commitment to, and our belief in the future of, 
PCS as a viable commercial entity. 

 
End quote, Mr. Minister. That was your decision. If it was our 
decision in ’79, it was your decision too. What’s happened since? 
I’ll tell you what’s happened since. You cancelled PCS 
International sales, and with it you cut back the markets, and your 
policy is to cut back on production so that our workers go 
unemployed. 
 
I say to the minister: start living in 1988, reverse the policy, show 
the leadership that your Minister of Energy said that you would. 
Why don’t you stand up for Saskatchewan people and not New 
Mexico people? Do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 
have just seen today why the Leader of the Opposition wants to 
talk about 1988 and not 1980-81 when he was responsible for 
making those decisions. And it was interesting, Mr. Speaker, that 
he indicated — and certainly, the board decision — but he 
indicated on management’s recommendation . . . because 
management recommended, because there was so much invested 
in the potash expansion at Lanigan, Mr. Speaker, they wanted, Mr. 
Speaker, that steel standing out there, rusting in Lanigan. That’s 
what they wanted, Mr. Speaker — the steel rusting in Lanigan on 
the landscape in Lanigan. That’s what they wanted, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact is, the fact is, Mr. Speaker, to try and tell the 
people of this province as the Leader of the Opposition has just 
done, that the potash corporation is losing markets because of 
decision, is blatantly false, Mr. Speaker. Our market share has 
increased, Mr. Speaker; it has increased into the United States, Mr. 
Speaker; it has increased through Canpotex, Mr. Speaker, 
throughout the world. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, to try and tell the people that we are 
losing market share is false, it’s wrong, and it’s deliberately 
deceptive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2238 
 

Call for Inquiry into Resignation of Saskatoon Deputy Police 
Chief 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make short 
comment with regard — a short statement with regard to the 
problems that have occurred recently in the city of Saskatoon as it 
relates to the city police. 
 
I have now reviewed the circumstances surrounding the 
resignation of Deputy Chief Henderson and have considered the 
calls of a public inquiry into this matter. I have also considered the 
suggestions that, with the resignation of Mr. Henderson, the matter 
should be treated as entirely closed. 
 
There are two aspects to this case. From the prospects of the 
Department of Justice, this is a criminal investigation. The 
evidence was independently reviewed by Mr. Serge Kujawa, Q.C., 
of the Saskatchewan Department of Justice to determine if a 
prosecution should proceed. That independent review is always, 
Mr. Speaker, always undertaken in the case involving police 
officers. Mr. Kujawa determined that no charges should proceed 
in this case as there was simply insufficient evidence on which to 
base a prosecution. 
 
The case also raises questions in relation to Mr. Henderson’s 
continued employment with the Saskatoon city police force. That 
aspect of the case was dealt with by the Saskatoon board of police 
commissioners and resulted in Mr. Henderson’s resignation. 
 
It could accordingly be argued that the matter is closed; however, 
as Minister of Justice, I remain concerned with the suggestion that 
this affair has shaken the confidence of the Saskatoon police force. 
Any police force must have public confidence to do its job. 
 
Further, before setting this matter to rest, I wish to be entirely 
satisfied that no further action is called for. I have accordingly 
asked the Saskatchewan Police Commission to conduct a 
confidential inquiry into the circumstances surrounding, and the 
results of this affair, and to report its findings and 
recommendations to me. The deputy Attorney General will meet 
with the chairman of the commission this week to discuss the 
process and the terms of reference. On the receipt of the 
commission’s report, I will determine what, if any, further steps 
should be taken. 
 
This course of action will give me the benefit of an independent 
and impartial review. The Saskatchewan Police Commission is an 
independent body established pursuant to The Police Act that has 
a broad mandate relating to the maintenance of quality police 
service in Saskatchewan, and a long experience in dealing with 
matters of this kind. 
 
I have considered the call for a public inquiry; however, it is my 
decision that such an inquiry is not called for at this time. In our 
justice system, matters related to criminal investigation are 
disclosed only in the most extraordinary circumstances. It is 
essential that the police and the prosecutors be in a position to 
conduct their business confidentially. 
 

This tradition of independence and effective . . . this tradition is 
intended to ensure that the administration of justice is independent 
and effective and to protect those touched by criminal 
investigation. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. I have had an 
opportunity to read the statement as the minister, in fact, was 
reading it. I don’t wish to throw gasoline on a fire that’s already 
burning pretty brightly. I am not sure, however, that this is going 
to do the job. 
 
The difficulty, it seems to me, Mr. speaker, with respect to the 
Henderson affair is been that everything has been conducted 
behind closed doors, and no explanation has been provided to the 
public, or indeed for that matter, I guess, to the police force. 
 
It seems to me that the difficulty here is that, firstly, I think there 
isn’t the confidence in the police commission — I’m not referring 
to the Saskatchewan Police Commission, members will 
understand — but there isn’t the confidence in the independence 
of the Saskatoon Police Commission that there should be. There is 
a feeling, I think, that that commission needs to be restructured; it 
needs a greater degree of independence. 
 
Secondly, I think the concern has arisen because everything has 
been so secretive. In the face of what looks like a serious breach of 
judgement and good behaviour, at an absolute minimum, not a 
word has been said, no explanation has been offered. We now 
have a continuation of this, I think, course of conduct that a 
confidential inquiry, which I think will solve nothing unless it’s 
made public. 
 
Let me end with the hope that if the inquiry is conducted 
confidentially, and depending on the nature of the allegations, I 
can see why that might have to happen if they’ve in fact involves a 
police . . . if there is a need to discuss police investigation and the 
manner in which investigations were undertaken and the reasons 
why they were undertaken, then I can see why the inquiry, or at 
least portions of if, might have to be public. 
 
I earnestly hope, however, that the report is made public. If the 
report is not made public, then this has all been a waste, and the 
members opposite and the minister will have accomplished 
nothing. 
 
So I end with the expression of a sincere hope that for the sake of 
the Saskatoon police force — which, Mr. Speaker, is a good police 
force and has enjoyed a good reputation over the years — for the 
sake of the Saskatoon police force, the minister solves the problem 
rather than avoids it, and makes the report which the Police 
Commission, Saskatchewan Police Commission, gives them, 
public. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 102 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of 

The Railway Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
respecting Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts resulting 
from the enactment of The Railway  
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2239 
 

Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 103 — An Act to amend The Animal Protection 
Amendment Act, 1987 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move first reading of a Bill to amend 
The Animal Protection Amendment Act, 1987. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order with 
regard to the question period earlier today. It is customary in the 
question period and at other times to note the presence or absence 
of ministers of the Executive Council. During question period 
that’s quite often done, and I don’t raise a point of order about 
that. 
 
But during the question period today the Deputy Premier referred 
to the fact that one of the members on this side of the House was 
absent from the Chamber. Mr. Speaker, he did that and you did 
not intervene — you did not intervene with the Deputy Premier 
even when a point of order was raised vocally from members in 
the House. 
 
I would like you to consider that matter, Mr. speaker, in 
conjunction with the rules of this House and, at an appropriate 
time, bring back a statement which will be supported by practices 
and procedures or citations. Would you do that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker: I recall the incident clearly. I will look at the 
verbatim record and, if necessary, I will make some statement. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 85 — An Act respecting The Saskatchewan 
Association of Certified Nursing Assistants 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
the House was informed just a few moments ago in question 
period, or prior to question period n the introductions of guests, I 
had the opportunity to introduce a group of people in the gallery 
who are, by and large, executive members of the certified nursing 
assistants in this province, people who have worked very, very 
hard to bring this day about, in terms of the time when we would 
be in this House discussing in principle, as second reading is, their 
new Act which gives them professional status in the province. 
And I think it’s an important day for them, and I know they feel 
it’s an important day. 
 
(1445) 
 
I first met many of the members of this group when I had other 
responsibilities over in the department of the then  

department of advanced education and manpower. I saw at that 
time that they were very serious about the concerns that they 
brought forward. I’ve continued to see that into this portfolio in 
Health, and I just want to say a word to them on a personal basis, 
Mr. Speaker, before beginning. Congratulations for the way 
you’ve conducted yourselves throughout all these months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to speak to second reading of The 
Certified Nursing Assistants Act, 1988, which will provide for the 
regulation of nursing assistants across the province. Previous to 
this Act, nursing assistants were regulated under The Registered 
Nurses Act, 1978. The 3,000 nursing assistants in the province 
have asked and have demonstrated the maturity to manage the 
affairs of their own profession. Mr. Speaker, this Act will allow 
the Saskatchewan association of certified nursing assistants to 
register set standards of conduct for, and discipline, their 
members. 
 
The Act is consistent with other regulated health professions in 
this province, and I would like to outline some of those features 
now. Mr. Speaker, it will be mandatory for anyone employed as a 
certified nursing assistant to be registered with the association. 
Title protection for the term certified nursing assistant and CNA, 
the abbreviation, is provided in the Act. These clauses will ensure 
that the public is protected from receiving services from 
unqualified practitioners. 
 
The Act also specifies that up to two public representatives may be 
appointed to the council of the association by the Lieutenant 
Governor in council. this type of public participation is of benefit 
to the association as well as to the public, and that’s been noted on 
many occasions, Mr. Speaker, throughout various Bills dealing 
with professional Acts of various associations. 
 
Nursing assistants will be responsible for registering their own 
members. This would, of course, include graduates of the 
Saskatchewan nursing assistant education program as approved by 
the Minister of Education. Mr. Speaker, the Act provides the 
association with the power to make by-laws, however, consistent 
with other regulated professions, by-laws that could potentially 
impact the public require the approval of the Minister of Health 
before taking effect, and that’s, as I say, consistent with other 
professions and it makes eminent sense. 
 
The Act ensures that complaints of incompetence or misconduct 
are acted upon in an effective manner. The discipline provisions of 
the Act outlines the manner in which complaints are investigated 
and discipline hearings conducted. Provision is also included that 
requires the complainant to be informed of the outcome of the 
association’s actions on any complaint. 
 
To assist in protecting the public, employers will be required to 
report to the association dismissals of nursing assistants for 
reasons of misconduct or incompetence. The association can then 
take the appropriate disciplinary actin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Nursing Assistants Association, as 
I’ve said earlier, has been fully consulted on the Act and looks 
forward to taking on their new  
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2240 
 

regulatory responsibilities. 
 
As this Act involves a transition of responsibility for nursing 
assistants, the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses Association has 
also been extensively consulted, and I know the two organizations 
have had many, I’m sure I could say several, but I believe it to be 
many meetings, and the SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered Nurses 
Association) concurs with the proposed legislation, and that’s 
important to note. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of The Certified 
Nursing Assistants Act, Bill No. 85. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While I must say that this 
is certainly a great day for certified nursing assistants in the 
province of Saskatchewan, I know that they have been working 
long and hard for many years to acquire legislation that allows 
them to be self-governing, Mr. Speaker. And in fact the NDP 
caucus back in 1983 or ’84 approved in principle, while not 
approving specific wording of any legislation, approved in 
principle the concept of CNAs (certified nursing assistants) being 
self-governing. So like the CNAs here and across the province, we 
are very pleased to see the legislation coming forward today. 
 
The legislation is a recognition of their valuable contribution in the 
health care field, Mr. speaker, of the excellent work that they have 
done throughout the years. And we believe as a caucus that they 
deserve recognition in law, and recognition that they are a very 
important and crucial part of health care in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This legislation will allow the association to better govern and 
manage their members and to better govern and manage their 
membership in the interests of the public as well, Mr. Speaker. 
They have worked long and hard in getting this legislation put 
forward. I, personally, have been extremely impressed with their 
diligence and their hard work, and I know they’ve had many 
sessions where they’ve been consulting with the Saskatchewan 
Registered Nurses’ Association, for example. And there hasn’t 
always been agreement, Mr. Speaker, but there’s been 
compromise and there’s been co-operation, Mr. Speaker, and I 
think that speaks well for both CNAs in the province of 
Saskatchewan and registered nurses, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s very, very heart-warming to see Saskatchewan people 
working so closely together and working so well to come forward 
with a piece of legislation of this nature that’s going to benefit all 
of us in Saskatchewan. 
 
I will have some questions, technical questions, in Committee of 
the Whole, but our caucus will be supporting this Bill, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, referred to a Committee of the  

Whole later this day. 
 

Bill No. 93 — An Act to amend The Ambulance Act 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to explain these amendments to The 
Ambulance Act of 1986. This Act, which was passed two years 
ago, provides a consolidation of legislation dealing with 
ambulance issues. It establishes new standards for the system and 
sets the stage for the future development of pre-hospital care. 
 
In the time since the Act was passed, my department has engaged 
in intensive consultation with the various interest groups in order 
to arrive at a complementary set of detailed regulations. I’m 
pleased, Mr. Speaker, to report that the process is now essentially 
complete. 
 
In the process of this consultation, a number of items were 
identified in the Act which required greater clarification. Further, 
new approaches were recognized which could accomplish the 
intent of the Act in a more appropriate manner. That is the purpose 
of this amendment Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Several of the changes outlined in the amendment Act are 
housekeeping in nature, and I will not go into them in any detail. 
Perhaps we can talk about them in committee with the hon. 
member from Lakeview. I would, however, like to outline the 
major areas that these amendments are designed to address. The 
first relates to the contractual relationship between ambulance 
boards and the operators that provide service in the province. 
Because this relationship is a corner-stone of the service delivery, 
the interest groups involved have recommended that the essential 
elements of these contracts be included in legislation. 
 
In addition, the amendment Act will include provisions that will 
protect the interest of individual operators and their own 
investment in the health delivery system of the province. 
 
The second major component is the inclusion of a dispute 
resolution process to resolve differences that may arise between 
boards and their contracted operators. Rather than leave both 
parties with no formal system to resolve disputes, a multiple-level 
process has been developed. This process is designed to provide 
for conciliation and, if necessary, binding arbitration and is 
developed to ensure fairness for both parties and a continuity of 
service. 
 
A final important aspect, Mr. Speaker, is the clarification that the 
practice of medical procedures by advance training ambulance 
personnel will fall under the jurisdiction of the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons. This is essential to ensure that 
high-quality, consistent standards of care are available to the 
residents of our province, standards of care that are delivered 
under proper medical control. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased with the legislation that has been 
developed with respect to our ambulance delivery system. It is 
designed to protect the interests of all the major players involved, 
particularly members of the public who utilize the service, and that 
must be and must  
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2241 
 

continue to be the major concern that we have here in the 
legislature. 
 
The consultation that has gone into the development of this 
legislation has been most extensive, and I would like to thank 
those individuals and groups who participated in this process and 
whose views are now represented here in these amendments. 
 
In particular, I would like to thank the members of the ambulance 
advisory committee for their commitment and diligence over the 
past few years. And, Mr. Speaker, that ambulance advisory 
committee represented the various sectors involved from hospital 
boards through members . . . operators, other people across the 
province, and I must say once again, their work was extensive in 
this area, and their work should be recognized by all members of 
this House who really are here to serve the same people. 
 
There’s no question, Mr. Speaker, that this legislation will place 
Saskatchewan on the leading edge of development in the 
pre-hospital care system in this country. I don’t think there can be 
any question about that, and it’s recognized, our Ambulance Act 
of ’86, and now with these amendments we will be recognized 
across this country as being the leaders in the country, and that’s 
right where we believe we should be, where our people believe we 
should be, and these amendments will take us there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With that, I’m pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 93, The 
Ambulance Amendment Act. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I should point out, Mr. 
Speaker, that I got a copy of the printed Bill today. I had a copy, a 
photocopy or a xerox copy of not the Bill in this form but in 
another form, on Friday. 
 
I have made some phone calls with respect to the legislation. We 
will require more time in order to make further contacts and to 
consider the minister’s comments. 
 
I understand that what this Bill does is it significantly changes the 
relationship between boards and ambulance operators, and it as 
well significantly changes the concept of what is a contract, 
because there’s provision in it that requires for the automatic 
extension of a contract unless there’s cause to terminate it. So it 
does significantly change the concept of contract as we know it in 
Canadian and in Saskatchewan law. 
 
I’m therefore going to ask to, in a minute, to adjourn the debate, 
Mr. Speaker, in order that I make contact with boards in the 
province and with other members of the ambulance profession in 
order to discuss these amendments and make sure that these are 
the amendments that indeed they wish to see the government 
putting forward. So I therefore adjourn the debate . . . second 
reading debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1500) 
 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 86 — An Act respecting Registered Nurses 
 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, on my left is Sid Smith 
from the Department of Health, and I have Gerry Tegart from the 
Department of Justice who’s been working with drafting of 
legislation. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I should point out that 
I was not aware that this particular piece of legislation was coming 
up; obviously there was a communication problem between the 
two sides of the House. And my material with respect to the matter 
is not in my office because I was working on it at home; however, 
I’m prepared to proceed on the basis of memory. 
 
There was a number of concerns that I had raised with respect to 
this legislation in second reading. And there is another couple of 
concerns that I also want to put on the record that I didn’t raise at 
that time, because the ones I was dealing with were the ones that I 
had hoped we could resolve through amendment, and I believe 
one of those has already been proposed in the House amendments 
before us today. The other two, I understand, from the registered 
nurses association are not agreeable, and they’ve given me their 
reasons for it. 
 
The other one in particular that caused concern was the section in 
the Act dealing with the abandonment of patients. Nurses have 
indicated to me, Mr. Chairman, that they are . . . that section really 
bothers them. And it bothers them because they’re constantly 
being put in a situation where they’re having to make a decision 
between or amongst patients and who should be receiving the 
care, and the provision allows for nurses to be disciplined if they 
abandon a patient. 
 
And I believe that this position that nurses are put in where they’re 
constantly having to decide which patient is going to get their 
attention because of understaffing in hospitals, Mr. Chairman, has 
caused them a lot of concern and it’s at the root of their concern 
with respect to this section. 
 
Another aspect of that that causes them concern is the fact that it 
may, at some time in the future, be used as an anti-strike clause, 
and that they will be . . . it will be claimed that they abandoned 
their patient if they go out on strike. I have spoken to the SRNA 
about that and they assure me that it is not intended to be an 
anti-strike clause from their point of view, and that’s . . . if there 
was a legal strike, that they wouldn’t be invoking this section as an 
anti-strike clause. But when we get to that particular provision, I 
would like to hear from the minister what his comments are on 
that particular section. 
 
Nurses have also indicated to me with respect to the fining, 
generally. There is a provision in the Act that deals with fining a 
nurse and also assessing costs against her in the event that the 
discipline hearings go against her and that she will be suspended 
until this fine and these costs are paid. And nurses have told me, 
Mr. Chairman, that  
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2242 
 

this imposes a great deal of strain on . . . like nurses aren’t in the 
same position doctors or lawyers are, for example, and it’s very 
difficult for them to pay a fine, and it’s almost impossible for them 
to pay costs of a hearing. And if they’re suspended and can’t make 
a living, it’s virtually impossible for them to pay a fine and/or 
costs, and so they’ve asked me to express this concern with 
respect to the legislation. 
 
And I have discussed it with the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association, and I’ve been advised that, in their recollection, costs 
have never been assessed against a nurse, and that it provides 
some sort of disincentive for frivolous legal proceedings, and that 
a fine is something that they don’t ordinarily levy also, but the 
right to levy it should be there in the event that some time in the 
future they might want to use it. 
 
And we’re not going to oppose the Bill because of this provision, 
but I would like the record to show that nurses have contacted me 
and have expressed concern about this particular provision. 
 
The other thing that they’ve expressed concern to me about is the 
possible conflict of interest when the executive director also sits 
on the council which makes a decision with respect to discipline. 
And I have spoken to the SRNA about this, and they also assure 
me that this whole procedure is looked after, inasmuch as the 
executive director has nothing to do with discipline hearings in the 
initial stages. 
 
But if the executive director did, and then sat on the council, even 
as a non-voting member but as a member that’s visible when a 
decision is being made with respect to the disciplining of a nurse, 
Mr. Chairman, I would suggest that is a conflict of interest. But I 
have been assured that that doesn’t take place. But nevertheless, I 
have said that I would put these concerns forward. 
 
The moral character question, I understand, is being dealt with in 
the House amendments, and that change is going to be made. 
 
And those, basically, are the major concerns that were put forward 
to me by nurses, as well as the ones I discussed in second reading. 
And we’d be prepared to proceed now on a clause by clause basis. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman. Yes, Mr. Chairman, I was 
just gong to say to the hon. member that we’ll probably best 
respond to those as we come to the clause within which each of 
those concerns presents itself. And if we can carry forward, we’ll 
go from there, and we can go on a item 1 agreement now, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 
 
Mr. Chairman: — House amendment to clause 2 of the printed 
Bill. 
 

Amend clause 2(n) of the printed Bill by striking out 
“suspended or revoked” and substituting “suspended or who is 
not expelled”. 

 

Clause 2 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 3 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 14 
 
Mr. Chairman: — House amendment to clause 14. 
 

Amend subsection 14(3) of the printed Bill by adding 
“majority” after “two-thirds”. 

 
Clause 14 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 15 
 
Mr. Chairman: — House amendment to clause 15. 
 

Amend section 15 of the printed Bill: 
 
(a) In clause (2)(a) by striking out “moral character” and 
substituting “good character”; and 
 
(b) In subclause (2)(g)(i) by striking out “investigation 
conduct committee” and substituting “investigation 
committee”. 
 

Clause 15 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 16 
 
Mr. Chairman: — House amendment to clause 16. 
 

Amend subsection 16(2) of the printed Bill by striking out 
“that he approves” and substituting “that the minister 
approves”. 

 
Clause 16 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 17 and 18 agreed to. 
 
Clause 19 
 
Mr. Chairman: — House amendment, section 19. 
 

Amend subsection 19(2) of the printed Bill by striking out “a 
person outside Saskatchewan as described in subclauses 
1(a)(ii)” and substituting “a person who last practised 
nursing in a jurisdiction outside Saskatchewan”. 
 

Clause 19 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 20 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Amendment to section 20 of the printed Bill. 
 

Amend clause 20(1)(b) of the printed Bill by striking out 
“paragraph 19(1)(i)(A)” and substituting “paragraph 
19(1)(a)(i)(A)”. 

 
Clause 20 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 21 to 25 inclusive agreed to. 
 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2243 
 

Clause 26 
 
Ms. Simard: — I guess the minister was just standing in reply to 
my earlier question with respect to abandonment. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the member’s concern was 
in section 26(2)(e), I believe, where the wording in here is . . . a 
key word there is “wrongfully” in the subsection which says 
“wrongfully abandoned a client”. 
 
I just want to point out to the member — and we’ve talked about 
this at some length in determining this — it’s important that the 
term “abandonment” not be considered to be as . . . And I believe 
SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) when they were raising 
this, the Union of Nurses was interpreting the word 
“abandonment” as only the narrow sort of interpretation of that 
word to mean leave a patient or whatever. And I think the term 
“wrongfully” placed there will certainly — in a hearing before 
peers, other nurses will certainly be able to determine whether or 
not, you know, someone who is practising nursing did, in fact, 
wrongfully abandon a client at a time of need or whatever. 
 
So I think this has been worked over for a good period of time and 
we believe, and all of the legal advice we have believes, that this is 
the best possible wording that we can come up with to serve the 
purposes that the nursing association needs, and that the public 
needs as well to have the assurance that’s needed in the provision. 
So unless you have, you know, further sort of arguments on that 
we can certainly go on. The member is indicating that she 
disagrees with me. It won’t be the first time, but I will say that I 
think we may have to come to the point where we’re agreeing to 
disagree. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, I want to ask the minister 
explicitly: did he say, and I may not have heard him say, that it is 
not an anti-strike clause from his point of view? 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’ll give you the assurance that it is not 
intended in any way to be an anti-strike clause. 
 
Clause 26 agreed to. 
 
Clause 27 agreed to. 
 
Clause 28 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Amendment to clause 28. Will the members 
take the amendment as read? 
 
Clause 28 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 29 agreed to. 
 
Clause 30 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Amendment to clause 30. Will the members 
take the amendment as read? 
 

Clause 30 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 31 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I believe the member raised 
a concern in her preliminary remarks regarding a section of clause 
31 as it relates to the levying of fines. And that’s in 31(2)(a)(i) and 
it says a fine: 
 

(a) that the nurse pay to the association within a fixed period: 
 

(i) a fine in a specified amount; 
 
The rationale behind that, and the fact that that sort of provision is 
in many of the professional Acts and the disciplinary provisions of 
those Acts, for the very reason that there may be time when some 
disciplinary measure should be, and is seen to be important that 
some disciplinary measure be imposed. But at the same time it 
wouldn’t be warranted that that disciplinary measure be 
suspension or revoking of licence or anything quite so severe. 
 
And that’s the thinking behind that as it relates to professional 
Acts across the piece. And this is one of those and that’s why it’s 
there, and it’s a matter of having that provision in there which 
really gives more latitude or more flexibility to the association to 
conduct their affairs in the fairest possible way as they deal with 
their individual members. 
 
Clause 31 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 32 to 41 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 42 
 
Mr. Chairman: — House amendment to clause 42. Will the 
members take the amendment as read? 
 
Clause 42 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 43 to 49 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, just before I move to report 
the Bill, I’d just like to say . . . or Mr. Chairman, I’d like to say to 
the committee that I notice a couple of visitors in the gallery. Jean 
Mahoney, the past president of the SRNA, and Jane Knox, the 
executive director of SRNA, are there watching as this Bill goes 
through its various stages. Obviously, this being the last stage in 
the House I’m sure they’re breathing some sigh of relief as some 
of the officials here, who have done a great deal of work as I 
indicated at another day here, in bringing this Bill an all the 
provisions of it to fruition. Before I report the Bill, I just wanted to 
recognize that, Mr. Chairman, to all members of the committee. 
 
So with that, Mr. Chairman, I move that the committee report the 
Bill. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 85 — An Act respecting The Saskatchewan 
Association of Certified Nursing Assistants 

 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2244 
 

Clause 1 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to the certified 
nursing assistants, there is a provision that allows for a special 
meeting to be called by 250 members, by request of 250 members. 
Now I noticed it was the same provision in the SRNA Act, and I 
wonder whether the minister could let me know why he chose the 
number 250 members, because with respect to the CNA, that 
would be a substantially larger number of individuals who would 
have to request a special meeting. And I’m wondering if that’s 
deliberate or whether 250 was just pulled out of the air? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, if I could just ask for just a 
couple of minutes, one of the officials here is just going to go out 
and do a check on that. I substantively agree with what the 
member has just raised in terms of the difference between the 
number of members, but if you could just give us a moment, we’ll 
. . . and I think I have an indication that members will agree to 
that. Just give us a moment, and we’ll have a reply. 
 
Yes, Mr. Chairman, as I said, the member raises an interesting 
point and I substantively agree with it. I just wanted to check to 
make sure that it was no surprise for the people in the CNA 
organization who are here. 
 
While it’s important that we not just define this, if there’s any 
specific ratio that this should follow or anything, it makes eminent 
sense that if the number is 250 for a very large organization like 
SRNA, a smaller number would be appropriate for the CNAs. I 
would advance a number of 125, and I believe they’d be in 
agreement with that. If the hon. member would be in agreement as 
well, we’ll provide the appropriate amendment. 
 
Ms. Simard: — We’re in agreement with that, Mr. Chairman, and 
I understand the CNAs are also in agreement with that. 
 
Mr. Chairman, there’s another thing that I would like the 
minister’s explanation on and that is governing examinations. I’ve 
looked through the by-laws and there is some general wording in 
the by-laws, but I don’t believe there is a specific by-law that says 
they have the authority to make by-laws governing examinations 
for CNAs. And I’m just wondering if the legal counsel on that side 
of the House could either assure me that authority is there for the 
CNAs and, if not, bring forward an amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’m assured that . . . our people believe 
that in section — what is it? — 14(2)(a), that section which: 
 

Subject to this Act, by-laws made pursuant to section 13 may 
be made for the following purposes: 
 
(a) prescribing the qualifications, standards and tests of 
competency . . . 

 
That that’s covered there, especially when it’s in conjunction with 
section 18(c)(i). You just flip to 18(c)(i) which says . . . which 
refers to by-laws —- that the fact that  

it is in the by-laws. You look at, “has passed examinations: 
prescribed and conducted pursuant to the bylaws;” and those two 
in conjunction with each other, I’m assured, do solve the problem 
that you raise. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’m not sure if I just need to put this on the 
Table, but I would just want to . . . it’s the amendment that we 
referred to earlier in the discussion, Mr. Chairman, and I would 
like to offer a House amendment which would in effect: 
 

Amend Clause 6(e)(b): 
 
by striking out “at least 250 members” and substituting “at 
least 125 members.” 

 
I so move, Mr. Chairman. 
 
(1545) 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 7 to 25 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 26 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, I notice that the SRNA Bill was 
amended with respect to what appears to be the equivalent of 
26(7) in The CNA Act. And I’m just wondering if the minister’s 
officials could take a look at that at this time and see whether or 
not a House amendment is necessary with respect to The CNA Act 
as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I am informed by counsel that the — 
who’s been very involved in this — is that while the wording is 
slightly different, the effect is the same, and the two associations 
had slightly different ways they wanted to approach this thing and 
so the wording was there. 
 
Now if there’s a problem, if the member sees a way in which there 
is substantive difference between the two, which I don’t think 
there is and our people don’t think that there is, that we just leave 
it at this. And if you’ll agree with that, I think we can carry on, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Clause 26 agreed to. 
 
Clause 27 agreed to. 
 
Clause 28 
 
Ms. Simard: — With respect to subsection (4) of section 28, Mr. 
Chairman, that section says that the discipline committee is not 
bound by rules of law concerning evidence. Now I know that 
that’s a standard section there. I raised concerns about it with 
respect to the SRNA Act. I have looked at some other professional 
legislation, and I  
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2245 
 

believe it is in some other professional legislation, but I simply 
want to say that it really does bother me that a discipline 
committee that’s making a decision as to whether or not someone 
has the right to continue in their occupation and to earn a living, is 
not bound by the rules of evidence. 
 
And I suppose the practical answer to that is, is that ultimately the 
discipline committee is bound by the principles of natural justice 
according to law and therefore would ordinarily consider 
themselves bound by the rules of law. 
 
But I want to put that concern on the record because I feel, in a 
situation where a discipline committee is deciding whether or not 
someone has the licence to continue practising their occupation, 
that they should be bound by the rules of law concerning evidence. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The concern that the member raises is one 
that has been raised not only in this professional legislation and in 
others as we get into the standard provisions that are there. 
 
Frankly, Mr. Chairman, the member, in raising the question and 
subsequent to raising the question, basically gave the reply to her 
own question, and it is that the . . . well, as she stated. 
 
Ms. Simard: — There is another provision of 28, and that’s 
28(10) that I would like some clarification on, Mr. Chairman. 
28(10) reads: 
 

The discipline committee may, either in the absence of the 
member who is the subject of the complaint or with that 
member’s consent, accept evidence on affidavit. 

 
Now that to me reads as though the discipline committee may, in 
the absence of the member who’s the subject of the complaint, 
accept evidence on affidavit. And I’m wondering whether I’m 
interpreting that correctly. 
 
And if indeed that is an interpretation that’s possible by that 
section, I find it rather strange, because I believe that in the 
absence of a member who’s the subject of the complaint, you 
better not be accepting evidence on affidavit. It’s even more 
important in the absence of that member to have viva voce 
evidence as opposed to affidavit evidence. 
 
So I’m wondering whether I’m misinterpreting that provision or 
whether indeed that is an accurate interpretation. Could I please 
hear from the minister on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Sorry for the delay. 
 
Mr. Chairman, while I recognize what the member’s raising, it’s 
felt, not only here but in other professional legislation, that the 
discipline committee, in this case, the discipline committee must 
have the flexibility to be able to deal with the varying 
circumstances that they have . . . that they must have, and that the 
use of affidavit evidence will be necessary from time to time. And 
they need, as I say, the flexibility earlier, and then the affidavit 
evidence  

will be necessary from time to time. 
 
I guess the point that I’m into . . . in the legal world here where 
you and my colleague beside me are far more comfortable than I 
am, for obvious reasons, I’m told that the rules of natural justice 
will confine the use of affidavit evidence to situations where it’s 
deemed to be fair to use that. And I suppose the weight of that 
affidavit evidence is . . . And I think that’s the natural process of 
law. In any case it will be a matter of a judgement call as to the 
weight that affidavit evidence is given. 
 
But that’s the reason behind it. That’s the reason it’s not only in 
this legislation but this has become a standard provision over a 
number of years now in some of these professional . . . pieces of 
professional legislation. So it’s the best explanation I can give you. 
 
You may want to get into it a little more. I just wish I could ask 
my colleague, the lawyer here, to stand up and you could go into a 
little of your lawyering here. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It wouldn’t do any good here. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Okay. 
 
Clause 28 agreed to. 
 
Clause 29 
 
Ms. Simard: I wanted to state with respect to the CNAs, in the 
same manner that I did with respect the SRNAs, my concerns 
about fines and levying costs of the inquiry and the hearing against 
certified nursing assistants. I believe that that could be a very 
unfair burden to be levied on a certified nursing assistant. 
Although I understand and fully recognize that this is a standard 
provision, I simply want to state what my concern is in that regard. 
 
Clause 29 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 30 to 44 inclusive agreed to. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister move to report the Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. Just before I do that, 
as I said earlier today in the second reading speech and earlier in 
the introduction of guests where I introduced the executive 
members, or some of them, that are there, along with the executive 
director of the nursing assistants’ association, I just want to say to 
them and to the House once again: I know that this is a landmark 
sort of day for their association and for the practice of that 
profession in this province. 
 
And I just want to say a personal word, once again, of appreciation 
for the way in which they’ve conducted themselves throughout 
these negotiations that’ll lead up to this stage, and just say to all 
members of the committee that we are well served, as I said 
earlier, in terms of the professional people we have in our nursing 
profession and the people we have operating as certified nursing 
assistants. Our public in Saskatchewan are well served by  
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2246 
 

both groups. So with that, Mr. Chairman, I move that we report 
the Bill. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 86 — An Act respecting Registered Nurses 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 
be now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move that the 
Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Leave is not granted. 
 

Bill No. 85 — An Act respecting The Saskatchewan 
Association of Certified Nursing Assistants 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move the amendments be 
now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a third time? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, next sitting. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 50 — An Act 
respecting the Control of Distribution and the Consumption of 
Beverage Alcohol in Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my opportunity 
to make a few remarks this afternoon with respect to Bill 50, the 
liquor control Act. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that there are two 
problems that I see with this particular Bill. The first one is that it 
increases access to, and makes provision to increase access to, the 
availability of liquor in Saskatchewan; and the second, that it gives 
the government power away from the scrutiny of the House in a 
fashion which I think goes perhaps beyond the tradition of the 
House, as I understand it. And those are the two items that I want 
to deal with this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With respect to removing of the powers from legislation into 
regulations, and into franchising, what this Bill does, Mr. Speaker, 
is it gives the cabinet a great deal of power to make regulations. 
Cabinet can make regulations about, first of all, who gets a 
franchise, where the franchise is gotten, and the number of people 
that can get franchises. It gives the cabinet power to put liquor into 
any store, virtually any store, if you look through various parts of 
the regulations. There are some parts of the legislation that make it 
appear as if it can only be done in food stores, but when you look 
at other parts, it leaves it wide open to  

cabinet. It gives cabinet the power over control of the prices and 
whether or not there’s going to be any kind of a regulation of 
pricing, and they can deregulate prices altogether. 
 
So what could happen is, in Saskatchewan we may end up with 
price sales and price wars in alcohol. It gives cabinet the power 
also to set the hours or to deregulate the hours, which could 
include then the sale of liquor even on Sundays. And particularly, 
if the legislation on store opening hours goes through, and if you 
combine that with accessibility of liquor in grocery stores and 
corner stores, then of course would leave that wide open for 
purchase of liquor at any time. 
 
Now in addition to the regulations, I mention that the liquor 
legislation here also deals with the possibility of giving out 
franchises. 
 
Now the franchising aspect is a kind of a thing that I’d even 
wonder why a government would want to get into it, because you 
would have liquor franchises which will be viewed by many, I 
think, as tickets to the good life — tickets to a good financial life. 
And in many places in the States, little businesses dream only of 
having a liquor franchise, and once you get a liquor franchise, that 
brings in business and clientele and brings in money that 
ordinarily might not accrue to that business. So while some 
businesses — those that get the liquor license — would have the 
advantage of that traffic, those that were unable to get that 
franchise of course would not have that luxury and would feel that 
it would be quite unfair. 
 
This leads then the government to be held at ransom by a person 
who’s specifically looking for a franchise. It leads to people 
almost demanding that they get a franchise or, if not, they’re 
holding at ransom support to the government. I don’t know if the 
government would really want that. I certainly think that if I was 
in cabinet I wouldn’t want to make my regulations or rules about 
who does or who does not have a franchise on the basis of political 
support. And that’s what it’ll lead to. 
 
On the reverse, you get exactly the same thing, where the 
government will be put in a position or leave itself open in a 
position of being accused of patronage franchisees. Now that’s 
again a government putting itself in a position where I don’t think 
we want a government to be. 
 
If there were any guarantee in this legislation that franchises 
would go out by tendering or by a fair tendering process, then we 
may be able to look at it in a more positive light. However, this 
government has a very doubtful and a very pitiful record when it 
comes to their record on tendering. There have been . . . I recall 
very distinctly, back in the late ’60s and into early ’70s, where one 
business by the name of Hackl Motors in Prince Albert made a 
public statement about the corruption that was going on in the 
government in the ’60s, and that was the Thatcher Government. 
And they . . . and Hackl accused . . . Mr. Hackl accused the 
government and their agents of coming to him and asking for 
donations to the political party, and if not, they were going to 
remove their government business from them. 
 
I have, since that time, and in the ’70s, although I haven’t  
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2247 
 

heard anybody say so publicly, but I’ve had architects that have 
told me privately that they also are in a position where they 
literally have to buy themselves . . . they have to buy their 
business. They’re expected to donate. 
 
What I’m afraid of is this kind of franchise operation leaves itself 
open, and leaves the province and the people of the province open, 
to more of this type of disreputable action. So I’m very wary, Mr. 
Speaker, of the possible selling of liquor stores that might happen, 
the franchising that’ll come as a result of it. 
 
Another difficulty with the franchising is that it would be 
accompanied with the selling of liquor stores, of the existing liquor 
stores. Many of the medium-sized towns in the province that now 
have liquor stores, we have a case where there will be a family or 
two which has got a good solid wage, the money coming . . . 
accruing from the liquor, part of it at least, is spent by . . . in wages 
to that person who accumulates it and makes it his lifetime work. 
With the franchising, that picture will change. Those communities 
will quite likely lose the people who had the good jobs with the 
good wages, and as a result it will be a detriment to the entire 
community. You lose that person, and the people that are going to 
be selling the liquor will be people who are going to be hired at 
$4.50 an hour, possibly ranging up to 7 or 8, but certainly not a 
good, full-time job and a full-time wage as is done right now 
through the liquor stores. 
 
I have to ask the question, Mr. Speaker, when we go through this 
deregulation of liquor, and what the government is doing through 
this liquor legislation, whether or not the government has asked 
itself the question of: where do we really want to go with liquor 
legislation? Or has the government simply answered to the 
demands that, well, we should open everything up, we should 
deregulate, and we should just do whatever a group of 10 or 12 
business people have decided and requested us to do. 
 
(1615) 
 
I think when it comes to control of liquor or deregulating liquor 
that we have to consider all factors, and it is admittedly not a very 
easy thing to deal with. But I think we should consider all of the 
factors — the positive ones and the negative one — and there are 
some positive ones. liquor is something that most of us have kind 
of grown up with, alcohol being something that’s very much used 
socially. And we’re all in a position where it’s difficult . . . and we 
don’t necessarily want to condemn the use of alcohol, particularly 
when it’s used judicially, and we know that in Saskatchewan over 
half of our population, or very close to half of our population, are 
moderate drinkers. 
 
So we have to, when we’re making legislation, we want to do 
some kind of a balance. We want to be able to accommodate the 
moderate drinkers who we generally feel, and is accepted in 
society, as being responsible, and at the same time be mindful that 
in Saskatchewan, while there are 586,000 moderate drinkers, there 
are also 46,000 what we call problem drinkers, and that half of 
those are between the ages of 15 and 24. And we have a 
responsibility here in this House to assure that those  

people who are affected by liquor in a negative sense are also 
looked after, and that their voices are heard and that we speak on 
their behalf. 
 
There are other statistics, Mr. speaker, that point to the problems 
of alcohol. One that is quite well accepted is the cost, the actual 
dollar cost of alcohol to Canada, and the figure has been used this 
year is it’s $21 million a day is the actual cost of alcohol in 
Canada. If you prorate that to Saskatchewan, assuming that we 
drink our . . . and have our share of problems of Canada, the figure 
will come out to be approximately $1 million a day loss in 
productivity and staff morale in car accidents. So it’s not a proud 
picture, Mr. Speaker. It’s not a pretty picture. It’s a picture that 
needs to be looked at very, very seriously in view of the 
difficulties. 
 
Now those are some of the tangible and some of the more 
measurable problems or difficulties with alcohol. There are also 
the more intangible ones which are maybe even more tragic than 
looking at just the dollar figures. They certainly bring out the 
tragedy, or just looking at the numbers, and that is something that 
you and I and everybody, I guess, knows but we sometimes don’t 
bring to light and don’t think of often enough, and that is the effect 
that liquor has on individuals — the loss of esteem, the loss of 
personal possessions that many people go through when they’re 
involved with access or rather an excess of liquor, and sometimes 
what happens to families where the person, as an individual, will 
be withdrawn or cast away from the family because of problems 
with alcohol. 
 
This has a tremendous difficulty . . . it is a tremendous difficulty 
for children, in particular. We know that in many cases progress at 
school is retarded if one or more family members has a liquor 
problem. It goes to the extent of the children having reduced 
access to food and clothing, and as a result, in some cases, even 
goes to as far as abandonment. 
 
So we have to ask ourselves a question in our society, is just how 
far do we want to go with respect to increasing the access in 
liquor? We ask, we have to ask ourselves the questions: what does 
it do to an individual; what does it do to a family; what does it do 
to our society; as well as what does it do to our economy? 
 
And as I mentioned again, Mr. Speaker, we have to keep in 
balance the fact that liquor is an accepted thing here in our 
Saskatchewan, in our Canada. 
 
So I’m asking the government members opposite, and the minister 
opposite, that when he introduced this legislation . . . I’m asking: 
why is it that you’re setting it up to increase the accessibility 
knowing these things? And why is it that when you’re increasing 
this accessibility, why is it that you are making provision for more 
government control which will only naturally lead, or which can 
naturally lead, to pressure on the government which can lead to 
patronage and also to corruption of government? 
 
I want to close, Mr. Speaker, with one other reference. And that 
reference is again to something that has happened in the past over 
the last three or four years, and  
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2248 
 

that is what is happening to the access? It was this government that 
allowed liquor advertising on television. Prior to this 
government’s promotion of liquor through the allowing of 
advertising, there was not any Saskatchewan-based advertising, 
just that that sneaked in without being filtered out on television. 
 
And the first beer ads that we saw were beer ads which associated 
the beverage of beer with youthful and athletic activity. And 
although the ad makers and the brewers laid claim that this would 
not increase consumption — and I don’t think it did increase 
consumption, and I don’t know if that’s the thing to argue at any 
rate — we know that what it did is it planted in the minds of our 
young people, those in that 15 or vulnerable age below that, 
planted in their minds the idea that if you’re having a good time on 
the beach, or if you’re having a good time on the softball field, 
softball diamond, or whether it’s playing basketball, or skiing, that 
liquor would be associated with that. 
 
And there was a bit of a public outcry on that, and I notice that 
now those type of ads are more . . . have been pulled. I have not 
seen as many of them as I did three or four years ago. And I’m 
glad to see that, that they’re selling beer in a different way, rather 
than trying to implant the sale of beer through using that type of 
advertising. 
 
But what it did is it showed me, Mr. Speaker, that the direction 
that this government is going in — that access to advertising in 
addition to this, which is deregulating the liquor laws more and 
more — tells me that the government is going in a direction which 
I don’t think it should be. I don’t think it should be going in the 
direction of increasing the accessibility. 
 
I will close, then, Mr. Speaker, with a summary remark — those 
two remarks — that I am opposed in principle to two things that 
this Bill does: one, that it increases the accessibility; second, that it 
opens the Bill up for patronage and franchising. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. I want to add my 
comments briefly to those of the member from Prince Albert with 
respect to these amendments on The Liquor Act. This has been a 
recurring theme in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, members opposite 
having taken steps, passed legislation, changed policies, which 
make alcohol more accessible. And their response is: I guess the 
public want it. Our response to all of this has been: but it is not in 
the best interests of society, whatever they want. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there’s one thing I think all members would agree 
upon, that is that there’s no need in our society to promote the 
consumption of alcohol. The product has no danger of 
disappearing from our society of its own volition. And yet 
members opposite seem to do that. The toll I . . . My mother, Mr. 
Speaker, for many years was very active in the WCTU (Women’s 
Christian Temperance Union), quite a strong chapter in Moose 
Jaw. I do not want to use the sort of phraseology which was 
typical of that group at that time — they’ve changed in the ’40s 
and ’50s — but I may say I share some of their concerns as I look 
around society. 
 
The toll taken by alcohol abuse in terms of health costs, in  

traffic accidents, time lost from work, and production lost from 
our society is very, very considerable. It is probably fair to say that 
there isn’t any chemical in our society, there isn’t any drug which 
is abused, which costs us as much as alcohol. 
 
This government opposite has adopted a policy of promoting 
alcohol consumption and making it more accessible. And they’ve 
done both. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m still not sure what prompted members opposite 
to allow alcohol advertising. Certainly the publishers and the 
owners of the media and the liquor industry itself would have been 
in favour of it, but I still do not understand fully why they would 
take such a step. It is clear advertising encourages consumption; it 
is equally clear our society needs to move in the opposite 
direction, and yet those steps were taken and have never been 
changed. 
 
They’ve also made alcohol more accessible. We had a debate 
some time ago about the consumption of alcohol in sporting 
events at Taylor Field and so on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we now have a Bill, and while the minister has not 
been very forthcoming about what he’s doing and why he’s doing 
it, those of us on this side of the House who over the years have 
watched this government promote the consumption of alcohol and 
make the alcohol more accessible, view this with some alarm. 
 
Clearly, Bill 50 is designed to provide for private franchising of 
alcohol. We’ve had that for some time in very small community 
where one can’t justify a liquor board store, but heretofore we 
have confined it to those very small communities where one can’t 
justify a liquor board store, but heretofore we have confined it to 
those very small community where there may well not be the 
problem with consumption of alcohol that may exist in larger 
centres. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t see how one can come to any other 
conclusion but what the private retail sale of alcohol is going to 
increase consumption. It is in the nature of businesses everywhere 
to want to increase product and want to increase product sales and 
want to increase profit; that’s what they’re there for. I cannot see 
how they will do other than to try to promote sales. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we . . . probably all of us have visited in U.S. states. 
The two border states particularly, North Dakota and Montana, 
both have private sales. We see them promoting the sale of 
alcohol, trying to increase sales, trying to increase profit. That’s 
going to happen here, and I think, Mr. Speaker, it is most 
unfortunate. The last thing our society needs is anything which 
makes alcohol more accessible, anything which makes it more . . . 
which promotes its consumption. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have, in Saskatchewan, I think an effort which 
many of us applaud, although I gather not universally so, and that 
is the alcohol-free grads. As I was driving to work this morning I 
was listening to apparently a controversy between the Regina 
school board, who are promoting alcohol-free graduations and 
some parents which apparently are not warm to the notion. And I 
gather there are some people present who think that’s not realistic, 
I guess, to be fair. 
 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2249 
 

Mr. Speaker, whether or not it’s realistic I guess is a question 
which parents of children of that age could answer better than I. I 
don’t have children who are of that age. Our children are younger 
than that, but I think we would all like to see graduations at 
schools and universities which are not fraught with the problems 
and consumption of alcohol which has been the case in the past. 
We may, I guess . . . honest people may differ, I guess, about how 
you achieve that, and that’s perhaps all we’re saying here. 
 
(1630) 
 
But I don’t see how we can honestly and consistently . . . on one 
side society saying, we want alcohol-free grads; on the other hand, 
have ads on television which promote consumption of beer and 
wine by young people — and they’re always young people, or 
almost always young people on those beer and wine ads — and 
make alcohol more accessible to private franchises with private 
business people promoting the sale and consumption of alcohol. It 
is the nature of business. It is not in their nature to try to restrict 
consumption. And that was always why I thought the Crown sold 
alcohol, was because there was no way to sell it through private 
outlets without have the sales and consumption of alcohol 
promoted. 
 
We’re now going to get away from that system at a most 
unfortunate time, Mr. Speaker. I think the statistics will show that 
the consumption of hard liquor is actually decreasing. The 
consumption of beer and wine is not. I think that’s in part due 
because we have advertising of beer and wine. I think that’s one of 
the reasons why it has not decreased. 
 
I think, as well, it perhaps has something to do, to be fair, with the 
life-style. People today pursue healthier life-styles. The lighter 
alcoholic products are thought to be healthier. I am not sure that 
one grows any stronger on the consumption of beer, any more than 
one grows any wiser with the consumption of beer, but that’s the 
popular myth today that beer and wine will make you healthier 
than the consumption of the hard liquor. 
 
I said I didn’t intend to go on for long. I don’t intend to go on for 
long. We will have some questions in the Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
I do not understand why we’re apparently making provision for 
the sale of alcohol on buses. The section provides for the sale of 
alcohol on trains, ships, and buses. Now the number of ships 
which ply their way back and forth across Saskatchewan is not 
large, nor indeed given the current state of the drought would the 
ships be very large. Any ship that tries to get across Saskatchewan 
wants to be light enough so that somebody can carry it on their 
backs because there’s no other way to go. 
 
Notwithstanding the optimism of the member from Melfort in 
bringing in a Bill on private railways, I don’t frankly expect to see 
travel by rail increase within this province. 
 
That means that the only purpose in the section must be to allow 
consumption of alcohol on buses, and I question  

that as well, and we are going to be questioning the minister of 
alcohol . . . that was s lip, but a Freudian slip . . . the minister in 
charge of the Liquor Board. We’re going to be questioning him in 
the Committee of the Whole. 
 
As I say, Mr. Speaker, the whole thrust of this Bill appears to be to 
make alcohol more accessible, and that is going to increase 
consumption. I, for my part, think that’s most unfortunate. The 
member from Prince Albert’s quite right — alcohol is a part of our 
society. Whether or not, if we had to do it all over again, we’d 
make it illegal, is something academics may enjoy discussing, but 
for us practical politicians it hasn’t much relevance because we’re 
never going to do it. 
 
But I would have hoped we would all agree that we should not be 
encouraging its consumption, and this government clearly is. 
They’ve done it with liquor advertising. They’ve done it . . . They 
promoted it with respect to the consumption of alcohol at sporting 
events, which took . . . That debate took place a couple of years 
ago. 
 
And now we’ve got a Bill which is going to turn the sale over to 
private people who by their very nature — I’m in business myself; 
I know — who by their very nature seek to increase profits. They 
do that by increasing sales. And they are almost certainly going to 
be doing it. 
 
So I join other members of this Assembly who have expressed 
concern about the thrust of this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 
referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 56 — An Act 
respecting the Reorganization of the Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to take part in debate on Bill No. 56, the reorganization of 
the Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, I would like to indicate just how SMDC 
(Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) was first 
created and when it was created. And I want to turn to the annual 
report of 1978-79, Mr. Speaker, and that was a report that 
indicates when SMDC was created. 
 
In June of 1974 the Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation was formed to participate in the development of the 
province’s hard rock mineral sector. And that was to take part in 
the development of the uranium industry and hard rock minerals, 
base metals, and precious metals. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, in 1977 SMD was created by an order in 
council under the legislative authority of The Crown Corporations 
Act, and at that time it was given its own Act as other Crown 
corporations in the province also have. It  
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2250 
 

was getting to be a big corporation and had to have its own Act. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, SMDC, when it was created, it was also 
created to create a window to the world, especially in the uranium 
industry at that time. 
 
Now we have Bill 56 before us, Mr. Speaker, An Act respecting 
the Reorganization of the Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation, and it has three parts to it. Number one was: there are 
three primary purposes of this Bill. First, we want to provide for 
merger of Eldorado Nuclear Limited of the Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation in to a single company which is far 
stronger than either corporation could have ever imagined before. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when we take a look at this, we know that 
SMDC was a big corporation, and probably the biggest 
corporation and one of the better corporations in the world as far 
as the uranium industry is concerned. 
 
Second, we want to ensure that the head offices of this world-scale 
resource company is here in Saskatchewan. And I want to touch 
on that a little later. 
 
And third, we want to allow for the only divestiture of the 
companies — I mean, the government’s ownership in this new 
company, and that are the words of the Deputy Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as far as SMD is concerned — and Deputy Premier 
indicated that by creating this merger we would now have the 
biggest uranium corporation and the most powerful in the world 
— and I say, Mr. Speaker, if you just take a look at how that 
happened, and it could never happen unless they were to 
amalgamate SMDC with Eldorado Nuclear. And of course we 
know that SMDC is a Saskatchewan-owned corporation, solely 
owned by the citizens of this province, and I feel that that is the 
way it should be. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, in all honesty that SMDC, 
regardless of the amalgamation, would still be the largest and the 
richest corporation in the mining industry in the word, regardless. 
We would not have to take on a weak sister to become a powerful 
organization in the uranium industry in the world. And I might add 
— and I want to emphasize that again, Mr. Speaker — it is owned 
solely, 100 per cent, by the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
And it didn’t just happen by chance. There was a lot of work and a 
lot of money spent in creating SMDC and making it the powerful 
organization that it was. As I indicated, it was started in 1974. But 
then you take a look at the exploration program that went along 
with SMDC — and I give some figures: in 1980, there was $80 
million spent on exploration, mainly in the uranium industry in 
this province, and that is a lot of money; in 1981, there was $70 
million spent in exploration, and that starts to go down when you 
get to 1983. 
 
And you take a look at the high of 80 million in 1980, and then 
you get down to ’83 and it goes down to $24 million in 
exploration, and ’84 that had dropped, Mr. Speaker, down to $18 
million, and that was a large drop. 
 

They talk about the head offices remaining in Saskatchewan, and I 
might add that there are, I believe, six head offices right now in the 
city of Saskatoon, head offices in the mining industry, and I speak 
specifically of the uranium mining industry. Key Lake, most 
certainly, is an important part, and the Saskatchewan government, 
SMDC, own 50 per cent of that corporation, and their head office 
is in Saskatoon. And Key Lake, Mr. Speaker, is the largest mine in 
the world, the largest operating mine of any place in the world, 
and their head offices solely are in Saskatoon. 
 
And Cigar Lake, which the citizens of Saskatchewan own 50 per 
cent of, their head office also, Mr. Speaker, are in Saskatoon. And 
of course we have SMDC, which no longer will be SMDC; its 
head office is in Saskatoon, and of course that’s 100 per cent 
owned by the citizens of Saskatchewan. And you have another 
head office in Saskatoon, and that’s Eldorado Nuclear, or Eldor 
Mines, which is the federal Crown corporation, and they also have 
a head office in Saskatoon. 
 
So I think that when the Deputy Premier was talking about 
creating a head office in Saskatoon, I think that we have to be very 
careful, and I think that he has to be very careful, that when you 
take and you amalgamate SMDC and Cigar Lake and Eldorado 
Nuclear and you create the one organization, then I think that 
there’s a possibility and a very real possibility that we will lose 
some of the jobs in Saskatoon, because the offices that are there 
right now, Mr. Speaker, are going to be amalgamated into one. 
 
And I suggest that this amalgamation, rather than creating a 
brand-new head office, may just be what it indicates — an 
amalgamation of some of the major players and the major head 
offices in Saskatoon. And I would be very, very careful on that 
one, and I think time will tell whether this is going to be a good 
move or a bad move. 
 
Then we have to take a look, Mr. Speaker, at the main reason. 
They say they want to create the world’s largest uranium 
corporation, and I say to you, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated before, it 
already is the biggest operation in the world. SMDC most 
certainly is the biggest uranium operation in the world when you 
take a look at its assets, and not only in uranium, but in gold also. 
It is a big operation. If you take a look at the assets of SMDC and 
the 50 per cent share in Cigar Lake alone, Mr. Speaker, that 
deposit is worth $10 billion Canadian — that’s $10 billion; and we 
in Saskatchewan have one of the highest royalty rates of any place 
in the world, and that guarantees that this type of moneys are 
going to come back to Saskatchewan people. 
 
(1645) 
 
And there’s something deeper here, and I feel, when you take a 
look at the type of privatization that has been taking place around 
the country, you just have to take a look at the federal government, 
who want to privatize Air Canada. 
 
And we take a look at the forest industry that has now been 
privatized, and Weyerhaeuser, a big corporation from the United 
States that has 8 million acres of our  
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2251 
 

prime forest land and they’re administering that 8 million acres, 
and reports have indicated prior to that sale that we had 25 years of 
prosperity ahead of us in the forest industry. Things looked bright; 
all reports indicate that we have 25 years of prosperity ahead in the 
forest industry. So then why, I say, at that time would they want to 
get rid of the assets of Saskatchewan government, Sask Forest 
Products? But they’ve done that, and I suspect that you will see, if 
we get a federal Conservative government back in Canada, that 
Air Canada would also be nationalized. 
 
Right now they have pulled back, and then again, they’ve brought 
forward legislation where they want to go ahead with 
privatization, and I think this is what’s behind SMDC and 
Eldorado. You have the two Conservative governments in the . . . 
We know what’s happening in privatization in this province, and 
they’re gong to privatize it whether we like it or not. 
 
And once again I say that you can compare the uranium industry 
to the forest industry. All indicators are showing that the uranium 
industry has a bright future in this province, and we have the 
largest reserves in the western world, and easily accessible and 
rich deposits. 
 
And here we are with a mineral that would help diversify this 
province, especially now when we really need diversification, so 
that we can’t just stay back and rely on the ups and downs of the 
agricultural industry. We need this type of diversification, and that 
is one of the reasons why, in the 1970s, in the early ’80s, that 
SMDC was created so that this province could take advantage of 
that type of diversification. 
 
We are now losing that. We are going to lose that and we are not 
going to have any say as to what is taking place in that industry, 
because once it’s privatized — then you get down to and they 
indicate 25 per cent is the most that anybody can hold — but you 
can just see down the road a few years, they’re going to get rid of 
30 per cent in the first two years and then gradually privatize it. 
 
And that really concerns me because right now, you take a look at 
the surface lease that we have, the agreement that’s in place in 
northern Saskatchewan. It’s not only in place in the uranium 
industry but also in the gold industry, and that surface lease says to 
the industry that you shall hire 50 per cent of northern labour, and 
that has been carried out in one mine and that’s at Amok, at Cluff 
Lake. They have always stayed at 50 per cent or 53 per cent, 
which they were just last week, and that is the type of 
development that we need in northern Saskatchewan. And through 
SMDC we could control that. 
 
And I think what you’re seeing now and in the last number of 
years, Key Lake has gone from a less than 20 per cent and now I 
believe is up over 30 per cent northern content, and I say that we 
have to . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 36 per cent, the Deputy 
Premier says, and that’s coming up, and we have to move that up 
in order to give Northerners their fair share. I really am concerned 
that if SMDC is privatized with Eldorado Nuclear, then we’re 
going to lose control over that surface lease and as to how the jobs 
are carried out, and so is the province going to be a big loser. 
 

I also worry about the workers’ health and safety. We had set up 
through SMDC some of the toughest health and safety laws in any 
place in the world, and that is something that we have to maintain 
because this is an industry we don’t want to make any mistakes in. 
And we have set that up and those rules and regulations are there, 
and once that is privatized, Mr. Speaker, I say that we are going to 
lose that, and the province is going to be the big losers. 
 
And that, when I speak of jobs, I think that’s important to maintain 
SMDC to give us that window on the world and to give us that 
type of clout that we need to enforce those types of laws and make 
sure that everybody has a fair share for health and worker safety. 
 
And thirdly, Mr. Speaker, and I think this is very important when 
we deal with environmental laws, Saskatchewan and the Minister 
of the Environment has continually indicated that he will adhere to 
this and will implement the toughest environmental laws of any 
place in the world. And we have those laws in place right now. 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that when we’re dealing with the 
environment, especially the environment in northern 
Saskatchewan, we have to be very careful because it’s fragile and 
we have to make sure that we can control what is taking place in 
the environment. And if the government goes ahead with this 
amalgamation, I say that we will lose that, and I think it’s going to 
be bad for the province as a whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again I say it’s an ideology that Conservatives 
both federally and provincially are working on. It’s the way 
they’re going down the road, and I think that it’s bad for this 
province. And I say that, you know, you just have to take a look at 
the forest industry is gone, Sask Minerals is gone, and we see the 
problems that we’re having now. We see the potash corporations 
that are having a lot of problems. We see all the families that are 
losing their jobs and being destroyed. And the same with the 
northern mines, with Eldorado. 
 
And you can go back to the Highways equipment and that was 
privatization and 200 families lost their jobs just with one fell 
sweep. And I say that’s bad for Saskatchewan. It’s almost like 
1929 to ’34 all over again where you had a federal government in 
Ottawa which was Conservative and a provincial government. 
And that’s how they operated this province. And as a result, they 
were thrown out and really thrown out where they didn’t get any 
seats in 1934. It’s not the way to go. 
 
And I just say that this type of destruction is something that the 
Conservative government of Saskatchewan does not have a 
mandate for. And I say this in all sincerity, Mr. Speaker, when the 
Conservative government was out campaigning in the 1986 
provincial election, they never indicated to the electorate out there 
that they were going to amalgamate SMDC and the privatize it. 
And of course they didn’t indicate at that time that they were 
going to eliminate the drug plan, and they didn’t indicate that they 
were going to put a gas tax on. As a matter of fact, they indicated 
that the gas tax . . . they would never put that gas tax on again. 
 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2252 
 

So I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that this government does not have 
the mandate to do what they’re doing. They do not have that 
mandate, because if they had gone out and campaigned and said 
they were going to do away with the drug plan, and they were 
going to do away with the dental nurses, and they were going to 
put the gas tax back on, and they were going to amalgamate 
SMDC with Eldorado Nuclear, well I can just say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that there would be very few members of the 
Conservative Party left, and they would be sitting on this side, not 
over on the government side. 
 
So I say, in all fairness, they do not have that mandate to go out 
and privatize this province and get rid of the assets that every man, 
woman, and child have worked so hard over this years to build up, 
assets that we need to diversify this province that we have. And I 
say that that has to come to an end, and I think that the members 
opposite, the private members, they should stand up and be 
counted, because it’s not too long down the road we’re going to 
have a provincial election, and let me tell you, the way this 
province is gong there’s not going to be much left. 
 
And there’s a number of Conservative members on that side that 
are in their first terms and I’m sure that they would like to come 
back in here for a second term. And there’s absolutely no way. 
And I say to those private members over there, there’s no way 
you’re ever going to get elected on a Conservative ticket, not after 
what has taken place in this province. 
 
You know, we had a debt in this . . . a surplus in this side of $129 
million when Allan Blakeney was the premier. Now we have close 
to $4 billion under the Finance minister that we have here. And I 
might add, not only that but he was even out $800 million in his 
budget. So I say to the members, that’s fine, the Finance minister, 
the former Liberal member, he’s not going to be running again, 
he’s not going to be around here, but he’s taken you all down the 
garden path. 
 
And I say it’s time for the private members to stand up and start 
fighting back and stop this privatization and, I might add, 
centralization which has taken place in this province. 
 
And when you talk about centralization and you talk about a 
region of this province where we have poverty and 
unemployment, just severe, and you see the type of localized 
development that just went in and announced the other day, into 
Meadow Lake, a hundred million dollars worth of capital, all put 
in to the one member’s, in Meadow Lake. And what happened in 
the rest of that region? Nothing. Nothing. It’s all localized. 
 
And I say to the private members on the other side, you have a few 
senior cabinet ministers who are puling the strings, but they’re not 
going to be around in the next election to be campaigning on your 
behalf. And I say to you as private members, stand up and be 
counted, don’t allow this destruction of our provincial parks and 
our public parks, and don’t allow the destruction of such programs 
as the dental programs and the drug program. Fight for that. 
 
And now once again we see SMDC, the leader in the  

world mining industry, going to be amalgamated with a weak 
sister in Ottawa to create such a large corporation, and then it’s 
going to be privatized. 
 
And I would just ask, I would ask the members on the other side to 
think that over, because it’s not going to be too long before we 
have another provincial election and you’re going to have to go 
out and you’re going to have to campaign on the policies that have 
been implemented by this government. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve listened with interest to 
the comments of the member who spoke before me, and he’s 
raised a number of interesting points about this valuable resource, 
Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation. 
 
And some of the points he’s raised have to do with the control of 
the corporation and loss of direct control over the corporation by 
the province of Saskatchewan, therefore the people of 
Saskatchewan being unable to directly affect that very important 
corporation. And I think Saskatchewan people would agree that 
this corporation is one of the important corporations in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and any changes with regard to that 
corporation should have careful consideration by this Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
My colleague has also raised some questions with regard to 
environmental controls relating to the industry that’s involved here 
and this concern with regard to that. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan’s record with regard to 
privatization in Saskatchewan has been deceptive at best — 
deceptive at best. There have been a number of the predictions that 
we have made with regard to privatization by this government in 
Saskatchewan that have already begun to come true, and that is a 
matter of concern for us and for the people of Saskatchewan — 
that there be some change in the manner in which this government 
approaches privatization. 
 
Obviously they have the votes to go ahead with privatization, but I 
think we should have some serious consideration of that matter. 
And I intend to give the matter some consideration further myself, 
Mr. Speaker, and move adjournment of the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1700) 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill No. 81 — An Act to 
amend the Automobile Accident Insurance Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have 
considered this Bill. We have some questions which we will want 
to ask during committee. I have no comments I want to make at 
this time, and so we’re prepared to let this Bill go to the 
committee. 
 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2253 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 69 — An Act to 
amend The Workers’ Compensation Act, 1979 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Just a few 
brief comments before allowing this Bill — brief, Mr. Speaker, 
my usual brevity and so on — before allowing this Bill to go to 
committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Members of the Assembly will be aware, Mr. Speaker, that 
coming to this stage has involved a relatively interesting kind of 
history, Mr. Speaker. The Workers’ Compensation Act 
amendments that are before us, as a matter of fact, largely came 
out of the recommendations of the committee of review that was 
struck back in December of 1985 and then reported to . . . filed this 
report in September of 1986 — nearly two years ago. Interestingly 
enough then, Mr. Speaker, we waited nearly two years before this 
Act came to the Assembly. Then on day 53 of this session it was 
finally introduced, with second reading asked for just two sitting 
days later. 
 
And so I simply want to say, Mr. Speaker, in second reading, that I 
consider it to be indicative of the commitment of this government 
towards worker protection when they have dillied and dallied as 
long as they have in bringing these recommendations forth. It 
would appear, Mr. Speaker, that the large majority of the 
recommendations . . . or large majority of the amendments, I 
should say, within this Act are consistent with the 
recommendations made by the committee, and with that I do 
concur. 
 
I do note, however, that the committee made three 
legislative-related recommendations that are not touched within 
this Act, and so therefore I serve notice to the minister that, when 
dealing with this Bill in committee, that I will, along with a 
number of questions, will be proposing some amendments, and I 
do refer the minister to the committee’s recommendations. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I am prepared to allow the Bill to 
go to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


