


















































April 29, 1988 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

April 29, 1988 
 

947 
 

 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, a group of 41 grade 11 and 12 students seated in your 
gallery, sir, from Leoville Central School in the Turtleford 
constituency. They are accompanied by teachers Keith Spencer, 
Brian Goota, and chaperon, Rita Fee. We’ll be meeting at 10:30 
for discussion. In the meantime, I hope you’re enjoying your visit 
to Regina. 
 
We wish you a very safe trip home. Thank you for coming down. 
I know it’s a very long trip. We enjoy having you here. I would 
ask all members to join in welcoming you to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to introduce to you, and through you to the other 
members of the Assembly, school students from Ruth M. Buck. 
There are 42 students here today. They are accompanied by their 
teacher Jim Sewell, and by Clover Duperreault. They are seated 
in the gallery — west gallery, and, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all 
members of the Assembly to join with us in welcoming them to 
the Assembly here today, please. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 
with my colleague, the member from Regina Rosemont, in 
welcoming the students from Ruth M. Buck School as well. My 
daughter Jennifer attends the school, and many of her friends do, 
and I note that, from looking at some of the children in the 
gallery, that they live on my street. 
 
The school is on the boundary of Regina Rosemont and Regina 
North West, and I’d like to extend a welcome to you, and I look 
forward to meeting with you after the question period with my 
colleague, the member from Regina Rosemont. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to 
you, and through you and the other members of the House, a very 
special friend of mine who is sitting with his family up in the 
Speaker’s gallery this morning, Mr. Jordan Cooper, his mother 
Marion, his sister Jolene, and his brother Lee. And I hope that 
they will find the proceedings this morning interesting and 
informative and enjoy their visit to Regina. And I would ask all 
members to welcome them this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 
ORAL QUESTIONS

Hospital Waiting List — Special Case 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, the day before yesterday I brought to your 
attention the case of Mrs. Klotz from Unity, a 76-year-old woman 
who’s been waiting for a hip replacement surgery for nine 
months, and that a long hospital waiting list has interfered with 
her obtaining this surgery. I’m wondering, Mr. Premier, whether 
you have reviewed her case, and whether you or the Minister of 
Health has contacted her personally? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the case was brought to our 
attention initially by the member for Wilkie, the MLA for the 
area referred to by the member, and the case was brought to our 
attention again, as the member has stated from Lakeview. Yes, 
we are looking very carefully at the case. But no, neither the 
Premier nor I, at least — I can’t speak for the Premier, but I don’t 
believe he has — I haven’t phoned her directly, but the case is 
under review and will be looked after forthwith. 
 
Ms. Simard: — New question to the Minister of Health, Mr. 
Speaker. The member from Wilkie received a letter I believe 
dated March 28, Mr. Minister, and you received a letter, a copy 
of a letter written to the Premier some time last week. No contact 
has been made with Mrs. Klotz. It’s my understanding she has 
not been contacted about this. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Minister, in view of the fact that her condition is 
rapidly deteriorating because her mobility is restricted, I am 
asking you whether you will personally contact her and look into 
the situation of the hospital waiting list and do something about 
getting this woman her surgery. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — What is happening, our people in the 
Department of Health are dealing with the particular lady’s 
doctor and with the folks in the health care system where she will 
obviously need these services. And once we have that finalized, 
obviously there will be a contact made to Mrs. Klotz regarding 
her care and when it can be received. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, you have a situation where two 
members of the family have contacted you, and you haven’t even 
had the courtesy to personally contact them. I say, Mr. Minister, 
that you’ve lost touch with the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Now, Mr. Minister, how many more thousands 
and thousands of people are going to have to suffer as a result of 
your long hospital waiting lists, and when are you going to 
resolve this problem, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — This particular problem, Mr. Speaker, we 
will do everything possible to resolve the particular problem as 
soon as we can. There’s no 
  



 
April 29, 1988 

 

948 
 

question that that’s true. Mr. Speaker, the member will, you 
know, continue to talk about the thousands and so on and hide 
behind the numbers, or the anonymity of numbers. 
 
I just say to you, Mr. Speaker, and I say to the member and to all 
members of the House, we are doing what we can to look after 
this particular case since it has been brought to our attention, and 
we will continue . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. The minister is attempting to 
answer the question. He’s having some difficulty. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Summer Closing of Hospital Beds 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is also to the Minister of Health and it pertains to the 
Saskatoon hospitals’ long hospital waiting lists, numbering now 
in the thousands; not now, but numbering for quite some time in 
the thousands — more than statistics — men, women and 
children desperately in search of much-needed hospital care. 
 
My question to the Minister of Health is this: can you advise the 
House whether or not, in addition to the announcement that City 
Hospital in Saskatoon would be shutting down 45 beds over the 
summer months, approximately a third to a quarter of its 
operating capacity, will you be able to advise the House whether 
or not Saskatoon St. Paul’s Hospital is also going to be forced to 
close — stories are from Saskatoon — up to 40 beds also due to 
lack of funding by this government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, in fact, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
confirm with the House that although there is a press report that 
said Saskatoon City Hospital would have 45 beds closed, I do not 
confirm with the House that that will in fact be the case for this 
summer. I don’t confirm that. The member will take it from the 
press report, and so on. So, Mr. Speaker, I do not confirm that 
there will be 45 beds closed at City Hospital, as he said. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the negotiations are ongoing with those 
hospitals, and we would like, to the greatest possible extent, to 
have hospital beds open throughout the summer. There are 
several factors involved in this, several factors involved in this. 
And while the hon. member and members of his team over there 
will often say it’s because of a lack of funding from the provincial 
government, Mr. Speaker, there are several factors involved 
which we are trying to deal with, not the least of which is the 
holiday schedule, which is there for physicians and for nursing 
staff and so on. But, Mr. Speaker, all of those factors are into 
consideration and there’s no question, there’s no question that 
what we would like to have happen, and I believe will happen, is 
that those hospitals will be open for the summer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary

question to the Minister of Health. The minister, as I heard his 
answer, neither denied nor confirmed the report that we have that 
St. Paul’s Hospital would be closing upwards to 40 hospital beds. 
My specific supplementary question to the Minister is this: will 
you deny, can you deny categorically that there will not be any 
hospital bed closures, totalling 40, at Saskatoon’s St. Paul’s 
Hospital on top of the 45 already that City Hospital has 
announced — closure? Will you categorically deny that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, what I have said is that we 
would like to have no beds closed over the summer in those 
hospitals or in the ones in Regina, frankly. We’d like to have 
that’s the case. Mr. Speaker, there are several factors in this, and 
the hospital administrations are trying as best they can to deal 
with their holiday schedules, to deal with their surgeons who are 
scheduling their time away, and so on. That’s a thing that’s gone 
on for 17 straight years, Mr. Speaker — 17 straight years in this 
province. And what I’m saying is that we are trying at what we 
can to be sure that those hospital beds are not closed over the 
summer, for some of the very reasons that members on all sides 
of the House have cited here on other days. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question to the 
Minister of Health. The Minister of Health says that there are 
several factors involved here. One of the factors that the minister 
failed to mentioned is the human factor that there are hundreds 
of people, thousands of people in Saskatoon who are waiting to 
get a hospital bed. 
 
My question to you, supplementary, Mr. Minister of Health, is 
simply this: what in the world is gone wrong with this 
government? Why is it that you cannot provide, at least as a 
short-run solution, funding to make sure that St. Paul’s Hospital 
will not close any hospital beds; why can’t you do that for this 
summer at least? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the member says that the 
human factor is forgotten. What I’m saying to you, Mr. Speaker, 
the reason, the very reason that we are curbing the number of 
beds or trying to eliminate beds being closed over the summer — 
dealing with some of those other factors which are the difficult 
ones to deal with with the folks that are working in the hospitals, 
in terms of their time off, and the way to do it. But the reason 
we’re doing it is for that very human factor because we recognize 
with the technology that’s around in some of these surgical 
procedures and the numbers of people waiting for things like — 
and we’ve heard about hip replacements, those kinds of things, 
orthopedic surgery, cataract surgery, those things which are 
causing the blockages in the surgical wards — those are the 
things which are causing it, and those are the things which we are 
trying to address. Those are the things which we did address with 
the million dollars last year in Saskatoon, which brought that 
down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are more surgical procedures going on, and 
there were more surgical procedures performed 
  



 
April 29, 1988 

 

949 
 

in Saskatoon last year than at any other time in the history of that 
city or in the history of this province. It’s going up at a significant 
degree, 12 per cent more increase last year. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while we recognize that those are the case, we 
also recognize that with those demands that I cited earlier, there 
are those kinds of demands, and we will do what we can to be 
sure that hospital beds are not closed over the summer and that 
people are in fact performing surgery, and that patients do in fact 
fulfil the appointments that they have, to come and take their 
surgical procedures when they can get them if it is in the 
summer-time. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the 
Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, according to the statistics that 
we have, in total in Saskatoon, as of March 31, 1988, there are 
9,582 people waiting to get into hospital, for a hospital bed — 
9,582, an unprecedented record at any time. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister of Health, is simply this: does 
this government have any specific long-term game plan? We 
know that it has no short-term game plan in terms of funding. Do 
you have any long-term specific game plan to tackle this serious 
problem for the people of Saskatoon and area, nearly 10,000 
waiting to get into health care? Is there any game plan at all, other 
than being governed by polls and political expediency on a 
short-run basis? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I hear the earlier questions 
and I took the early . . . (inaudible interjection). 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. I’ve asked the hon. member to 
allow the minister to give his answer, without interrupting on a 
rather continuous basis. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I heard the earlier questions 
as it relates to the particular people that are waiting, and I have 
that same concern for particular people who wait. That’s the key 
in waiting lists at all times is how long will an individual wait, 
any individual, for whichever procedure they’re waiting for. 
That’s the key, not the number that are waiting. The key is, how 
long will any individual wait? And anybody knows that, and 
anybody in the health sector knows that. 
 
The member cites numbers. We want to talk about numbers and 
we’ll talk about numbers. And I’ve said that there have been 
more procedures done in Saskatoon than ever before, and that is 
an increasing number, through some of the initiatives of the extra 
million dollars for those three specialty areas. Okay, that’s one 
thing, Mr. Speaker, and I need a couple of other things to explain. 
 
The day surgery unit at the Saskatoon City Hospital has had a 
tremendous impact — a tremendous impact — on lowering the 
time that people have to wait and on the number of procedures 
performed in Saskatoon. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to a long-term plan, and that’s 
key, and that’s the one question I could not

believe coming from the mouth of that Leader of the Opposition, 
and it’s this. The long-term plan, Mr. Speaker, is what should 
have been there before we assumed office in this government, 
because St Paul’s Hospital has a major regeneration project 
which is obviously part of a long-term plan; the new City 
Hospital is part of a long-term plan, and it must be the long-term 
plan that’s in place. Mr. Speaker, the cancer clinic, the new one 
opening in June, is part of a long-term plan, and the additions to 
University Hospital are a long-term plan. 
 
Now the last point, Mr. Speaker, is this — the last point is this. 
There must always be two tracks that we are on: one, the 
long-term plan which you did never have, which you never, ever 
had, a long-term plan, which we now have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — And obviously in the short term on the 
day-to-day they annualize; the year-to-year budgeting, we have 
some difficulties. And those people cause many of those 
difficulties. It’s not a matter of . . . So, Mr. Speaker . . . 
(inaudible) . . . 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the 
minister in charge of long-term answers on health care, but little 
action. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, by now even you will have 
to admit there is a hospital waiting list crisis in Saskatchewan’s 
base hospitals, particularly in Saskatoon. 
 
You will know, Mr. Minister, that your budget cut-backs last year 
caused the elimination of 33 full-time teaching specialist 
positions at the Plains hospital centre in Regina. Your cut-backs, 
Mr. Minister, caused the elimination of 33 specialist positions 
and caused the specialists to leave Regina. They included 
southern Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, they 
included southern Saskatchewan’s only infectious disease 
specialist on AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) and 
the only endocrinologist — all gone. 
 
Will you confirm today, sir, that at University Hospital in 
Saskatoon, several of the orthopedic surgeons are leaving the 
department? Will you confirm that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I won’t confirm that, 
but, Mr. Speaker, what I will say to the hon. member, he talks 
about the case in southern Saskatchewan in terms of specialists. 
We have had some successes. There have been some successes 
in terms of recruitment, in terms of recruitment of specialists in 
southern Saskatchewan. It is not the case, as that member has just 
said, that it was related to the Department of Health’s funding or, 
in fact, to the government’s funding that the University of 
Saskatchewan, more specifically the College of Medicine, hold 
specialists back to that college. It’s for this reason, Mr. Speaker, 
and it’s a very good reason as it relates to the College of Medicine 
and the service that that College of Medicine provides to this 
province, not only to Saskatoon but to this province. 
  



 
April 29, 1988 

 

950 
 

The College of Medicine in Saskatoon has been an excellent 
college over a good number of years. As we’ve said, with 
increasing technology and increasing specialization, the College 
of Medicine has been for a good number of years providing 
training in specialty areas in a wide variety of areas. The College 
of Medicine must decide and has taken it upon themselves, with 
the co-operation of the university and the Department of 
Education, a look at themselves in terms of: what can we be and 
which areas will we be centres of excellence in? 
 
They’ve asked those questions. Those are responsible questions, 
Mr. Speaker. Those are the kinds of questions that must be asked, 
and those are the kinds of questions that the College of Medicine 
is doing in a responsible way for the long-term plan that those 
members pay lip-service to when they ask questions, to which 
they never paid any real attention or active attention to when they 
had an opportunity to do something about it in government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 
Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, your hollow excuses and 
assurances are of no value to this House or to the people of 
Saskatoon who are on waiting lists. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I simply asked you, Mr. Minister, whether 
there are orthopedic surgeons at University hospital who are 
leaving. Do you know the answers or not? You said there was 
blockages in orthopedic surgeons situation in Saskatoon. How 
many are leaving, and when are they leaving? 
 
Your policies have forced specialists to leave in Regina; the 
waiting lists are getting worse; the waiting lists . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order, order, order. The 
hon. member has asked him several questions and is going to 
provoke a long answer. I’d ask him to get to his next question. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, at the end of February the 
hospital waiting lists at University Hospital in Saskatoon have 
increased — increased — from the end of February to the end of 
March. How much worse must this situation get, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the waiting lists at none of 
those hospitals has increased in recent months. The hospital 
waiting lists in terms of numbers, which you continue to talk 
about, is going down, Mr. Speaker, and I have said that before 
that the number is going down, and is going down not as quickly 
as I would like it to be, or as any citizen in this province would 
like it to go down, because of some of the reasons that I cited 
earlier in this question period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the orthopedic surgeons at University 
Hospital, I will not confirm that that’s the case, but I will say this; 
there have been surgeons in various

specialty areas who will leave from time to time — that’s an 
ongoing thing — and there are others who will come in from time 
to time. 
 
A good example, Mr. Speaker. We have a physician in this city, 
a specialist by the name of Dr. Sherman, a Regina boy, a Regina 
person, who was trained and as well-trained as any orthopedic 
surgeon in this country, has chosen to come back and is now 
practicing in the city of Regina — a very excellent practice and 
has his roots here, obviously, and will be here for some good, 
long period of time. 
 
Those are the kinds of recruitment programs that are going on, 
and we are having some successes in recruitment, Mr. Speaker, 
in many of these areas. And those successes in recruitment are 
what are necessary for the long-term plans as it relates to 
specialized services in both of our major hospital centres in the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — A final question to the Minister of Health. 
The hospital waiting lists at University Hospital were 2,168 at 
the end of February. At the end of March there were 2,180. 
They’ve gone up, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you admit, will you admit that the orthopedic 
surgery department in University Hospital by the end of June will 
be gutted? And I want to know: what’s your plan to solve that 
situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll say this: I do not accept 
the inflamed rhetoric and the terminology — this program will 
be gutted, and so on. I don’t accept that inflamed rhetoric from 
that member or any of his colleagues over there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those hospitals and the base hospitals who are under 
regeneration in this province, much needed and much overdue 
regeneration in this province, will have the kind of equipment 
and will have the ability to recruit excellent specialists as it goes 
on. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t confirm what the member has said. I 
don’t confirm what he has said, but I deny directly, I deny 
directly that kind of inflamed rhetoric from that member who 
does nothing but talk politics about anything, nothing but politics 
about anything for his long career in this House, nothing but 
politics to everything that he ever asked a question about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. The member for Regina Rosemont sits 
in his seat, points at the Chair, and makes accusations. I ask him 
now to rise and apologize to the House. 
 
Order, order. I asked the member for Regina Rosemont, who 
makes a habit in this House of hollering at the Chair, to rise now 
and apologize to the House. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order 
  



 
April 29, 1988 

 

951 
 

here. It is required . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — No point of order, no point of orders. There are 
no points of order until after question period is over, at which 
time points of order are accepted. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I’m willing to apologize to the House for any 
improprieties. Could you please tell me which improprieties I 
committed? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member from Rosemont, as I said 
earlier, makes a habit of sitting in his seat and hollering at the 
Chair for one reason or another, which he was just doing again, 
which he was just doing again. 
 
Order, order. Order. Order, order. 
 
I ask the hon. member for Rosemont, for the final time, to 
apologize to the House . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
I’m sorry, I didn’t hear the hon. member for Rosemont. 
 
Order, order. I ask the hon. member from Rosemont once more, 
with due respects, to stand and apologize. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, please humbly accept my deepest 
apologies. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — It is accepted. 
 
Order, order. Order, order. 
 

Privatization of Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I direct my question 
to the Minister of Parks. Yesterday, Mr. Minister, you announced 
that you had privatized Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park. The 
people of Saskatchewan know the results of your previous 
sell-offs of our public parks. It means higher prices for the public, 
poorer services also to the public, and lost jobs. 
 
I am therefore asking you, Mr. Minister, if today in this 
legislature you will admit that in this case, as well, as in the case 
of the Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park, we are going to see an 
increase in prices, poorer services, and lost jobs. Will you admit 
that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — No. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister 
of Parks. Mr. Minister, you didn’t say very much. And if you are 
so sure, Mr. Minister, if you want to boast so much would you 
please do this: would you agree to table here in this Assembly 
today the privatization agreement you have signed with the 
developer? And would you point out the specific written 
guarantees you have that there won’t be higher prices, poorer 
services, and less services to the public, and lost jobs? Will you 
table that document in this legislature today, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member says 
I didn’t say very much. One minute they’re

bitching and complaining that we give long answers; then they 
get up and complain when they get short answers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they want to know if there are jobs lost . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my question also is to the minister 
responsible for Parks, and I sincerely hope he will calm down. 
Mr. Minister, I don’t need to tell you that the people of Moose 
Jaw are very proud of the Moose Jaw Wild Animal Park. We’re 
proud of it as a place to take our families, proud of it as a place 
to take visitors to our city and province, and we’re very proud of 
the men and women who have worked in that park for many 
years. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is very simple: why did you feel it 
necessary to terminate the employment of those that worked at 
the wild animal park, some of whom have been there many, many 
years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, jobs are not being lost. 
Alternative employment has been offered to the employees. 
Secondly, nothing is sold off in terms of the park — it is a lease. 
Thirdly, the proponents have agreed to put in $800,000 of capital 
improvement to that park, no expense to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan or to the taxpayers of the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, we have a number of questions 
about this agreement, this lease that you’ve signed, but we’re not 
going to have time to ask them all today. We do want to know if 
the quality of the park is going to be assured. We want to know 
if admission prices are going to be kept affordable. We want to 
know if the indigenous nature of the park is going to be 
maintained. Mr. Minister, will you answer these questions by 
tabling the agreement that you’ve signed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, we are satisfied that the 
lease agreement that has been worked out is in the best interests 
of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan and of the taxpayers of Moose 
Jaw, and the park will be opening as scheduled. It will run as a 
wild animal park. Those guarantees are built into the lease 
agreement. 
 
And once again, all I can reiterate is that we are seeing massive 
improvements to that park, a park which was losing $250,000 a 
year to the taxpayers. One year it lost $290,000, and now we’re 
getting $800,000 of capital improvement, no expense to the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that’s a good deal for 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 
POINT OF ORDER 

 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on the point of 
  



 
April 29, 1988 

 

952 
 

order on the matter of grave concern on the proceedings in the 
House today. I bring to your attention the example of the Minister 
of Parks who stood in his place in answer to a question and used 
unparliamentary language and you chose not to hear him, 
whereas the member from Rosemont, to whom you would not 
say what it is he was supposed to apologize for, somehow you 
requested an apology. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that this paying attention to 
one side of the House to the other, I think, is becoming very 
obvious, is unacceptable, and needs to be corrected in order for 
this House to function. Mr. Speaker, any member of the House 
who is asked to withdraw or apologize needs to know what it is 
he needs to withdraw or apologize for. 
 
I ask you then, Mr. Speaker, two things in my point of order: will 
you review the record as to the parliamentary language used by 
the Minister of Parks and ask him to withdraw and apologize to 
this House, with children sitting in the gallery he used that 
language; and I ask you also to review on what basis we are not 
able to ask for a point of order or a clarification when a member 
of the House is asked to apologize for and you are unable to tell 
him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I’d like to respond to the point of order 
raised by the House Leader of the opposition. Perhaps in the heat 
of the moment I wasn’t thinking very clearly of which precise 
word I used, and which thereby was using, and it has caused some 
offence in the benches opposite, obviously. Therefore, I have no 
hesitation whatsoever, Mr. Speaker, in apologizing to the House, 
and I respectfully withdraw the comment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — My point of order had nothing to do about 
whether he chooses now to apologize. My point of order, Mr. 
Speaker, is that this member was supposedly heard and that 
member was not heard . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Using foul language. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — . . . using foul language in this House, and 
I think that that is wrong, Mr. Speaker, and this House cannot 
tolerate it and function properly. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Would the member for . . . Minister of 
Parks . . . Order. Would the Minister of Parks and Renewable 
Resources please calm down. 
 
Regarding the member’s first point of order, according to rule 
35(3): 
 

Mr. Speaker shall not entertain points of order during the 
oral question period. Points of order may be raised later on 
in orders of the day. 

 
Regarding the second part of your point of order, I must quite 
frankly admit to the House that my attention was

distracted and I did not hear the member’s statement. However, 
having said that, I’m certainly prepared to review the verbatim 
record and certainly take any action which that record deems to 
be necessary. 
 
Order, order, order. I’d ask the hon. member for Quill Lakes to 
please allow the proceedings to continue without interruption. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, I just asked for a point of order as a 
point of clarification. Is it the correct interpretation of the conduct 
of the rules of the House that members are not heard from their 
seat, but are heard when they stand in their place? And if that is 
true, if that is true, then I wonder if the Speaker would take the 
opportunity to supply me, either orally or after or by way of letter, 
precisely what it was that I had to make an apology for? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Members don’t have latitude to make 
comments or any remarks from their desks just because they’re 
not being recognized. I think that all hon. members would agree 
that, if that was case, we could quite easily have chaos in this 
House. 
 
Secondly, as I said earlier, unfortunately the hon. member from 
Regina Rosemont does on many occasions make comments 
towards the chair from his desk relating to the actions, etc., and I 
think that members in the House, including himself, do recognize 
that. I simply asked him this morning to apologize for those 
actions and that was the basis of my request, and I think it’s a 
reasonable request and I think it applies to all members who 
continue to do that. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a well-known 
parliamentary rule that members cannot accumulate breaches of 
the order and then deal with them all at once. They must deal 
with each breach of the rules of order as it occurs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I distinctly heard you say — referring to the 
member for Regina Rosemont — and it sounded suspiciously to 
me, Mr. Speaker, like you had an accumulation of grievances. I 
can understand that, having been in that Chair. But, Mr. Speaker, 
I think the Speaker and any member of the House cannot 
accumulate breaches of the rule and then use them all at once in 
a omnibus ruling. They have to deal with them as they occur. 
That’s my point of order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’ve heard the point of order. I’ve heard the 
point of order and it’s a point of order well taken, and I thank the 
hon. member for raising it. 
 
The hon. member does realize that several members — and of 
course we’re not going to go into names at this time — have, 
from time to time, made remarks towards the Chair, and that is 
unparliamentary and not acceptable. And it’s not forgivable 
either. Those are actions that should not go on, and all hon. 
members I’m sure recognize that. And I’m bringing it to their 
attention again this morning that they desist from that, or this 
House will not be able to function. 
 
I ask the hon. member for Regina Rosemont, whom I said had 
been part of that in the past, to apologize this 
  



 
April 29, 1988 

 

953 
 

morning. And that’s what I have done, and I think that the best 
thing to do is to put that matter to rest and let it serve to a warning 
to all hon. members that they are not to make derogatory remarks 
to the Chair, regardless of who is in it. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, another point of order. And 
I want to say to you, sir, Mr. Speaker, that when you apply that 
ruling, it is important that you apply it across the House and not 
have one single individual singled out. Because if those 
comments are made, they’re made on the other side of the House 
as well. 
 
I raise with you this, sir. The Minister of Health was on his feet. 
You stood in your place and you tried to call him to order; he 
refused to take his seat. He stared you down and you took your 
seat. All you had to do, sir, was press your button and cut his 
mike (microphone) off. That never happened. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Speaker: why do you allow that kind of action to 
take place, where the minister can abuse the ruling of this House 
and the functions of this House and you don’t call him to order? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — In speaking to the point of order, I’d just 
like to point out that it is improper, inappropriate and, I suggest, 
unparliamentary that that member or any other member can 
question the rulings of the Chair as to imply motive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The only thing that they can do — and it’s been done once 
previously in this House — is to move a substantive motion to 
censure the Chair. They have no right to question the ruling of 
the Chair, Mr. Speaker. And I would ask, Mr. Speaker, to check 
that out and ask whether or not that member who has just raised 
the point of order has not called the motives of the Chair into 
question. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My point of 
order simply was this: why does the Speaker not ask the member 
to yield when the Speaker is on his feet? Because I am saying to 
you, sir, and you will know that the Minister of Health was on 
his feet, stood on his feet, and stayed on his feet while you were 
on your feet, and in fact you took your seat and he did not. 
 
I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, is it not required under the rules that 
you ask the Minister of Health to take his seat when you get on 
your feet, or any other minister? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Well, that’s an interesting point of order. 
Perhaps I’ll take it under review. 
 
(1045) 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 1 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. Chairman, 
today I would like to begin with some specific questions to which 
I’m hoping I’ll get some specific answers, and it concerns the 
community pastures and policy change to the pasture system. Mr. 
Minister, first of all, how many pastures are there in the 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Fifty-four for cattle. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — And those 54 pastures, Mr. Minister, how many 
patrons are involved in the community pasture program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Approximately 4,000. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, could you outline for me the 
structure of the pasture management, from lands branch down to 
the patrons? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, there are four regional 
supervisors, and under the regional supervisors there are 22 land 
reps. And each land rep supervises the pasture under his or her 
jurisdiction — sometimes it’s more than one; sometimes it may 
not be any. Each pasture has a pasture manager, and the patrons 
in each pasture provide an advisory committee to help manage 
the pasture at the local level. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, what was the date on which 
the policy was actually changed on the community pastures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Early November, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Early November. Do you have a date? You 
don’t have a date on which the actual policy was changed? Like 
one day it was the old policy; the next day it was the new policy. 
Was that date specific? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — All I can say it was late fall, early 
November that the policy was discussed with people, and I don’t 
have the date, specific date. It was over a period of time when we 
reviewed it with people who were in the industry. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, I have a copy of the . . . 
from Saskatchewan Agriculture, the policy lands branch in 
Walter Scott Building, provincial community pastures, livestock 
allocation management and fee schedule, and it says: effective 
November 1 ’87, this is the department’s policy. Was that the 
precise date that the change took place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well it was . . . it would be at that time, 
and I think I said in November that the policy was taken out to 
the patrons and to others to have their advice, because earlier 
people had asked us to modify the policy to allow their private 
and own breeding stock to go into the pastures. So we said in 
November we will begin to review it so that in fact when we start 
the whole process this spring, they can be ready with their own 
breeding stock, and that’s exactly what’s taking place. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, were the patrons notified of 
  



 
April 29, 1988 

 

954 
 

this change by way of letter, so that they would have some time 
to respond and maybe make suggested changes to the policy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the policy was discussed at 
patron meetings and with the staff — that is the people that are 
involved in the management — and obviously in the fall so that 
they could prepare for next spring, so that they literally had 
months to examine it and find out how many patrons would be 
interested, how many might not be — all of that time necessary 
because we’re just starting, obviously, to look at using the 
pastures now. So it gives them five or six months to 
accommodate any changes in the breeding patterns they want, or 
their own private stock, or breeding capacity that they want to 
build up. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well if the patrons weren’t notified by letter, 
were at least the advisory board notified, the advisory boards to 
the pastures? Were they notified of the pending policy change so 
that they could have some input into the policy before it was 
actually written? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well as has been the custom in the past, 
any policy changes that are taking place are normally after the 
fall round-ups and after they begin to close the pastures, which is 
in late fall. So if you have suggestions for a policy change that 
said that we could go as much as 50-50 in terms of the flexibility, 
we would take it to the meetings as they wind up the pastures and 
they can have patron meetings, and that’s what we do. 
 
So we could put out the concept in November 1 and then take it 
out to the meetings when they’re closing up the pastures and talk 
to the people, and we’ve talked to them, obviously, in November 
and December, and they’ve given us the suggestions they want. 
 
Many of them have taken advantage of it. As I pointed out 
yesterday, approximately 200 bulls have been purchased that are 
private breeding stock because people thought it was a good idea. 
We purchased, I believe, 275 last year and only purchased 95 this 
year, which is an indication that people were quite interested in 
providing their own breeding stock as a result of the suggestion 
we go as far as 50-50, which is the flexibility that they want them 
to see. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, it seems to me that the 
processes were being reversed. You told me that . . . are telling 
me that you put out the policy, you wrote the policy in the 
department and then you went out to the patron meetings. You 
didn’t give the patrons or the advisory board forewarning of a 
policy change. 
 
You have now a policy number 0109, if that’s the first of the . . . 
if that’s the date, I don’t know, but that’s the number on this 
policy that I have. And you say that they were allowed to make 
their recommendations, to input at that time — not before the 
policy was written. Then you say they have patron meetings in 
the fall whereby they can discuss the policy and recommend 
changes. Mr. Minister, I know for a fact, and you know, that there 
were a number of changes recommended. In fact people were 
very upset at the policy change.

Can you tell me if this policy from the lands branch, dated 
effective November 1, has been changed to reflect the needs and 
wishes of the community pasture patrons? 
 
(1100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — What the patrons wanted was flexibility. 
And they talked to us throughout the summer and the early fall 
and said — and those that were interested said, I would like to 
put in my own breeding stock because I’ve got a special breeding 
program — could I do that? And we said, well, we’re at 70-30; 
we’ll have the flexibility to go to 50-50. so in November we write 
them and say, we can go 50-50; it’s completely flexible. 
 
The second part of the program, it’s up to them. If they want to 
participate in it, fine; if they don’t, we provide the bulls. It’s as 
clear as that. If they want their own, they can have them. If they 
want government bulls, we provide them. 
 
So, on, it’s on the basis that they ask for it. And secondly, if those 
that don’t want to participate, they don’t have to. If you want your 
own breeding stock, you can. So there’s no imposition. 
 
It says we have changed the policy. We will have flexibility to 
go to at least 50 per cent personal breeding stock if you want. In 
some pastures it’ll be 100 per cent government stock, and some 
pastures will have a large percentage of private stock. That’s the 
flexibility they want. 
 
In your community pasture, maybe you want all government 
bulls. If that’s the case, we have the capacity to provide all 
government bulls. In other places, in other jurisdictions, they 
might want mostly private breeding stock. The flexibility is there. 
They asked for it — it’s not an imposition; it’s open-ended. They 
can respond if they like. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, the policy is remaining the 
same. And the policy says that you’re going to reduce the number 
of bulls by 35 per cent per year until the bull program is 
eliminated. And the policy hasn’t changed, and yet you’re saying 
you’re saying you’re giving them flexibility. 
 
First of all, when you say they asked for it, Mr. Minister, that is 
not true. They, being the majority of the patrons in the pastures, 
do not want the bull program to be eliminated over the next three 
years, and you can ask them. Obviously you didn’t ask them that 
before you made the policy change, and that’s why you had the 
backlash, and that’s why you have to backtrack. But the fact 
remains, the policy remains the same. 
 
Are you going to eliminate the bulls on a 35 per cent basis over 
the first three years? And has the first year’s objective been 
reached, with bull reduction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve said it very clear, and 
I’ve said it to any patrons. It’s a voluntary program. We targeted 
that we could move that fast if they wanted 
  



 
April 29, 1988 

 

955 
 

to. If they don’t want to, we won’t move that fast. The first year, 
we’ve met the targets, people have picked up on it, they like it. 
I’ve just responded, if they want to use their own breeding stock 
then we won’t use government. That’s all it is and if they follow 
that target, fine. If they want to go faster, they can come in and 
say, this is really good, I get to put my own breeding stock in the 
community pasture, and that’s exactly the kind of program they 
want. 
 
We’ve had to buy up about 200 less bulls because people have 
picked up on it. So obviously it proves that your observation, that 
they didn’t want it, is wrong. They like it — they like it. At least 
they like it to the extent that we’ve had to back out — we don’t 
need 200 bulls because they’ve used their own breeding stock. 
We only had to buy 95. Now that 95 may be for a pasture here or 
one in your area. 
 
I said, we can target as much as 50-50, but it’s completely up to 
the farmer and the rancher. If they want their own breeding stock, 
they can have it. If they don’t, fine, we’ll provide the bulls. So 
that policy is there, they know it, and I particularly said for small 
operators, you won’t be forced to buy your own breeding stock; 
if you’ve got 15 or 20 cows, fair enough, we’ll provide that, but 
if you want to have your own, we will allow you to have your 
own breeding stock and not just be forced to use government 
bulls. You don’t have to use the government bull, you don’t have 
to. That’s all I want you to know and understand, you don’t have 
to use it, you can use your own in community pastures. 
 
That’s what some patrons wanted, was that flexibility. That’s 
what they got and it seems to be working fine. For those that 
don’t want them, they can use the government bull. For those that 
want their own, they can use their own. You don’t have to use 
the government bulls in community pastures. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, this year’s reduction of 35 per 
cent was, I believe, nearly completed some time ago. Could you 
tell me on what date that the reduction, the 35 per cent reduction 
for this year was, let’s say, 90 per cent complete? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well as of this month, April when you go 
through the winter and find out how many people want to have 
their own breeding stock, then we find out how many we have to 
purchase. So as of April 18, we were at 35 per cent, and it takes 
the winter to decide how many you’re going to buy and they 
make up their mind and they have the flexibility. So by this 
month we’ve reached the target totally dictated to by the patrons. 
They either want government bulls or their own. And they’ve 
reached the target the first year. They’ve bought their own; they 
like it. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, in February when we had a 
meeting and the member from Kelvington-Wadena came over, 
he was telling the farmers, the 25 or so farmers that came in to 
meet, that the 90 or 95 per cent of the 35 per cent reduction had 
already been achieved. And you’re telling me now then that 
farmers still have the option to have a government bull. Okay 
then, if 95 per cent of the reduction had already been received, 
they’ve

been culled, what position would that have left farmers in? 
 
And what I’m saying to you, Mr. Minister, is you made the policy 
decision; you made the change; you made the reduction; and you 
sent the land reps out to tell the farmers that they have to buy 
their own bulls. And I know that happened and you know that 
happened — or you should know that happened. So what you’re 
saying now is — your backtrack is to say — well farmers can 
have their government bull if they want. That’s what you say 
now. 
 
But you’ve already accomplished reducing them by 35 per cent, 
putting many farmers in a scramble to organize themselves to buy 
bulls at great cost to themselves, a program that was functioning 
very well. So how can you stand here and tell me that they still 
have the option when in fact you’ve already reduced that 35 per 
cent? And are you going to reduce the 35 per cent next year? Is 
that your objective? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know how often I 
have to say this to the hon. member, the farmer . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, then we’ll be here for a long time and I’ll 
keep saying the same thing: the farmers can choose to buy their 
own bulls if they like, and they can have government bulls if they 
like. We have that complete flexibility. The farmer wants the 
flexibility. 
 
Over the winter we have found out that they have bought almost 
200 of their own breeding stock, or have used them — maybe 
they didn’t buy them, they had them at home. Now they can put 
them in the government pasture. They like to do that — obviously 
they do. They had their own breeding stock, they can now put it 
in the government pasture as well as their own pasture. It doesn’t 
cost them any breeding fees to us their own bulls. They like that 
a lot better. 
 
Maybe many of them had a bull anyway and so rather than pay 
government fees they could use their own and they can run it in 
the community pasture and they think this is a tremendous deal 
— complete flexibility. And you can’t seem to understand that. 
 
The farmers want that. They don’t want to be obliged to just 
using government bulls — they don’t want that. Now I don’t 
know what you want. What do you want? Do you want all 
government bulls? What do you want? I mean, tell me what you 
would like to have in terms of the breeding program — do you 
want all government, all private? You know, make up your mind. 
 
What we have is flexibility. If you want to use your own bull that 
you have in the barn all winter and you want to turn him out in 
the community pasture with your cattle, you can do that now. 
And you can do it more so than you did before because we have 
said we’ll go as far as 50-50. I mean, we’re complete flexibility. 
 
Why are you against people having the freedom to decide what 
bull they want to use? I mean, how many times do I have to say 
it? They have their choice. They can use their own bull that’s tied 
up in the barn and they can take it to the community pasture. They 
can do that, and they want 
  



 
April 29, 1988 

 

956 
 

to do it, and evidently about 200 more of their own breeding 
stock is being used because we didn’t have to buy them — we 
only had to buy 95. 
 
So we are accommodating those that want the flexibility, and 
those that want government programs and those that don’t. So it 
can be one year you may find, or over a period of a decade, you 
may find people are into a new breeding program; they want to 
go at it with vigour, and others they may back off for whatever 
reason. I mean, that flexibility is there. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, let’s get the facts straight. 
you had put out a policy and you intended at that time to reduce 
the number of government bulls to zero over a period of 
approximately three years. That was the intention, because that'’ 
what the land reps were telling the patrons. 
 
You can sit in here and tell me all you like about the options. We 
know the option was there before — some of the pedigreed 
breeders wanted their own bulls; that’s fine. But what you’re 
doing now is forcing everyone to — that was your intention — 
forcing everyone to have their own bulls. And what that does is 
causes great havoc and great cost to farmers, especially if I’m a 
farmer with a split herd and I have part of my herd in the pasture 
and part of my herd at home, I need two bulls. 
 
How’s that supporting the farmer? I mean, what you’re doing is 
putting extra cost on them. So I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, I’ll ask 
you this: are you going to maintain the bull stations that are 
presently located in the province? Will they be maintained 
throughout the next five years or so? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes, we maintain the bull stations, and we 
will be doing that. That’s where we winter the bulls. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — You maintain the bull stations now? Your 
intention was to eliminate government bulls. Was it your 
intention to maintain those bull stations? I don’t think it was. 
 
And do you realize — you say you’re a farmer — do you realize 
what happens when patrons put their bulls into a pasture? The 
first week, all they do is fight. I mean, you should know that. 
There’s going to be a lot of problems caused because these bulls, 
like somebody said, if they’re any good at all they’ll fight. And 
there’s going to be damage done to the bulls; fences mean 
nothing to them in cases like that. Whereas in the bull stations 
when they’re wintered all together, they know each other and 
there’s no problems. I mean, these types of things you never even 
considered when you were making changes to the policy. 
 
I’m not advocating all government bulls. All I’m doing, Mr. 
Minister, is trying to again tell you what the patrons of this 
community pasture program want. And they don’t want you to 
eliminate the bull program, and that was your intention. 
 
And your policy still remains the same, although we backed you 
up. Thank heavens at least we backed you up on this one. But it 
took a lot of fight to do it, a lot of letters

and a lot of organization from patrons of the pasture to make you 
back up to say that if they want a bull, they’ll have a bull. But the 
fact remains you’ve taken out 35 per cent of the bulls. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, you say as of April 1 you’ve reached your 35 
per cent reduction. Have there been any requests for you to buy 
new bulls to supply pastures that don’t have a government bull? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Two observations. There’s no real 
evidence that bureaucratic government bulls fight any more or 
any less than private bulls, whether they’re good or not. And 
when you turn them loose in the spring, if you want to argue 
about which bulls fight more . . . I mean, they’re going to have 
some fun reading Hansard 50 years from now, trying to figure 
out where you’re coming from with respect to the kinds of things 
that you’re talking about. 
 
Secondly, let me say that we monitor the program for the bull 
sales in March and April. We find out how many we need. We 
had to purchase 92 bulls. We did that. 
 
And again, I go back and say that we are prepared to respond to, 
and always have been prepared to respond to, the farmer and the 
rancher. If they want most of the bulls to be their own, we’re 
prepared to do that. That’s why we laid out the policy. they said 
how far would you go. I said, I’ll go as far as you like. And many 
people said, well I would like to have this community pasture; 
and the patrons, you talk to them and say, I want to use my own 
bull, so he said, fine. So we laid out that flexibility. 
 
Now whether they want it 70-30, 50-50, or 25-75, that’s up to 
them. We run the community pastures. They have the complete 
flexibility to use their own breeding stock, and we will certainly 
let them do that. And we have our own bull stations, and we will 
maintain bull stations as long as there’s a demand for public 
bulls. It’s as simple as that. 
 
So we can chase our tail around here a long time trying to decide 
what you really want. What would you like? Tell me what you 
would like, and then I’ll have some idea what you’re after. Do 
you want us to have all government bulls, or do you want just the 
flexibility? If you want the flexibility, you’ve got the flexibility. 
That’s what you got. It’s there. We have government bulls, 
opportunity for private breeding stock. But you’ve got complete 
flexibility at the discretion of the patrons. If they want to go to 
all private bulls and they want to use their own bull in the 
community pasture, they can do that. They’ve been told that. 
Some don’t want to, we’ll accommodate them, but I’ll live within 
their recommendations. 
 
(1115) 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, you’re right, we can go 
around this a hundred times. but I think I’ve made my point. 
 
You can say you gave them flexibility, but I’ll tell you, Mr. 
Minister, that was not your intention, and you’re not telling the 
whole truth. The land reps went out to the meetings — and you 
know their mandate, and I’ll tell this 
  



 
April 29, 1988 

 

957 
 

for the record — they went out there to impose a policy that you 
unilaterally put forward to reduce the number of government 
bulls to zero, cutting them at a rate of 35 per cent per year. And 
that was the policy and that’s what the patrons were told. And 
you can shake your head no, Mr. Minister, but that’s the truth and 
the patrons know it so I don’t have to talk about it here any more. 
 
And I’ll just add one more thing. Your little whimsical comment 
about government bulls fighting more than private bulls. Well, I 
mean, that’s about as much as you know about it. These bulls are 
wintered together, they live together in the bull programs . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . And you should know that; the 
member from Kelvington-Wadena knows that. And when they’re 
not wintered together, when they come into a pasture, they fight. 
I mean, you should know that, and obviously you didn’t. It 
doesn’t surprise me, I guess. 
 
Another little question that I want to talk about is the 
compensation insurance. You took that away. I mean, that’s 
another cost onto the farmers. Now they’re going to organize 
their own compensation program or whatever. You know, this 
. . . you ask what I want. And what I want is what the patrons of 
this province are telling me. They want the old policy back 
because it was working well. It was a good program, and you 
wrecked it. 
 
Tagging, you’re changing the tags, and the new tags they lose 
about 4 per cent of the tags. They also have . . . you’ve increased 
the breeding fees at a time when, you know, there’s not real logic 
to why you would do that. The program wasn’t losing money. 
The only cost it was costing you was the administration charges 
I understand. 
 
I mean, the whole policy change was not necessary. A little item 
like salt, another 20 bucks per patron it’s going to cost. I mean, 
you’re talking money out of their pockets again, money that they 
don’t have. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I will ask you: in light of all the discussions 
that we had, the letters and calls, and the resolutions that I read 
off to you yesterday from different community pastures, will you 
. . . if you say now that the bull program will get . . . they can still 
have public bulls, or private bulls, will you now please revert to 
the old policy before November 1, ’87 to satisfy those patrons? 
If you say it’s no different now, the patrons are asking the old . . . 
saying the old policy was good; we want it back. 
 
Will you give them . . . You know, you didn’t consult with them 
in the first place. They’ve consulted now. Will you listen? Will 
you please listen to those people in the community pasture 
program who want the old policy back, and comply with that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I will reiterate the policy 
once more — and I will say this regardless of what land reps said 
what to some particular patron group — the policy that came 
from cabinet and the policy that came from caucuses, that was 
we’re going to have complete flexibility for the farmers and 
ranchers out there. And if they want to go to private bulls in a 
pasture, in a community pasture, they want to use all their own 
bulls, they can go to it.

So if you want a target of 100 per cent, they can have it. It’s up 
to them. That was the policy. So I’ll just make that very clear. So 
make it absolutely sure what cabinet and caucus said is that we’re 
going to have flexibilities for farmers and . . . flexibility for 
farmers and ranchers out there so that they can use as much of 
their own breeding stock as they like. 
 
Secondly, with respect to the whole question of insurance, I want 
you to know that we were making a small profit on the insurance 
program. We were making money on it — making money. Now 
why should we be doing that with patrons’ money? 
 
So we said to them . . . Previously they came in to us and they 
said, three pasture operators have their own compensation 
program, running it very successfully. They get to share their 
own dividends and they get to keep the premiums. They keep 
their own. By you’re telling me I got to do in government, so that 
the government can manage it, when I’ve got on-pasture 
operations that do it on their own and they get to keep the surplus 
for themselves. They get to run it; they can have lower rates; they 
can shop around. They know what’s going on. it’s just like 
running your own farm versus you’re farming for the 
government. You know that. 
 
So here you’re back and say we should have all government 
bulls. That’s what you’re saying. and you should have all 
government programs and government insurance. And your 
argument is that, well government bulls don’t fight, and the 
government can run it better. I mean, nobody believes that. 
Okay? Nobody believes it. 
 
When the pasture patrons can use their own breeding stock, they 
like that, because they know that they can pick and choose the 
kind of breeding stock they want. When they can have their own 
insurance programs, they get to run it; they get to share in the 
dividends and the premiums. 
 
Now you say no, it’s got to be in government. Well look, 
obviously we don’t agree. I mean, your philosophy is a lot 
different than mine. You would take it . . . I mean, you’d like 
them all to be farming for the government. You would want them 
all to be government bulls and you’d want all the insurance. 
 
You know, if you want to talk about insurance, farmers complain 
to me about insurance, a lot of insurance. They reminded me that 
it was the NDP administration that had hidden taxes on insurance 
for farmers and people all across this province. 
 
Money was taken from senior citizens, for example, who didn’t 
even own vehicles, and diverted $20 million annually to the SGI 
auto fund. Farmers had to pay that, even farmers that didn’t have 
driver’s license contributed to the SGI auto fund in terms of 
insurance. But you had to have your government insurance, and 
you had to take money from people who didn’t even drive. Then 
you had to have up to $20 million you’d take from gas tax and 
divert it. 
 
What else did they do? Well you covered up the bureaucratic 
bungling managing SGI. You funnelled 6 to 
  



 
April 29, 1988 

 

958 
 

$8 million annually from the auto fund right into SGI. I mean, 
the record of government insurance under your administration is 
not good. 
 
So when patrons come in to us and they say, can we have our 
own insurance program, we say, you have your own insurance 
program. You keep the dividends; you share in the premiums; 
you can carry it from year to year. You get to choose. and they 
said, well that makes some sense. All right? 
 
So you want it all government. You want all government bulls 
We’ve gone the other way. If the patrons can set up their own 
compensation programs and insurance programs and they get to 
keep the money, then, for Heaven’s sakes, why would you want 
to keep it in government? I mean, it’s just more expense to the 
taxpayers. They’ve got to keep more people doing those things 
when the individuals can do it. and if we were at the same time 
to cover all different circumstances and all pastures, ending up 
with a situation where they’re paying too much money, then why 
not let them do it if they want to. 
 
So again it’s the flexibility, and it makes sense to everybody — 
to the people that run it, to the taxpayers, to the general public. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, it amazes me how you can 
go on and off the topic. When you talk about insurance, the cost 
of running the insurance program through the government to 53 
. . . or to 54 pastures would be significant less cost, significantly 
less hassle for the farmers. now they’re going to have to go round 
and 54 pastures are each going to have to find their own 
insurance, work their own insurance program. And what do you 
think the cost of that will be out of their pockets? There won’t be 
any dividends for them to share. 
 
And if you were making money on the insurance program, then 
I say, Mr. Minister, that is a problem that you should have 
rectified if you say it as a problem, and you should have reduced 
the premiums to just on a cost of supplying the insurance. Why 
didn’t you just reduce the premiums and keep the program? It’s 
much more effective and efficient to run it from a central location 
than it is for each pasture to have to now go out and organize. 
 
And when you . . . One more point I’d like to make on the bulls. 
Do you realize now that right — in many areas of this province 
— in the middle of seeding, the farmers are now going to have 
go take time off and get their bulls organized to get them to 
pasture, and there’s going to be problems when they get in those 
pastures and they’re going to have to have more time. 
 
And I think, Mr. Minister, you were right when you say that we 
differ in philosophy here. 
 
And I think that this move — and I’ll ask you it in form of a 
question — is this move of changing the policy the initial stages 
of privatizing the community pasture program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — This is complete flexibility to allow the 
farmers to use their own breeding stock. And in the case of 
compensation or insurance program, they can

receive the benefits directly as they manage it. And it makes 
sense for them; it makes sense for the taxpayer; it’s less 
bureaucracy; it’s more efficient; it’s more effective, and it’s 
better for the farmers because the get to choose. 
 
Now I don’t know how you could get it any better for farmers 
and for the taxpayer, when the farmer gets to choose his breeding 
stock. And we will be there with public breeding programs if he 
wants to use it, and it’s less costly to the taxpayer. You can use 
the money for other things. I mean, the rate you’re going on we 
would have . . . it’s like we got a money tree and we just keep 
adding more government programs and all this stuff, and yet you 
still want more money. Where would you think you’d get it? I 
mean, you have never talked about the international market; 
you’ve never talked about any combination of things that would 
be necessary to provide revenue for people — nothing. 
 
I mean, you don’t like $30 million that we get from 
Weyerhaeuser or the $300 million you get for the pulp company. 
You don’t like that money. You’d rather lose $91,000 a day. And 
you say, well it’s privatization. You have no idea what 
privatization is — no idea at all. 
 
I will say to you that when we privatized the pulp company in 
Prince Albert . . . the member from Moose Jaw North could 
probably learn a lot about the pulp company that was losing 
$91,000 a day and now converted into a profitable operation that 
gave us . . . will give us over $60 million this year, and a 
brand-new paper mill with another 140 jobs and half a million 
dollars a month in salaries, and you say, oh well, that’s 
privatization. Well I guess I mean, that’s tremendous for the 
taxpayer. They stopped losing $91,000 a day and got $60 million 
in revenue this year alone, and the debentures for $230 million, 
and on top of that they get 60 million because they can’t make a 
payment against that debenture until the paper mill starts. We just 
keep getting more and more money, plus a new paper mill. And 
you’re talking about privatization. 
 
I mean, we can spend a lot of time here in Agriculture estimates 
on privatization. Okay? It’s good for the people who work there, 
the employees at PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company) and at 
the paper mill think it’s a good idea. The patrons of the pasture 
want their own breeding stock and have them — they think that’s 
a good idea. Why would you ever deny them the right, like you 
did in PAPCO and other things, to let them participate? 
 
I mean, when you go back and look at . . . I mean, all kind of 
utilities . . . You wouldn’t allow people to participate in the Sask 
Power Corporation and buy bonds, right? Government over there 
never thought about it. You wouldn’t let them do it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — High taxes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — You wouldn’t let them do it. And he 
mentions taxes. Income taxes went from 34 per cent to 58 per 
cent, and the farmers in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman, 
really didn’t like that. Income tax for farmers went from 34 per 
cent to 58 per cent. 
  



 
April 29, 1988 

 

959 
 

Senior citizens never had a heritage program; they never had a 
chiropody program, and you know what? — senior citizens in 
rural Saskatchewan said, do you know what? — it was half a 
decade, a half a decade where the NDP wouldn’t build one new 
nursing home bed, not one new nursing home. Well, Mr. 
Chairman, rural people said, I think it would be a good idea if 
you built nursing home capacity. So obviously that’s the thing 
that they supported. 
 
So I would, Mr. Chairman, I must remind the members opposite 
that when we talk about privatization and taxes, please go back 
and look at the NDP taking income tax from a 34 per cent of the 
federal to 58 per cent. And they were rejected — rural and urban 
across this province. People in this province, they remember that. 
 
The NDP tax because they want everything in government. They 
increase taxes and rates because they want everything in 
government. They increase taxes because they want to control 
everything. Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ll say to the hon. member, he 
wants to talk about choices for people — I’d be glad to talk about 
public participation and privatization. 
 
Mr. Chairman, let me just remind the members opposite, any 
time we start getting to the truth, they will speak from their seats, 
and those in the gallery can listen to them now. They chirp and 
they chirp and they talk. Just listen. The member from Quill 
Lakes can’t stand to listen to the truth. It’s great to listen. The 
public in Saskatchewan should be here to listen to these people; 
they sit in their seats and they don’t even have the courtesy, Mr. 
Chairman, to listen to the response. They will just talk and talk 
and I’ll leave it up to you, Mr. Chairman, to decide if, in fact, the 
decorum in the legislature is what it should be, given the way 
they talk on the other side. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, I didn’t think you were 
going to go goofy on us today, but I see that thought failed. I 
think the taxpayers of this province would enjoy the $88 million 
that Weyerhaeuser made, that PAPCO could have made this year, 
as opposed to the 30, but we’ll leave that aside, we’ll leave that 
aside. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you that you failed to answer was 
this, and I’ll simply repeat it again and I’ll ask you to give me as 
accurate an answer as you can on this. Is it your intention to event 
over the next few years to privatize, completely privatize the 
community pasture system, as the moves that you’ve made in 
your new policy would indicate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — No. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well thank you for that, Mr. Minister. So in 
other words, that you will not be asking the patrons or anyone 
else to purchase any of the pastures, the land, and the facilities in 
those pastures, so that the government will no longer own them. 
Is that accurate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — If farmers and ranchers want to buy land 
and if they want to use their own breeding stock, we’ve sold more 
government land back to farmers and ranchers in this province 
than since it was started. And we’re very proud of that. If the 
people want to own the

land, then we will certainly have the flexibility to allow them to 
purchase farm land. You, on the other hand, bought land for the 
government. That’s completely the opposite. Where you were 
buying land, we are selling land. People came to this country to 
own their own farm and to run their own pastures, not have the 
government do it. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I will say to the hon. member: he believes in 
land bank and he believes in tenant farmers; he believes in all the 
kinds of things that he’s getting out of socialist Europe from 
some place — we don’t. We think the farmer should own the 
farm, and we’ll do everything that we can to back him up and to 
help him out. 
 
Mr. Chairman, when you look at land you’ll find that when you 
go back and look at the NDP, what did they have? They had death 
taxes, the widow tax, succession duties, and they kept taking the 
farm, taking money out of people. When you had a death in the 
family, the NDP would come in there and grab several hundred 
thousand dollars. Mr. Chairman, it’s pathetic — it’s pathetic. The 
NDP would just stand in there and take the farm. They would 
actually take the farm at a time of death in the family — 
succession duties and death tax. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, we’re not going to do that. We sell the land 
back to the people. We help them finance it. We let them operate 
in their community pastures. Mr. Chairman, we look after senior 
citizens. We will protect the people as much as possible, and will 
continue to do that in agriculture, rural and urban, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, I was afraid that you were going 
to say something like what you just said. And one of . . . the key 
phrase that you said is if the patrons or people want it, if they 
want to buy land. Well we’ve seen a classic example here in this 
policy change where the people didn’t want it. You said you 
talked to some, a few. I don’t know if you did or not, but I’ll tell 
you, Mr. Minister, it wasn’t the majority of the patrons. And you 
said they wanted it — well, they don’t want it. And you’re 
shoving it down their throats on it. And that’s why I asked you 
about privatization, because I know your ideology. You’re 
running on your ideology and you, I think, will at the right point 
in time say yes, we’re going to get rid of this program — privatize 
it. And that’s not what the people want right now. That’s not what 
they want in the community pasture program. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, you have taken a good policy prior to 
November 1, ’87, a policy that was not costing the government 
any money — the community pasture program — except for 
administration, which was not significant. You have changed that 
policy from a policy of where patrons had reasonable pasture 
fees, where they had good services. 
 
You’ve changed that policy, that their fees have increased, their 
services have decreased, meaning more dollars out of their 
pocket. You’ve made a decision without consulting them as to 
the number of bulls that the government will supply — without 
consulting them. 
 
You say they have flexibility, that they can have their own private 
bulls or public bulls. They had that flexibility 
  



 
April 29, 1988 

 

960 
 

before, because there was about 25, 28 per cent, I understand, of 
private bulls in there already. That flexibility was still there 
without a policy change. 
 
But you’ve made the change for some reason. And I believe the 
major reason was, first of all, you’re unloading some of the cost. 
You’re trying to . . . I don’t know what kind of cost you’re going 
to unload, but it’s going to cost the farmers money. It’s going to 
cost the farmers more money out of their own pockets. 
 
It’s going to create a situation where farmers who are going to be 
eventually forced into buying their own bulls, farmers who don’t 
necessarily have money and who will possibly put a lesser quality 
bull in the program than his neighbour simply because he can’t 
afford it. And I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, those bulls aren’t 
selective when they’re breeding. 
 
You’re going to have a situation where you’re going to have 
dissension between farmers, possibly because they’re going to 
. . . you know, if your neighbour puts a poor quality bull in, puts 
a $1,500 bull in, and you put a $3,500 bull in, I mean, this is the 
type of thing that’s going to happen. 
 
You’re going to lose good pasture managers eventually because 
in the past year the number of reduction of bulls, government 
bulls, is going to be that there’s no longer going to be a need 
possibly for pasture managers. And we have, I understand, 
excellent pasture managers right now, and you’re going to put 
that position in jeopardy. 
 
You’ve reduced services as far as staff go and that reduction in 
the last year, reduction of staff, has caused more death because 
the numbers of riders were reduced and they weren’t able to 
cover as much area. You’ve taken an insurance program that was 
running well centrally for 54 pastures, and you’re going to tell 
the farmers now that they’re going to have to run their own 
program in 54 different locations. 
 
Mr. Minister, they don’t want that. And it’s summed up by 
another little letter that I had and it says, and I’ll quote, “To make 
it fair for all pastures we do not want any changes in policy.” I 
mean, I’ve read these off, signed by many patrons. We have 
meetings here. I’ve had calls from people, and surely you have 
too. But you refuse to put the old policy back in that was working 
well. It wasn’t broken. 
 
That’s why I say to you, and my fear is that it’s your intent, just 
because of your ideology, to privatize the community pasture 
system. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, that is not the right direction for you to be 
taking, and the patrons of the community pastures know what 
you’re trying to do. They know of a reduction of services, they 
know the increase in prices, and they know the problems the bulls 
are causing. And they know how they’ve had to fight to get you 
to back track. They know you have a hidden agenda. 
 
So I say, Mr. Minister, that I would again just ask you, please, on 
behalf of the patrons of the community pasture association, 
would you throw out your policy, new

policy, and reinstate the old policy prior to November 1, ’87. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, we are going to maintain a 
policy of complete flexibility for farmers and ranchers to use 
their own breeding stock, and I’m not going to change that. 
They’ve asked me to have that flexibility. So if they want to use 
their own cattle, they can use them, and that’ll be there. 
 
And I think it’s unfair that NDP lawyers sitting across the way 
here can gloat in their seats when people are in trouble, thinking 
about the foreclosure actions that they can get into. I mean that’s 
pathetic. And the member from Humboldt should know better, 
the member from Quills should know better than others. They sit 
there and they take this lightly. They take the difficulties lightly, 
because they can look at the foreclosure and say, well there’s 
another source of income for me. That’s very unfair. They should 
be concerned about farmers and ranchers. They should be 
concerned about families — not waiting in anticipation to 
foreclose in them. That’s not fair. And even if they are NDP, they 
should not succumb to that. 
 
The member from Quill Lakes sits there and he gloats in his 
place. He gloats in his place because he can say, well look at these 
poor people’ I can foreclose on them, because he is a lawyer. 
Well that’s very unfair, very unfair, Mr. Chairman, and I think 
that they should review their policies a great deal because all over 
the province now people are saying that the NDP lawyers 
foreclose on home owners and farmer. 
 
And the member from Humboldt, he knows very well, he knows 
very well that when farmers and ranchers were facing thousands 
of dollars — some cases thousand of dollars a month — in 
increased costs because of high interest rates, the NDP did 
nothing for them, nothing. And he’s concerned now because he 
says, do you know what, they get to use their own cattle in the 
community pastures And when they were losing thousands of 
dollars a month in 20 per cent interest rates, the NDP could do 
nothing but buy their land and go get some more money out of 
them in succession duties and death tax. 
 
Now they shouldn’t gloat from their seat. They shouldn’t gloat 
from their seat just because they’re lawyers and because they’re 
NDP because they can go out and foreclose on people. It’s not 
fair. They should treat people right. They should be kind to them. 
 
See, they sit in their place and they can just hardly wait to count 
the money, count the money that they could get if they went out 
there and foreclosed on people. I will just say, Mr. Chairman, the 
member from the Quill Lakes, the member from Quill Lakes 
should not, should not go out there as an NDPer and say, here I 
am as a socialist; I’m sorry to do this, but I have to foreclose on 
your farm. 
 
I say, Mr. Chairman, they know better. We’re going to provide 
the flexibility for community pastures. We provide the protection 
against low interest rates. We provide counselling assistance. 
We’ve provided the deficiency payments for farmers and 
ranchers. We’re 
  



 
April 29, 1988 

 

961 
 

going to continue to back up for farmers, and we’re not, Mr. 
Chairman, we’re not going to sit there and gloat and wait for 
foreclosures so that the NDP leader can go out there and make a 
living with his law firm, foreclosing on home owners in Regina 
and Saskatoon, and farmers and ranchers across the province. 
 
And I read letters yesterday into this legislature, to the leader of 
the Opposition, saying, please don’t do this any more; it’s unfair. 
And God forbid if you ever took over government. The people 
know how you feel, how you really feel, because they have . . . 
as you said yesterday, you have a long history, a long history of 
CCF-NDP, and they know you very well now. So they know. 
 
And the answer is, Mr. Chairman, the answer is they don’t want 
any part of your kind of policy, and they don’t want any NDP 
lawyers foreclosing on them any place in the province — Regina, 
Saskatoon, rural or urban. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — I think I know that speech off by heart now. 
That speech you’ve given, you gave me about five times 
yesterday and starting off again today a couple of times. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to now change to the production loan 
program. I think we’ve established the fact that you’re not 
standing up for farmers as regards to community pastures, and 
you’re charging them more for less services and intending 
probably to privatize at some point in time. 
 
Mr. Minister, with regards to the production loan program, can 
you tell me on what date the production loan program was 
implemented and what the rules of the loan were? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Item 1 agreed? 
 
Mr. Upshall: — I have asked a question, Mr. Chairman, and I’m 
patiently waiting for an answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The production loan program . . . Well I’ll 
just go through the several categories. The purpose is to provide 
low interest loans to help farmers plant the 1986 crop. Assistance 
were provided. Farmers were eligible to receive loans of $25 per 
cultivated acre as listed in their 1985-86 Canadian Wheat Board 
permit book. 
 
The interest rate is 6 per cent and loans are repayable over three 
years. Individual farmers could receive up to $100,000, and 
multiple operators up to $200,000. Farmers may elect to defer 
principal repayment for 1987 by paying the interest only. The 
original was 6 per cent, then the next year we said that you didn’t 
have to make any payments at all, except interest, and then after 
that we extended it to 10 years. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Yes, I believe that is right. But let’s just take it 
one step at a time. First of all, in November of ’85 you announced 
the program; in December of ’85, I believe, approximately, you 
announced the details of the $25 per acre at 6 per cent. The next 
year you asked for the

interest only on the principal — the first repayment of interest on 
the principal. 
 
And then, Mr. Minister, could you just describe to me what 
happened in grain prices from 1986, 1987 and now 1988 crop 
years? 
 
(1145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I believe, Mr. Chairman, they went down 
in ’86 and ’87 and up in 1988. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, yes, I knew you were going to say that. 
The fact remains that the grain prices after the first announcement 
of the production loan program dropped 20 per cent. They 
dropped again . . . or then you asked for only the interest back . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . which was fair; I agree with the 
member from Kelvington-Wadena. Then the grain prices took 
another 20 per cent drop, but you changed the rules, then you 
changed the rules. The grain prices took two consecutive 20 per 
cent drops, and then you changed the rules. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you explain the rule changes for me with 
regards to interest, the security and the repayment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the farmers asked us if they 
could postpone the principal payment in 1987, and we said we’ll 
allow that so they could just pay the interest. Then the SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and others said, how about you extend 
this program over 10 years and leave a choice for farmers that 
they could either go with the original three-year program, or they 
could go for a 10-year program so they could cut their cash flow 
requirements. And that’s exactly what we did — so an either 
choice — and it’s up to the farmer. He can use 6 per cent for three 
years, and he’s got that either in the three-year or the 10-year 
program. He can pay it back without penalty. So he can take 
advantage of 6 per cent money and he can pay it off whenever he 
likes, and he’s got the complete flexibility of three years as 
originally was there, or 10 years, which is 6 per cent and nine and 
three-quarters, and over the 10-year piece, approximately 8 per 
cent fixed interest rates for 10 years. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — And what consultative process did you go 
through before you made the decision to change the production 
loan repayment over a 10-year program, up the interest rate to 
nine and three-quarters per cent, and take the security from the 
farmers? What consultative process did you go through before 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we had a very 
specific recommendation from the Saskatchewan Association on 
Rural Municipalities, which is probably the most widespread, 
comprehensive local political organization in Saskatchewan in 
that the municipal councillors come from every community and 
they’re all over the place, and they normally give us very good 
advice and recommendations. I’ll say this: we listen to them very 
carefully, whether it’s on the rat program or whether it’s on 
municipal problems or it’s on taxes or with respect to production 
loan. They said, extend it over 10 years and keep the interest rate 
as low as possible. 
  



 
April 29, 1988 

 

962 
 

The wheat pool came in and did the same. They said, I think you 
should extend this program for 10 years — they talked to their 
delegates all over the place — and we said we would be glad to 
do that. And so we designed a mechanism that we could 
implement that gave complete flexibility to the farmer, so that 
they could go right through and say they could have it just as they 
had it before at 6 per cent money for three years, or they could 
extend it to 10 years with the option of nine and three-quarters, 
knowing that the rate overall was at approximately 8 per cent for 
10 years. 
 
And the people that we talked to, rural and urban, across the piece 
said, that sounds like a good idea. Because of the 10-year 
extension, the taxpayers advised us, as well as their own financial 
people said — because it’s a 10-year period it could go through 
one or two administrations — have security there so that in fact 
the taxpayer is protected. And so that we did and people had the 
choice, and they could sign up. Obviously the financial 
institution says, it’s no problem on existing loans, but for new 
loans we want to make sure that we have security. We signed an 
agreement with them, the credit unions and the financial 
institutions. We did that and everybody was perfectly satisfied 
that the extension was fair. It’s long; it’s over time; it’s the 
lowest, fixed-rate interest rate program any place in Canada. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s interesting that you said 
the pool was onside because on February 3, ’88, I have a clipping 
from the Leader-Post saying “Pool against loan repayment 
changes” — Pool against loan repayment changes. It says: 
 

The original program was put in place on a promissory note 
and didn’t have the security clause in the option available 
now. 

 
We don’t think the farmers’ situation has improved since 
the implementation of the original program and it’s difficult 
to see why they (were) becoming more difficult at this time. 

 
Larsen added that the original requirements to get the loan 
were too lax, given the further collapse of (the) grain prices 
in 1986-87. 

 
So, Mr. Minister, here we have a case again of you saying that 
you consulted with some people, and yet the people that you’re 
consulting with say that they were against the changes that you 
made to the loan program. 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, it’s beyond me to realize why you 
would, at this point in time, not just again ask for the interest back 
on the principal. Mr. Minister, why did you not do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, we wanted to make it 
absolutely clear that this was not a grant, and when you provide 
loans to people, you’re expected to pay them back. And the 
advice from the farmers and the ranchers and the wheat pool — 
the wheat pool, including the SARM — said, no, you’re right. 
You’ve got to ask people to make payments. You can’t just write 
it off or else nobody would make any payment. So they said, 
extend it over a long period of time; make it as easy as possible.

We cut their payments by over $200 million the first year. Cut 
their payments, on an average case, from about 7 - or 8,000 a year 
to less than . . . to about 3. So it cut it in half. It’s exactly what 
they wanted us to do. And, Mr. Chairman, we allow people to 
have that option and at the same time we’ve said to them, for 
Heaven’s sake, you know, you’ve got to pay your bills. We can’t 
just write them all off or else nobody would pay their bills. 
 
The farmer, ranchers, the SARM — Saskatchewan Association 
of Rural Municipalities — and the wheat pool, the flax growers 
and the cattle growers, and others said: extend it over time; ask 
them to make a payment; reduce the payment; make the interest 
rate as low and as fixed as possible. That’s precisely what we did. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, I have three file folders here 
with I don’t know how many letters from people who were upset 
with the changes to the loan program. And they’re saying, look, 
we don’t have the money. Grain prices have dropped. You said 
that they increased in ’88, and that’s another story. That’s a 
political story I’ll tell you, maybe today — maybe not. 
 
But they’re telling you that they don’t have the money. They’re 
telling you that the rules were, under your first initial attempt to 
convince them to vote for the Tory party before the ’86 election, 
the rules were nice and easy. And then all of sudden now, when 
things have gotten, the economy has gotten worse, you’re 
tightening up the rules on them. 
 
And the problem was, Mr. Minister, that initially, right in the first 
instance when you put this production loan out, because it was 
such a political manoeuvre, you didn’t address the problem of 
repayment. And what’s happened is you have now become a 
sixth . . . that production loan has become a sixth of the debt 
problem in Saskatchewan — one-sixth. Your doing. 
 
Now many of the farmers needed the money, and they were glad 
to have that money. And then you changed the rules on them. 
And they’re saying, how can we trust this man? How can we trust 
this man when he said he’s going to give us at 6 per cent and then 
now bump it up to nine and three-quarters per cent and take 
security? 
 
And what’s happened is that it forced the banks into a situation 
where they had to say, look, if the government’s going to take 
security on this loan . . . you never ever thought this out. It 
amazes me what process goes through your department when you 
put these loans out. You never even thought it through as to think, 
well maybe we’ll dry up some of the operating capital for 
farmers. And so then you had to go and scurry around with the 
banks. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I ask you this; what did you do in order to 
alleviate the problem of security with the banks and with the 
government — from the government with the banks, rather? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, let’s make sure that 
the public knows exactly what the program is so that you don’t 
mislead them. 
  



 
April 29, 1988 

 

963 
 

The program was 6 per cent money for three years. That’s 
originally designed — 6 per cent money for three years, $25 an 
acre. Then we said, if you can’t make your payment, we will say, 
we will postpone the principal payment one year, just pay the 
interest. 
 
People come into us and said, could you extend it for 10 years — 
change the rules; that’s what they said. We said, no, we’re going 
to say this: you can have your original option of 6 per cent and 
you’ve got it for three years and you can hang on to that or you 
can go for 10 years for an average of 8 per cent. Now you choose, 
and I’ll let you know. 
 
As of April 22, 1988, we find out that 54 per cent have chosen 
option one, just to stay with it as originally; and 46 have selected 
option two, which includes the three years at 6 per cent and then 
the rest of the term at nine and three-quarters for an average of 8. 
And they can pay after the second or the third with no penalty so 
that they could take advantage of that 6 per cent money as the 
guys that took the first option. So you’ve got 6 per cent in both 
options for three years which is exactly what we promised them, 
and they’ve got it. And if they want to go for longer, then it 
averages 10 per cent . . . 8 per cent. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, let’s just make sure that we know and the 
public knows that we sit at 6 per cent for three years on both 
programs. That’s exactly what it is. There’s no penalty to repay 
it. If you want to pay if off faster, you can. So if you opt for the 
10-year program and you pay it off in two years, you get the 
money at 6 per cent and you’ve got that complete flexibility and 
no extra cost. 
 
So what we did, Mr. Chairman, when we talked to the financial 
institutions, they said that’s fine with us, that’s fine with us. On 
existing loans all we want to know is that we can have collateral 
when we have new operating loans over 10 years. And we said 
we will allow that and they signed off and they said terrific, go 
do it. And that’s why people have responded. So you can get 
access to credit from the credit unions and the banks because it 
applies just like the original one. It’s 6 per cent money for three 
years whether it’s on the three-years program or the 10, and they 
have the option of going 10 years. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, we’ve responded exactly the way the 
farmers wanted but not the way the NDP wanted. That’s their 
problem. The way the NDP wanted okay? 
 
He talks about the price of wheat going down and he won’t ever 
talk . . . that’s the first time he’s talked about the market, the 
international market, in two days. He says why don’t you just 
give it all to them? Give them a billion dollars, right? Write it off; 
that’s what the NDP said, just write it off. And you can have 
anarchy out there that it was fine. The government will just go 
borrow more money. Just give it to them and they don’t have to 
pay. That’s what he keeps telling people. 
 
Well, I mean, is that the advice you’re giving the Liberal 
candidate in Elphinstone? Is that the advice you’re giving him? 
The public should probably be interested in knowing that. I mean, 
it’s extremely interesting, that the Liberal candidate in 
Elphinstone, the Liberal candidate, is a former NDP editor of The 
Commonwealth and he’s

seen coming out of the NDP caucus here, getting marching orders 
in the legislature. What kind of a coalition have you got going 
now? The Liberal doesn’t have any money, so he’s seen coming 
out of your caucus office, seen coming out of your caucus office. 
So the Liberals and the NDP are working like this, hand in hand. 
 
An Hon. Member: — In bed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — . . . in bed together. I’m sure the people in 
Saskatoon will be glad to know that too, that the Liberal 
candidate here is a former editor of the NDP Commonwealth, and 
he’s seen consulting with the NDP in the caucus in the legislature 
here. They’re running like this, the NDP-Liberal coalition, again 
and again. I mean that’s what you’re after, right? Why don’t you 
admit it — why don’t you admit it? That’s what you’re after. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I will only say to the individual that we provide 
all . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Chairman, point of order. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I would ask the Chairman to consider the 
remarks of the Premier, and whether he was talking in respect to 
the question of production loans in his comments recently made. 
You sat there, Mr. Chairman, and I think it’s your duty to call 
him to order, or else there will be no discussion of the agricultural 
policies which he is afraid to discuss. 
 
He is so terrified of our new leader, the member from Riversdale, 
that he is absolutely obsessed with it, and he is going to not 
address any problems of the agricultural in his estimates. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Chairman, to certainly consider whether his 
remarks were appropriate. If not, then it’s wide open. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, can I just respond to the 
point of order? It is well known, Mr. Chairman, it is well known, 
that the NDP policy with respect to loans and land and land bank 
has been an NDP-Liberal coalition policy for a long time, and it 
applies to agriculture and it has for years. So I will look at the 
policies coming out of the federal Liberal government and the 
NDP government on agriculture policy. 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I think probably both the questions and the 
answers have been ranging a little wide, and maybe members on 
both sides of the house will concentrate a little closer on the 
subject at hand. And with that, the point of order is not well taken 
by the Chair, and I give the floor back to the member from 
Humboldt. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’m going to challenge that ruling and ask 
the Speaker to come back. Mr. Chairman, I listened with care to 
the questions put by the member from Humboldt. They were on 
point and specific. I listened with some care to what the Premier 
was saying, and he was talking about a Mr. Eistetter, who’s a 
candidate. 
  



 
April 29, 1988 

 

964 
 

Mr. Chairman, for you to say that everybody’s at fault is to avoid 
your responsibility. I therefore, Mr. Chairman, challenge the 
ruling that you just made, that the point of order was not well 
taken, because if you’re right, then we can talk about anything in 
this Chamber — we can say absolutely anything. If I want to talk 
about the by-election, or if I want to talk about the 1987 election, 
the 1982 election, or any other, that’s wide open. Well that is not 
the rule of the Assembly. The rule of the Assembly is when your 
agricultural estimates are here, Mr. Premier, you’re supposed to 
deal with it. So for those reasons, Mr. Chairman, unless you’re 
prepared to reconsider your ruling, I hereby challenge you. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to speak in regards 
to the challenge there. All members of this Assembly recognize 
the fact that the chairman runs the committee and calls the 
committee to order at a particular time. 
 
I have been sitting in this Assembly this morning and I realize 
that your first ruling was accurate — the questions have been 
wide-ranging and therefore, the answers are deservingly. And I 
therefore suggest that it’s the waste of the House’s time to call 
the Speaker back in, and I think that all member in this Assembly 
should honour the chairman’s ruling. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please, on both sides of the House. 
 
I’m informed by the Clerk that it’s traditional in this House that 
during debates in estimates, that questions and answers both get 
to be wide-ranging, and I think there’s members here that will 
attest to that. With that, we’ll let the ruling stand as it is and the 
member still has the prerogative, if he so wishes, to challenge 
that decision. If he elects not to, I give the floor back to the 
member from Humboldt. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I must say, sir, your ruling is incorrect. On 
reflection, it seems to me that you’re quite right; Liberals are 
coming to the NDP, so are a number of Conservatives, and I find 
nothing wrong with that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The more I think about the Premier’s 
allegation, the more I think you’re quite right. And if you’re a 
little sensitive about it, I can understand it, because it’s going to 
cost you your job whenever you call the election. We are building 
a coalition of the New Democrats, Liberals and Conservatives, 
and it’s going to be a new tomorrow after the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — So, Mr. Premier, if the odd Liberal candidate 
gets caught up in the rush into the NDP offices, that’s 
understandable, that’s understandable. And I can understand why 
you’re a little sensitive about it. 
 
Mr. Premier, I also wanted to get into the question of the 
production loans. I wonder, Mr. Premier, for old-time’s sake if 
nothing else, when I ask you a question, if you could avoid — to 
use the language of the member from

Quill Lakes — going goofy on me and talking about the nursing 
homes and Eistetter and foreclosures and a number of other 
things. 
 
You either, Mr. Premier . . . you have been doing one of two 
things for the last day and a half. You either go goofy on us and 
get into an utterly irrelevant discussion of heaven only knows 
what, or you escape into the pedantic and tell us things that the 
detail, of course, we know. I wonder, Mr. Premier, if you’d deal 
with the issue. 
 
The issue, it seems to me, with respect to production loans, is 
twofold. The whole program was badly flawed from the 
beginning. It strikes me, Mr. Premier, and I think it is 
self-evident, that one of the major problems with the agricultural 
industry was it was undercapitalized. It was carrying far . . . at 
the onset of the agricultural recession it was carrying far more 
debt than was healthy. 
 
Mr. Premier, the last thing that the farming industry needed was 
a whole lot more debt. When you added a billion dollars in loans 
. . . when you gave a billion dollars in loans to the farmers, you 
added a billion dollars in debt, and you therefore added very 
significantly to the key problem. 
 
So I say, Mr. Premier, that by giving $25 an acre loan to anybody, 
whether they needed it or not, whether they could pay it back or 
not, was a very badly flawed program. 
 
I sit in the desk of the former member from 
Assiniboia-Bengough. That was in the days when 
Assiniboia-Bengough had some representation in the House. Mr. 
Premier, I recall that member saying with clarity that the whole 
system of granting loans at $25 an acres was badly flawed, and it 
proved . . . and it turned out to be accurate. 
 
And lo and behold, you found that out. It took you three years to 
come to the same conclusion that the member . . . former member 
from Assiniboia-Bengough came to within a few days. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. I’m sorry, 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. It took you a few years to come to the 
conclusion that he came to in a few days, but eventually you both 
arrived, I think, at the same conclusion and that is that the 
program was badly flawed. 
 
Mr. Premier, if it wasn’t bad enough that you took and added to 
their problem, Mr. Premier, then when it came time to pay, the 
obvious was true, that you weren’t . . . that a lot of them were not 
going to be able to pay it. 
 
Mr. Premier, I suggest to you that you have been harsher than 
private banks. When a private bank has a loan that they’ve got a 
problem with, they’re happy if they just get interest until the 
situation improves. Mr. Premier, you wouldn’t settle for that. 
You had to have the principal back. 
 
Mr. Premier, I suggest to you what you should have done 
  



 
April 29, 1988 

 

965 
 

was allowed the loans to carry on and just collected interest. I 
also want to suggest to you that secondly, Mr. Premier, you 
should have left the interest rate at 6 per cent for an indefinite 
period of time. I say that, Mr. Premier, for an indefinite period of 
time until the agricultural problems improve. 
 
Mr. Premier, the price of grain is considerably lower than it was 
when you gave out those loans. Now the price of grain might 
improve over the next period of time, and if it did, that would be 
time enough to collect the principal, but those farmers are in 
worse shape now than they were when you gave them the loans. 
It is therefore nonsensical to ask them to pay back, not only the 
interest, but the capital as well. 
 
Mr. Premier, your program was badly flawed from the beginning. 
Then when the obvious hit you that this program should never 
have been introduced in this fashion, then, Mr. Premier, you 
made two mistakes. You’ve increased the interest rate, and 
you’ve demanded that they pay back the capital portion of the 
loan at a time when they’re worse off than they were when they 
got the loan. You’re a lot harsher than if they’d have dealt with 
the Royal Bank or the Bank of Commerce or any one of the 
private banks. You’re harder to deal with than a private bank, Mr. 
Premier. 
 
And if you wonder why there’s Liberals, including Liberal 
candidates, streaming into NDP offices, it might have something 
to do with the fact that you’ve been a lot harder to deal with than 
a private bank, and that doesn’t say much for you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I didn’t think that I 
would see the NDP in the house in this legislature defending 
Liberal policy and Liberal candidates, but now we see it. 
 
I can say to the hon. member when he talks abut the problem of 
the production loan, we’ve got to go back and say, what caused 
the problem? The problem was caused by two things: one, 
national policy at that time; and local policy at that time. The 
national government was under Mr. Trudeau; the local 
government was under NDP, and what did we have? We had 20 
per cent interest rates. The prime minister, Mr. Trudeau, said, I 
won’t sell your wheat. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sell your own. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Sell your own wheat. You had death taxes 
and succession duties in Saskatchewan. You had land bank and 
you had foreclosures and you had a policy that got people into 
trouble. 
 
Now what was it? You say . . . And I have to say this, Mr. 
Chairman, but the NDP voted with Mr. Trudeau time and time 
again in Ottawa, keep propping them up and propping them up. 
And we had no marketing policy; we had a high interest rate 
policy. We had foreclosures and we had land bank. That’s what 
caused the problem. 
 
So by 1982 the combination of the Trudeau policies and the NDP 
policies here as a coalition had people absolutely frightened 
because they couldn’t handle the

20 per cent interest rates on farms. And they said, nobody’s going 
to sell my wheat, because Mr. Trudeau come out here and he 
says, sell your own wheat. I mean he just give you the finger, as 
opposed to saying I will help you. 
 
And the NDP propped him up, and we remember that, okay, that 
old coalition. That’s why I throw it up today in terms of the 
policy. Agricultural policy and interest rate policy and monetary 
policy affects agriculture. It affects farmers. And that coalition is 
evident in Elphinstone and it’s evident all over the province — 
that coalition. 
 
So when the Liberal candidates come out of the NDP caucus 
office in Elphinstone, people in Saskatoon should know that. 
That’s the old Trudeau-NDP coalition that says, we can have 
high interest rates, we can have succession duties, we can have 
all this stuff. That hurts farmers. 
 
Now the reason that the production loan was even necessary is 
because of old NDP-Trudeau coalition policies. and you know 
that. You know that. And people now are starting to realize it. So 
you prop them up and they prop you up. You’re like this. Okay, 
the two of you are like this. You’d do anything — anything — to 
make sure that the kinds of policies that we present could not be 
accepted by people. 
 
I will say the production loan program was asked for by farmers 
and ranchers. The NDP didn’t come up with a production loan 
program. The Liberals didn’t. They didn’t come up with anything 
like that. They’d foreclose on people, they wouldn’t sell their 
wheat, and they’d have 20 per cent interest rates. And you stood 
right there as a cabinet minister, with 20 per cent interest rates, 
and did nothing, not a thing. 
 
Every home owner in Regina and Saskatoon . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . You listen. Every home owner in Regina and 
Saskatoon that cost them 2 or $300 a month when interest rates 
were 20 per cent, the NDP sat here. Not one dime would you give 
them. 
 
And if they’re sitting here in Saskatoon or Regina today at lunch 
time, they know what it cost at 20 per cent interest rates. Okay. 
They know. and they know that the NDP did nothing. And in 
agriculture policy, the Trudeau policies and the NDP policies of 
20 per cent interest rates and no sale of wheat was pathetic. That’s 
what got us into trouble out here. It wrecked the oil industry, the 
potash industry, the agriculture industry. 
 
Agriculture — agriculture depends on good monetary and fiscal 
policy and marketing policies, and what we experienced in this 
country was a combination of bad policy, and it was the Trudeau 
policies with the NDP policies and we remember them well. 
 
All I say to you is when they’re in trouble, they come to us. They 
said, would you protect us against high interest rates, and we said, 
yes, protect us against high interest rates. Would you provide us 
low interest loans at $25 an acre at 6 per cent, and we said, yes. 
And then would you go and say, would you extend it over 10 
years, and we said, yes, and you can have the choice of three 
years or 10 
  



 
April 29, 1988 

 

966 
 

years. And always they have the choice, and there’s no penalty 
of paying it off. And they said, now that’s the kind of a 
government we like to see responding to us. 
 
I go back — and again I will go back and say, your policies, with 
Mr. Trudeau, wrecked and crippled agriculture in western 
Canada, and you know that. It was pathetic. And everywhere in 
Canada, nobody will elect an NDP in rural Canada because they 
know those policies hurt them. They remember them. 
 
Now I will say, when you had the chance, when you had the 
chance you had succession duties, death taxes, foreclosures, land 
bank, and you were like this with Mr. Trudeau, and you voted for 
all those policies. Well you’ve come back to reap it. 
 
(1215) 
 
It may be popular in downtown Regina Victoria, in your riding, 
or Centre — Regina Centre. They say, oh well, that’s very nice, 
Mr. Member, the NDP member couldn’t help me at 20 per cent 
interest rates; he didn’t know how, but he’s a nice guy. That’s 
what they’d say. 
 
We said, look we’ll help you. We’ll come in there and we will 
actually help you. We’ll make very sure that the banks and other 
financial institutions don’t foreclose on your home because of 20 
per cent interest rates — that’s what we do. 
 
We stood in there. We said, it’s nine and three-quarters or it’s 
thirteen and one-quarter or it’s 8 per cent for small business, and 
stood our ground. And we didn’t just agree with Mr. Trudeau to 
say, I won’t sell your wheat, or you can have any kind of 
monetary policy, so interest rates go to 20 per cent. No. 
 
And we didn’t blame the international markets for interest rate. 
We said, I don’t care, we should have a change in the federal 
government and a change in the provincial government. And 
thank goodness we changed them both, because we’ve got lower 
interest rates and better protection for home owners and families 
than they’ve ever seen in the history of this province. Now that’s 
action and that’s protection. 
 
So when you talk about production loan, we designed it to help 
people — for farmers; we’ve designed it for home owners, and 
we’re not going to have as you do, NDP lawyers foreclosing on 
people when they’re hurting. We’re going to make sure that we 
protect them and provide the interest rate protection, and the 
production loan protection, and the deficiency payments, and all 
those things that real families need, because if you are 
compassionate and sincere, you’ll put your money where your 
mouth is. You won’t just stand there and say, talk about it. 
 
You talked abut the fact that you were a cabinet minister at 20 
per cent interest rates and didn’t do a thing. Nothing, nothing. 
How could you feel compassion, how can you stand there today 
and say the NDP cares when you wouldn’t give them a dime? 
Wouldn’t give them a dime. That’s the reason the production 
loan was necessary to start with because of those bad policies. 
They have been

rejected. 
 
And I say to you, I say to you, rural people, rural people, Mr. 
Chairman, know what caused the agricultural problem. We see, 
Mr. Chairman, and I think I can point it out, rural people know, 
even if they’re NDP. The president of the NDP riding of 
Melville, which is rural, has resigned because of NDP policy. He 
knows the truth about the Trudeau-NDP coalition and what it 
means in term of family values, agriculture policies, 
communities, all those things. 
 
He’s not my president. He’s your president, and he quit over that. 
He understands that the NDP have lost the soul, the heart, the 
compassion. All they can talk about is foreclosing on farmers. 
All they can talk about is how nice it was when we have high 
interest rates. Well when the NDP presidents start quitting it tells 
you something. 
 
And across this country agriculture policy was in deep trouble in 
the 1970s and ’80s because of the Trudeau-NDP coalition. We 
see it evident in Elphinstone today, and the hon. member stands 
up there and he’s proud of it. Well, maybe he is. But you’ve got 
presidents and people ripping up their NDP memberships 
because of your policy, and if you haven’t got the message yet, I 
think it’s just fair that somebody should share it with you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, I too, if I had not rose, would 
have applauded that answer. For the first time in a day and a half 
there was at least a germ of truth in what you said because you 
said that the member for Regina Centre was a nice guy. At last a 
germ of truth. Nothing more than that, but at last a germ of truth, 
Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, I wonder if we could get away from showering the 
member for Regina Centre with accolades, and if we could get 
back to agricultural estimates. Mr. Premier, I didn’t suggest . . . I 
may say just in passing it’ll come as news to Mr. Trudeau and 
Mr. Blakeney that they were fast friends. That wasn’t quite how 
they saw the relationship at the time, but no doubt with your 
magical powers, you could rewrite history. 
 
Mr. Premier, I would really like to return to the agricultural 
estimates, and specifically these production loans. 
 
Mr. Premier, I don’t think I alleged that you caused the problem. 
I don’t think I alleged that the Conservative Party, not then in 
government, was responsible for the high interest rates, which 
were in international phenomenon, or the overcapitalization . . . 
or the undercapitalization of farms, which was something of a 
west . . . something of a North American phenomenon. 
 
What I think you’re to be faulted for is not having dealt with the 
problem, not having created it. You didn’t create it and we didn’t 
create it. And I doubt that you could fill a Volkswagen with 
people in Saskatchewan who actually believe that we created 
high interest rates and the undercapitalization of the agricultural 
industry. But you’ll try. You’re not going to find a Volkswagen 
full of people who will believe what you’ve been saying about 
the 
  



 
April 29, 1988 

 

967 
 

member from Riversdale either, but you’ll say it. 
 
I may say the member for Quill Lakes said it all last night in the 
very last sentence before he closed down: if you were half as 
worried about the agricultural problems as you are about the 
member from Riversdale, you wouldn’t be in the trouble you’re 
in, and the farmers wouldn’t be in the trouble they’re in. So lets 
worry about the agricultural problems and not about the member 
from Riversdale. 
 
Mr. Premier . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I worry about him; he might . . . 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, you worry about him. You sure do. You 
sure do. Because after the next election you’re going to get an 
opportunity to ask him questions. 
 
Mr. Premier . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, he won’t be around. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — No, you may not be around. That’s true. 
 
Mr. Premier, I didn’t suggest you caused the problem and I would 
suggest that we try to keep the level of debate such that you don’t 
suggest we caused it. Nobody did. Nobody in this province 
caused that problem; it was there. You are to be faulted, however, 
for not having dealt with it. 
 
Let me, Mr. Minister, describe your agricultural policy. If you 
like a somewhat flippant, but I think largely accurate terms, your 
agricultural policy consists of throwing money at the farmers 
before the election and letting the chips fall where they lay 
afterwards. 
 
Before the election you gave them hassle-free cash. After the 
election you raised the interest rates and you want the capital 
back. That is your policy, Mr. Premier — to throw money at them 
before the election and to let the chips fall where they lay 
afterwards. 
 
It is your vision, Mr. Premier — and if it isn’t, I’d like you to 
correct me, but I think it is — it is your vision now as it was 20 
years ago that there are too many farmers and there needs to be a 
family farm rationalization plan, to use the phase of someone 
who thought a lot like you. 
 
I suggest, Mr. Premier, that that is your goal — fewer farmers — 
and that’s why you’re simply letting the chips fall where they lay 
while you don’t deal with the issues, and why you go bananas on 
us when we ask you some relatively serious questions, like why 
did you increase the debt on farms with that program, and why 
are you now so harsh in insisting that capital be repaid in addition 
to interest. I don’t think you could find a private banker who 
would do that in the circumstances. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, let me try this again for the 
hon. member. He says it’s nobody’s fault that there’s 20 per cent 
interest rates. That’s not true. it is a monetary policy of a country 
that decides the interest rate, and you’re looking at your exchange 
rate and your interest rates. And you can change that policy.

My only point was, through the Trudeau administration . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where did you get your degree in 
economics? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I have a Ph.D. in agriculture economics. I 
don’t believe that you have as many degrees in economics. Okay. 
So all I can say is that . . . 
 
Monetary policy and fiscal policy make a big difference. And 
you can have an influence on interest rates. 
 
My whole point was, in the 1970s and early ’80s we had a 
Trudeau-NDP coalition in Ottawa that said that they were going 
to have a very loose monetary policy, that they were going to 
have a high interest rate policy. And that’s how we ended up with 
a 20 per cent interest rate, and the NDP propped them up. 
 
Now what did that mean? That meant people here — your family, 
mine, and others — had to experience 20 per cent interest rates. 
And you stood in your place here and said, that’s not my fault. 
Well it is your fault because you supported Mr. Trudeau. The 
NDP voted with them. They continued to support them year after 
year after year, and we got hurt out here. We had to face 20 per 
cent interest rates. 
 
Then we said, all right, you can’t do anything down there, would 
you do something locally? And we asked the NDP, and people 
begged on their hands and knees all over the province. They said, 
I’m going to lose my home, I’m going to lose my farm. They 
were afraid for their children. They couldn’t pay their bills. 
 
If you’ve taken out a mortgage at 10 per cent and the interest rate 
to 20 per cent, your payments doubled. And I want the member 
from Regina Centre to understand how it hurt people in his 
riding. Their payments doubled at 20 per cent interest rates. And 
you said, it’s not my fault. And they said, well that may be. Could 
you do anything about it? And you said, no. They said, somebody 
should do something about it. That’s when we came in and said 
for home owners, I don’t care whether the Trudeau-NDP 
coalition doesn’t know what they’re doing, we’re not going to 
stand for it. And in this province it won’t be above thirteen and a 
one-quarter for all the homes, for everybody, and made it 
universal. And they said, well finally somebody got a hold of it. 
 
Now I’ve got to go back and ask: why is there problems in 
agriculture to start with? It’s because they wouldn’t sell our 
wheat, because they didn’t care, because the monitory policy that 
drove interest rates up to 20 per cent. I mean, who can live under 
20 per cent interest rates? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who can live under a Tory government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well under a Tory government we dropped 
the interest rates; we dropped the interest rates. We got them 
down to 6 per cent. And they stand in their place now, Mr. 
Chairman, the member for Quill Lakes and the member from 
Regina Centre, complain to us 
  



 
April 29, 1988 

 

968 
 

about 6 per cent interest rates. We’ve locked them in a 6 per cent 
for three year, 8 per cent for 10 years, and they complain. 
 
They allowed it to be 20 per cent and didn’t lift a finger — didn’t 
lift a finger. How can you stand there and say that 6 per cent is 
too high, or a 10-year program of 6 per cent, and an average 8 
per cent is too high, when you let it go to 20 per cent and you 
endorsed the monetary policy and the sales policy that caused the 
very problem. 
 
No wonder people get upset when you say, I’ll help people in 
Regina Centre. I would like to know what you’ve done for the 
people of Regina Centre to protect their homes against 20 per 
cent interest rates — nothing. You didn’t do anything. You didn’t 
stand in there and protect them. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They don’t own homes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well he says they don’t own homes. Well 
if the interest rates are lower, they could own homes; that’s the 
very point. See, you don’t understand that people suffer with 20 
per cent interest rates. We’ve got them at 6 per cent. 
 
We said in this program, because of these bad policies and 
because of the international unfairness of the wrong policies in 
Europe and the United States, we will come in and provide 6 per 
cent money for farmers. And we’ve kept that program exactly the 
same. That’s why 50-some per cent of them didn’t budge at all. 
They’ve accepted that 6 per cent money. And we said, if you 
want it longer you can still have the 6 per cent money for the 
same three years and it’ll be averaging eight for the period of 10 
years. And they can have their choice. It’s fixed, it’s locked in, 
and they bought that. 
 
Now all I can say to you is that you can prop up the Trudeau 
Liberals all you like. Okay, you can do it on Meech Lake; you 
can do it on all kinds of things, on interest rate policy and 
monetary policy. The people here in Saskatchewan know what 
hurt them, and they remember the coalition that hurt them, and it 
does; it hurts them; it lost farms and homes. 
 
Today we have a production loan program because somebody 
had to respond and we did. And because of drought, because of 
high interest rates, we stepped in and said, we’re going to have 
so much an acre; we’re going to have 6 per cent money; we’re 
going to have 8 per cent money; we’re going to lock it in, and we 
are not going to have succession duties and death taxes the NDP 
did. We’re not going to play the games the NDP lawyers do in 
foreclosing on people. That’s not the answer; that not the answer. 
The answer is sound economic policy. 
 
Look at the interest rate policy, and the monetary policy, the trade 
policy, the national marketing policies, the industrial strategy 
that exists in Canada today. No nation in the free world is keeping 
up to us in the creation of new jobs, absolutely the best record in 
Canada, the best record in the free world. Absolutely the best in 
creation of economic activity, new economic activity and over a 
million and a half brand-new jobs because of the right monetary 
and fiscal policy. Now that’s important for this

country. People want to know that they have a chance. They 
don’t want 20 per cent interest rates, and they don’t want that old 
coalition that didn’t care. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I just make the point: the production loan 
program was set at 6 per cent money for three years. It’s still 6 
per cent money for three years if you choose that option. If you 
want a longer option, it’s 10-year money for 8 per cent, and 
there’s no penalty for paying it off early. So under either program 
we didn’t change it at all, it’s 6 per cent for three years. The only 
thing we changed is to extend it farther, if they want — if they 
want. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I will tell you that they might not want me 
to talk over the dinner hour; they might not want me to talk over 
the dinner hour. It’s my estimates, it’s agriculture, and I’ll tell 
them that those old policies — those Trudeau, NDP policies — 
that had high interest rates, wrecked this economy out here, and 
we’re the people that have to pick it up because you dropped the 
ball. You wouldn’t deal with it, you wouldn’t get them to market, 
you wouldn’t get them to deal with international subsidies. You 
haven’t asked one question in agriculture estimates about the 
unfairness of international subsidies. Not one question. 
 
And imagine the price of wheat goes to $2 or down to $1 and you 
could only say, the provincial government would have to bail 
them out. You didn’t mention how the interest rates got to 20 per 
cent, you didn’t mention how the price of wheat goes down. All 
right, you guys don’t want to deal with it internationally. You 
don’t want to deal with the prices. You say it’s not your fault. All 
I can do is remind you, time and time again, you and your 
candidate and the Liberal candidates are like this in the 
by-elections, and you’ve admitted it; seen coming out of your 
caucus, both of them like this. It goes back 25 years. Trudeau and 
the NDP were working just like this, and we’ve seen the policies 
and we’ve reaped the results. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Chairman, in agriculture policy the farmers 
don’t want 20 per cent interest rates, they want 6 per cent, and 
that’s what they got in the production loan, and we’re happy to 
provide that kind of support for farmers here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
(1230) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I say, Mr. Chairman, without any 
equivocation, that Liberals, whether they be Trudeau Liberals or 
Thatcher Liberals or whatever, are welcome to join the team of 
the member for Riversdale and get together and build this 
province. So are disaffected Conservatives. And if you don’t 
think there’s some disaffected Conservatives coming to us, just 
wait till Wednesday night at about 9 o’clock, when I think there’s 
going to be some results then that’s going to interest you. 
 
Mr. Premier, I want to deal with . . . We are at least off the subject 
of Mr. Eistetter and on to the subject of agricultural estimates. 
Mr. Premier, I want to deal for a moment with the question of 
high interest rates. It is as accurate or inaccurate to say that high 
interest rates are a Conservative policy, as they are a Liberal 
policy. 
  



 
April 29, 1988 

 

969 
 

Let me take you back to the revered figure of the Conservative 
Party, John Diefenbaker. He fired James Coyne because Mr. 
Coyne, the governor of the Bank of Canada happened to believe 
in high interest . . . tried to fire him because Mr. Coyne believed 
in high interest rates. He didn’t get away with it because the 
Senate blocked it, but he tried — but he tried. 
 
Mr. Premier, let me come to a more recent example, Mr. Crow. I 
just finished, Mr. Premier, reading an article in The Globe and 
Mail. I know that this is an anathema to you people. Anything in 
The Globe and Mail is pretty bad stuff. But I just finished reading 
an article in which the writer was critical of Mr. Crow because 
he is maintaining artificially high interest rates, the current 
governor of the Bank of Canada. He’s maintaining high interest 
rates at a time when the Canadian dollar is rising, and the learned 
writer of the article thought that the interest rates ought to go 
down. 
 
But, well okay, but you might admit, it’s a Conservative 
administration in Ottawa now when artificially high interest rates 
are being maintained . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, they’re 
not. They’re artificially high. They’re artificially high, Mr. 
Premier. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Premier, the obvious. Any government in 
Ottawa, whatever their stripe, have only a very limited control, 
extremely limited control over interest rates. They are largely a 
factor of international finance, over which any particular 
government has very little control. 
 
All I can say, Mr. Premier, is it’s darn fortunate that Iowa State 
— which I think is where you got your doctorate . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ohio. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Ohio State is 1,500 to 2,000 miles from here, 
because it must be very, very embarrassing for anyone connected 
with that esteemed institution to see a doctorate of economics 
behave in a fashion which you have over the last day and a half. 
So it’s fortunate for them that they don’t have to . . . It’s fortunate 
for them that Regina television doesn’t saturate Detroit the way 
Detroit does Regina, because it would be embarrassing for them 
if they did. 
 
Mr. Premier, I wonder if instead of giving us this startling lecture 
on interest rates and international finance, I wonder if we could 
stick . . . I haven’t got into the . . . we haven’t got into the issue 
of subsidies because we prefer to deal with things for which you 
are directly responsible. I don’t say you’re responsible for those 
international subsidies; I do say you are responsible for dealing 
with the problem, and that’s what you haven’t done. 
 
Mr. Premier, I say again, your policy is to throw money at them 
before the election in the form of hassle-free cash. Your policy 
afterwards is to let the chips fall where they lay on the assumption 
that, what the heck, rationalization of farms, with fewer farms 
it’d be a stronger agricultural industry. Well I say, Mr. Premier, 
that isn’t our vision of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Our vision of rural Saskatchewan is that as many farmers

as possible should be saved, and there should be means by which 
new and young farmers can get into the industry. And that’s our 
policy. It isn’t yours, but it’s ours. 
 
So I say, Mr. Premier, you’re letting the chips fall where they lay. 
You’re doing it not out of ignorance, you’re doing it quite 
intentionally because of your vision of a rationalized agricultural 
industry. Away you go. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t know how the 
hon. member can stand in his place and say that he is for lower 
interest rates when he had a chance as a cabinet minister to do 
something and he wouldn’t do it. Now he says that governments 
don’t have any impact on interest rates, and that’s just not true. 
It’s just not true. 
 
He’s heard premiers . . . We had the first ministers’ conference 
that was in Regina here after the 1984 election. He saw the 
premier of Alberta stand there and look at the new Conservative 
Prime Minister and he says, Mr. Prime Minister, don’t you have 
that dollar too high. You let those interest rates go where they 
have to. Keep those low interest rates going. If the dollar has to 
go down a little bit, you let it go, because we don’t want 
artificially high interest rates. 
 
And every Conservative premier knows exactly what that means 
— lower interest rates. People want low, fixed interest rates. 
That’s what they should have. now that’s monetary policy. And 
the taxation policy and the interest rate policy and the monetary 
policy go hand in hand. 
 
And if you’ve got huge out-of-control deficits at the national 
level where you print too much money, you’re going to run into 
problems. The province does not print money. Now maybe you 
think that they do. At the national level the money supply will 
have an impact on those interest rates, and you know that, and a 
value on the exchange rate and the interest rates. 
 
Now all I’m saying that under your administration interest rates 
were 20 per cent, and you said it’s nobody’s fault. And you let 
people in your constituency and across the province on farms 
bear 20 per cent interest rates, and your only answer was land 
bank. We’ll go out and buy your land; interest rates are real high. 
And you had succession duties and the death tax so that if there 
was tragedy in the family you’d still tax them there. That was 
your policy. 
 
And you’re involved now in the foreclosure on family farms. I 
mean, former cabinet ministers are involved in the foreclosure of 
family farms. That isn’t right. That isn’t fair. If they’re in trouble, 
they hurt. They need compassion. They need long, low-run 
interest rates. Your lawyers and your firm should go out and give 
them guidance on how to survive, not serve foreclosure notices 
on them. I mean, that’s not fair. 
 
I mean, if NDP lawyers are going out there and taking foreclosure 
notices and giving it to family farms, that’s not fair at all. That 
isn’t even decent. Where are the principles? Where are the old 
principles of the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) 
who would have stuck up for them? 
  



 
April 29, 1988 

 

970 
 

Well, I’d say that if there are NDP lawyers that have contracts 
for banks and working for banks and foreclosing on farmers . . . 
I mean, I read you this letter that was written to me from Steve 
Daskosh yesterday. And he writes it to the Leader of the 
Opposition. And he just says, please don’t foreclose on my farm. 
He says, you know, what are you doing to help farmers? This is 
what he asks: 
 

Dear Mr. (Member from Riversdale) . . . especially when 
you are planning to win the next election, handling farm 
foreclosures, and advising the banks to take away the lands 
from farmers and their livelihood. 

 
He’s saying that to you, your leader. He’s saying, why would you 
do this to somebody in agriculture. 
 
He goes on to say to your leader: 
 

It must be a very good-paying business for you because you 
handle some very petty foreclosures. 

 
He’s telling them that it hurts his family. 
 

My foreclosure (he says) which you are handling, is 
approximately $100,000 when I am worth . . . 600,000. I 
paid about 60,000 in five years. 

 
He’s telling your leader that he’s been paying his bills, he’s doing 
all he can to pay. 
 

(And) this fall (he says) I paid the bank $8,000 and about 
three days after I received a notice or foreclosure from your 
NDP office. The bank stated that you had advised them to 
serve this notice on me. 

 
And he goes on to say to your leader: 
 

Should you win the next election — God forbid! — there 
would not be any farmers left in Saskatchewan, (and he 
says) you hypocrite. 

 
And he signs it, Steve Daskosh. 
 
Now that’s as a result of high interest rates. As a result of you not 
doing anything, you lost the election. And then after you lose, the 
NDP lawyers are out foreclosing on farmers on behalf of banks. 
 
Now how can people take you seriously when you say, Mr. 
Premier, I don’t like our program of 6 per cent money for 
farmers? I mean, that’s what we’ve done. We’ve provided long, 
low interest rates to home owners and farmers because it’s the 
right thing to do. 
 
But I will say to the hon. member, just because you’re a lawyer 
or just because you’re with the NDP Party or because you have a 
coalition like this with the Liberal Party and the Trudeau Liberals 
that goes back for years, doesn’t give you the right to vote and 
foreclose on people in difficult times, and then stand up and say, 
vote for me. 
 
There are foreclosure proceedings, and they happen. And law 
firms do that. But the law firms don’t go out and say, vote for me.

Well this gentleman and his family from Albertville understand 
exactly what I’m talking about. And if you want to start 
convincing people to vote for you, you could at least start with 
him and say, I apologize for adding frustration and the fear and 
the agony of foreclosures by being there on behalf of the NDP. 
 
So I would just say, our interest rate policy is to have it as low as 
possible, as low and long-range as possible. And we reject the 
Trudeau monitory policy, the NDP, Trudeau coalition with 
respect to monetary and marketing policies. We reject the 
international subsidies which are unfair, that caused the $2 
wheat. 
 
We want to work nationally and internationally towards lower 
interest rates and higher price wheat. I just don’t know why the 
NDP wouldn’t at least join us in asking for lower interest rates 
internationally, and higher grain prices internationally, and work 
with us; work with us. Then we can go out there. 
 
That’s why we had the president of France here in Saskatchewan. 
Francois Mitterrand, the president of a very powerful country in 
the European economic community, was invited here to talk 
about agriculture policy and interest rate policy and subsidy 
policy so that we could help farmers. And we brought him here. 
Did you ever do that? Did you ever encourage people to back 
away from those subsidies? 
 
I can only say to the hon. member that when you had your chance 
you failed. When you had your chance you propped up a 
monetary policy that resulted in 20 per cent interest rates. And 
today all you can ask for is the names of people who are about to 
go down under so you can serve foreclosure notices on them on 
behalf of banks. And you got caught doing it, and it’s very unfair. 
 
What would you want us to do today? We’ve got 6 per cent 
money; we’ve got 8 per cent money; we’ve got thirteen and a 
quarter; we’ve got low interest rate policy nationally and 
provincially for the first time in a long time. And you’re saying 
they now would like it lower — they would like it lower. 
 
Well maybe you’ve started to learn. People suffer at high interest 
rates and they need help. And we will continue to provide low 
interest rate loans and ceilings for home owners so that in fact 
they won’t lose their homes and their farms because of high 
interest rates. We’ll make sure that that’s the case in this 
province, and to the best of my ability I’ll do it all across the 
country and convince the federal government to have a low 
interest rate policy. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, I want to direct a question to the 
Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Premier, I think in respect to your 
loans, the production loan, you’ve indicated that you gave people 
an option. Nine and three-quarters per cent over 10 years — 
that’s what it is, it’s nine and three-quarters per cent . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, well three years they can pay 
under the original 6 per cent and the balance of seven years at 
nine and three-quarters per cent, right — nine and three-quarters 
per cent over the balance of the term of the agreement, that’s 
right. Now you’ve raised . . . no doubt 
  



 
April 29, 1988 

 

971 
 

you have raised the interest there. The Farm Credit Corporation, 
which is under the jurisdiction of the federal Tories, raised the 
interest rates on loans. The federal Tories cut or did away with 
the moratorium on foreclosures. 
 
Just a simple question: do you agree with the Farm Credit 
Corporation’s lifting the moratorium on foreclosure? And do you 
agree with the federal Tory policy of, in fact, raising the interest 
rates for Farm Credit Corporation loans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I have lobbied the federal 
government and the FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) time and 
time again to have as low interest rates as possible, and 
following, our lead at 6 per cent. As a result of much of that, the 
FCC’s commodity-based loans will be at 6 per cent, and they’ve 
got $450 million out till 1991 at 6 per cent. Now they didn’t have 
that before . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It’s 6 per cent — the 
commodity loans are at 6 per cent and they stayed at 6 per cent, 
and they’ve got $450 million out at 6 per cent. 
 
Now I will continue to pressure them to reduce interest rates and 
keep them as low as possible. I will also let the hon. member 
know that they wrote off over a $100 million in debt, at the same 
time they provide commodity-based loans at 6 per cent. I would 
recommend to them that they provide 6 per cent money — 
long-term money — right across the piece for 10 years or 20 
years or 25 years, and I have continued to recommend that. And 
the longer and the lower the interest rate they provide, the better 
it is. And they get that representation every time they walk into 
my office. 
 
So I can tell you today that they have got $450 million out at 6 
per cent money on the commodity-based loan programs as a 
result of us lobbying for 6 per cent and low money. Because we 
said we’d do it, they initiated a program. Now that’s almost half 
a billion dollars — $450 million at 6 per cent which is helping a 
large number of people. And I congratulate them for that because 
I believe that the low interest rates are the thing that will help 
farmers survive more than anything else — low and long-run, 
fixed interest rate, production loan program, or commodity credit 
corporations, or Farm Credit Corporation of a commodity-based 
loan programs. 
 
So any times that they raise their interest rates, I phone them, I 
talk to them, and our caucus does, and say, keep those rates down. 
And if . . . any time that they’ve raised them, and in terms of the 
Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance, we say, don’t worry 
about that dollar too much. It doesn’t have to go up. If it has to 
go down to keep interest rates down, let’s make sure that we have 
a low, long-run interest rate policy for this country, and 
particularly for farmers. 
 
(1245) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You know, if anybody was to believe you, Mr. 
Premier, you’d think that the farming situation is in good shape, 
and under your stewardship it has been devastated. 
 
And as I have indicated to you before, in your own report,

Mr. Premier, initiated by you and your MLAs, it indicates 33 per 
cent of the farmers are about to be wiped out. And you sit in here 
and try to say that there’s nothing more that you and the federal 
government can do. 
 
But, I mean, how long are you going to allow these 33 per cent 
of the farmers to be wiped out? Well you aren’t helping them, 
because look at here in Saskatchewan, you couldn’t even supply 
the number of bankruptcies in ’87. Do you know what it said? 
Bankruptcies down in Canada, but not in Saskatchewan in ’87. 
You didn’t want to give that figure because it wasn’t good, and 
your deputy obviously should have had it because it’s right in the 
press. 
 
And 85 Saskatchewan farmers were driven out of farming — 85. 
That’s under your policies, Mr. Premier. You are driving farmers 
out. You’re foreclosing on farmers under ACS (Agricultural 
Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan). You are driving them out 
of farming and you’re sitting there and you’re concerned, and 
your only concern is you’re going to lose. That’s what happening 
to you. You’ve lost all sense of direction, of concentration. You 
can’t even sit down in this legislature with the problem of the 
magnitude it is. 
 
And we are suggesting to you, Mr. Premier, that unless there is a 
complete and total restructuring of some of the debt of those that 
are in the most serious financial problems . . . and I don’t say that 
the provincial treasury alone can handle it. I ask you to join with 
the federal government. That’s what I ask you. Because the 
international situation will, I presume, in the end, and I urge the 
federal government to attempt to change the subsidization 
policies of United States and Europe. But you know what? At 
one time you stand up and say, oh, the high interest rates was the 
problems of the NDP. You could have done something. It’s not 
internationally controlled. But then when it comes to 
subsidization, he says, oh, we can’t touch that. That’s what you 
say; we’re caught up in another international problem. 
 
You know, your consistency is lacking, Mr. Premier. But not 
only that, your commitment to agriculture is starting to come 
through — you don’t have it. you don’t have it, Mr. Premier, and 
I’m going to enjoy the day when the farmers turn on you, as the 
people of Elphinstone are going to turn on you. And you’re 
frightened, Mr. Premier, and as the voters in Eastview are going 
to turn on you. That’s what will happen. 
 
Mr. Premier, you indicated in respect to the options in respect to 
the production loan, and you indicated that 54 per cent of the 
people opted for the original contract. That’s what you said. And 
you said, And you said, 46 per cent opted for the option number 
two, that is, the three years at 6 per cent and the remaining seven 
years at nine and three-quarters per cent. 
 
This is the point, Mr. Premier. Here we have it — 40 per cent of 
the farmers, according to the Farm Credit Corporation, indicates 
that 11 per cent of the Saskatchewan farmers are insolvent and 
an additional 28 per cent are having considerable cash flow. And 
what you’ve done, Mr. Premier, to those who are least capable of 
being able to pay back the loan, those in the most 
  



 
April 29, 1988 

 

972 
 

serious financial concern or situation, what you’ve done is give 
them an option to pay more interest, and each year they have to 
pay off their loan. And as my colleague was saying from Regina 
Centre, this program . . . you knew that the debt problem was on 
the rise when you introduced the farm production loan. 
 
In 1985 there was $4.9 billion of debt here in Saskatchewan, and 
you said, what is more important to me: to address agriculture 
and the young farmers who were caught in the high interest rates 
and the high price of land and save a new generation of farmers, 
or was it more important that I get elected? And so you went out 
and said, I’m for universal program. 
 
I’ll tell, Mr. Premier — and I’ve gone through this with you 
before — there were farmers in my constituency who said: I 
don’t need this loan; I don’t need it, but I’m going to have to pay 
back some of those loans that are in default. Do you know what 
happened, Mr. Premier? Many of the farmers took that loan; 
many of the farmers didn’t need that production loan. It was put 
out there to attempt to buy votes. 
 
Just like your home improvement program, Mr. Premier. Do you 
know what you did there? You made it available on a universal 
again, and you tried to buy city votes. And do you know who you 
denied the right to participate? The poor. That’s what you did. 
You set up a grant of $1,500, and if you were a poor person and 
you didn’t have the $3,000 to put up for improvement, they 
couldn’t even qualify for the grant. That’s priorities. That’s the 
priority that you put into agriculture under your production loan. 
Buy me an election, he said, and let the cards fall. 
 
Well I want to say, Mr. Premier, I’m disappointed that we have 
gone all day yesterday, and we’ve discussed it here this morning, 
and we sat down and we asked you whether you would, as the 
Premier, and as Minister of Agriculture, if you would indeed 
meet with the Prime Minister to bring in a proper restructuring of 
debt. And we’ve asked you that a number of times. And I don’t 
know why you’re not doing it. I mean, 40 per cent of the farmers 
from Saskatchewan on the verge of going bankrupt, out of 
business. And I don’t know why you won’t in fact go and see the 
. . . talk to the federal officials in order to develop a program. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, the significant thing here is that what I want 
you to reconsider and explain to us in this House, is it your 
intention to stand by, when you have this opportunity to meet 
with the federal party, federal government, and to allow up to 40 
per cent, the generation of new young farmers to be destroyed in 
this province? Is that your intention? 
 
And if you’re talking about helping farmers, Mr. Premier, what 
you did in your budget was that you cut $8 million out of the 
budget in Agriculture this year — $8 million. And you know 
what you did with that $8 million. And you know what you did 
with that $8 million, Mr. Premier? You cut corporate income tax 
from 17 to 15 per cent, and that came to about $8 million. So you 
took it from Agriculture, which needs it, and you handed it over 
to your corporate friends. 
 
You say that your treasury can’t meet the problem, and I

agree — with your incompetence and your mismanagement and 
your waste, that’s a fact. But I’ll tell you, we’re going to continue 
to fight on behalf of farmers in Saskatchewan. You go down to 
the Renaissance Hotel downtown in Regina, Mr. Premier, and 
you have rented eight floors of empty space for $8.4 million. Isn’t 
that a great priority! 
 
You set up in your budget no assistance for farmers whatsoever, 
and you know what you have done in your budget? You’ve said 
to the resource royalty companies, we’re going to cut your 
royalties further, and you’re going to give $35 million more of 
concession. We’ve gone through the period when the oil prices 
were good and exploration and development was going on. You 
had a choice, Mr. Premier, to manage and you chose not to. 
 
You forgave and gave the oil companies of this province, during 
the period form 1982 to 1985, $1.7 billion of concessions of 
royalties and tax breaks. Those are your priorities. You’re tied to 
the multinational corporations, the oil companies, the banks, the 
trust companies, and you pretend. And you pretended pretty well 
for a little while but the truth is out now on you. You can’t tell 
half-truths any more, Mr. Premier, you’re going to have to come 
clean with the people of Saskatchewan because the people of 
Saskatchewan are figuring you out pretty well. 
 
I can only say, Mr. Premier, it’s been a disappointing 
performance here. I don’t think ever in the history of this 
legislature have we seen a Premier who in his estimates while we 
tried to address a very, very serious problem . . . we’re prepared 
to sit down here as an opposition to co-operate with you, to make 
joint representations here. We will move a motion here in this 
House, if you will join with us, requesting the federal government 
to consider the restructuring of debt in Saskatchewan. we’ll join 
with you. We moved a motion here in this legislature for a 
deficiency payment and do you know what you did in ’85 or early 
’86, I guess it was, you and your colleagues voted against it. 
 
You don’t want to co-operate. You’re terrorized now. You can’t 
focus on your government and on agriculture. And the reason that 
you’re terrorized and the reason that for the last day and a half 
that you have been ranting is because of the fear that you have 
from the member from Riversdale. That’s your problem. You’re 
obsessed with it. You’re frightened. You’re scared and you’re 
irrational, and that’s sad for a Premier of the province. 
 
I’ve got a tremendous amount . . . I hope the Premier over the 
weekend will get some rest, will come to his senses and want to 
deal with it, because I’ll tell you, you’re going to be here a long 
time, Mr. Premier, if you’re going to carry on the way that you’ve 
carried on in the last day and a half. 
 
I’ll tell you, you’re going to be before this legislature and we’re 
going to get some concrete programs from you to deal with the 
crisis there, or you’re going to be here along time, my friend. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I have a lot more to say on this, and at this time, 
it being near 1 o’clock, I would move that the committee rise, 
report progress, and ask to sit again. 
  



 
April 29, 1988 

 

973 
 

The committee reported progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a brief 
statement with respect to an important project, and I would ask 
for leave of the Assembly to do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. members would like to 
hear the purpose of the statement, if you could just briefly 
provide them so that they can . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, it has just been announced by 
the Prime Minister . . . or the federal Minster of Energy and the 
Premier of Alberta, that we have the first and second stages of an 
oil upgrader at Lloydminster, and I would just read it into the 
record here. I just got handed it, but I will certainly provide a 
copy to the hon. members, and it’s very straightforward. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 
 

Lloydminster Upgrader 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I am pleased to announce, Mr. Speaker, 
that the first step of a two-step process to initiate the construction 
of a $1.3 billion Lloydminster bi-provincial upgrader project was 
completed today. A statement of principles has been signed 
which provides for a future agreement between the governments 
of Canada, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Husky Oil Ltd., and other 
private equity participants, and sets out the conditions under 
which the governments will support the upgrader. 
 
The second step of the process calls for Husky to secure 
commitments to the project from other private sector equity 
investors. construction may then proceed under a detailed project 
agreement based on the statements of principles. This is another 
step in a long and difficult road to making the Lloydminster 
bi-provincial upgrader a reality. 
 
The nature and extent of government involvement has now been 
determined and agreed to by all parties. It is now up to Husky 
and other equity investors to provide the equity financing 
necessary for the project to proceed. 
 
The project’s projections of benefits from the construction and 
operation of the upgrader are as follows: 3,000 person-years of 
direct employment during construction; 330 permanent jobs 
related to the upgrader operation; 1,500 permanent jobs could be 
created as a result . . . as related to production facilities, that are 
developed to supply feedstock; and 7,200 indirect jobs across 
Canada are expected, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Private equity contributions would finance half of the project 
costs. Husky has sought and received a financial package from 
the three governments which would enable Husky to attract new 
private equity into the project in Lloydminster. Government 
participation would involve guaranteed loans to the project to 
cover one-half the total projected cost.

A summary of the statement of principles for the future 
agreement is as follows: the project will be financed with a 50-50 
debt to equity ratio; the debt shall be loaned by the governments 
to the project to be fully repaid no later than 20 years after 
production start-up. If oil prices improve, the debt will be repaid 
faster, and significant improvement in oil prices will trigger full 
repayment of the debt and permit governments to then share in 
projected profits. 
 
This statement is in effect until December 31, 1988, with an 
option for any of the signatories to withdraw after June 30, 1988. 
 
AS with the 1984 memorandum of understanding between 
Husky Oil Limited and the governments, other private sector 
equity partners are required for the project to succeed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are delighted with the new upgrader in the city 
of Regina. We’re very optimistic about the new Husky project in 
Lloydminster. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It seems to be 
that elections seem to be preceded by announcements that never 
seem to happen. It is obvious that this announcement is not being 
made for the benefit of the by-elections in Elphinstone and 
Eastview, because they’ve already given up on them, but there 
must be a pending federal election on its way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, in the true misguided 
tradition of this Premier, we again have an announcement 
without any specifics. We’re told — and I finally have a 
statement that’s brought over after the Premier was three-quarters 
of the way through his report — that Husky and other investors 
will yet have to find the financing that’s going to take place here. 
Now that, Mr. Speaker, is not a very definitive statement. 
 
We want to know, what is the finance deal? The Premier 
wouldn’t say. How much of Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money is 
being put into it and is being put at risk? The Premier didn’t say. 
How much equity do the people of Saskatchewan have for any of 
their money that may be put in here, into this project? And the 
Deputy Premier says nothing — nothing. Now what . . . is that a 
deal for Saskatchewan taxpayers; or is it another cushy deal for 
a big corporate oil industry company internationally rooted in the 
United States? 
 
If only the Premier would have stood in his estimates, Mr. 
Speaker, and made the same kind of commitment to the farmers 
of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — . . . then maybe he would have done 
something productive and constructive. We’ve heard the talk of 
jobs before. We’ve heard the talk of jobs before and we have 
45,000 people unemployed. That is the kind of announcements 
we’ve been hearing, and that’s what 
  



 
April 29, 1988 

 

974 
 

they’ve been — announcements — without anything concrete 
coming out of it. We will wait to see what the specifics are on 
this, and to see how and to what extent the Saskatchewan 
taxpayer may have been sold out again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:07 p.m. 
 


