


















































June 16, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 16, 1988 
 

2151 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I once 
again have the honour of having a group of students in from 
Swift Current. This time, Mr. Speaker, this group is from Oman 
School, which is on the south side of our city. They are 20 
students in number, grade 4, seated in the west gallery. And 
they have with them today their teacher Linda Heinrichs. They 
have also invited, I believe, about seven adults with them and, 
of course, Al, the bus driver, who they couldn’t do without. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will look forward to meeting with this group 
immediately after question period, and I hope the students enjoy 
the proceedings today. And I would ask all members to please 
welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a real pleasure 
for me to introduce to you, and through you, a large group 
seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, from the East Elementary 
School at Esterhazy. There’s 42 of them and they’re grade 4s 
and 5s. They have their teacher along with them today, or two 
teachers, as a matter of fact, Darrell Paproski and Janet Morgan, 
and also some chaperons, and I’d like to name them too: Eloise 
Johnson, Shirley May, Iris Soyka, Pat Arndt, Gail Bruce, Mrs. 
Ilg, and the bus driver Rodney Irvine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these groups are always special when they come 
into the gallery, and this is one that’s just a little bit extra 
special because my grandson, Terrance Johnson, happens to be 
in this group today. I’ll be meeting with them later on for 
pictures and drinks and a little bit of a question period. 
 
I just wish them a safe trip back home again and would ask all 
members to greet them in the usual manner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s also 
my pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, some students that have come from 
beyond our borders, Mr. Speaker, from Russell, Manitoba. It’s 
the Major Pratt School from Russell, grade 6, numbering 40 
students. They’re also accompanied today by two of their 
teachers, Wayne Dunham and Jan Shauer, and also chaperons 
Dianne Lovas and Hertha Frieze. 
 
We welcome these people from outside our borders, Mr. 
Speaker, to the Assembly. We hope you enjoy the sessions here. 
I will be meeting with them out on the lawn at approximately 
2:30 for some refreshments and any questions that they might 
like to ask as far as the goings on here in the Assembly. 
 
So I’d ask all members to please welcome these students  

from Russell, Manitoba. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tusa: — It’s also my pleasure this afternoon to 
welcome to the legislature four people from my home town of 
Cupar, John and Mary Werner accompanied by their son Henry, 
and their daughter-in-law Marge. This is John and Mary’s first 
visit to the legislature, and I might add that John is 90 years old 
and Mary Werner is 88. 
 
Also I might add that they have been married for 68 years. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Tusa: The Werner family have been neighbours of 
my family for most of my life. During their 68 years together, 
they’ve raised three children and have been pillars in their 
community. I can’t say that John and Mary have graduated from 
any famous university, like Saskatchewan or Princeton or 
Cambridge or any of those universities, but I might say that 
many years ago both of them have graduated from the most 
basic of universities, the university of life. And during their 
many years together, they have acquired their master’s degree 
in wisdom. 
 
My fellow colleagues, I fell that John and Mary Werner are true 
pioneers, what I like to call the salt of the earth, the kind of 
people that have truly made Saskatchewan great. I trust, Mr. 
and Mrs. Werner, that you will take away with you pleasant 
memories of your visit to our seat of government today. 
 
Please welcome John and Mary Werner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Lay-offs at Sask Minerals 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question today is to the minister in charge of privatization. As 
the members of the House will know, and especially the 
minister of privatization will know, in April of this year, 
actually late March, the government opposite announced the 
sale of Sask Minerals to two out-of-province corporations, 
saying — no, not saying, guaranteeing — that all of the jobs 
would be secure, that there’d be no job loss. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is this: is it correct that today 
seven of the employees at Sask Minerals, or the former 
employees, have been given their permanent lay-off notices? Is 
this true; and if it’s true, how do you square that action with 
your statements of a few months ago? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, Mr. Speaker, I cannot confirm that 
seven employees have been given lay-off notices. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary  
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2152 
 

question to the minister. Perhaps I should rephrase it this way: 
is the minister not aware of the fact that seven employees, at 
least seven employees, have been laid off at Chaplin and at Fox 
Valley? Or is the minister taking the position that he knows 
absolutely nothing about the developments in those two 
communities with respect to the former Sask Minerals? Is that 
your position? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, as I said previously, I have 
no knowledge of seven employees being given lay-off notice. I 
have been advised that there were three employees — three — 
one at Fox Valley and two at Chaplin that were given lay-off 
notice, but not seven. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
minister. I see that the minister is answering questions with a 
precision which is unaccustomed to this minister and this 
government opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Minister, my question to you is this, so 
we clarify this: you confirmed that three employees now 
formerly of Sask Minerals have received their permanent 
lay-off notices; will the minister undertake to advise the House 
at some very early date whether or not in fact his number is in 
error and that there are seven workers and seven families 
affected? Will he undertake to explore whether or not it goes up 
as high as seven? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: —Mr. Speaker, all I can respond to is the 
information I am aware of, and that is three employees, one at 
Fox Valley and two at Chaplin. And I understand, of those 
three, that the one was offered alternate employment and 
refused it; one of them is eligible for early retirement; and that 
the third was with cause. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the 
minister of privatization. Will the minister confirm, or perhaps 
advise the House, whether or not it’s also true that, as a result of 
the privatization of Sask Minerals, that all of the remaining 
employees there are now being forced to take a mandatory 
one-week-a-month period off for the balance of the year, and as 
well being mandatorily forced to take two weeks off in July, all 
apparently the plan of some form of cost-cutting and effective 
measures in this regard by the new private corporations. Will 
the minister confirm that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, Mr. Speaker, I certainly cannot 
confirm that. I can confirm though that the Kam-Kotia 
company, as I understand, are working very, very diligently and 
close to signing a rather large deal with Australia which I hope 
will ensure employment, ensure the use of the resources and the 
use of those . . . and the sale of those around this country. I 
cannot confirm what the member of the opposition alleges. 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister. 
I have to say, Mr. Minister, that your answers are less than 
forthcoming. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — You apparently, Mr. Minister, know 
nothing, or very little, about the permanent lay-offs, nothing 
about the special working arrangements, but yet you know 
something about a purported sale to Australia. I say to you, sir, 
you’re not coming clean with this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — My question to you is this, sir: you 
guaranteed this House and those workers and the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan that under your UK, 
English-dominated privatization scheme there would be no jobs 
lost. That was a guarantee. What happened to that guarantee? 
Why don’t you speak to those private companies now about 
reinstituting the jobs of those workers laid off and let’s get 
Saskatchewan families and towns back to where they were? 
How about saying that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am giving the 
information that I’m aware of, and that is that there has been 
early retirement offered; there have been extra jobs offered, and 
the allegations raised by the Leader of the Opposition, as so 
often is the case on that side the House, have no factual basis, 
and that again is rumour, innuendo, and you can try and put 
whatever label you want onto this, English-made. 
 
I tell you, I travelled the province of Saskatchewan and this is 
Saskatchewan-made. And later today I will give a ministerial 
statement that shows you exactly the type of public 
participation initiatives that are taking place in this province, 
who are the ordinary citizens of this province, by giving an 
opportunity to share in the development and diversification of 
our resources. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the 
minister of privatization. The minister of privatization says he’ll 
have an announcement to make on ministerial statements today. 
We look forward to that announcement because there are many 
of those kinds of announcements that this minister has made. 
 
And I want to refer to you your announcement that you made at 
the time of privatization of Sask Minerals, which in part said 
the following, quote: 
 

The rights of the employees have been at the forefront of 
this deal. Their employment is secure. 

 
“Their employment is secure.” That’s the statement that you 
made at the time of privatization. That, Mr. Minister, is an 
untruth. Will you apologize to the House, speak to the private 
companies, and get those workers reinstituted in their 
work-force. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2153 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated to the 
Leader of the Opposition, my information indicates that there 
has been one given the option of early retirement; one offered 
alternate employment, which refused; and one dismissed for 
cause. Now it may well be — and I wouldn’t doubt it — that 
the member opposite would like to bind companies so that they 
could not make changes for people to dismissal for cause. We 
do that in this government; they do it in private industry. 
 
And it may be his case that he wants to make deals where 
companies have to take employees, and irregardless of 
performance, no mention as to their productivity, their 
dedication to the company, you must keep them. That’s the 
trade union mentality of the member opposite. 
 
I believe there may be times when employees could be 
dismissed for cause. I think that happens around the world. I 
think that is a common occurrence. It can happen both within 
government and the private sector. He prefers the other. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have another question to the 
minister of privatization. Nobody says that the employer does 
not have the right to manage . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, 
no, at any time. No one has said that at any time and I say that 
now. But I tell you what we say as an official opposition: no 
government has the right to sell out the birthright of this 
province to private corporations outside. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I tell you, sir, that your United Kingdom, 
London-inspired, Oliver Letwin-driven privatization policy, 
when it costs jobs — one job is one job too many in a province 
which is suffering economically. My question to you, sir, is 
this: why don’t you take off those ideological blinkers? Why 
don’t you fire Oliver Letwin? Why don’t you get to a “made in 
Saskatchewan” solution for jobs and families and communities 
here? Do it the Saskatchewan way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I find this very, very 
amusing. It just shows the true colours of the leader . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Let him answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Correct, let him answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I most certainly will answer. It shows the 
true colours of you, sir. First of all I hear you stand in this 
House, as a leader of an opposition party, and you condemn 
every American there is. You’re against free trade; you’re 
against the Americans. 
 
Today I hear you stand in this House, as a leader of a party, and 
condemn the British, condemn everybody in Britain. Why don’t 
you get up and condemn Japan;  

why don’t you condemn China? Because I know from whence 
you come. You follow in the footsteps of your past leader, who 
felt the best economic development of this province is to visit 
the Soviet Union. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lay-offs at Wascana Campus of SIAST 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I direct my question to the 
Minister of Education. Mr. Minister, we have just seen the 
performance of the minister of piratization, and that when the 
minister of piratization gives a guarantee to the workers of Sask 
Minerals, that when it’s piratized they can’t take him at his 
word. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minster, last October 23 in this House when 
we were discussing your super-institute built to create to build 
the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology, 
you said, and I quote: 
 

I said to them, and I say to this House today, and I say to 
all of those educators and that staff across this province, 
Mr. Speaker, when this Bill passes, or when these Bill 
pass, there will be no lay-offs. 

 
And I underline that last phrase, Mr. Minister: there will be no 
lay-offs. Mr. Minister, you made that same assertion many 
times after that in this House, and I ask you, sir: will you tell me 
why there 16 instructors and two clerical staff who have been 
given notice for permanent lay-off, notice for permanent lay-off 
at the Wascana campus of the Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the 
specific cases that you refer to, I have no specific knowledge of 
them, or at least no knowledge in great detail. My recollection 
is that it likely has to do with what programs are being most 
greatly utilized by students, or most being desired by students. 
It could even be something to do with the fact that it is summer. 
But I’ll take notice of the question and bring back the details, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the 
fact of the matter is, when the minister of piratization gives his 
guarantee there’ll be no jobs lost, and when you give your 
guarantee that there would be no lay-offs, people have come to 
know that they can’t take you for your word. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Despite your assurances to the contrary, despite 
your work, Mr. Minister, 18 people at the Wascana Institute are 
about to join the ranks of the unemployed. And as I understand 
it, Mr. Minister, the case is this: they come about directly 
because Flora MacDonald has directed that federal moneys 
dedicated towards pre-employment training and the life-skills 
training at Wascana are now to be diverted to the job strategies  
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2154 
 

program. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Minister: have you told the federal 
government how unhappy you are that its job strategy program 
is creating unemployment in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, the member originally 
tried to make the point that somehow the restructuring of the 
technical institutes and the creation of the new Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology, that somehow that was the 
cause for apparent lay-off notices. Now apparently the reason is 
something to do with a Flora MacDonald and a reallocation of 
programming expenditures. 
 
The reality is, Mr. Speaker, that in this province post-secondary 
education, whether it be through the institute structure or 
universities, is a priority of our government, We’ve seen great 
strides forward, and I think we’ll continue to see great strides 
forward. 
 
If there are some variations in the kinds of programs that we 
provide from year to year, that’s normal. It’s called responding 
to changing times, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll continue to do that. 
We’ll continue to do it in a way that’s sensitive not only to 
students but as well to the employees, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
simply put, I make today one point and one point only. When 
you say that there will be no lay-offs to the staff of the technical 
institutes in the province of Saskatchewan, you cannot be taken 
at your word, and that is the point I make today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And I ask you, I ask you again, Mr. Minister: in 
light of your guarantee that there would be no lay-offs, given to 
all employees after 140 technical instructors had already been 
cut in spite of your assurance, in light of these 18 lay-offs 
coming at the Wascana campus, I ask you, what can the staff at 
the other three campuses expect? 
 
And I ask you as well: can technical students in the province of 
Saskatchewan expect to go this year again through yet another 
period of confusion and dismay as you hack and slash at the 
education system in this province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member has used words like 
hack and slash, Mr. Speaker. I mean, this is an example of 
hyperbolic rhetoric; it is in fact nothing to do with the reality. 
He similarly referred to 140 lay-offs last year. As I recall, each 
and every one of those was offered some kind of position or 
other option. The hon. members opposite never like to bring 
that fact to public’s attention, Mr. Speaker, because they’d 
rather talk about 140 people being laid off when, indeed, yes 
there were lay-offs, but as well, because we were sensitive to 
those employees, we  

tried to relocate as many of them as possible and to give them 
other options. And I think virtually all were offered, with 
perhaps one exception, other options. 
 
So I think the record speaks for itself in terms of how we try to 
help employees, given program changes, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Quarterly Reports for FIC and AIC 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A question to the 
Minister of Consumer and Commercial Affairs. Mr. Minister, in 
estimates earlier this week, you admitted that your department 
could not produce quarterly reports for First Investors 
Corporation and Associated Investors Corporation for the 
periods ending March 31 and June 30, 1985. You could not 
produce them because they were not in your files. Mr. Minister, 
can you explain why these documents were not in your files as 
required by law? Is your government too incompetent to 
regulate, or are you just too busy protecting your friends in the 
business community? How did this happen? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated and the 
member has just indicated, that in estimates the quarterly 
reports were not located in those particular files at that time, 
whether they were misfiled or in fact whether they had not been 
received, I certainly cannot tell him at this time, and I told him 
that last week when we were in estimates. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Misfiled or not 
supplied . . . Mr. Minister, section 25 of The Investment 
Contracts Act of Saskatchewan states, and I quote: 
 

No later than 30 days after the expiration of each quarterly 
period, ending March 31, June 30, September 30, and 
December 31 respectively, every licensed issuer shall file 
with the superintendent a statement certified by its auditor. 

 
That is the law of Saskatchewan. Can you tell this House why 
these two subsidiaries of the Principal Group, a company which 
over four years gave over $46,000 to the Progressive 
Conservative Party, can violate the law of Saskatchewan? Can 
you answer that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the 
member opposite has had a real hang-up with regard to the 
Principal Trust situation and what’s happening in Alberta. He’s 
well aware of the fact that a very lengthy inquiry has been 
going on for, I think, in the neighbourhood of 120-some days 
now. He’s also aware of the fact that the province of Alberta 
has primary jurisdiction over this particular company, or these 
two particular companies. 
 
We simply follow the same practices that the previous 
administration had followed when they were in power, and that 
was relying on information from the province of Alberta with 
regard to these two companies. There was  
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2155 
 

no indication from the province of Alberta that these two 
companies were in serious difficulty. We would certainly know 
from evidence that has come out in the inquiry that the province 
of Alberta did have information, but that’s something they were 
not sharing with the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would further point out, Mr. Speaker, that these two particular 
companies were having difficulty back in the 1970s when that 
group over there was in power. And I would simply wonder, 
why were they not doing something about it at that time? And I 
know the very reason they weren’t doing anything about it — 
because they did not have the information at that particular time 
either. 
 
So I mean, it’s fine for them to follow specific procedures when 
they were in power. We follow the same procedures, and now 
they don’t think that’s a good idea. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
you say that I have a hang-up, and I’ll admit to having a 
hang-up that thousands of Saskatchewan depositors lost their 
money in First Investors and Associated Investors because of 
your government’s negligence. And I’m hung up on that, I’ll 
tell you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And this is all too common with your 
government. You have no legislative authority, no legislative 
authority whatsoever to ignore the filing requirements of The 
Investment Contracts Act of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Why are these quarterly reports missing from 
your files, Mr. Minister, reports that happen to coincide with 
that period during which the companies’ house of cards was 
falling apart? Why are these reports missing from your files? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, I would point out to the 
member opposite again, as I did several times in estimates, as is 
common on that side of the House, Mr. Speaker, they really like 
to use these scare tactics, and it’s really unfortunate. It’s really 
unfortunate that the member opposite still insists on indicating 
that these people have lost their money. He still indicates that 
they’ve lost their money, and that’s using scare tactics with a 
group of people that, I think, it’s very, very unfortunate. 
 
It’s unfortunate that at the present time they are still waiting to 
find out whether or not the Government of Alberta is at fault 
and whether or not they are going to recover all of their money. 
But to this point, Mr. Speaker, no one has lost any money as far 
as these two companies are concerned — they have not lost any 
money. Until such time as the Code inquiry is finished, no 
decision is going to be made in so far as any kind of plans as far 
as the Government of Alberta or any other government is 
concerned with regard to these investors. 
 

I would also point out that the basis on which the licences for 
these two companies was put forward was because of the 
financial statement. The financial statement or the final audited 
report was received, Mr. Speaker, and it was on the basis of that 
that the licences were issued to these two companies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Final supplementary. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, your department’s latest annual 
report proclaims that one of the three mandated purposes of the 
department is to ensure that basic standards of conduct in the 
market-place are upheld. I say that allowing a company to 
operate without paying any attention to the laws of this 
province violates that mandate. 
 
Your government’s commitment to privatization, deregulation, 
and failure to enforce the law has cost thousands of 
Saskatchewan families their savings. What kind of defence do 
you have for your department and its former minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, I would simply point 
out again that, to this point, investors have not lost one nickel 
— not lost one nickel. And I would also point out that the basis 
on which these companies were granted their licences in this 
province was the financial statement, which was received. It 
was not based on whether or not the quarterly reports were 
there; it was based on the financial statement. And the 
understanding that we had from Alberta was that everything 
was in order, and we had no reason to withhold those licences. 
 

Rafferty Dam Project 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, on April 12 in this 
legislature the member for Rosemont asked me a question, and 
because I couldn’t get recognized in this House after having 
taken notice over some extended period, the question was raised 
again yesterday, Mr. Speaker. And so the answer to the 
question, Mr. Speaker, is approximately $777,000. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Meadow Lake Sawmill Announcement 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today 
and announce to my legislative colleagues and the people of 
Saskatchewan, the sale of the Meadow Lake Sawmill, Planer 
Mill, and the Green Lake Sawmill to NorSask Forest Products 
Inc. 
 
NorSask Forest Products is a Saskatchewan company owned 
equally by two local companies — Techfor Services Ltd. and 
MLDC (Meadow Lake District Chiefs) Investment Company 
Ltd. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Techfor is owned entirely by the Meadow Lake 
employees and was established to allow each employee an 
opportunity to invest in the saw mill through  
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2156 
 

the purchase of shares. 
 
And MLDC is an investment company owned by the 10 Indian 
bands comprising the Meadow Lake Tribal Council. 
 
The joining of these two companies forms a co-operative 
ownership of the saw mill that will ensure the efficient and 
productive utilization of our forestry resources, and stimulate 
increased economic growth in the local economy. 
 
That’s partnership Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — the 
Saskatchewan way of building a stronger province that will 
benefit us all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members opposite often suggest that public 
participation does not allow Saskatchewan men and women to 
participate in the growth of our province. I am pleased to report, 
Mr. Speaker, that over 90 per cent of the employees at Meadow 
Lake have purchased shares in the saw mill, along with each of 
the representatives of the tribal council. Ownership of the saw 
mill is now directly in their hands. 
 
As shareholders, these individuals now have a stake in their 
own operation, giving them greater control, opportunity to share 
in profits, and incentive to run the mill successfully. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, for the first time, the local northern 
communities will also have the opportunity to participate 
directly in the development of their forestry resources. 
 
Under the terms of the forest management agreement, the 
northern communities will have first right to harvest, haul logs, 
and carry on reforestation in their area. Aside from protecting 
the forestry resources in the local area, this means having a first 
chance at new jobs, new opportunities, and new economic 
development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition also continually insists that public 
participation does not protect the rights of the public 
employees. We see the employees’ rights as being paramount, 
and I am pleased to report that they were at the forefront of this 
deal. Employment is secure, benefits and wages will be carried 
forward, the collective agreement will be honoured, and the 
current management team remain unchanged. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this deal will also bring new investment into the 
province — new investment that will ensure a more balanced 
utilization of our resources, create now jobs and new 
development. 
 
The new owners at Meadow Lake plan to implement a $3.2 
million upgrading and modernization of the saw mill and planer 
facilities. This program will ensure future profitability and a 
competitive edge in the volatile lumber market by improving 
productivity, increasing recovery rates from raw materials, and 
expanding product lines. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, Nortek Energy Corporation of Edmonton 
has committed to constructing an $80 million pulp plant at 
Meadow Lake to utilize the aspen resources  

of that area. And King, Murphy Lavalin, an established 
engineering firm, is planning on building an $11 million 
chopstick plant in Meadow lake. 
 
Combined, these two new companies directly create over 150 
jobs for Saskatchewan men and women and another 300 are 
expected from the spin-off demand for wood supply. That will 
inject, Mr. Speaker, thousands of dollars in wages directly into 
the town of Meadow Lake and stimulate further growth and 
development in the local economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these companies could have located in other 
provinces but they came to Saskatchewan because of their 
confidence in our people and in our resources. This government 
shares that confidence in our province, and through public 
participation initiatives will continue to attract new companies, 
new investment, and revenues into Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have always stressed that consultation is a major 
part of public participation. Not too long ago I visited Meadow 
Lake and talked with the employees, the tribal council, the local 
people, and the town of Meadow Lake. I involved them directly 
in the decision making process, Mr. Speaker, and that is public 
participation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at employee ownership, community 
participation, new investment, new jobs, value-added 
development and diversification, Mr. Speaker, that is public 
participation the Saskatchewan way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Before we recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana, I’d just like to once more remind ministers 
to try to keep their ministerial statements down to a reasonable 
length. And once more, it was somewhat lengthy today. And I 
would just like to once more remind ministers to keep their 
ministerial statements to a reasonable length . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . just relax. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — I want to thank you for the compliment of 
being the member from Saskatoon Nutana. We’re all looking 
forward to being the government come 1990. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it has now been some five 
months since that member over there became the minister 
responsible for privatization. And under that member’s 
leadership, privatization in this province has meant one of three 
things. It has meant job loss; it has meant a loss of revenue to 
the people of this province; and it has meant a loss of control 
over our own provincial economy. That’s what privatization has 
meant. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — This minister has been travelling our 
province holding meetings on privatization. He calls it public 
participation the Saskatchewan way. And that minister has 
made guarantees from one end of this province to the other. But 
we saw how good his word was  
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2157 
 

today, we saw how good his word was today when it came to 
job guarantees to the people at Chaplin and Fox Valley. 
 
I was at the meeting with my colleague, the member for Moose 
Jaw South, the critic for Sask Minerals, when that member over 
there made a commitment to the people in Chaplin and a 
commitment to the people at Fox Valley that there would be no 
job lay-offs. And today we see what that commitment and what 
that guarantee meant. That guarantee meant absolutely nothing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — We saw, we have seen this government make 
a guarantee to the 411 dental workers, and last Friday we saw 
those unemployed dental workers who are the victims of your 
privatization. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Ministerial statements do not 
allow wide-ranging statements. Order, order, order. The hon. 
member realizes that, I know, and she’ll want to keep her 
remarks confined and related to the ministerial statement. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, my point in all of this is that 
these members have made commitments to job guarantees 
which is referred to in this ministerial statement, and they made 
commitments to the 411 dental workers when they privatized 
the school-based children’s dental program, and I’m simply 
saying their guarantees cannot be trusted, and they are not true. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  
Ms. Atkinson: — We will reserve judgement on his promises 
here today, of economic growth and jobs. We will reserve 
judgement. But given this minister’s track record, given this 
minister’s track record we are not all that hopeful. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — We will be anxious to see the full details of 
this deal. You will remember that the other side of the House 
had another pulp and paper deal not too long ago, and you will 
remember that we had one devil of a time getting the 
information out of that government. 
 
Today they have announced that there will be an $80 million 
mini pulp and paper plant coming to northern Saskatchewan, 
and I would be very interested to see whether or not there are 
loan guarantees to that pulp and paper plant. I’d be interested to 
see that. We’ll be interested to see whether or not there’s loan 
guarantees to the $11 million chopstick plant that’s coming into 
northern Saskatchewan. We’ll be interested to see whether this 
minister has guaranteed loans to out-of-province companies. 
 
They certainly, based on their past practice, have guaranteed 
loans to Weyerhaeuser and all of these kind of people — Peter 
Pocklington. It seems to be the only way they can attract 
business to our province, by guaranteeing  

taxpayers’ money to prop up these large multinational 
corporations. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Minister, we have seen your privatization with Highways 
workers — over 200 people lost their jobs. We have seen the 
privatization when people bought off our equipment at fire sale 
prices. We’ve seen how those Highway workers have suffered. 
We have seen the privatization of the school-based children’s 
dental program and how those people have suffered. We’ve 
seen what the kind of privatization deals your government has 
been involved in have hurt the people of our province, they 
have hurt the people of our province. 
 
So we will reserve judgement on this one. We will see whether 
or not your commitment to more employment, whether your 
commitment to economic growth will actually come to reality. 
And we will wait to see, Mr. Minister. This minister has made 
guarantees before and the verdict is still out on this guarantee. 
And I predict that we’ll be back in this legislature at some time, 
talking about the guarantees and commitments that this minister 
gave to the people of the province today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 100 — An Act respecting Railways in Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting Railways in Saskatchewan. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill 101 — An Act to amend The Revenue and Financial 
Services Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I move first reading of a Bill to amend The 
Revenue and Financial Services Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 24 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 
Agricultural Returns Stabilization Act 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have with 
us today, to my right, Mr. Stu Kramer, assistant deputy 
minister, Saskatchewan Agriculture; and to his right, Hal 
Cushon, who’s the manager of the market analysis section of 
the economics branch at Saskatchewan Agriculture. 
 
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2158 
 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With regards to 
this Bill which appears to be fairly straightforward, however, I 
have a couple of questions I would like to ask the minister and 
his assistants. 
 
First of all, what is the present debt of the programs affected by 
The Saskatchewan Agricultural Returns Stabilization Act, and I 
believe that’s cow-calf-to-finish market, the feeder-to-finish and 
the . . . in the beef stabilization plan and SHARP (Saskatchewan 
hog assured returns program). Could you give me a breakdown 
of the current debt of those . . . of the program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, the total is 92.073 million; in the 
cow-calf we have 44.685 million, which incidentally is down 
from a high of 50 million; the feeder-to-finish is 23.502 million, 
and the SHARP program, the hog one, 23.886 million, which is 
down as well from a high of 24.466 — giving a total of 92.073 
million. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Yes, in that respect. Mr. Minister, the 
programs have been, I understand, paying for themselves and 
there has been very little drain on the funds in the programs due 
to the industry coming back up on its feet a little bit, except the 
feeder-to-finish side of the plan, as I understand it, which has 
increased slightly. 
 
Now under these programs, we’re seeing that the SHARP 
program is at the 70-per cent level now because of the 
phase-out that your government has taken upon going into the 
federal program. And in light of the fact that we are seeing two 
of the other programs decreasing in value, is there anything that 
I am missing when I think about why the necessity to double 
the amount of the program, or was that an arbitrary figure, or 
what calculations went into that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think it’s safe to say that the kind of 
thinking that went behind coming up with the number 200 
millions of dollars is not unlike probably the kinds of thinking 
that went into the 1978 Bill when it allowed for a $100 million 
ceiling. It is 10 years later now. There’s been the inflation. I 
think what the thinking here . . . the balance that one always 
tries to strike on these is that to make sure the number is high 
enough so that the plan is solvent and it has the liquidity that it 
needs. And if you’re at 92 million now, you’re eight million 
away. If you had a big pay-out, you could be in trouble. 
 
And on the other hand, you don’t want to make it so high that 
we as a government aren’t accountable to the legislature and 
that the legislature doesn’t have a chance to examine this. For 
example, if a guy set it at a billion, we’d probably never be back 
here. 
 
So I think it’s a balance between making sure that the plan is 
solvent and can work and not have to be coming back here 
every two or three months to get the limit up, if that was the 
case; on the other hand, not having it so high that the legislature 
doesn’t have a chance to examine the affairs. 
 

Mr. Upshall: — Yes, I can understand that, Mr. Minister, but 
surely there has to be some logic involved when calculating a 
figure or a cap to put on any program. 
 
What I was asking is: what was the procedure that was 
undertaken to determine the actual moneys needed? I know you 
have to have a cushion or a contingency so that you don’t run 
short of funds because the program needs its money, but you 
have the numbers on the amount of cattle being enrolled in the 
program and shipped, the number of hogs. 
 
What procedure, I was asking, did you go through to determine 
the actual amount of money that would be needed in the next 
five years? I’ll just repeat that: in the next five years under the 
SHARP program, and in the next five years under the 
cow-calf-to-finish and feeder-to-finish programs, and what was 
that precise number, so that we’ll know what the approximate 
pay-out will be in that period of time? Then we’ll also know 
what the contingency would be up to the 100,000 of $200,000 
limit. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — First of all, I think what I would say is 
that I suppose over the next several years, I, like any other pork 
producer or any feedlot operator, or any cow-calf producer for 
that matter, would hope that prices over the next decade are so 
high that we don’t have to trigger insurance fund pay-outs. 
 
As I said earlier, in terms of why the 200 million, the rationale 
there today is no different than it was in ’78. A hundred million 
made sense in ’78; I think it served us well. Today the number 
that makes sense, given the parameters I outlined — 200 
million makes sense. And in fact, if we had to make a pay-out 
again like there was in April, where they had to draw down 8.8 
million, if we ran into a situation like that again, tomorrow if 
you like, we’d be over the limit. 
 
So if 100 million made sense in 1978, we are of the view that 
200 million makes sense today. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — So I can take it from that that you really 
haven’t done any calculations on the projection, considering the 
SHARP program in the first year . . . completed its first year of 
its phase-out program and in four more years it’ll be phased out. 
You haven’t done any calculations as to the numbers of cattle 
that will be involved in the program. 
 
Are you telling me that you really don’t know how much 
money that you will be spending over the next five years, and 
do you have no projections on the prices, no projections on the 
numbers? The minister is shaking his head up and down and 
sideways, and I understand that type of logic because we get it 
from that side of the House all the time — yes, no, maybe so. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, seeing we’ve determined the fact that your 
department has not done any type of logical . . . made any type 
of logical move to attempt to explain the number, I will just 
assume then that the only program that’s going to be in this is 
the beef stabilization after the SHARP program is eliminated. 
Can I assume then that the beef stabilization program, in your 
estimation, will carry  
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2159 
 

on as it is in its present form and not be turned into a federal 
tripartite program as the hog program was? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Just so that nobody is misled . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why would you want to mislead 
everyone? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, not me. The hon. member asked 
about projections — certainly beef stabilization board, SHARP, 
departmental officials, the economics branch obviously is very 
much involved in strategic planning and projections, and 
certainly they do have projections, and it’s with those kinds of 
things that some of the thinking that you’ve put into the pot 
when you’re coming out with these numbers. But even the best 
planners can’t predict droughts, and the fact that barley prices 
alone — I can speak from my own personal experience — have 
almost doubled in the last three or four months. So you can’t 
pencil into your best projections things like droughts. 
 
So this number that we’ve come up with will give us enough of 
a shock absorber there, a cushion, not only for the existing plans 
but if there were new plans to be put in place — wild rice or 
whatever the case may or may not be down the road. 
 
And finally, as it relates to the federal-provincial producer, 
tripartite stabilization plan in beef. Negotiations are still 
ongoing there, and I think you will find the same situation there 
as you found in pork. The provincial government didn’t move 
until the pork producers themselves were prepared to move. 
And that’s how we operate on this side of the legislature. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, I can understand that you can’t 
project whether or not there’s going to be a drought. But 
certainly in your calculations and projections you must have a 
number of different scenarios, whether the barley price reaches 
a certain level or the beef prices reach a certain level. I mean, 
you have to know. 
 
And all I was trying to determine is: what, in your projections, I 
mean — you can give me a spread if you like — but what in 
your projections would the optimum number be in the program 
. . . pay-out in the program be? Would it be $150 million, would 
it be $160 million? Now that’s all I was trying to get at, and I 
still don’t get an answer. 
 
But I’ll ask you one more question on the beef tripartite, the 
possible move to tripartite program. Is there anything in the 
move to tripartite the producers or this side of the House 
doesn’t know about, as it might indicate that there would be an 
extra cost involved to the provincial government in order to get 
into that program, therefore, the need for a doubling of the 
dollars in this current program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: The tripartite plans have nothing to do 
with this fund. It would be . . . it’s guaranteed by the federal 
government. 
 

Mr. Upshall: — So then we can assume that the “no moneys” 
in this program are necessary if the provincial government 
decides to move from beef stabilization to the tripartite 
program? As I understand, that’s what you’re saying. 
 
In that case then, you said that the move to tripartite in beef is 
still under review. The point I’m trying to make is that with the 
significant increase of doubling from 100 to $200 million in this 
program, it would lead me to believe that possibly that there 
wasn’t going to be a move to beef tripartite. And I think that 
would be an excellent move on your part just to leave the 
present program in place, for a number of reasons, because 
single-desk selling, because it’s a cost of production formula 
where the tripartite program does not have that, and those two 
aspects of the program give farmers the assurance of stability in 
the market rather than the federal program of an averaging 
provision, whereby your average could come down over a 
period of years and eventually you wouldn’t get any benefit out 
of the program, and remove the central-desk selling aspect. 
 
So in your deliberations, what will be the major factor in 
deciding whether or not the provincial government moves away 
from the provincial beef stabilization program to the federal 
tripartite program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member asks: what’s the 
driving force or the driving reason for entertaining a national 
tripartite program for beef producers. And the obvious reason, I 
suppose, is what we’ve seen over the last 10, 15, 20 years, 
maybe even longer, is a shoot-out developed between provincial 
treasuries who use their treasuries to attract the livestock 
industry to their provinces. And a classic example, I suppose, 
has been Quebec, where they virtually bought the hog industry 
out from under every other province’s feet over this last decade 
or so with very lucrative programs and very lucrative support. 
 
Very much part of our thinking still, and our Premier’s thinking 
at the negotiating table, is yes, our producers will buy into a 
national plan if they see a cease-fire and if they don’t see 
side-loading and bottom-loading and some of those other sins 
that take the place of top-loading. Because we are very much of 
the view that our producers can compete; we have a natural 
advantage; we just happen to produce feed grains here in 
abundant quantities and high quality, and we just happen to 
have a quarter of the entire cow herd of all of Canada. So we 
have the natural advantage. But if other jurisdictions are going 
to buy our industry away from us with their treasury dollars, 
then all it does is continue to drive our insurance costs up. 
 
The other compelling decision that obviously has to come with 
that is that our producers have to feel ultimately comfortable 
with the negotiations and with the proposal before we would 
undertake to become part of a new plan. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, I would say to you that 
from what I’ve . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Why is the member from  
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2160 
 

Yorkton on his feet? 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Chairman, I would ask the Assembly for 
leave to introduce some students. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. It’s 
my honour and privilege to introduce another group of students 
that are in the Speaker’s gallery; these happen to be from 
Yorkton, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It’s the St. Mary’s School 
— 29 students in grade 4. 
 
And I just want to say that just a week or two ago we were at 
their school to turn sod for a brand-new $1 million expansion to 
their school, and the students were all out there to help us 
participate in that sod turning. And I was by there the other day, 
and I see that construction is really going on. This is the 
Minister of Education that’s sitting right in front of me here. 
 
So I welcome you to the Assembly. I hope you have a good stay 
in Regina. We hope you find it interesting and educational. I 
will meet with you in half an hour for pictures and to meet with 
you out on the lawn to answer any questions that you might 
have. 
 
So I would ask all members of the Assembly to please welcome 
these students from St. Mary’s School in Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 24 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 
Agricultural Returns Stabilization Act 

 
Clause 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, you 
were saying that we need to ensure that other provinces don’t 
buy out our industry here. Well I say to you that the tripartite 
system will put farmers . . . the federal tripartite system will put 
farmers on even shakier ground than they are right now. Under 
the provincial program, at least they have a reasonable return 
for their industry. 
 
I have talked to many farmers around this province who have 
called me, and in their own homes, saying that the move to 
tripartite would simply undermine the support that they’re now 
getting. For example, one fellow I talked to said that over the 
last three years he would have lost $3,000 a year under the 
tripartite system as opposed to the stabilization system — and 
that’s $9,000 over the last three years. That’s a significant 
amount of money that helps keep the beef industry in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I say to you that despite the fact that you talk about top-, 
side-, and bottom-loading, that that will continue in other ways 
and you won’t be on any better terms with regards to the beef 
industry in Saskatchewan than you are right now. In fact, you’ll 
probably be worse off because of  

the negative aspects of the federal program. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, am I led to believe then that the increase . . . 
or the doubling of the amount of money to the stabilization fund 
has nothing to do with the fact that the beef stabilization 
program is going to be staying as is, and nothing to do with the 
fact that you’re possibly going to be moving to the federal 
program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, there is . . . This doesn’t have any 
implications for the federal program. In fact, I suppose if we 
hadn’t done this, one could have maybe made the argument, 
erroneously, but if one was wanting to ascribe motives; if we 
hadn’t expanded the fund limit, a borrowing limit; if we hadn’t 
expanded it, one could legitimately maybe make the argument 
that we were trying to squeeze and force them into the federal 
plan because this one was no longer solvent. 
 
The fact that we are indeed expanding the limit so that this plan 
can continue to operate for the benefit of all farmers ought to 
speak to the very point about whether we stand behind our beef 
producers or not, and we do. We stand behind them four-square. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, that’s the point I was getting at. 
And I was hoping in my own mind and for the benefit of those 
beef producers in rural Saskatchewan that the move to double 
the cap would indicate that you wouldn’t be moving to the 
tripartite system, and I think that they would be solidly behind 
staying in the provincial system. 
 
Mr. Minister, just with regards to the tripartite . . . federal 
tripartite program, what representation have you had from 
cattlemen or cattle groups, people involved in cattle, like wheat 
pool or other farm organizations such as the National Farmers 
Union? And what approach have they given to you in terms of 
whether or not you should be staying in the provincial program 
or moving to the federal program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Virtually all groups support, in 
principle, a moving towards a national plan. The only one that 
might not support it in principle would be the NFU (National 
Farmers Union), but from my recollection of my days in 
Agriculture, all groups support it in principle. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Does that support in principle, Mr. Minister, 
include losing the central-desk selling aspect of the current 
program and losing the cost of production formula that we have 
now and turning it over to an averaging formula? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I think when you get into the 
models, in so far as what triggers pay-outs, some of the issues 
that you raise, that’s where you start to get the divergence of 
views, not only across Saskatchewan but across Canada. 
 
And of course equally important from our standpoint is, it’s one 
thing to have an insurance fund and have the rules the same 
across Canada, but if another province is then going to go 
outside the plan, outside the insurance plan that’s been put in 
place to provide for the ups and the downs in the industry, 
they’d go around the corner and then put another plan — but 
they don’t call it a plan;  
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2161 
 

side-loading, bottom-loading, whatever you want to call it — 
over and above this, then the whole reason for getting into a 
national plan goes down the tube. And of course that’s one of 
the things we want to be very much assured of. 
 
Our farmers . . . We’ve got natural advantages here. We just 
want to be able to capitalize on them. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, I want to go back to the 
question, because as I understand it those are two of the major 
reasons why most people are against moving to the tripartite 
program, and I ask you again: does the agreement in principle 
by those groups and people that you have talked to include 
losing the central-desk selling aspect and losing the cost of 
production formula? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — My answer remains the same. As I 
said earlier, that’s where the consensus breaks down. They all 
support — we should have a national plan; that’s what makes 
sense. We have a crop insurance plan across Canada — Canada, 
Saskatchewan crop insurance — we have that across this 
country. We have a national pork plan across the country. 
 
It’s when you start to get into triggering models that you get 
some debate. The additional factor that’s very important, as I 
said, the shoot-out must stop from the treasuries of other 
provinces if we’re going to have peace in the red meat industry 
in this province and not have production locating where the 
fattest treasury is. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, I can understand fully why 
you wouldn’t answer the question because those are two of the 
very important questions that have to be answered when people 
have to decide whether or not they’re going to support a move 
to the federal tripartite system. And I think that under the 
present system we have now, I agree with . . . I have no 
problem with increasing the cap to $200 million. 
 
I would like to think that you have done your homework better 
in the department so that we on this side of the House, and other 
people farming, might know what the actual cost would be over 
the next few years, and whether or not there was some 
indication as to the move away from stabilization. 
 
I think that you have to take into consideration the whole 
industry and not the people that you hear in the industry. And I 
think that’s a big problem with this government. When they say 
they consult and listen to the people, they only listen to one or 
two people, because that’s the ones they want to listen to. And I 
think that if that continues, we’re going to see a move to the 
tripartite system, and we’re going to see a move to the tripartite 
system, despite the fact that many people are going to be 
opposed to it if those major barriers aren’t overcome and 
changed. 
 
And I think in the end run you’ll see a great deterioration of the 
beef industry in this province. We always hope that the prices 
of cattle are going to maintain a relatively high level, but that’s 
not always the case. And in times of low prices, you have to 
make sure that your industry continues so that in good times 
that you can expand. And I haven’t seen that in the past for this 
government, but I  

just hope that you come to your senses and leave the beef 
stabilization program as it is. 
 
Clause 1 agreed. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the agricultural officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to thank the 
Department of Agriculture officials. And I must say, when I 
was minister, and I know now as the Premier being minister, 
that these people do great work for the province of 
Saskatchewan. I can think of no other portfolio that’s faced 
more challenges than Agriculture over the last five or six years. 
 
It doesn’t matter whether it’s grasshoppers or international 
negotiations or droughts or the myriad of challenges that we 
face, these officials have always come through. They give their 
utmost. Hours mean nothing to them, and I’m just delighted that 
we have such fine civil servants working for us in this province, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I thank then again today for their help 
on this Bill. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chairman, I’d be remiss if I did not too 
thank the officials and the minister for the participation in the 
committee stage of this Bill. 
 

Bill No. 26 — An Act to amend The Oil and Gas 
Conservation Act 

 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my 
immediate right I have Mr. John Reid, deputy minister. Behind 
Mr. Reid is Ray Petrich, solicitor for the Department of Justice. 
Immediately behind me is Pat Youzwa, the assistant deputy 
minister, and to my immediate left I have Mr. Bruce Wilson, 
the executive director of our petroleum and natural gas division. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have some 
questions that I wish to raise with the minister with respect to 
Bill 26, An Act to amend The Oil and Gas Conservation Act. I 
want to start with some sections, and I will try and keep it as 
co-ordinated as I can, depending on the responses. 
 
But I want to perhaps start out with the section regarding the 
waste. And I want to get from you first of all, and this is in 
reference to the explanatory notes, some explanation, Madam 
Minister, as to how this Act, as is provided in the explanatory 
notes, will in effect prevent waste. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I can say to the member 
that the section that he has been reading, with the term “waste,” 
it is not meant to deal with the issue of prevention of waste. It 
was indeed to bring the Act up to date and perhaps to what 
constitutes and to better regulate waste matters as it pertains to 
the development of oil. 
 
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2162 
 

Mr. Solomon: — So you’re saying that the amendments put 
forward in this Bill are to bring the Act up to date, and not in 
effect to be more proactive in terms of environmental situations. 
Is that correct, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No, I see this Act as being very proactive 
when it comes to environmental issues, particularly in dealing 
with waste, and I believe that you also recognized that when we 
were doing the second reading debates. I had the opportunity to 
go back through Hansard earlier today and in fact that’s what 
was acknowledged. 
 
When you talk about preventing waste, I think all of the 
companies, all of the producers in exploring and the developing 
of the product, make a concerted effort to prevent waste. But we 
recognize, given the industry, that in fact there are some waste 
materials there, and it is those waste materials that this 
legislation is meant to deal with. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Could you explain then, in your own 
remarks, how the Act is making the older Act, or amending the 
former Act and making it more proactive with respect to the 
environment. It seems to me that after looking at it and studying 
it for a number of days that the amendments are not 
environmentally . . . or as environmentally important as the 
minister has first informed us that it would be. And I was 
wondering if you could perhaps enlighten us and outline clearly 
how this Act is going to be a proactive environmental initiative 
with respect to oil and gas conservation. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the section that we’re 
dealing with, once again let me state that it clarifies what 
constitutes waste. That had never been covered previous to this 
legislation before the House. And while there had been 
practices existing for a number of years, it was never, every 
very clear in existing legislation. 
 
And I use for some examples for the member’s benefit: waste 
water disposal wells for potash, salts, refining, upgrading, 
chemical industries. And while they are all licenses, there was 
nothing specific in legislation that covered these areas. And 
what this does, it in fact gives the department some very 
explicit authority to be able to challenge some practices, if need 
be, particularly as it relates to the environment. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Are you saying that the section that we’ve 
talked about, which is section 4 . . . or the one that defines the 
waste, is giving the department, in that section, authority to 
monitor and review and challenge what the various drilling 
companies are doing with respect to their properties and in 
waste management? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — This gives power to control industries 
and the monitoring of, other than oil and gas. The department 
has been able to monitor, through the authority in legislation, 
oil and gas. This gives authority to those other areas that I used 
as an example for you. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Could you explain to the Assembly, Madam 
Minister, how the department currently monitors this? What is 
the process? Do you have inspectors around the province that 
do this, and how many? Do they go out  

automatically, or do they notify the drilling rigs in advance 
they’re coming out, or do they notify the companies in which 
there are wells located that they’re inspecting them? Give us an 
overview of how the process works. You say that the 
department now monitors this and inspects them. 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, let me deal with oil and 
gas, how it is monitored. First of all, there are several field 
offices around the province in the producing areas, and of 
course the companies must have well drilling licences. And 
from that point on, the department monitors and ensures that the 
wells and the lines that will be there with the producing well are 
inspected and tested. And after a well is drilled, found 
productive, up and running, that is done thereafter on an annual 
basis by the field offices. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — How many field offices are there, and how 
many staff do you have in these offices, please? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — There are four offices with 14 
technicians. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — What has been the reporting record to date, 
Madam Minister, with regard to these field offices? Has there 
been abuse that the department has determined or defined, by 
the oil companies? Have there been a number of spills or 
problems with the environment, be it soil, water or noise in the 
locations? What kind of problems are we having out there? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I would have to say that the problems are 
not major, and I think for several reasons. I think, given the fact 
that the department does monitor and do the inspections, on top 
of the guide-lines being clearly understood by the producers and 
clearly adhered to, those are the reasons why in fact there are 
not major problems there. 
 
That is not to say that spills do not occur in the course of 
drilling a well, or perhaps in a work-over or maintenance areas. 
They do, in fact, and I believe it was only last year that an issue 
of a salt water spill had been raised with me by the member 
from Regina Rosemont. They do occur but they are cleaned up 
very quickly, and as I said, the guide-lines they adhered to, and 
of course they are inspected after that too. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Could you provide some information as to 
how the process works with respect to these inspections? Does 
the staff of Energy and Mines go to these locations on an ad hoc 
basis? Do they monitor the licences on some kind of a regular 
schedule, or do they just . . . or is it ad hoc? Secondly, if there is 
a problem, how do the field people determine whether there is a 
problem? Are they informed by the landowners? Are they 
informed by the companies drilling or running the drill site? 
Just give us some idea of how that process works, please. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the process is as such that 
on an annual basis the field office would visit, if I may call it 
that, every well two or three times on an annual basis. At that 
time, problems would be noted; that’s one  
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2163 
 

way of doing it. The other, of course, is that the companies are, 
in fact, required to report problems; for example, the spills. 
Within that reporting system they must provide various pieces 
of the information — the nature of the spill, the volume, if it’s a 
spill of oil — and of course they must indicate to the 
department or the field office at that time how they are going to 
fix the problem. 
 
I suppose another mechanism that a problem might come 
forward to the department would be in that a landowner in fact 
is not satisfied that a company has adhered to the rules, or in 
fact that a company even has made an attempt to correct a 
problem. And often those types of complaints will come to the 
minister’s office first before they go to the department or the 
field office. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Are they handled directly by the department, 
or do they go to the Surface Rights Arbitration Board? How 
does that fit in, into the system? And I’m talking about the 
landowners having some complaints with regard to the 
locations and sites. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — It depends on the nature of the problem 
whether they in fact would be going to the Surface Rights 
Arbitration Board. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Section 18.2 and .3, with regard to contracts. 
This is a section which I’m assuming is in there as a result of 
the gas deregulation policy of the government, in which the 
current government is basically freeing up the corporations in 
this province to sell our natural gas and export it, where the old 
Act prevented that from happening. And of course there is a bit 
of concern with this particular section, in my view, and I’ll go 
through some of the concerns one at a time if I can. 
 
Under the umbrella of contract confidentiality, will important 
information regarding gas reserves and export volumes and 
domestic supply life, and so on, be available to members of this 
House, or available to the public? Of if not, how is that 
information provided? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — That kind of information has always been 
available in the past on an annual basis by the department and 
will continue so. When we announced the deregulation of the 
natural gas policy, there was a provision in there, indeed, for 
security of supply, and on an annual basis the department would 
be looking at a supply security determination. In other words, 
an annual calculation of how many reserves in fact are left. 
They would also then look at the commitments that have been 
made, and put that against that annual calculation and other 
outstanding commitments to in fact see what is there for 
reserves. That is a provision that must be adhered to, and was 
within the policy when the announcement was made. So the 
information will be public on an annual basis. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — And the information will be provided by 
whom, Madam Minister? For example, with regard to the 
companies filing these contracts they have, what determined the 
contract and the volume of the contract, and to whom the 
contract is made with. 
 

That information . . . Can you explain to us how is that 
handled? Is that handled on a general basis; does the department 
issue, through an annual report, all of this information? 
 
You say it’s available. How is it available? Is it voluntary 
information? Is it provided automatically through some 
regulation of your department? I’ll stop there and get to more 
questions in a minute? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — What is published at the present time and 
will be in the future is the total of the reserves. You were quite 
correct in stating what you had thought were perhaps in the 
contracts to individual producers — of volumes, the customer’s 
name. It also includes price, and that will not be made public, 
company by company. 
 
The department does not necessarily take only the word of the 
producers when all this information is submitted, and in fact 
they have an analysis done, in the determination of the reserves 
left, by someone in engineering. And they ask that person to 
take a look at the pool and then do his or her analysis on their 
findings and give them an estimated calculation of the reserves 
to see if, in fact, it lines up with the information collected over 
the year. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So you’re saying the information submitted 
by a company is monitored and checked by an official of your 
department on an ongoing basis. 
 
It’s fair to say then that the estimates provided by the 
companies with regard to natural gas will be fairly accurate. Is 
that what you’re saying, Madam Minister? And that the 
monitoring procedure will be that every contract or every 
company that’s involved in the natural gas business in this 
province who file with you — and I’m assuming it’s automatic; 
compulsory as opposed to voluntary — that you will, or your 
department will direct an engineer or some other competent 
person trained in the field to determine whether the information 
as provided is, in fact, fact. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, that’s correct. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — There is no indication or no preference of the 
department to do this in-house or contract it out. What is the 
plan for that? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — This is all done in-house with the 
department’s own engineering staff. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Last year how many companies were drilling 
for natural gas or registered with the Department of Energy and 
Mines that had natural gas reserves? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I can only give you an estimate, and we 
estimate it to be about 50 companies that were drilling and had 
reserves. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — And how many companies would there be 
now under the program of deregulation, say in 1988? And how 
many do you project for the next year or three? 
 
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2164 
 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well if we’re talking about from last 
year, the numbers really haven’t changed a lot because we in 
fact were into deregulation last year. So an estimate, give or 
take on either side of it, would still be for 1988, about 50 
companies. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — And how many companies were in that 
position prior to deregulation in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I don’t have that information with me. I 
suppose the department could go back and look at it over time. 
We could certainly try and send you the information. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I would appreciate that, Madam Minister, but 
in the official’s view, would you say there are fewer or more 
under deregulation — companies? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Oh, I think it’s safe to say that there’s 
definitely more. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So the process of companies submitting the 
information with the department is as follows: they provide the 
information with regard to price and with regard to the export 
purchaser and the reserves, and other information. Could you 
give us some more detail as to what kind of information, 
specifically, they have to register with the department? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Upon export or application for export, the 
form has various pieces of information. One would be the 
customer’s name, the price, the length of term of the contract, 
the transportation arrangements that the company has made, the 
volumes that are involved, and also the lands that are involved 
in producing the gas that is required to meet the obligations in 
that contract. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — What is the penalty, if I may ask, if the 
information provided by the company is not correct? Is there 
any kind of recourse? What is the process upon inspection by 
the department that any one of these items that you’ve referred 
to are inaccurate? What does the department then do? Describe 
a scenario of what may happen. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I suppose the penalty would be that you 
would revoke their permit and they would lose the sale. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Madam Minister, is revoking the permit in 
the Act for lack of providing this particular information? 
 
Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, with the other clauses in 
section 18, in particular 18(n), (o), and (p), it says here in the 
explanatory notes: 
 

They’re provided, or they’re added to provide the power to 
make regulations with respect to the construction and 
operation of waste oil processing facilities in the 
submission of information to the department in relation to 
those facilities. 

 
What kind of regulations do you have in mind with respect to 
this, and how will that be monitored? Will it be monitored by 
your field staff in the field offices? 
 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, it I could answer the 
previous question first, on the penalties involved, and in fact 
would that penalty be in legislation. What it is, it’s in section 
56, and in fact it is to do with the gas removal permit. And it is 
looked after in that manner. It will be in the permit itself, and 
that will be covered under regulations. 
 
Dealing with your other question, I think if you read very 
clearly, or very carefully, I might add, section 18, you will see 
that first of all . . . you ask, what does it do? It will give 
authority to outline some regulations for the building of those 
facilities. It says: with respect to the construction and operation 
of waste oil processing facilities, and also the submission of 
information — so they will be required at some point in time to 
submit a form to the Department of Energy and Mines stating 
factors that were not required in the past in terms of what 
they’ve done with this waste material. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Would they also outline to you the strategy to 
ensure that the waste material is disposed of in a safe and 
acceptable manner for the department? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — They will have to outline the method of 
disposal before they get a licence. And the Department of 
Energy and Mines, along with or in conjunction with the 
Department of Environment, in fact will determine and 
henceforth approve or disapprove of the methods laid out. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Madam Minister, with regard to section 18.2, 
it says here in your explanatory notes, that the information that 
the producers will have to submit contract information to the 
department, that information will be used in relation to the 
monitoring and administration of and adjustments to the new 
price-sensitive natural gas Crown royalty and tax structures 
which were instituted in principle as part of phase 1 of 
Saskatchewan natural gas deregulation. 
 
Now everybody in this province knows that the Conservative 
Party and the Government of Saskatchewan has a very cosy 
relationship with the large oil companies and other oil 
producers in this province and throughout Canada. that’s shown 
by the royalty breaks that you’ve given to them over the years. 
There’s been, depending on whose estimate you use, 
somewhere in the $2 billion ballpark figure — $2 billion — of 
tax breaks that you’ve given to the oil companies in the last six 
years alone. And that’s $2 billion of taxpayers’ dollars that 
could have been used for other programs. 
 
We’ve gone through those debates in the House, and I won’t 
bore you with all the details again. The people of Saskatchewan 
know where the deficit has fallen, that the $2 billion has not 
gone for health care, has not gone for the dental plan; therefore 
you’ve cut back on dental plans and drug plans, and you’ve 
increased taxes at unprecedented levels as a government in 
general. 
 
But with regard to this section, Madam Minister, and with 
regard to the auditor’s report on the Department of Energy and 
Mines, in particular page 53, and I’ll read this out for the 
record, the auditor says that: 
 
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2165 
 

A study and evaluation of the management control 
systems for the administration of the department disclosed 
(a number of) conditions, which, in my opinion, resulted 
in more than a relatively low risk that errors or fraud in 
significant amounts may occur and not be detected in a 
timely period. 

 
He goes through a number of items with regard to your 
department, one in particular, as it relates to this section that 
you’re putting forward, and it’s 11.06 in his report. he says, and 
I quote: 
 

My representatives also observed that the documents used 
by the Department to adjust computer generated 
assessments of petroleum and natural gas royalties and 
taxes are not reviewed or approved by senior officials of 
the Department to ensure that all adjustments to computer 
generated assessments of petroleum and natural gas 
royalties and taxes are accurate and bonafide. 

 
Now, Madam Minister, does this amendment in here address 
one of the allegations, one of the many allegations with regard 
to ineptitude in your department with respect to royalties, which 
either reflects a cosy relationship or reflects ineptitude with 
respect to the administration of your department? Does this 
section address that or does it not? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all it does 
nothing of the sort that the member has alluded to. And let me 
state here, it’s unfortunate that we once again have to get into 
the old debate. It’s very unfortunate, and I want to add, Mr. 
Chairman, somewhat disappointing given that the member has 
had several months now, in fact, to learn his portfolio that he is 
critic of and has not simply done it — to take a look at the 
figures and stuff. 
 
To answer the member’s question, Mr. Chairman, on the . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I hit a nerve, I can tell; a very 
sensitive nerve . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Chairman, if 
the member from P.A. would like to ask some question on this, 
we would be delighted to entertain him. We will wait until the 
member from Regina North East perhaps takes his seat. I’m 
sorry, Regina North West. 
 
(1600) 
 
The remarks that the auditor has referred to, in fact, is in my 
mind a good indicator of the increase in activity that the 
department has had to handle in a time when they are looking at 
a new systems, computer systems, to deal with the complexity 
of a price-sensitive royalty system. You put those two factors 
together and they, in fact, were behind. I think several 
adjustments have been made, have been done and completed 
since the writing, or since the auditor had looked at the 
department and in fact have been corrected. I would hope that 
that answers the member’s questions. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I had indicated it was unfortunate. I don’t think 
that I should leave a statement of a $2 billion give-away go 
once again. The only good thing about it is  

that the member is now using the same figure which he wasn’t 
doing before and if he thinks that that is any kind of an 
indication of a cosy relationship, I ask him to go back and 
review the figures. He will find that in fact he is dead wrong. 
 
He might be also interested to find out that if he reviews the 
kind of income that came in, and we are dealing with gas 
particularly, and what he has raised. In 1982, I believe, under 
his government — he was a member then — the intake from the 
gas companies or the oil companies was $1 million. And we’re 
estimating $23 million this year, and I think that is a very good 
indicator of the success of natural gas deregulation in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Madam Minister, the fact of the matter 
is that Saskatchewan people, who are aware of the situation that 
there is a Conservative government in this province, know full 
well that the Conservative Party and the Conservative 
government has foregone $2 billion in oil and gas royalties 
since 1982. And that figure can be debated whether it’s 1.9 or 
2.1, or 2.4 or $2.0 billion. The fact of the matter is that your 
government has, on every occasion when they’ve made a 
commitment to the people of this province, broken that 
commitment when it came to dollars and cents — whether it 
was tax decreases or something else. 
 
And we can talk about and debate the issue of your commitment 
as an MLA or as a candidate in the last couple of elections, 
making a commitment to eliminate the 5 per cent sales tax. 
That’s now increased by 40 per cent. Or your commitment to 
cut personal income tax by 10 per cent and now we’ve got two 
income taxes in this province — the only province in Canada 
with two income taxes of that nature, and the highest personal 
rates next to Quebec. 
 
Madam Minister, we can talk about the credibility of your 
government and the credibility of your party when it comes to 
making commitments, and the fact of the matter is there’s not a 
lot to talk about because there’s not credibility there. 
 
So I can get in and debate the royalty issue with you for the 
next two or three hours if you want, but let’s get back to this 
Bill. You haven’t answered my question, whether this section 
addresses the mismanagement and incompetence that’s been 
inferred in the auditor’s report with respect to the way your 
department’s handling royalties and so on. 
 
But let’s go on to something else here in the same report. Mr. 
Chairman, with regard to this Bill, oil and gas conservation, and 
with regard to the drilling deposits, the auditor says, and I 
quote: 
 

Also essential to an appropriate system of management 
controls is a system which provides for physical control and 
accountability (accountability, Mr. Chairman) over 
negotiable assets to ensure that they are adequately protected 
against loss, fire and theft. Methods for achieving these 
controls normally include restriction of access to assets, 
accountability over assets while in custody, adequate 
segregation of the custodial  

  



 
June 16, 1988 

2166 
 

function from operational and accounting functions, 
specific assignment of custodial responsibilities, 
satisfactory physical protection of the assets and adequate 
insurance coverage. 

 
And it goes on and talks about the process in which: 
 

Oil and gas companies interested in drilling for oil or gas 
in Saskatchewan are required to maintain drilling deposits 
with the Department. 

 
And it goes and mentions the process. But what I want to point 
out is that the bottom of his conclusion is this, and I quote: 
 

The above conditions allow the possibility of 
misappropriation of bonds held in trust by the Department 
with a consequential loss of the Crown. 

 
We’ve seen very serious allegations in this auditor’s report, 
Madam Minister, allegations which, I maintain, should be 
addressed, whether it’s in this Bill or whether it’s in some other 
forum. 
 
But with respect to this Bill, my question to you is: why have 
the drilling deposits been changed from $1,000 per well to $100 
per well, which is a significant decrease. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I believe if you reread that you will 
perhaps find the answer in your question. Let me try and answer 
it. I’m not sure that it will be any clearer for you. 
 
The thousand dollars that they had been assessed was in fact . . . 
and now moving to 100, it was well-specific and it’s 
company-specific. There’s a $20,000 ceiling in there that was 
not there before so they will be paying $100 per well up to a 
maximum of $20,000. 
 
I am also told that the thousand dollars was all that you could 
spend before and that could create some problems in, in fact, 
the bill was more than that. For example, it might be 10,000. 
But before all you had was an opportunity to collect a thousand 
on it. Now that is being changed with this. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So you’re saying that the well deposit system 
is not a hundred dollars per well but a thousand dollars per 
well? Yes, and now it’s being changed to be $100 per well, is 
that what you’re saying? And why was the change made from 
1,000 down to 100, and can you also tell us if there was a limit 
on the amount that one company had on deposit prior to this 
change? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — We wanted a fund, and we wanted a 
million dollars in that fund to be able to deal quickly and 
adequately with problems that arose. The hundred dollars per 
well will give us the million dollars. Under the old system of 
$1,000 a well, because it was well-specific and 
company-specific, without a fund there, all you could fix out of 
that was up to $1,000, when in fact your bill might be 10,000 or 
$20,000. And so we made the decision that we figured the right 
direction to go was with a fund to in fact be able to pay more 
than a thousand dollars if that’s what the bill was. 
 

Mr. Solomon: — Well it says in the explanatory notes that the 
deposit system is company- and site-specific and requires that 
1,000 per well be maintained on a deposit with the department, 
to a maximum of $20,000. Is this wrong, or is this right? 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s the old system. 
 
Mr. Solomon: —The minister, Mr. Chairman, says that was the 
old system. But you just said a few minutes ago that there was 
no cap on the amount of money that the company could put in. 
So could you explain what this explanatory note says? It says it 
was $1,000 to a max of 20; now you’re saying $100 to a max of 
20. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — First of all, what you are reading is the 
existing provisions. They are still in place, and that outlines the 
thousand dollars. 
 
Okay, the expenditure coming out of that was also the thousand 
dollars. If you had a problem at a well, and that deposit system 
was in fact to take care of it, you could only go up to the 
thousand dollars of what had been put in for that well. 
 
Now with a separate fund there, there may be, for example, a 
problem — an abandoned well. Things haven’t been looked 
after properly down by Weyburn; the company is gone, has 
been gone for some time; you can’t find them. You can’t hold 
them to their obligations because you can’t find them. 
 
With the fund there, the department will be able to act quickly 
to be able to address the problems and in fact clean up what is 
there with a higher number than a thousand dollars per well. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — What you’re saying then, Madam Minister, is 
that oil companies, prior to this amendment, under the old 
regime, could drill 10 wells or 20 wells, and that would be the 
maximum amount of money they’d contribute to a fund of 
$20,000. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — That’s right, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Now you’re saying that the amendment will 
provide oil companies to not provide a $1,000 deposit on the 
well deposit system, but $100 to a maximum of 20,000. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — That’s correct, Mr. Chairman. And the 
member must remember, it is to form the initial fund of a 
million dollars. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So why do you want to reduce the amount 
from 1,000 to 100? Why don’t you have the current rate of 
$1,000 in existence, increase the cap or not have a cap at all, 
and let the fund grow? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well we took a look at what is required. 
We don’t need $10 million; we don’t need $20 million to look 
after the problems that are there. But we felt we required $1 
million if that’s what that is going to be spent on. If in fact 
that’s what you require, why would you charge 10 times more 
on that particular problem? 
 
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2167 
 

Mr. Solomon: — Well because we’re getting to the central 
thesis of this whole operation this afternoon. You’re putting 
forward, in the explanatory notes and in the Act, that you’re 
setting up an environmental fund. First of all, it’s either named 
incorrectly or you’ve explained it incorrectly in this legislature, 
and you’re misleading the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
This is not an environmental fund; it’s a fund, it’s a contingency 
or an insurance fund of last resort. 
 
An environmental fund, in my view, is a proactive fund that 
would monitor the various environmental aspects that are 
occurring in the oil business; for example, taking a proactive 
stance with respect to water pollution, noise pollution that’s 
around drilling of wells, soil pollution, and other environmental 
impacts with regard to drilling of oil and natural gas. 
 
So why, Madam Minister, are you saying it’s an environment 
fund? Why are you saying it’s an environment fund when it’s 
not an environment fund? If it was an environment fund, you 
should have stipulated in here some kind of terms of reference 
for the fund that are more proactive with regard to the 
environment, rather than going through the nonsense of naming 
this thing an environment fund when it’s a fund of last resort 
after companies, who are responsible for cleaning up their own 
area, are no longer in business because they’ve been out of 
business for some reason, and there’s no other recourse of 
action for the landowners. Why? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well you’re really off base my good 
friend in terms of how you’re interpreting the legislation. You 
can accuse me of a lot of things, but I think you better look in 
the mirror while you’re doing the accusing. 
 
We have said, and in fact you have the information that states 
we’ve always said this is a fund of last resort when it comes to 
environmental problems. The companies — if they are there 
there’s no problem in getting the money out and insuring that 
that problem is being looked after — are responsible in total for 
the environmental problem that they have created. 
 
Now every once in a while we end up with a problem where 
one cannot determine exactly who’s responsible for various 
reasons. You might have one fly-by-nighter that comes through, 
abandons a well in the middle of the night, or steals off in the 
middle of the night never to be seen again. 
 
So what are you going to do? Are you going to sit there and 
wait for ever, or are you going to charge the taxpayers to clean 
it up? I don’t think so. So this is a fair system that, in fact, 
insures that the problem is looked after, and not at the expense 
of the taxpayers but at the expense of the producers. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well it seems to me, Madam Minister, that if 
an industry is involved in our province, and the oil and gas 
business is involved in our province, that if there is some 
concern with regard to an insurance fund or a contingency fund, 
that perhaps the industry should be  

either taking a significant role in funding that or funding it 
entirely. 
 
And what you’re saying is that this is a . . . You’re calling it an 
environmental fund. It’s a contingency fund or it’s an insurance 
fund. You’ve misnamed it, or you’re trying to mislead people 
by saying, because this thing exists, that people will say, oh, an 
environment fund; it’s a good thing; it’s going to protect the 
environment that is involved with respect to the industry. 
 
Well, Madam Minister, which is it? Is it an insurance fund and 
a fund . . . a contingency fund of last resort, or is it indeed an 
environment fund? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, the industry is paying for 
this . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Exactly. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Pardon? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Exactly. I know that, and so does 
everybody else. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well you should state that then. 
 
An Hon. Member: — But what is the fund? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — As we said, it in fact is an environmental 
fund. Yes, it’s a contingency fund, and yes, it’s a last resort. 
When there is an environmental problem and we cannot 
determine who is responsible and that they shall be there to pay, 
rather than have to seek for six months or a year or more as to 
who you’re going to get to fix that problem, this ensures an 
adequate supply of money for the department to fix the problem 
immediately. 
 
I would suggest if you have some doubts about how it might 
work, that you go and you talk to a few farmers that have either 
had a spill that has not been looked after or perhaps an 
abandoned well, while they sat and wait for someone to find out 
who’s going to fix the problem on their land. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So then you’re misleading this legislature 
when you’re calling it an environment fund. It’s a contingency 
fund. It’s a clean-up fund. It’s got nothing to do with the 
environment. It’s there as an insurance pool of cash up to a 
maximum of a million dollars. That’s what you’re telling us. 
 
Madam Minister, can you tell us how many companies in this 
province drill more than 200 gas and oil wells in any given 
year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: —Last year, and those are the most recent 
figures that I have, there was only one company that drilled 200 
or more. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — What was the name of that company? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Ocelot. 
 
Mr. Solomon: —Ocelot. And in my study I note that  
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2168 
 

there’s probably a number of other companies that are drilling 
significant numbers of wells, so that over a year or two a 
200-well maximum would be reached quite quickly. For 
example, Husky, or NCO, North Canadian Oils, is drilling 
somewhere around 150 oils this year alone. 
 
Buy why, Madam Minister, do you want to limit this fund? 
Why do you want to put a cap on it of $1 million? And 
secondly, why do you want to limit the amount that is 
contributed to this fund to 200 wells only? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well first of all, I suppose if you want to 
do some mathematics and take 200 wells times 100, that is not 
stated in there. There is a cap there. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I stated earlier it was determined what would be 
required for the next year in order to address any problems that 
might be there. And in doing that analysis and coming up with 
that figures, the department in consultation with the industry, 
takes a look at what has happened previously and look at the 
estimates for the drilling of new wells, that type of thing, over 
the next year. And we felt that we were very reasonable in the 
approach to it, and it was determined that in fact that is 
approximately what would be required — nothing more, 
nothing less. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So you decided to put a cap on it, but you’re 
not going to tell us the specific reason. You feel it’s an estimate 
of $1 million. 
 
In the United States, where they were trying to establish a 
chemical waste clean-up fund, called super fund, I believe it 
was, a percentage of production basis was used for collecting 
the necessary amounts of money for this fund. 
 
A percentage basis, Madam Minister, allows more money to 
accrue, and the fund can grow over time and it is more fairly 
distributed because the larger companies who can afford to have 
more of this money committed to the fund contribute their fair 
share. 
 
A costly but important investigative work regarding pollution 
over large areas could be undertaken with proper funding. If 
this was a truly environmental fund and you let the cap grow, 
perhaps the government could be involved in a very positive 
sense in the environment, and in a very real sense in the 
environment as opposed to, through some smoke and mirrors 
and public relations, through naming this fund an environment 
fund and it’s not actually an environment fund. 
 
So why would you not consider setting up a fund that is more 
proactive with regard to the environment. And there’s all kinds 
of things this fund could do, not just as an insurance or a 
contingency fund. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, you know we’re 
dealing with a specific industry, oil and gas, and what I hear the 
member saying is that is a way of looking after all 
environmental problems. Here’s this easy-come, easy-go 
money. That’s what I hear, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Now I am dealing with oil and gas industry within this  

fund. You have asked, you know, why not look at the 
percentage basis. I suppose one could do that. I think it’s a little 
bit more complicated. It would require further monitoring, the 
submitting of budgets, or whatever you may base it on, 
percentage of wells, percentage of number of barrels per day. 
I’m not sure what you would base it on in terms of that 
percentage, but it would indeed be more complex. 
 
The member must remember that in fact it is not your large 
company that you are going to have a problem with. History 
shows that it’s . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Allow me to 
finish. History shows that it in fact is a small company, perhaps 
has drilled one or two holes, maybe in pumping 15 barrels per 
day out of one well and another one shut in, and price of oil 
goes down, money becomes tight, and the company is finished 
and no money. And I think you have to take a look at that 
aspect of it. 
 
The hundred dollars on the per-well — and I go back, Mr. 
Chairman; in fact it is what required — we will not spend a 
million dollars a year. Let me make that clear. If the past is any 
indication, it will be approximately $100,000 a year. So we felt, 
with a million dollars you have enough there, even with 
interest, unforeseen problems, or for a few years ahead of time. 
so you will not be spending a million dollars a year. It will be 
approximately a hundred thousand. 
 
And of course then you’re fairly well fixed for the few years 
after that, depending what the interest rate is. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Petersen: — I would like to ask leave of the Assembly to 
introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Petersen: — I would direct your attention to the Speaker’s 
gallery where I have a group of people in from the Wishart 
School from Wishart, Saskatchewan. We have 20 students, and 
they’re accompanied by their teacher Virginia Latoski, 
chaperons John Prisiak, Donna MacDougal, and last but not 
least and without whom they couldn’t have got here, their bus 
driver Stan Dublanica. 
 
So I would ask all members to help me welcome them here 
today. I will be meeting with you a little later on for a question 
and answer period. I would urge you to take note of the 
questions and answers that are being given here at the present 
time. We’re in committee; we’re discussing a Bill. I think you’ll 
perhaps have some questions which I’ll attempt to answer when 
we meet out on the lawn, I believe it is. 
 
So would all members join me in welcoming my guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 26 — An act to amend The Oil and Gas 
Conservation Act 

 
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2169 
 

Clause 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to offer 
my words of welcome to you as well, to this Assembly. We’re 
now in a part of the legislative process which we call 
Committee of the Whole, and it deals with The Oil and Gas 
Conservation Act and amendments thereto. So we’re trying to 
get some information with respect to that Act. 
 
Madam Minister, you have an opportunity, as a minister of the 
Crown, in particular since you’re sort of leaning towards 
protecting our environment — it’s not a very good effort, I 
might add — but you’re leaning towards that by naming this 
insurance fund an environment fund. 
 
But you have an opportunity, as a minister, to capitalize on this. 
Why wouldn’t you consider, if you’re going to call it the 
environment fund, to expand the amount of money that might 
be available, not just use it as an . . . use part of it for the 
insurance aspect, but be proactive with regard to the 
environment as it applies to the energy industry? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the amount was put 
in for what is required. 
 
I guess if there was anything clear in this Assembly today, it is 
the lack of knowledge and understanding of in fact what that 
industry does. The member might be interested to know the 
industry as a whole spends literally tens of millions dollars a 
year addressing those environmental problems. 
 
In Saskatchewan alone, if you were to go back even in your 
days as government, you would find that it was probably 
required for problems that had not been looked after are 
somewhere in the range of under $10,000 on an annual basis. 
 
Now that isn’t to say that problems didn’t occur that had the 
potential to cost more than that. What it says is that people 
working in that industry, men and women, in fact, held the 
environment in high esteem and were willing to put dollars and 
a commitment there to ensure that it was looked after. As a 
consequence of those commitments and their dedication within 
the industry itself, you find that the unlooked after problems in 
dealing with the environment are minimum. 
 
Now when we look at the issue, or when I did last year leading 
up to this year’s budget and, in fact, legislation, I took a look at 
what has been happening over the last couple of years, the 
number of wells that are out there, the increase over 1982, back 
. . . even 1983 and 1984. I took a look at our deregulation policy 
and what was coming on stream with gas wells, and there’s no 
doubt, with the increase in activity you have the potential for 
greater problems. You may in fact end up not having them 
because the industry will look after them and pay those millions 
of dollars to do so. 
 
But for protection of taxpayers’ dollars and in fact the 
environment, we elected to go with a million dollar  

environmental fund, hoping that perhaps we won’t even be 
spending $100,000 over the next year. 
 
Ideally, the best of all worlds would be that we don’t have to 
spend that money. But just in case, the money will be there, and 
it won’t come out of the taxpayers; it will be out of the 
producers. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Why don’t you call it a contingency fund or a 
going-out-of-business fund or a fund of last resort, rather than 
environment fund? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well because it isn’t necessarily a going 
out of business. I use that in this House today as an example. 
There perhaps may be some other reasons for it, but it simply 
isn’t a going out of business, as the member has suggested. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — That was a suggestion that you had made 
earlier, and I was just putting it into your own words. 
 
Madam Minister, what will happen with the money that’s 
currently on deposit now? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Some of it will be refunded, and of 
course some of it will go into the fund and be credited towards 
those companies. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Define “some.” 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Within approximately $4 million. We 
require one . . . 4 million. We required $1 million. 
 
Now most of that 3 million that goes back, if not all, will be 
going back to the small producers, not the large companies, 
because they will have reached that 20. But by far the majority, 
99 per cent will be the small companies. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — So the real truth comes out now. You’ve got 
a $4 million fund, and you are giving back $3 million more to 
the oil companies that you have on reserve. What is the purpose 
of returning the $3 million to the oil companies when you could 
use that fund for truly environmental purposes? Is this a sock to 
the oil companies, this Bill? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well you can’t. You’re forgetting what I 
told you about the $1,000. Like, you could only use that in 
$1,000 blocks. That’s why it’s grown like it has. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Amend it. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — And you have to be . . . well, the member 
says amend it. It has to be there to address problems. What I’m 
telling you today is those problems should be around $100,000 
a year, not $4 million, not three, not two, and not even one 
million in one year. And what we have set up is a very realistic 
recognition of the needs out there and the moneys required. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — This Bill, Bill No. 26, Madam Minister, is 
becoming to look more and more like a snow job.  
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2170 
 

That’s what it is. You’re telling us that you’re putting a cap on 
the fund of a million. You’re reimbursing the oil companies $3 
million. You’re saying that all of these changes have to take 
place because they’re easier take place than to just change one 
portion of the Act, or the regulations, which say the maximum 
pay-out per location is $1,000. What kind of nonsense is that? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Where do you think the $4 million came 
from? 
 
An Hon. Member: — From the oil companies. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Yes, it’s there, held in trust. That the kind 
of trust fund that had been there. Okay . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Bonds. Bonds. Put into bonds. Even the interest 
on those bonds goes back on a . . . I don’t know if it’s an annual 
basis or whatever, but a regular basis, and the $4 million is not 
government money. It is the industry money, companies held in 
trust by a government department. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Madam Minister, could you tell this 
Assembly who initiated these changes? Who specifically asked 
you to make these changes? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I asked the department to do a review of 
the deposit system and to look at the issue of environment. And 
I did it in detail after there had been a particular problem in the 
Weyburn area and after the increase in the gas activity on the 
west side of the province, namely out in the Maple 
Creek-Leader area. The department, I asked them to take a look 
at what happens in Alberta, the needs of Alberta versus what 
happens here and the needs of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Madam Minister, can you explain to the 
House what percentage of the current fund is used for 
administration, if any; what percentage is used for the insurance 
fund; and how do they compare to the projections of the million 
dollars that you’re cutting the fund into. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — There has not been an administrative cost 
on the department for this, nor will there be in the future. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well that’s obviously and painfully clear to 
the people of Saskatchewan, Madam Minister, because the 
auditor has outlined the kind of incompetence that you as a 
minister are responsible for in your department. I mean, the 
comments I made earlier about the auditor’s report clearly 
stated that you obviously don’t have control of your 
administration or they don’t have the ability to administer it. 
And now you’re saying there’s no administrative costs from it, 
so I can see where the auditor is getting some of that 
information from. 
 
With regard to 18.4, Madam Minister, it says that you as 
minister may invest any moneys in the fund that are not 
presently required, and any investments that are authorized as 
investments for the Consolidated Fund. With the freedom of 
moving money in and out of the fund solely under your 
discretion, how is this money going to be kept track of? Can 
you please give us an overview of  

how that’s going to be looked after? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, first of all, Mr. Chairman, the 
money doesn’t move in and out of the fund. The Minister of 
Finance, when the money comes in will put that into 
investments. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Why would the money in your section 
18.4(3) be deposited in a separate fund as opposed to the 
Consolidated Fund, just for investment purposes? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — For accounting purposes, because it’s 
company money . . . to what there is now, which is held in trust. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Madam Minister, is section 16 . . . number 
16, section 52 as amended, and it’s relating to the enhanced oil 
recovery, you’ve deleted, from what I’ve read, potential 
environmental impact initiatives and focused more on 
environmental . . . or enhanced oil recovery methods. Why is 
that? Is that because there’s been more danger or more reporting 
of spills and so on? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, this is purely 
housekeeping. And what it does, it refers specifically to types of 
plans, and these types of plans basically acknowledge current 
practice, perhaps practices that were not there 10 or 15 years 
ago and they now are named in here. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — The retroactively clause is in there for up to 
. . . not earlier than two years — section 19.19(2). Why are you 
making it retroactive if you’ve got the money on hand? Is that 
to maintain the one million of the $4 million? Why wouldn’t it 
start from this day forward? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The reason that it is retroactive is because 
it is in with gas changes. And in fact, they will not be assessed 
retroactively, that fee; it will take place when the regulations are 
passed. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Section 4(2) really provides the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council with a lot of power, and you seem to have 
considerable powers if you choose to use them. Do you not 
think that there would be some opportunity for a minister to 
favour special interest groups or be involved with conflict of 
interest in the sense that you can withhold information or not 
provide information to the public? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Can you give me the numbers that you 
are referring to? 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I’ll read it out; I made a note on it. It’s: 
 

the Lieutenant Governor in Council may: 
 
(c) amend or revise a unit operation . . . 
(d) alter or revoke any provision . . . 
(e) add any area that the minister believes. . . 

 
And so on. I’ll just find it for you here. Good question — I 
made a note on this. I’ll just check it out here for a second. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, perhaps I could ask the 
member a question. Is it on the issue of pooling? 
 
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2171 
 

Mr. Solomon: — Yes. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Okay. The reason that it is necessary that 
there be some authority through the minister to the department 
in order to do this, is that you may have a variety of interest 
within a pool — and for the sake of the discussion today, let’s 
say here, okay — and you cannot get an agreement by 
individually on how they are going to do or what they are going 
to do. The wells don’t get drilled if the agreement isn’t there. 
Everybody loses, including the Crown. The company loses, all 
the other companies or the individual producers lose, and the 
Crown loses, the R.M. loses, no well producing, tax base down, 
even somebody in quill Lake might lose from it. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I’ll read you page 6 of this Act, 56(1)(b), 
with regard to: 
 

. . . developing, conserving, and managing gas resources 

. . . the minister may, on application and after 
consideration of: 
 
(b) the present and reasonably foreseeable future gas 
consumption and use requirements of Saskatchewan 
persons: 

 
There doesn’t seem to be in this section a mention of quantity 
or percentage of reserves, and I don’t know why this is. For 
example, does this approach allow the public any reference as 
to when too much gas is being exported? You obviously, as the 
minister, make that decision as to how much reserves we should 
have, and you make the decision as to how much shall be 
exported. How do you do that? If you’re getting a number of 
companies making application to you for exporting — they 
don’t all come the same day, they come over a period of the 
year — how do you decide, through this Act and through your 
authority, which ones to approve? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well I think I’ve stated the policy fairly 
clearly for the member as to the determination of those reserves 
and what happens after. In fact the public would know, you 
would know as a citizen of Saskatchewan, through the 
Department of Energy and Mines, what the annual reserves are 
at. 
 
Certainly the announcement of the policy was made very clear, 
and when . . . before export permits are signed, that analysis 
will be done by the Department of Energy and Mines before 
any kind of a recommendation is made on a particular 
application or permit before it goes to the Minister of Energy 
and Mines. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Can the government change its mind as to the 
appropriate . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Why is the member from Melfort on 
his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Just excuse me, Mr. Chairman. I have 
some unexpected guests who have just arrived in the gallery, 
and I would ask leave to introduce these guests, Mr. Chairman. 
 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to introduce to 
you, and to all members of the Legislative Assembly, a group of 
unexpected guests from back home who have dropped in to 
visit us here in the legislature. This is a group of students from 
Pleasantdale in the constituency of Melfort. Pleasantdale is just 
a little bit south of the city of Melfort. 
 
I don’t know how many we have in the group, but they look 
like a cheerful bunch, and I would welcome all of you to the 
legislature. If you can stick around till 5 o’clock, I’d be happy 
to come out and have a quick visit with you. And it’s just very 
nice to see you, and I would ask all members of the legislature 
to join with me in welcoming all these students and friends of 
mine from Pleasantdale School. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 26 — An Act to amend The Oil and Gas 
Conservation Act 

 
Clause 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My question was 
to the minister . . . and I’ll repeat it if I can remember it. I think 
I can. But with respect to the reserves of natural gas, your 
department will set an appropriate level of reserves. Can you 
simply change your mind as to what that level of reserves is at 
any particular time with regard to future supply? And if so, 
what is the process? Do you do it arbitrarily; do you go through 
some public announcement on it; or do you do it in a secretive 
fashion? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The reserve or the security, security of 
supply base that has been set through the policy is in fact a 
policy determined by government. Now whether it was policy 
that has been accepted by government through order in council, 
or whether it’s legislation, you and I both know that both of 
those matters can be changed. I would suggest to you that it is 
not a simple matter for a Minister of Energy and Mines to 
simply change their mind on what that reserve base should be. 
There’s a fairly thorough study that goes into it with a lot of 
technical experience, and one would want to ensure in fact that 
the level for security of supply for this province was in fact 
there. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Madam Minister, you’re saying that 
you now have the authority with regard to security of supply to 
make an arbitrary decision. What impact does that have on oil 
and gas companies, in particular gas companies, who have 
submitted to you a 20-year contract that you’ve approved and 
that contract is committed for 20 years on the basis of your 
department’s approval, and in some cases we’ve seen just 
recently where a 20-year contract or thereabouts, money is paid 
up front in cash? 
 
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2172 
 

How do you then change your mind with regard to the amount 
of reserves that we have, in particular as it applies to the free 
trade agreement which prevents us from exporting a less 
amount of oil regardless of our situation in Canada? Explain 
that. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: —Well first of all, on the determination, 
when the determination is made on an annual basis it isn’t 
simply based on the amount of gas that’s being used for that 
year or for this year. In fact, and we went through all the 
information that is required on the export permits which 
includes the length of term of the contract, those commitments 
are taken into the calculations that they will do on an annual 
basis. So if you are now to appoint, based on 10 contracts that 
are 20 years down the road, that take you under your 15 years 
supply, then it is not likely that you will see any further export 
permits go from this province until new reserves are found. 
 
How does that affect free trade? Well you have some difficulty 
with it, because you have misinterpreted the free trade 
agreement to begin with . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, not 
at all. I would love to worry. I’m telling you that on the trade 
agreement, it does not affect that. Provinces — and if you go 
through the details — still reserve the right to set their policies, 
for those policies can very well include a reserve base for that 
producing province. There’s nothing to indicate that that isn’t 
so. 
 
Secondly, on the trade agreement, the United States cannot 
demand. Somebody in the United States wants to buy gas, and 
they come in to Saskatchewan, and they meet with one of our 
producers. That producer still must go through the process of 
the export permit. 
 
Now if the reserve base is not there, they will not get the gas 
they’ve been negotiating with. That permit has to be approved 
first. So it just simply doesn’t fit in from my perspective, and I 
know that you and I will disagree, and disagree thoroughly on 
it. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well you disagree with your federal 
government and your federal party’s own free trade agreement. 
We debated this before, Minister, and I had the agreement and I 
read it out verbatim, and it was contrary to what you’re saying 
this afternoon in this House. 
 
In effect, the free trade agreement provides the Americans with 
the same volume of supply over the previous three years in the 
event there’s an oil or gas shortage in this country, and the only 
way we can cut back, Madam Minister, according to the 
agreement, is upon their approval — that is the approval of the 
U.S. Congress — or if we cut back the same percentage. So if 
we’re providing them with 2 per cent of their supply, we have 
to cut back our supply accordingly. 
 
And you know that’s in the agreement, the Prime Minster of 
this country knows, your Minister of Trade and Development 
knows that, and you’re denying it right now. 
 
So explain, Madam Minister, how you as a minister would 
therefore look at these contracts, and after they’ve  

been committed for a long period of time, change your mind 
with respect to the exporting of the natural gas. How could you 
do that to these companies? And I’m not defending the 
companies, but I’m curious to know how you’re going to be 
able to do this and break the contracts under this free trade 
treaty. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well first of all, what I said to you was 
that someone in the United States cannot come up and demand 
our gas without an agreement from the person that they’re 
doing the negotiations with. Okay? There has to be an 
agreement with the producer and with the customer out of the 
United States. 
 
Now on top of that, there’s one more hurdle that they have to 
get through, and that is the export requirements, the export 
permit. The producer must, in filing all that information, meet 
the requirements that the policy in fact is being adhered to. If he 
cannot meet those requirements, then he will not get the export 
permit. If he doesn’t get the export permit, the U.S. customer 
doesn’t get the gas. Like, that’s fairly black and white and fairly 
simple. 
 
Now in terms of the trade agreement and talking about 
cut-backs, you’re absolutely correct that within the agreement, 
in times of shortage — emergencies and shortage — that there 
is a percentage there. But I ask you, why is it any different than 
what it’s been in the past? 
 
I mean, Canada, and in turn all the other provinces, under the 
Energy Supplies Emergency Act, have had that type of thing for 
years. And it hasn’t been through a trade agreement. What the 
clause does in the trade agreement simply confirms and 
reaffirms the agreements that have been signed in the past as to 
how you’re going to deal with energy in time of shortage. 
 
You know, as I told, I think it was one of your party members 
one day, fellow, you see too many bogymans under your bed 
when it comes to that trade agreement. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Madam Minister, this trade deal 
supersedes any federal legislation . . . or provincial legislation 
with respect to oil and natural gas. 
 
And the problem we’ve got, Madam Minister, is that your 
department is bringing forward this oil and gas conservation 
Bill as a pretence and as part and parcel of this deregulation. I 
mean, deregulation and privatization and free trade go hand in 
hand. You know that. 
 
You know that when we sell off the assets of the people of this 
province, that the only way government can become involved in 
those particular assets, once again, under the free trade deal, is 
through the approval of the U.S. Congress. And we see here in 
this that the free trade arrangement does not allow for such easy 
diversion of gas or oil once the initial supply contracts have 
been established. And you’re saying today, oh yes, at the snap 
of my fingers, if we’re short of gas, we’re going to be able to 
cancel those contracts. 
 
Now tell the people of Saskatchewan, Madam Minister, which 
is it? Can you or can you not, under this Bill? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if we’re short of  
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2173 
 

gas, they’re not going to get the contract to begin with. They 
won’t have any gas if we’re short of gas. That’s the policy 
that’s in place. And I’ve gone through that twice. And the 
member from P.A. still sits and talks from his seat and doesn’t 
have the courage to stand and get into the debate. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Madam Minister, can you tell us, at the 
current consumption rate of natural gas and the current 
contracted export rate, what are the reserves of natural gas for 
the people of Saskatchewan? And just give us the reserves for 
the latest number and what year that number was determined, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, January 1, ’87, and those 
are the latest figures that we have, the reserves would have been 
2.3 trillion cubic feet. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — The reserves as of January 1, ’87, you’re 
saying, is 2.3 trillion cubic feet. Deregulation has occurred 
since then. What is the estimate of the department with respect 
to the amount of reserve and for how long? What time period 
are we looking at? How long is this in sure supply for 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — About 25 years at current consumption 
rates. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — And can you tell the people of the province 
what you believe to be a fair safety net in terms of a security of 
supply. Is it 25 years? Is that the level you’re going to maintain? 
Or is it going to be longer or shorter? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well I have stated earlier and it was 
announced in the policy that in fact it’s a 15-year requirement. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — And the 15-year requirement is a provincial 
requirement or a federal requirement? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No, the provinces have the responsibility 
and the authority to set those kinds of decisions. It’s a 
producing province and in determining the primary rate of 
production, which we’ve debated in this House before, we have 
the full authority in fact to determine the reserve base. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Madam Minister, I’m very curious to know 
why your government would allow the deregulation of a 
resource as important as natural gas, which is absolutely 
mandatory in terms of a security of supply for the residents of 
this province and this country in order to get through the 
winters; to export natural gas at levels which we see 
accelerating. 
 
And I believe that once this Bill has passed and over the next 18 
months to two years, that we will see even a greater acceleration 
when, from the information provided to us clearly shows that 
there are only a few natural gas pools around this province and 
that the more wells that we drilled and the more natural gas that 
is extracted, weakens the amount of natural gas available to us 
at the current technology required to take it out of the ground. 
 

(1700) 
 
Why would your government jeopardize the future of the 
residents of this province and future of the residents of this 
country with respect to deregulating natural gas when we’re 
faced with a climate that will find it for ever and a day, 
mandatory to have heating fuel such as natural gas for our 
industries and for keeping our homes? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, if one takes a look at the 
actual figures of the state of natural gas in Saskatchewan over 
the last several years, one would be astounded with the 
statement and the question that has come forward. I can only 
say to you, well go out and count the wells if you don’t believe 
my statistics; they’re there. Find out for yourself; talk to the 
industry. 
 
With the implementation of deregulation, I can only state that in 
fact the security of Saskatchewan residents, Mr. Chairman, has 
been enhanced. And I use . . . for example, you go back to 
1981, and we had 16; 1982, 9 wells drilled. And at that time, 
Mr. Chairman, at that time the reserves were at 148 billion 
cubic feet — that was in 1982, just a few short years ago. 
 
Now in 1986 we have 233 wells drilled that year, but the 
reserve base increased, Mr. Chairman, to 233 billion cubic feet. 
So when the member asks about deleting the security, it’s 
totally reversed. The activity, deregulation, the opportunity of 
access to markets, in fact, has increased the number of reserves 
there and that security. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to take 
a couple of more minutes, and we’ll be done. 
 
The minister will know she hasn’t informed the people of this 
Assembly or the people of Saskatchewan that part of the reason 
for the increase in natural gas reserves is accidental. Companies 
have been drilling for oil and they’ve been finding natural gas 
and they’ve been capping them. And with the deregulation, 
there’s obviously the natural gas fields where they’ve been 
seeking out natural gas, but a lot of the new finds — or I should 
say, the finds of natural gas; I don’t know what percentage it is 
— have been found and have been capped. And whether it’s in 
anticipation of the deregulation policies of this government or 
not, I don’t know that. 
 
But, Madam Minister, over the three years your party and your 
government has clearly stated its overwhelming support for the 
oil companies, and they’ve been reflected in the policies that 
you’ve undertaken, both the oil royalty breaks for them and 
others. 
 
This Bill 26 is another effort, in my view, Mr. Chairman, on 
your part, Madam Minister, to minimize oil companies’ 
accountabilities and natural gas companies’ accountability to 
the people of this province. It’s another effort on your part to 
give advantage and reward to those companies that in effect 
have been providing less and less of their fair share of the 
revenues coming out of a resource that belongs to all the people 
of this province. 
 
Its also another effort on your part to allow oil and natural gas 
companies to take less and less responsibility for their  
  



 
June 16, 1988 

2174 
 

actions. You have made a deliberate effort to mislead the people 
of this province with respect to an environmental fund. You’ve 
misnamed an insurance fund, or a contingency fund, by calling 
it an environmental fund. You’ve lost the opportunity to 
provide some leadership in this country with respect to an 
environment fund by not providing more leeway with respect to 
the objectives of this fund, and in particular with the amount 
that may be available to help the environment as it relates to 
this industry. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, and Madam Minister, I’ve got other things 
I’d like to raise, but I see the time is drawing nigh, and I would 
therefore inform the minister that as a result of some of your 
initiatives, the opposition will not be supporting this Bill. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 8 
 
Mr. Chairman: — House amendment to clause 8: 
 

Amend section 18.4 of the Act, as amended by section 8 of 
the printed Bill by striking out “subsection (1)” and 
substituting “subsection (7)”. 

 
Clause 8 amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 9 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 14 
 
Mr. Solomon: — I have one question with regard to the 
penalties of the existing Act, if the minister would entertain one 
more question. 
 
Because you’re telling us that these amendments are an update 
of the Bill — you’ve gone on record as saying that — and 
because you’re saying you’re modernizing some of the aspects 
of this Bill, why would you not have modernized section 61 
which outlines the penalties for obstruction of minister, etc., in 
exercise of powers. For example, and I read, quote from section 
61: 
 

Every person who: 
 
(a) obstructs, hinders or interferes with a minister or any 
person authorized by him (or her) in the exercise of any of 
the powers conferred by or pursuant to this Act; or 
 
(b) without a reasonable excuse fails to assist the minister 
or any such person when called upon by him to assist in 
the exercise of any such powers; 
 
is guilty of an offence and liable on summary conviction 
to a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $200. 

 
That was in 1965. The question I put to the minister is: why 
wouldn’t you update that to make it more of a penalty rather 
than something that’s so modest? 
 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Chairman, perhaps the answer, 
in the most briefest of terms, can better be put in the form of a 
question. The member should question why that wasn’t changed 
from 1972 to ’82, given the strong dislike for a particular 
industry and its people, from the opposition. 
 
The answer simply, Mr. Chairman, is that there . . . it’s never 
been a problem. It’s been there, as the member has said, since 
1965. It’s never been used, never required to, because the 
Department of Energy and Mines and the previous mineral 
resources had more effective ways of dealing with the 
problems, and I suspect that’s why the government from ’72 to 
’82 never changed it. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Well, Madam Minister, we never changed 
some of the other things in this Act, as well, which are obvious 
benefits to the oil business and the natural gas business. You’re 
selling out the resources of our country by deregulating natural 
gas. You’re not allowing the people of this province and future 
generations to have equal access to an important resource which 
is primary when living in Canada in terms of climate. And I 
think what we have to do, Madam Minister, is lay on the record 
that this Bill is not a Bill which is totally acceptable. You’re 
misleading the public on it, and I think your previous comment 
has not done much justice to that either. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Chairman, I can only state: we agree 
to disagree; the member is wrong. 
 
Clause 14 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 15 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


