


















































March 24, 1988 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 March 24, 1988 
 

81 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Neudorf. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a pleasure for me to 
participate in this debate. I would like to make a few comments, 
Mr. Speaker, on the overall throne speech that was presented to us 
this past week, and then I would like to spend the majority of my 
comments in the area of education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech that has been presented to us left a 
lot to be desired, and it is more significant, Mr. Speaker, in what it 
didn’t contain than in what it contained. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think everybody will agree that we are in tough 
economic times in this province. Some of it is due to international 
circumstances, but much of it, Mr. Speaker, is due to the policies 
that have been implemented by the members opposite in the last 
five or six years. 
 
I want to, Mr. Speaker, at the outset say that I do not intend to 
support the throne speech, and I will make it amply clear as to 
why I cannot and will not support it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the throne speech the people generally expect that 
the government will set out its future plans to that the people will 
know, in general terms at least, what they can expect from this 
government in the next little while. 
 
I want to, Mr. Speaker, refer to the remarks made by the member 
from Cut Knife-Lloydminster this afternoon. And I hesitate to do 
this, Mr. Speaker, but he read from an article in the Leader-Post of 
Dale Eisler on March 23. He wrote the following, and the member 
quoted from Mr. Eisler the following: 
 

Back during the 1982 election campaign when Grant Devine 
was weaving a spell over Saskatchewan people, it was often 
fascinating to watch him operate. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster 
didn’t read, however, are the following. Mr. Eisler writes: 
 

Compared to the situation six years ago, the farm economy is 
in a far more desperate situation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Eisler goes on to say, and the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster forgot to read this, “the total farm debt in 
Saskatchewan today is approximately $7 billion, . . . “ And he 
goes on to quote the member from Kelvington-Wadena and this is 
what that member had to say. He said, “ . . . there is now a 
mountainous debt on the backs of farmers.” Mr. Speaker, this is 
the Legislative Secretary to the Premier and to the Minister of 
Agriculture who said “. . .  there is now a mountainous debt on the 

 backs of farmers.” That mountainous debt, Mr. Speaker, has been 
incurred by the farmers while these members were in office, while 
these members were in office. And that’s exactly what the 
member, the Legislative Secretary for the minister of Agriculture, 
indicated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me go on to quote the article. And this is what he 
says: 
 

In the case of the land bank, a farmer who rented from the 
land bank because he couldn’t afford to buy the land was 
certainly in no better position five years later when values 
had inflated and he had no option to purchase. 

 
That is correct, but let’s go on. 
 

But these days there is a far greater crisis of ownership facing 
farmers than was ever posed by the government land bank. 
There are thousands of farmers today who face the threat of 
losing their land to creditors. For them, the emotion has not 
gone out of the pride of ownership. 

 
Mr. Speaker, and neither has the fear that comes with the 
prospects of being tenants on what was once their own land. 
 
That is, Mr. Speaker, the position that these people have put the 
farmers of Saskatchewan in. They are going to become tenants on 
their own land and the land is going to be owned by the creditors, 
not just of this province but of Canada and internationally. That’s 
what these people have done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to . . . Mr. Speaker, the other day when the 
throne speech was read, members on both sides of the house 
chuckled and smiled when the Lieutenant Governor read the note 
on dangerous dogs. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say to 
the members here that I think the problem of dangerous dogs must 
be addressed, and should be addressed. 
 
However, having said that, Mr. Speaker, having said that, when 
you look at the throne speech and he mentions not a word on 
native people; not a word has been mentioned of job creation; not 
a word has been mentioned as how the government is going to 
address the problem of private schools; not a word has been 
mentioned as how the government is going to address the problem 
of francophone rights in this province; not a word was mentioned 
as to how the Minister of Health was going to address the problem 
of 11,000 people on the waiting list in Saskatoon; could one help 
but wonder why members on both sides of the House thought it 
was rather funny that the government, that the government would 
emphasize that they would address the problem of dangerous 
dogs, but wouldn’t address these other very, very important items? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster this 
afternoon also said, oh, the members opposite, you 
  



 
March 24, 1988 

 

82 
 

 should stop scaring people. Don’t put the fear into people. 
 
Well I will ask the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster. 
Somebody should have put the fear into the highway workers that 
lost their jobs. They would have been better off. Why didn’t 
someone warn the dental nurses that they would be losing their 
jobs — summarily dismissed. Someone should have addressed the 
problem also for the Department of Education workers who the 
Minister of Education summarily dismissed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what about the Kelsey workers, STI (Saskatchewan 
Technical Institute) workers? What about those people that were 
simply told to leave their offices after years and years of service 
— dedicated services? Someone, Mr. Speaker, someone, Mr. 
Speaker, should have warned these people. And that is not scaring 
those people. 
 
Someone, Mr. Speaker, should have warned the young people that 
there would be no opportunities for them to attend technical 
school or universities because of the policies of this government. 
That is not scaring people. That is telling the people the truth of 
the effects of your policies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I want to address a few of the 
remarks made by the member from Rosthern. and the member 
from Rosthern, and I will quote, he says there has been amazing 
growth in difficult economic times. And, Mr. Speaker, I agree 
with the member from Rosthern. There has been amazing growth 
in this province, but the wrong kind of growth; the wrong kind of 
growth. 
 
What has grown in this province? Well I’ll just give you a few. In 
1982, the debt in this province, the total debt owed by the people 
of this province, was $3.5 billion. That has grown to over $10 
billion under this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1982 there was no deficit. that deficit has grown. 
In fact, Mr. Minister, we left you with a surplus of $139 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please, order. Order. 
Order. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I know it hurts the member from 
Turtleford to hear the truth, but he has to accept the responsibility 
for creating that large deficit of $3.4 billion. He is sitting on the 
treasury board; he has created that deficit. Mr. Speaker, that is a 
growth that has occurred. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another growth that occurred under this government 
is the welfare rolls. We have about 39,000 or 40,000 people on the 
welfare rolls. Yes we’ve had growth, but what else has grown? 
Mr. Speaker . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please, order. I ask the hon. 
members to please allow the member to continue. 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a correction 
here. I stand corrected. It’s not 40,000 people on the welfare rolls; 
it’s 60,000 people on the welfare rolls. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what else has grown? Well, the unemployment 
list has grown. We now have 40,000 people seeking employment. 
The member form Rosthern is absolutely right; there has been 
amazing growth. 
 
But it doesn’t stop there. What else has grown? Well the Premier’s 
personal staff has grown. It is doubled to what it was under the 
former premier. 
 
What else has grown? Well the political advertising budget has 
grown to about 20-some million dollars . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Well it doesn’t stop there. Mr. Speaker, the hospital waiting 
lists in Regina are now well over 5,000; in Saskatoon, they’re well 
over 11,000 — triple to what it was when we were the 
government. 
 
Oh, there’s growth, but it doesn’t stop there, Mr. Speaker. What 
else has grown in this province. Mr. Speaker, in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, the out-migration of our young people has simply gone 
up almost at a right angle. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the 
out-migration in this province is about 9,000 a year, almost 300 
people every day. 
 
What else has grown? Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you what else 
has grown. Taxation has grown — gone up last year by $265 
million and the Premier and the Finance minister indicate it will 
go up again next week in the next budget. So yes, the member 
from Rosthern is absolutely right. We’ve had growth, the wrong 
kind of growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you talk about growth, there has been other 
kinds of growth also. Taxation on schools . . . by school boards, 
implemented or made necessary because of the lack of finances by 
this government in education. In 1976, when you take into 
consideration the property improvement grant, the province paid 
72 to 73 per cent of all educational costs. Today it’s less than 50 
per cent. That, Mr. Speaker, is the kind of growth we don’t need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen this province grow from the province 
that had economic stability to a province that has economic 
disaster. Mr. Speaker, if that is what the member from Rosthern 
was taking about growth, I certainly agree with him 100 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me now turn to education. Mr. Speaker, people in 
this province have always been proud of our educational system. 
We have attempted, we have attempted, Mr. Speaker, to offer 
quality education in this province and it’s always been done on a 
co-operative basis, the co-operative basis between parents and 
trustees and teachers and the government. Those were the four 
components of our educational system. Those were the people 
who worked together to make sure that we have top-notch 
education. We’ve always been fortunate in this province in having 
dedicated, loyal, and well-qualified teachers, and the government 
and the parents and trustees have recognized this by making 
certain that they were well remunerated for their work. 
  



 
March 24, 1988 

 

83 
 

But, Mr. Speaker, in the last little while we’ve seen a change. This 
consultative process, this co-operation that has existed, has 
changed. And I say, Mr. Speaker, it has changed basically when 
the present minister became the Minister of Education and his 
deputy minister was hired to run that department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you say that I am picking on the civil service I’m 
telling you I am picking on one individual and that is your deputy 
minister. Mr. Speaker, when I go around this province there is one 
name that comes up more than even the minister himself, and that 
is the deputy minister and his attitude towards people who have 
spent their life in education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say this: the deputy minister, we can’t hold 
him responsible, because his immediate boss is the Minister of 
Education, and he is accountable to that minister and that minister 
is accountable to the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that in my travels in the province . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, if you could please call 
the minister from Turtleford to order, I would like to continue with 
my deliberation. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I want to simply say that if we are 
going to develop a top-notch, quality education as we always have 
done, Mr. Speaker, we in this province need to make sure that that 
co-operative way continues throughout our developments. 
 
I want to say to the minister that in 1982 we established a 
committee to re-examine the goals and objectives of education. 
And that committee came forward with the Directions report, and 
it’s fair. 
 
In 1982, we lost the government, and the then minister of 
Education, the member from . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Swift 
Current, thank you. The member from Swift Current appointed a 
new committee, and that committee came up with the core report, 
the core curriculum report. And on the whole, as I travel 
Saskatchewan, the majority of the people are satisfied with that 
report. They like the goals; they like the objectives; but there are 
some refinements that have to be made. 
 
One of the problems, Mr. Minister, that I hear time and time again 
is that they wish that some simulated projects had been carried out 
on the core program in our high schools so that we could work out 
the kinks, see what some of the problems are before we implement 
it full-fledged throughout the province. This has not been done. 
And why, Mr. Speaker, was it not done? Because the Minister of 
Education, the present Minister of Education, when he looked at 
that report, didn’t like some of the directions and the 
recommendations that were made, and he wanted to change them. 
So what did he do? He fired all the people or retired all the people 
— force retired them — who had anything to do with the core 
curriculum. And then he went about rehiring some people who 
believed in what he wanted to have done, 

 and he has made some of those changes. And it has caused some 
problems out in rural Saskatchewan and in urban Saskatchewan. 
 
I say to the minister: please, if you want to have the consultative 
process, go out to the people; listen to them. Don’t tell them what 
should be done; listen to them. You and your deputy minister can’t 
go out there and be the arrogant couple who knows everything and 
say to people, this is the way it’s going to be done, and it’s going 
to be implemented in September of 1988 without any simulated 
projects and without any experience at how this is to be carried 
out. 
 
I say to the minister, as I have indicated before, generally 
speaking, the people accept the program. I think it can meet the 
needs of the 1990s and possibly to the 2000s. But I’ll tell you that 
there should . . . that some of the changes that you are making are 
not going to be well accepted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I want to, however, congratulate the 
minister. As I go about the province I also hear one other name 
that is mentioned quite often lately, and that is the name of Fred 
Renihan. Now I don’t know Fred Renihan personally, but from 
what I hear out there, I want to congratulate the minister for hiring 
this person who has, I think, a rapport and a confidence with the 
teachers and the trustees of this province. From what I can gather 
. . . and that’s the good news that I hear in the province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, one man alone can’t do all the work that is 
necessary before this program is implemented in the fall. And I 
say to the ministers in the rural Saskatchewan, there is a real 
concern about some of the implementation facilities that are 
needed. In rural Saskatchewan you cannot ask the people to carry 
out all the practical arts when they don’t have the facilities to do it. 
How are they going to have all the teachings in the arts when they 
don’t have the facilities to do it? And that is needed. So that means 
there must be additional funding for facilities, additional facilities, 
if you expect the people to carry out this project. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the deputy or the minister must make 
available to teachers funds for inservice training. That has got to 
be done this summer before the fall begins. And we need that 
money now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m simply saying, Mr. 
Minister, what the teachers out there are telling me, and I’m sure 
that you must have heard that by now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my time is running out very quickly here and I want 
to make several other comments. One of the comments, Mr. 
Speaker, that came to me lately, or questions that were asked of 
me, was whether or not I could get a copy of the survey that was 
being done by the Department of Education, a survey, for 
example, on teachers. And the question — this was done by Tanka 
Research apparently, asked by the Department of Education to 
carry it out — and the question went something like this. The first 
question was: are you a teacher? If you said yes, that was the end 
of the survey. If you said no, then the question was: are you related 
to a teacher? If the answer was yes, the survey was ended. If,  
  



 
March 24, 1988 

 

84 
 

however, you said no to that, then the survey started. And I only 
know some of the questions because I couldn’t get hold of a copy 
of the survey. 
 
The other question was: do you know that the average teacher 
makes $35,000 a year? Do you know that a teacher only works 
four or five hours a day? Totally erroneous. And this, Mr. Speaker, 
was done during the negotiations, when negotiations were carried 
out. And I can only surmise that it was done by the Department of 
Education to undermine the teachers of this province, while very, 
very good negotiations was going on. Mr. Speaker, I want to ask 
the minister to table that survey, to table that survey so that 
everybody can see what all the questions were that were contained 
in that particular survey. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the minister, also, to please come 
forward, soon in this session, on a position on the francophone 
rights in this province. The Wimmer report has been down for 
some time. I know that you people have appealed it and the 
francophone association have appealed it, but the francophone 
association have only appealed it because they were afraid that the 
government was not going to be taking any action. And I say to 
the association, negotiate a position as is acceptable to them, and 
that is acceptable under the Meech Lake accord, and come to some 
agreement. There is no need, Mr. Speaker, to go for a further 
appeal to . . . and come to some conclusions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also say to the minister, please come forward soon 
on your position on private schools and how they will fit in this 
whole situation. I would like to know the government’s position 
on private schools and how they will fit in this whole situation. I 
would like to know the government’s position and so would many 
other people. Where do you stand on private schools? Should they 
be funded or should they not be funded? Will you make the Dirsk 
report available to everyone? And I ask the minister to come down 
with a decision soon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I want to just refer to the collective 
bargaining situation. I ask the minister again to please use his 
offices, his good offices so that we can have a resolution to this 
collective bargaining. 
 
The Minister of Finance did not hesitate to intervene, and that, Mr. 
Speaker, was the problem for 22 meetings — well over a year. 
The government trustee team could make no offer because the 
Minister of Finance had intervened. I ask the Minister of 
Education now to use his office. You have a mediator now; let’s 
resolve this situation. Offer the teachers a fair and reasonable 
contract. That’s all they are asking of you, a fair and reasonable 
contract. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — It is not reasonable, Mr. Minister, it’s not 
reasonable for you to offer zero, zero and three when you offer 
your managers of Crown corporations 5 per cent, and in some 
cases that is close to $10,000 a year increase. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — That, Mr. Speaker, is unacceptable. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to apologize for those people who I may 
have misled yesterday when I said in the question period that the 
Minister of Finance had sent out $1,000 to those employees. The 
words I should have used was “to SaskPower employees,” 
because if you grammatically look at it, it would include SaskTel 
and SGI employees, and that was not my intention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I want to say to the minister again: look at the 
quality of education. The quality of education is at stake. The 
quality of education is at stake, and it is your responsibility to see 
to it that these negotiations come to an end, and that they are 
resolved amicably and in fairness to the teachers of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I notice that my time is up. I want to 
say to this House, I cannot, I cannot accept the throne speech, not 
for what it contains, but mostly for what it does not contain. It has 
not addressed the serious problems of this province, and the 
direction that the government is taking is simply the wrong 
direction at this particular time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I take great pleasure in 
entering into this debate, and just before I do so, I’d like to 
welcome all the members back to their regular seats. And of 
course I’d like to welcome the new Leader of the Opposition back 
to an unfamiliar chair. 
 
The throne speech covered some broad territory, Mr. Speaker, but 
I was particularly interested in the comment it contained to 
proceed with the government’s policy of public participation 
wherever economic rewards and social benefits justify it. 
 
I have that interest because, as you know, Mr. Speaker, in my 
riding the great possibilities thoughtful privatization policies can 
produce. I am, of course, speaking of the Weyerhaeuser pulp and 
paper plant that is located in Shellbrook-Torch River, although 
members opposite fail to recognize it being in that seat. That’s 
where the paper mill is, and I’d like to mention to the member 
from Humboldt, he probably doesn’t know where it is either. 
 
In 1985, Mr. Speaker, PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company) 
suffered a $33 million loss. Now that wasn’t the fault of the 
employees; it was the fault of the financial package that was put 
together to purchase that mill. The money was borrowed on what 
they called bridge financing at 17 per cent interest from the banks. 
There was no money ever paid towards the principal or the 
interest, so the debt kept climbing and climbing. 
 
So it wasn’t the fault of the employees that the PAPCO pulp mill 
was losing money. It was the financial package that the former 
NDP government put together to purchase it, and they never made 
a payment on the principal or the interest. And at 17 per cent 
interest, fellas, it builds up pretty fast. 
 
But anyway, the taxpayers were paying heavily to 
  



 
March 24, 1988 

 

85 
 

 maintain a boondoggle, and a boondoggle was helping no one. 
The jobs of the employees were under serious threat with a 
corporation suffering such losses. And so the Progressive 
Conservative government decided to have a go at turning things 
around. 
 
Now we could have thrown some money at it, like the NDP would 
do. We both know where the NDP members from Prince Albert 
and Prince Albert-Duck lake were coming from. They didn’t want 
to see the paper mill there, or Weyerhaeuser. They were against all 
those good things. They could have thrown some money at it to 
keep it in operation. 
 
We could have ignored it like the Liberals would have done. But 
no — we could have taken some decisive action like the 
Progressive Conservatives do. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we took a losing proposition for the people of my 
constituency, a losing proposition for the people of Prince Albert, 
and a losing proposition for the people of Prince Albert, and a 
losing proposition for the people of Saskatchewan. We found a 
committed buyer — a buyer, who, as part of a hard bargain, 
agreed to build a paper mill to produce a fine paper for an 
international market — an international market — a buyer 
committed to maintain an expanding work-force to create jobs for 
my people back home, Mr. Speaker, and for the people who have 
to be represented by a couple of NDP naysayers; and a buyer, Mr. 
Speaker, that has delivered, from losing in excess of $90,000 each 
and every day, to making a substantial profit. 
 
(1930) 
 
I want to emphasize once more that that wasn’t the employees’ 
fault that those losses were being accumulated. They were losing 
markets — a government-run pulp mill was losing markets. They 
didn’t have the management ability to capture those markets that 
were necessary to make that mill very, very profitable. 
 
I’ll tell you . . . I’ll go into another little story for the benefit of the 
member from Prince Albert. And he won’t believe this one, but 
it’s the truth. And I got it from one of the former NDP members 
out of Manitoba that I met with in Fredericton here some time ago. 
I imagine he’s out there trying to win his seat back right now, but 
anyway . . . He told me that in Manitoba they have two pulp mills, 
two pulp mills in Manitoba. One of them, one of them is privately 
owned. One of them is privately owned. The other one is 
government owned. He said to me, that government-owned pulp 
mill is killing us, we’re going to have to sell it. It’s losing money 
every year, and on a daily basis it’s losing money. He was an NDP 
member. The deputy chairman of the House told me this, that we 
have to sell that pulp mill. 
 
Well isn’t that funny. The people across the way here from Prince 
Albert and Prince Albert-Duck Lake and from Humboldt are 
saying, we should have never sold that pulp mill because it would 
have ended up making a profit. At this time in Manitoba . . . at this 
time in Manitoba where there’s a private pulp mill and a public 
pulp mill, the only one that’s really making money is the private 
one. The government one is losing money. 

So I think that that proves the point. And it came from one of the 
members of the NDP party from Manitoba that told me this. So 
. . . I mean, that proves the point that the government-operated 
pulp mill wasn’t making money. And certainly they can’t afford to 
expand it into a paper mill in Manitoba as Weyerhaeuser is doing 
in Prince Albert . . . or Shellbrook-Torch River. I’m sorry, I made 
a slip. 
 
The members over there are certainly against the paper mill, and 
it’s well-known. They said it would never be built. That’s all 
well-known in Prince Albert. You can ask anybody on Main 
Street. But anyway . . .  
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: — And from the profit, Mr. Speaker, the new 
company has instead of taking money out of the pockets of 
taxpayers, is putting new money into the public treasury. Very 
significant amounts of money. From being an operation where 
people’s jobs were uncertain at best, and soon to be gone at worst, 
to being an enterprise that will be employing some 250 more 
people, Mr. Speaker, that’s what privatization can do and I support 
that. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, the member for Riversdale likes to rave a 
bit how these out-of-province companies come in here and don’t 
do business with our people, but somehow slavishly connected to 
buy their supplies from out of province. The NDP try and promote 
that idea, that these multinational companies come in here, as what 
they call multinational companies — Weyerhaeuser is 
Weyerhaeuser Canada. They say they buy everything from out of 
province. It’s no benefit to Saskatchewan or the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers. So let me help them become aware of how the real 
world works, the world in Shellbrook-Torch River and 
Saskatchewan and not the world of fantasy textbooks and socialist 
planning. 
 
In the real world, Mr. Speaker, the new company purchased 75 per 
cent — that’s three-quarters, three-quarters — 75 per cent of all its 
needed materials right here in Saskatchewan. Now 75 per cent 
doesn’t seem like they’re buying most of it out of province, not 
according to some textbook, but according to sound business 
decisions and with a sense of commitment to the community in 
which it conducts business. And I want to tell you people here, 
you people here aren’t probably in Prince Albert quite as often as I 
am. Everybody up in that area is very, very happy with the good 
corporate citizens that Weyerhaeuser are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: — About a year and a half ago there was a major fire 
up North and some buildings burnt that were housing children. 
Weyerhaeuser, what did they do? Immediately they moved in 
some mobile accommodations for those people on the old 
Molanosa road. I was right up past there just shortly after, fishing, 
and I seen them. They moved them in a cluster so they had some 
decent accommodations. They do those kinds of things in the 
community. 
 
When they first bought the pulp mill in Prince Albert . . . A 
  



 
March 24, 1988 

 

86 
 

 lot of the rural municipalities north of Prince Albert of course are 
tourist-based. Tourist-based, — of course, I’ll explain this to some 
of the fellows from the South — tourist-based means they have 
lakes and trees and a kind of a beautiful setting that people love to 
enjoy in the summer-time, with golf courses and things like that. 
 
Some of those rural municipalities were a little worried, and some 
of the resort villages were a little worried, now that, as the NDP 
would say, this big multinational is in here, and they’re going to 
take all the trees off of the land, and they’re not going to leave 
anything for recreational purposes. Well let me tell you, 
Weyerhaeuser went up to the Lakeland R.M., designated all the 
land that was previously designated by PAPCO, and added 5,000 
acres — 5,000 acres added to the outside circumference to make 
sure that the parkland is protected, make sure it’s protected. These 
people are really good corporate citizens. They’re really starting to 
mix into the real rural and urban fibre of central Saskatchewan. 
And this is important, very important. 
 
These people across the way can say all the negatives they want 
about it, but they are not saying so many negative things around 
Prince Albert now because the positives are starting to come out, 
the positive things that our people on the street are saying about 
Weyerhaeuser. The member from P.A. and P.A.-Duck Lake are 
not saying so many negative things. No, they’ve quit using the 
scare tactics that the paper mill won’t be built. 
 
I toured it the other day. I toured that paper mill the other day, and 
it is something to see. And I met . . . I met a lot of my friends on 
the floor, working at that paper mill, constructing it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — All Tories. 
 
Mr. Muller: — And there certainly are all Tories. They’re from 
Shellbrook-Torch River, the member from Regina North West is 
saying. 
 
Some Hon. Members : Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: — Anyway, it’s great to see Tories and NDP 
working side by side, building a paper mill, and I’m sure that the 
member from Prince Albert will finally see the light and come out 
and say what a positive group of people Weyerhaeuser is. I’m 
waiting for him to say that in his speech. I’m sure that he will 
come out and say he’s in favour of the paper mill, he’s in favour of 
the people up there that are building it, and in favour of how 
Weyerhaeuser is being good corporate citizens in the area. I’m 
sure that he will apologize for any of the negatives that he has used 
in previous speeches of his . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . He says 
he won’t apologize. Well I’m sure that he’ll have second thoughts 
about that before he gets up to give his answer to the throne 
speech. 
 
So let the Leader of the Opposition make no more unjustified 
claims about the Weyerhaeuser plant. I’m sure that if he was here 
tonight and could hear all the positives, that he may even change 
his mind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was also impressed with the commitment of the 
throne speech to pursue the opportunities 

 presented by the free trade agreement with the United States. That 
is one of the things that’s really dear to my heart, being a farmer 
all my life, giving me access in the red meat industries. That has 
always been a great concern of mine, of not having access to the 
southern markets. 
 
I refer you back to my observation on the . . . I’m sorry, I just 
started over. Well I seen the member from Saskatoon South got 
mixed up in his notes there, too. But anyway, I see that I have 
certainly got mine mixed up. But anyhow, I have to go on a little 
longer about the free trade agreement and its positive side. 
 
As you know, the basic framework . . . The Leader of the 
Opposition, the Leader of the Opposition is totally against free 
trade, totally against access to our southern neighbours. But I have 
to be in favour of the free trade agreement. 
 
He says that we’re going to lose our sovereignty. He says we’re 
going to lose our sovereignty. The member form Riversdale says 
we’re going to lose our sovereignty to the United States. We won’t 
be able to control our own exports; we won’t be able to control 
what we charge for our export products. Well as you very well 
know, the basic trade framework for this country is the General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, or the GATT, as they call it. And 
this is the agreement that the Leader of the Opposition said we 
should use exclusively, exclusively as our vehicle for developing 
our foreign markets. Don’t try to deal with the Americans, he has 
said. Put all the eggs in the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs 
and Trade) basket. 
 
We . . . Mr. Speaker, let me say that I continue to support the 
GATT and the negotiations that we are going through with GATT 
nations. But let me also point out, the member from Riversdale, 
the ramifications of recent GATT rulings. They have ruled that our 
wine and beer industries must be subject to the regime they have 
decided upon, not the one that we have decided upon. And I was 
waiting for the Leader of the Opposition to start telling us how this 
is proof positive that the GATT has injured Canada sovereignty, 
that we have given our independence to a group of international 
trade officials. 
 
Because here we have a Canadian policy, and when it comes to 
breweries, Mr. Speaker, really a provincial — a provincial policy. 
Here we have an internal policy, and this GATT things, the Leader 
of the Opposition wants us to rely on 100 per cent — 100 per cent. 
This GATT things has told us that we cannot set our own policies. 
Why is the member from Riversdale is silent on this, Mr. Speaker? 
Why does he not ask questions about that? 
 
His preferred option has been demonstrated to infringe our 
sovereignty, and I think we should hear what he has to say about 
it. Because, Mr. Speaker, there are a significant number of jobs 
that depend upon the breweries in this province, a significant 
number. And in the negotiations with the Americans that the 
Leader of the Opposition does not want us dealing, in those 
negotiations we obtained full exemptions for our breweries — full 
exemptions for our breweries. 
 
The deal with the Americans protected those jobs. And 
  



 
March 24, 1988 

 

87 
 

 now those jobs are threatened by the member of Riversdale’s 
policy. I think this whole thing points out clearly just how narrow 
and illogical and purely ideological the stand of the Leader of the 
Opposition is. And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I much prefer to have 
the fate of the paper mill in Shellbrook-Torch River be in the 
hands of a panel on which Canada has full and equal voice than I 
would a panel where your voice is one in a very large crowd. 
 
(1945) 
 
But lest anyone try to portray me as opposed to the GATT, let me 
just repeat that I do support the trade mechanism. I point these 
things to show the hypocrisy and inconsistency of the member 
from Riversdale. And, Mr. Speaker, after entering the third decade 
in this House he should know better. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that members on the opposite 
benches now want to take some advantage of what I’ve said in my 
speech, to give some rebuttal, and maybe some apologies to 
Weyerhaeuser and the people who have put together the free trade 
agreement. After this fiery speech of mine I’m sure that they want 
to make some apologies for what I’ve said. 
 
Well let me finish my remarks by congratulating His Honour the 
Lieutenant governor on his fine delivery of the Speech from the 
Throne, and in expressing my support for the contents of that 
speech. And let me thank the government for its continued 
commitment to the people of my constituency and clearly to the 
people of the entire province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And certainly I have to make some comments again, just before I 
finish off. You know, I got into the large projects in my area, the 
Weyerhaeuser, and of course the larger project is the free trade 
agreement. But I really have to compliment our fine Minister of 
Health from Meadow Lake, and the support he got in supporting 
me in the new 30-bed nursing home that I’m getting in Canwood 
— of course I like to flog that one a little. And it is . . . I’ve been 
there and I’ve gone through it in the construction phases. I 
understand it’s going to open in sometime in July . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Just in time for you to move into it. 
 
Mr. Muller: And yes, like the member from Souris-Cannington 
said, I’ll be able to get a room. 
 
But anyway . . . Mr. Speaker, I obviously will be supporting the 
motion of my colleague from Rosthern, and thank you for your 
undivided attention. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me to take part in 
this throne speech debate, and to speak on behalf of my 
constituents in my riding of Saskatoon University, and it’s also, I 
think, good luck for me, Mr. Speaker, to be following in this 
debate on the remarks of the member from Shellbrook, because it 
gives me an opportunity to rebut some very serious inaccuracies in 
the member’s remarks. I want to take a moment to do that, Mr. 
Speaker. 

 I was intrigued, Mr. Speaker, by the remarks of the member from 
Shellbrook when he referred to the hard bargain that the 
Government of Saskatchewan drove with Weyerhaeuser 
corporation of Tacoma, Washington. I was equally intrigued, Mr. 
Speaker, to see the reference that the member made to 
Weyerhaeuser corporation inheriting a publicly owned company, 
PAPCO, that was losing $90,000 a day, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I want to set the record straight. I challenge the member form 
Shellbrook to table documentation that will support his accusation 
that the Prince Albert Pulp Company was losing $91,000 a day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to table, for members of this Assembly, the 
consolidated statement of income and retained earnings for the 
Prince Albert Pulp Company for the years 1980 and 1981, the two 
years before the PC government took office, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
going to lay these on the Table, but before I do, Mr. Speaker, I 
want to read into the record what the net income of the Prince 
Albert Pulp Company was under the NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the 12 months ended March 31, 1980, the audited 
consolidated statement shows that PAPCO made $23,461,879, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s not a loss of $91,000 a day. That’s a very 
substantial profit, Mr. Speaker. In the year 1981, Mr. Speaker, the 
audited statement of the Prince Albert Pulp Company shows that 
PAPCO under the NDP made a profit of $24,132,000, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this $91,000 a day is fictitious loss 
perpetrated by the PC Party opposite. 
 
They advertised, Mr. Speaker, on public radio across this 
province, claiming that PAPCO under the NDP was making a 
$91,000 a day loss when they knew that that was a total 
inaccuracy, Mr. Speaker, a total falsehood, in complete 
contradiction, Mr. Speaker, to the audited financial statements of 
PAPCO. And I lay those audited financial statements on the Table 
right now, Mr. Speaker, and I challenge members opposite that if 
they have any documentation that refutes these audited financial 
statements, that they should bring it forward now. I’ll be handing 
these to the page, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . .  
 
The member for Meadow Lake, the Minister of Health, asks me if 
I read the three volumes that he tabled last year. Yes, Mr. Minister, 
I did read the three volumes you table din December of 1986, and 
what that showed, Mr. Speaker, is that in addition to the 
inaccuracies that I already mentioned, this government sold an 
asset that was worth at least 350 million to $400 million. They 
sold it, Mr. Speaker, for $250 million. They sold 12.5 million 
acres of northern forest rights, the Prince Albert Pulp Company 
pulp mill, the Saskatoon chemical plant, and a number of smaller 
operations for only $250 million, and then, Mr. Speaker, they 
didn’t collect one penny in the form of a down payment — not 
one penny. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in the last fiscal year they provided the 
company that purchased the pulp mill, Weyerhaeuser, with $9 
million in revenue to build highways under your Highways budget 
Mr. Speaker. A colossal give-away. No requirement for interest 
payments or principal payments unless Weyerhaeuser makes a 20 
per cent return on their equity. 
  



 
March 24, 1988 

 

88 
 

Mr. Speaker, that’s what that agreement was all about. Those were 
the details of the agreement and when the Minister of Health asked 
me if I read the agreement, it’s clear, Mr. Speaker, that I did, and 
that it constitutes a massive — perhaps the most massive — 
give-away in the history of Saskatchewan politics. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to focus on the remarks, at that point, 
that I intended to make in this throne speech debate, and say that 
in these past months many people in my riding have been 
expressing dismay over what they see as the steady erosion of 
public services at a time when provincial taxes on individuals and 
families are at record high levels. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my constituents say to me this government is 
destroying our province. There will be very little left if they get 
another term in office. And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that my 
constituents are correct, because the very infrastructure that 
generations of Saskatchewan people have built to serve the public 
good is being dismantled piece by piece by the PC government. 
 
In dramatically cutting medicare, education, and social services 
the Premier is allowing the very fabric of Saskatchewan society to 
be eroded and he is creating untold suffering by thousands of 
Saskatchewan residents. People in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
are going without essential medications because they cannot 
afford the cost of the deductible on prescription drugs and the high 
up-front cost of many prescriptions. Thousands of people are 
suffering unnecessary pain and discomfort because they can’t get 
access to a hospital bed in this province, Mr. Speaker. There are 
11,000 people waiting for entry to hospitals in my home city of 
Saskatoon alone. 
 
Here is a government, Mr. Speaker, who does not even have the 
compassion to provide the resources needed to feed hungry 
children in our province. The hunger crisis is so desperate in 
Saskatchewan that many food banks in our province cannot keep 
pace with the demand. Yet this government refuses to expand 
school lunch programs and continues to slash away at allowances 
for welfare recipients, ignoring the reality that half of the 
recipients are children, Mr. Speaker. Child hunger, which was 
virtually unheard of six years ago in Saskatchewan, is one of the 
deepest blemishes on the free market capitalist economy this 
government has sought to create. It is the most obvious 
manifestation of economic injustice in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen in the last two or three years in this 
province, as the economy gets worse under this government and as 
the social safety net that used to exist in this province collapses as 
a result of the cuts of the PC Party, an unprecedented crises in 
Saskatchewan, both in terms of homelessness and inadequate 
housing in our province and in terms of hungry people and hungry 
children in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if there is any manifestation of economic 
injustice in Saskatchewan, it is the manifestation that is 
demonstrated to us in the long line-ups at Saskatchewan food 
banks, and in the many children in this province who go to be 
hungry and wake up hungry and go to school hungry, and face a 

 Department of Education that won’t even provide the 18 cents a 
day that it costs for each child to get a school lunch program in 
this province. And I say, Mr. Speaker, shame to a government that 
won’t respond to that kind of basic need. The time has long since 
passed, Mr. Speaker, when any government of this province ought 
to accept child hunger as a reality in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve also seen a serious deterioration in the last 
year in the quality of education in Saskatchewan. We have a 
government that has sacrificed educational quality for small, 
short-term financial savings. The crisis in accessibility to 
post-secondary education has now reached a point, Mr. Speaker, 
where students with an average of 75 per cent or less will be 
turned away at the College of Arts and Science at the University of 
Saskatchewan this fall. That’s what the enrolment quota that has 
been imposed by the University of Saskatchewan will translate 
into this fall, as a result of the cuts in funding by this government 
to the universities of this province. The accessibility crisis is 
equally evident in our technical institutes where east year 3,600 
students were turned away from Kelsey alone at a time when the 
government had just eliminated 550 student space at Kelsey. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, our intention in seeking a mandate to govern 
this great province is straightforward. We want to rearrange the 
priorities of this government to put people and humanity first 
again in Saskatchewan. We intend to take the funds the 
government s spending on empty office space and use them to 
expand school lunch programs in Saskatchewan. We intend to 
take the $140 million that the Premier is wasting on the 
unnecessary and environmentally unsound Rafferty dam project 
and instead invest those funds in restoring the prescription drug 
program in Saskatchewan and providing the funding that is 
necessary to reduce hospital waiting lists in this province. 
 
We want to force Weyerhaeuser to make interest and principal 
payments on its $250 million debt to the people of Saskatchewan, 
and use those funds, Mr. Speaker, to provide the support that is 
necessary to abolish enrolment quotas at our university in 
Saskatoon, and to provide the quality of education and the quality 
of post-secondary education that is needed in educational 
institutions throughout this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to see the $300 million oil royalty holiday 
that this government established for the oil industry over the past 
several years at a cost of $400 a taxpayer in this province. We 
want to see that oil royalty holiday abolished; and we want to see 
that money instead, Mr. Speaker, used to eliminate the annual 
deficit that this government has been running up in the province of 
Saskatchewan so that we don’t face escalated interest payments 
year after year on a growing debt that again is becoming of crisis 
proportions. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to two issues that particularly 
affect my constituents and that relate directly to employment 
opportunities in my riding. One of these is the unfortunate 
announcement by SED Systems in Saskatoon that it was going to 
be haying off staff and that its future in the province of 
Saskatchewan was questionable. And the second, Mr. Speaker, is 
this 
  



 
March 24, 1988 

 

89 
 

 government’s failure to introduce and announce already, at this 
point in the year, a student summer employment program for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(2000) 
 
Last year, Mr. Speaker, we saw the PC government sell 450,000 
common shares that it held in SED Systems of Saskatoon, and to 
sell those shares for a mere $1.1 million. And for that minimal 
benefit, Mr. Speaker, the PC Party gave up control, the control that 
it had in SED systems. And in giving up that control, Mr. Speaker, 
it essentially meant that a Saskatchewan presence in the most 
important and significant high-tech company in the province was 
lost. 
 
SED systems, until that time, Mr. Speaker, had always been a 
Saskatchewan company. And I think it is noteworthy that the PC 
government decided to give up its holdings in SED systems 
despite the fact that there were millions of dollars of public money 
tied up in the company. I remind members opposite on the 
government side of the House that the Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Corporation has put $6 million in term financing 
into SED systems and has provided an interest-free loan to SED 
systems of $1.9 million for the construction of its new office and 
manufacturing complex at Innovation Place. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan government 
departments and Crown corporations have major research and 
development contracts with SED Systems. Now, in effect, what is 
happening at this point, Mr. Speaker, is that because the 
Saskatchewan government has given up its control in SED 
systems, large amounts of Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money are 
being used, in effect, to accommodate and finance an 
Ontario-based firm in St. Catharines, Ontario. 
 
SED Systems is now totally owned by Fleet Aerospace of St. 
Catharines, Ontario, which in turn is owned and controlled 
primarily by George Dragone, the head of Fleet Aerospace. And 
the member for . . . I notice members opposite shaking their heads. 
I invite them to check the record, and they will see very clearly 
that Mr. Dragone has, in effect, control over Fleet Aerospace, and 
because Fleet Aerospace owns SED systems, has control over 
SED Systems. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the point that I’d like to make is simply this: 
that for a mere $1.1 million worth of Fleet stock, the 
Saskatchewan government has given up its ability to exercise 
influence over the destiny of Saskatchewan’s most exiting 
high-tech company. And in handing SED systems over to Fleet 
Aerospace, what this government has done is handed a high-tech 
company over to another high-tech company who is well-known 
to have a track record of buying up small high-technology 
companies around North America, cutting the parts of those 
companies that don’t fit into their overall corporate plan, laying off 
staff frequently in the companies that they purchase, Mr. Speaker, 
and then in effect consolidating parts of the operation into St. 
Catharines, Ontario. 
 
If you look, Mr. Speaker . . . I invite members to look at the record 
of Fleet Aerospace in North America, and they will 

 see that it is a consistent record of buying up other small high-tech 
companies, selling parts of those companies off, laying off staff in 
the companies that have been purchase, and consolidating 
operations to a significant degree in their corporate headquarters in 
St. Catharines, Ontario. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, for the Government of Saskatchewan to hand 
over SED systems to Fleet Aerospace, with its corporate record 
being what I just described, was a highly, highly irresponsible 
thing to do, and it’s no surprise at all — it should come as no 
surprise to members of this Assembly — that SED Systems is 
now saying that it will lay off staff in Saskatoon. And my fear, Mr. 
Speaker, is that one day we may see a situation in Saskatchewan 
where SED Systems is no longer part of the Saskatoon 
employment picture and job creation picture at all, because if 
times get tough in the high-tech field it would not surprise me at 
all if George Dragone would fully consolidate SED Systems 
operations into St. Catharines, Ontario. 
 
I warned members for the government side of the House a year 
ago that this would happen and at the time the minister of 
Economic Development, member for Kindersley, denied that that 
would happen. The member for Kindersley said that he had 
received guarantees form SED systems that they would continue 
to maintain full employment at their plant in Saskatoon. 
 
And I say to the Minister of Economic Development that he could 
not possibly have received those guarantees in writing because he 
has refused to provide me with that written documentation. He has 
refused to lay on the table of this House any indication of a 
guarantee between Fleet Aerospace and the Government of 
Saskatchewan that Saskatoon jobs in SED systems would be 
guaranteed. And now it’s clear, Mr. Speaker, that there was no 
such guarantee. It’s clear that Fleet Aerospace and George 
Dragone have a free hand to lay off as many people of SED 
Systems as they want to. And the responsibility for that action lies 
squarely on this government and its decision to sell out 
Saskatchewan people’s interest in SED Systems for a mere $1.1 
million when there’s over $9 million of taxpayers; money alone at 
stake, tied up in SED Systems in the form of loans and 
interest-free loans and other forms of assistance from the 
Government of Saskatchewan, plus millions of additional dollars 
of Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money that is tied up in Crown 
corporations and government departments entering into research 
and development contracts with SED systems. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that this demonstrates the folly of the PC 
plan to private, to privatize companies in which there is a public 
presence in this province; and in so doing, to give up our ability to 
have any real control over job creation in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to address a second question that is very 
important to the constituents of Saskatoon University in terms of 
employment opportunities. And that’s the issue of a summer 
job-creation program for students in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and this government’s failure at the end of March 
to have at this time provided any indication to students and to 
employers about, first of all, whether there will be a 
  



 
March 24, 1988 

 

90 
 

 summer job creation program for students; and secondly, what the 
budget will be and what the criteria for applications will be, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We are in effect three weeks away from university students getting 
out of university in this province and coming onto the job market. 
We will have over 25,000 post-secondary education students 
graduating in a short period of time, looking for jobs — and at this 
point in time, Mr. Speaker, we still have no job-creation program 
in place for the summer for students. 
 
Now last year, just to briefly review the record, Mr. Speaker, we 
saw a government that cut summer job-creation funding from 
$10.5 million in 1986 to $4 million in 1987. We saw a government 
last year, Mr. Speaker, that cut off all volunteer non-profit 
organizations from being eligible for funding under the summer 
job-creation program for students. We saw a government last year 
that, in effect, cut 4,000 job opportunities for university and 
technical institute students in this province to obtain employment 
last summer, Mr. Speaker, over the period 1986. 
 
And the question is, Mr. Speaker: what is the opportunities, what 
is the government’s plans for summer job creation this summer? 
Will they reinstate funding to non-profit organizations? They 
ought to, but we’ve had no indication at this point in time that they 
will. Will there even be a program? We don’t know whether there 
will or not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this is highly irresponsible, because the government’s 
decision not to announce a program by this time in the year means 
that thousands of employers across this province, even if a 
program is put in place, will not be able to put jobs in place 
quickly enough for students to be able to take advantage of them 
when they come out of university and technical institutes in three 
or four weeks’ time. Mr. Speaker, it takes at least two months’ 
notice for employers in Saskatchewan to be able to put jobs in 
place, summer jobs for students, and this government isn’t even 
giving employers three weeks’ notice before it will expect jobs to 
be put in place if there is to be a program at all. 
 
So I say to the Minister of Employment that it is his responsibility 
to announce in this House tomorrow a program for student 
summer employment in the province of Saskatchewan. And for 
the throne speech to fail to make an announcement about such a 
program is highly irresponsible, 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the final point that I want to make before 
closing my remarks in the throne speech debate relates to the 
decision that this government made, since this Assembly last sat in 
November, to approve three new uranium mine operations in 
northern Saskatchewan — to approve the construction of three 
new uranium mines in north-eastern Saskatchewan, at Wollaston 
Lake, Mr. Speaker, which is our most valuable commercial fishery 
resource in the province, which is, Mr. Speaker, one of the most 
beautiful lakes, without question, in the province of Saskatchewan. 
A magnificent natural resource, Mr. Speaker, and the government 
is going to new lengths, Mr. Speaker, in not only approving new 

 uranium mines but actually approving the construction of 
uranium mines out in the middle of that lake, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government is now saying, not only is it acceptable to 
construct new uranium mines in the province of Saskatchewan, 
but it is acceptable to build a new open-pit mine, the proposed 
Collins Bay A-zone mine, 250 yards out into Wollaston Lake, in 
water depths that are currently 45 feet deep. This government says 
that its acceptable to mine thousands of tonnes of radioactive 
materials out in the middle of a valuable commercial fishery 
recourse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not only approving one such mine out in 
Wollaston Lake, it’s actually proposing to build two such mines. 
A second mine will be located approximately 100 yards out into 
the lake in water depths 25 feet deep. And it should be just 
common sense to anyone in this province, Mr. Speaker, that the 
construction and operation of those two open-pit mines out in 
Wollaston Lake, in a major, beautiful, and highly valuable lake in 
this province, is going to be . . . poses a very serious pollution 
threat to that natural water resource, Mr. Speaker. It is almost 
assured, in my judgement, Mr. Speaker, that Wollaston Lake will 
be polluted either in the short term or the long term as a result of 
the approval of these two open-pit uranium mines out in the 
middle of the lake. 
 
And in addition to that, Mr. Speaker, this government has 
approved a third uranium mine underneath Wollaston Lake, 
known as the Eagle Point uranium mine, which it’s proposed will 
operate for the next 20 years, Mr. Speaker. this mine will be 
located as far as 1,500 feet out underneath Wollaston Lake. 
 
The government, Mr. Speaker, has done nothing to examine, first 
of all, the combined impact of all these mining developments on 
Wollaston Lake. Each of them have been examined only 
independent of one another. And it has done nothing, Mr. Speaker, 
to take steps to ensure that in the long term, these mines will be 
properly closed down, properly decommissioned, and that the 
radioactive tailings from these mines will not pollute the lake in 
the long term. There isn’t even . . . In the environmental impact 
studies that were filed with the government, there isn’t even a 
decommissioning plan, a closing down plan for these open-pit 
uranium mines that are to be built in Wollaston Lake. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the environmental impact assessment that was 
filed is totally inadequate. I don’t believe, Mr. Speaker, that any 
other government in this country would allow such a highly 
inadequate environmental impact assessment on such a 
controversial development out in the middle of lakes to ever be 
found acceptable by the Department of Environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this environmental impact assessment should have 
been the subject automatically of public hearings in this province. 
These three uranium mines should have been the subject of public 
hearings in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, that the government received dozens and 
dozens and dozens of letters from concerned 
  



 
March 24, 1988 

 

91 
 

 people across this province asking four public hearing son these 
three major uranium mine developments. And the government 
refused to hold public hearings and immediately approved the 
projects as quickly as possible with a short press release statement 
being the only announcement that these projects were being given 
the green light. And, Mr. Speaker, this shows that the 
environmental impact assessment process which this government 
has set down and the legislation that governs it has become 
thoroughly impotent under the PC Party.  
 
(2015) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious that the members opposite have 
not read a recent report that was filed by the Standing committee 
on environment and Forestry of the House of Commons in Ottawa 
titled The Eleventh Hour. It’s a study of high-level radioactive 
waste in Canada. And it’s a document that came down in January, 
1988 with representatives, Mr. Speaker, from all political parties 
in the House. 
 
And this document, Mr. Speaker — among other things — 
recommends a moratorium on nuclear power development in 
Canada until the problem of high-level radioactive waste disposal 
is solved in this country. And every ounce of uranium that we 
mine in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, will become 
high-level radioactive waste that no government in this country or 
in this world community knows how to properly dispose of. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s folly to be developing either new uranium 
mines or new nuclear power plants in this province until the 
problem of high-level radioactive waste disposal has been 
resolved. And herein Saskatchewan we have also not resolved the 
problem of lower-level radioactive tailings disposal in this 
province — and we have over 30 million tonnes of radioactive 
tailings in northern Saskatchewan which have not been properly 
disposed of — and yet this government goes on approving new 
uranium mine projects in this province without even laying down 
a plan for the proper disposal of these radioactive tailings, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think that that is thoroughly irresponsible of the 
members opposite. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to, in closing, comment briefly on one 
other item that I think has been a matter of controversy, and is a 
matter of importance to all members of this House and all 
members of the public, and that is the recent statement, Mr. 
Speaker, by the Premier of Saskatchewan, when he referred to one 
for the minority groups in this province namely people who are 
homosexuals in Saskatchewan, as people who are akin to 
criminals and bank robbers in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was shocked that the Premier of this province 
would make such remarks about any group of people in the 
province of Saskatchewan, about nay minority group in the 
province of Saskatchewan. It was totally uncalled for, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s akin to the kind of statements that we saw the Nazis 
in Germany make about minority groups there, including Jewish 
people, Mr. Speaker. They were referred to, Mr. Speaker, as being 
no better than bank robbers and criminals. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier of this province, 

 in effect, degraded and betrayed all people in Saskatchewan when 
he referred to a group of people in this province — a group of 
people who among them have outstanding men and women of 
great public service to the province of Saskatchewan — when he 
referred to them, Mr. Speaker, as being no better than criminals 
and bank robbers. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that his remarks demonstrate why there is 
a need in this province to have protection for people who are 
homosexual against being discriminated against, because the 
Premier himself, Mr. Speaker, demonstrated adamantly such 
discrimination. And I say that the kind of an attack on any 
minority group in this province must be opposed by all members 
of the Legislative Assembly; that it is simply improper and 
uncalled for an unacceptable for the Premier of this province to 
launch an attack on any minority group in Saskatchewan and in a 
totally unfounded manner to compare them to criminals and bank 
robbers. 
 
And I call on the Premier of this province, Mr. Speaker, on behalf 
of my constituents in Saskatoon University, to withdraw those 
remarks and to withdraw them here in this Assembly. And on that 
not, Mr. Speaker, I say that I will not be supporting the throne 
speech. I will be opposing the throne speech and so will all 
members on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure . . .  
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure to respond to the Speech from the Throne back to my 
constituents, back in the Shaunavon riding. 
 
I would like to begin my remarks today by welcoming all the 
members to this 21st session for the Saskatchewan Legislative 
Assembly. I’m sure each of you are as anxious as I to have 
Saskatchewan benefit from the new, exciting legislation this 
session will implement. 
 
I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that each member will take heed to the 
remarks made by my colleague from Rosthern, the remarks that 
dealt with respect and responsible conduct so worthy of this 
institution and, indeed, so worthy of the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in His Honour’s throne speech, government direction 
from this province’s key issues were touched on. These were 
trade, agriculture, resources, public participation, diversification, 
education, and the family unit, health — many, many others. 
 
Today I would like to focus on the PC government’s strong 
commitment to one of its most vital industries — Saskatchewan 
agricultural sector. There’s no question that Saskatchewan’s farm 
families have been faced with some of the most difficult financial 
challenges imaginable, Mr. Speaker. And I shudder to think of 
where those families and this province would be if they were 
  



 
March 24, 1988 

 

92 
 

 governed by a party with agricultural policies 25 years old, led by 
a man who can’t even distinguish his back from the front with a 
cowboy hat. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: — But, Mr. Speaker, fortunately for the farmers of 
this province, they have a Premier and a government who 
understand agriculture. They understand because the good 
majority of these folks are farmers themselves. 
 
And it is because this government understands that we have led 
the way in commitment to a major agricultural program initiatives. 
Programs, Mr. Speaker, like that production loan program, a 
program which has approved over $1 billion for 58,000 farmers to 
receive $25 per acre at 6-per-cent money. The average loan works 
out to around $19,000 per farmer. That’s $19,000, Mr. Speaker, 
that many, many of our farm families would have been in serious 
straits without — $19,000, Mr. Speaker, to ensure crops got into 
the ground, to ensure our farm families remain viable; $19,000, 
Mr. Speaker, to help farmers through the roughest point in 
agriculture crisis. 
 
Well as you know, Mr. Speaker, under the original program, the 
loans were repaid over a three-year period, and in normal 
circumstances and for the many, many Saskatchewan farm 
families the three-year period term would have been sufficient. 
However, Mr. Speaker, the fact is that the Minister of Agriculture 
and the provincial government have received requests by some 
farm families and farm organizations to give him another option, 
an option that could extend the repayment schedule over a longer 
period of time. And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, this government 
acted upon those requests. This government acted, Mr. Speaker, 
because this government is in touch with the people. 
 
Saskatchewan farmers now have two options under the production 
loan program. They can, Mr. Speaker, number one, retain 
repayment schedule as per existing document over three years; or, 
Mr. Speaker, number two, select a 10-year extended repayment 
program — 10 full years to repay the loan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the NDP would like to say this is an awful 
thing, a terrible thing. Give a man a $19,000 loan, they extended 
the time he has to repay if from three years to 10 years — very 
terrible, terrible. They don’t like it. Back in my home town and in 
my towns surrounding my area, there’s people that paid back their 
full term in one year; a big percentage is paid in three years; the 
rest had taken the 10-year loan program and are very happy about 
it. 
 
The simple fact of that matter is, Mr. Speaker, the extension 
occurred at the request of farm families — not by this government 
— and farm organizations. And giving the agricultural sector of 
this province an option, as we have provided for in this program, is 
in fact the strong proof of commitment to listening to the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
An example of that commitment are demonstrated through all 
areas of government agricultural programs and initiatives. For an 
example. The Farm Land Security 

 Act is one of those initiatives, an Act that severely restricts farm 
land foreclosures, Mr. Speaker. Over 14,000 notices have been 
received with approximately 60 per cent resulting in successful 
mediation with the creditors. Enacted on December 31, 1984, Mr. 
Speaker, we have extended its life to December 31, 1988 with 
provision for further extension to December 31, 1989. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to make a comparison here 
between the kinds of commitment of this government ant the 
commitment of the government across the way. The Farm Land 
Security Act, an act designed by the government, has been proven 
successful in keeping farmers on the land and in control of their 
land. Compare that with the land bank Act in the NDP term, an 
Act designed and a proven success in taking the land away from 
the farmers and putting it in the hands of big government — 
taking the land away from the farmers and taking it and running if 
from this building here. Two very different kinds of commitments, 
Mr. Speaker — a commitment to the farm families demonstrated 
by this PC government; a commitment to government ownership 
and control demonstrated by the NDP. 
 
Counselling and assistance for farmers is another program which 
this government is strongly committed to. Our PC government has 
provided nearly $122 million in government guarantees on 
operating consolidation loans. That money represents a 
commitment to over 3,000 farmers, Mr. Speaker — over 3,000 
farmers. And this program too was extended by our government to 
December 31, 1988 again with provision for further extension to 
December 31, 1989 if required. This program alone has saved 
farmers approximately $22 million in 1987. Through the refund 
. . . (inaudible) . . . I’ll correct it for you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another program is the livestock facilities and 
investment program, Mr. Speaker, the provincial tax credit of 15 
per cent for renovations or construction of livestock facilities. That 
has since 1986, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say, provided tax 
credits of $2.7 million to 1,186 producers. To break that down, 
Mr. Speaker, an average of $2,240 per producer — $2,240 per 
producer never even contemplated by previous NDP 
administrations, never even suggested by the previous NDP 
administrations. An idea whose time had come, but a party across 
the floor whose time has long since been over. 
 
(2030) 
 
For the benefit of the members across the way, I feel more 
examples are necessary to show them the full meaning of 
commitment to the agricultural sector of this province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The livestock cash advance program — another commitment, Mr. 
Speaker. Twenty-three thousand, six hundred farmers have 
received $223 million in interest-free money through the PC 
government since the program was introduced of July 1985. 
 
The feeder association loan guarantee program — another 
commitment, Mr. Speaker. This allows feeder associations to 
borrow funds on the strength of 
  



 
March 24, 1988 

 

93 
 

government guarantees and thereby making it possible to receive a 
better rate from the lenders. I believe it bears stating that 43 
associations have received guarantees of $22.5 million since 1984. 
And that, Mr. Speaker, that’s $22.5 million worth of guarantees 
that allows these producers to work together in co-operation with 
feeder associations to co-operatively manage their own operations. 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is what I call a commitment. 
 
I would also like to mention the save our soils programs, Mr. 
Speaker, a three-year, $500,000 extension-oriented soil 
conservation program to promote soil and crop management 
practices. By the way, I apologize  . .  Deputy Speaker. 
 
Farm families in our province are becoming increasingly aware of 
negative cost factor involved in poor grades due to soil lacking 
essential nutrients. This government is committed to seeing that 
our farm families are fully educated on practices best suited for 
our province — a final illustration of our Premier’s and our 
Progressive Conservative government’s commitments, not just in 
today’s agricultural challenges, but to those of the future. 
 
And I would like to say with that, we have another commitment 
that we have promised the people and we have done this very 
thing, and that is update the crop insurance program. Mr. Speaker, 
this program has been expanded to cover a broader spectrum. The 
cost to top up this crop insurance program amounts to 468 million, 
and this program benefits more than just a few farmers here and a 
few farmers there, Mr. Speaker. Last year alone through 
Saskatchewan crop insurance programs, this government insured 
more than 50,000 farmers — 50,000 farmers represents a good 
number of our farm families across this province. So it is clear for 
all you to see, Mr. Speaker, that this government recognizes the 
vital importance of agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: — We recognize the thousands and the thousands of 
families that rely on the survival of agriculture for their livelihood. 
And we are committed to seeing these families through the way of 
challenges of today so that they too can look forward and ahead to 
their active participation in Saskatchewan’s vibrant future. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to state my full support for 
this government’s continued commitment to agriculture in 
Saskatchewan as stated in His Honour’s Speech from the Throne. 
And I state my full support form the motion being debated today, 
the motion as read by the member from Rosthern, Mr. Speaker, 
and seconded by the member from Moosomin. 
 
With that I would like to thank you for having the opportunity to 
speak this afternoon in support of the throne speech and the 
motion. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives 

 me great pleasure to rise in opposition to the Speech from the 
Throne. But before I get into the substantive portion of my 
remarks in dealing with the speech, I’d like to take this 
opportunity to express my congratulations to the office of the 
Speaker and to the office of Hansard. For those of you who are 
watching on television tonight in this province, I hope that people 
will realize that today is an historic day for the rights of minorities, 
particularly the rights of the francophone linguistic minority in this 
province. 
 
I have here in my hand, Mr. Speaker, a copy of a bill entitled: Bill 
No. 1 of 1988, An Act to amend The Agricultural Credit 
Corporation for Saskatchewan Act, Second Session, 21st 
Legislature in Saskatchewan on one side, and on the other side, for 
the very first time in the history of this province, we see: Projets 
do Loi, numéral un, de loi modifiant la Loi intitulé The 
Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan Act. 
 
We have, today, begun a process in which the francophone 
minority of this province has now access to the laws of the 
province of Saskatchewan. And to your office, sir, and to the 
courage of your office in following the law, the precedent set 
down in the recent Mercure case, I want to put forward my 
congratulations. 
 
Having said that, there is not much else I can congratulate the 
government of this province for. When it comes to the throne 
speech we have seen, as the Leader of the Opposition has so 
correctly pointed out in this speech in reply, we have seen a vast 
wasteland of ideas, a document whose paucity of vitality is so 
evident that to use the expression “a government run out of steam” 
is an understatement, to say the very least. 
 
This is a government who have not only run out of steam but 
whose engine, in fact, is rusted, broken, and worn out. It is a 
government who operates on one principle — one principle only 
— the principle of rhetoric, the principle in which form is used to 
replace substance, at least on the level of rhetoric, and which 
waste, mismanagement, and inefficiency provides the substance to 
its every action. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the Premier of this province — who 
takes delight, takes some political delight I might say, in 
attempting to pit one Saskatchewan group against another 
Saskatchewan group, or a Saskatchewan majority against a 
Saskatchewan minority — as my colleague and friend, the 
member for Saskatoon University has just pointed out, took what I 
thought was probably one of the most despicable acts of any 
premier of this province, when he took nothing more than a blatant 
political slice, slap, and attack at a minority, the homosexual 
minority in this province, and attempted to use that for his own 
political advantage. 
 
You know, politics can get pretty low and pretty dirty sometimes. 
Politics can get pretty low and pretty dirty sometimes, but I want 
to say this to you, Mr. Speaker, that not since I have been elected 
and not since I have watched the political scene in Saskatchewan 
have I seen someone who is supposed to represent the interests of 
all Saskatchewan turn on one of its minorities and compare them 
to criminals, compare them to bank robbers. I think that the 
statements of the Premier in this regard are despicable. They are 
cheap politics — nothing more, 
  



 
March 24, 1988 

 

94 
 

 nothing less. And it does nothing more or nothing less than 
cheapen the office of the Premier of this province and it does 
nothing more or nothing less than cheapen the character of the 
holder of that office. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker . . . I think that the Premier of the 
province owes an apology not only to the homosexual minority in 
this province but to all other minorities who may be next the 
victim of his attack. To compare them to bank robbers is 
ludicrous. To compare any minority to bank robbers is ludicrous. 
 
The fact . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, we 
have, chirping like the bird on the wire, the member from Wilkie. 
Perhaps the member from Wilkie would like to stand up and enter 
into this debate. Perhaps he’d like to declare where he stands on 
the question of bigotry. Perhaps the member would like to declare 
where he stands on the question of intolerance. Perhaps he’d like 
to stand, enter the debate, and talk about whether or not minorities 
in this province have rights. Perhaps the member will have that 
opportunity. Mr. Speaker, perhaps that member will in fact show 
his true colours along with the colour of his red neck. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier of this province compared a minority 
with bank robbers. Well I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that there are 
bank robbers in this province and they’re sitting on the other side 
of the House. There are crooks and criminals in this province who 
are robbing the purses and robbing the future of the people of this 
province . . .  
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I find that 
language that the member from Regina Rosemont is using 
unparliamentary, and I would ask him to apologize to the House . 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, I will withdraw the remarks that I 
made. I will withdraw the crooks and criminals remarks that I 
made, but I think, sir, but I think, if I may say . . .  
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — I have asked the member from Regina 
Rosemont to apologize to the House. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay, I will offer my apologies on that, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The word . . . word, if I may, “rob,” 
which is probably rather harsh but I think falls within the 
parliamentary tradition, I will use, seeing that a precedent has been 
set by the Premier of this province in accusing people of being 
robbers. 
 
I will say that the people of this province are being robbed by that 
government. They are being pickpocketed by that government 
through its taxes, a tax structure which has taken hundreds and 
hundreds and hundreds of dollars more each and every year of the 
last six years that it has been in that office, from the pockets of 
Saskatchewan people; that it’s taken tens and hundreds of millions 
of dollars out of the economy of Saskatchewan, out of the 
productive apparatus of this province, away from good productive 
use, and into the hands of its political friends through patronage, 
patronage appointments, plain old fashioned greed, and plain old 
fashioned pay-offs. 

We only have to look in downtown Regina at the new Ramada 
Renaissance Hotel, built with the government’s money, built with 
the taxpayers’ money, built with the money of the people of this 
province, and which the government then turns around, rents out 
eight empty floors at $125,000 a month for empty space in that 
hotel, in order to do one things and one thing alone, and that’s to 
pay off its political friends, the owner of the Ramada Renaissance 
— the owner of the Ramada Renaissance who happened, during 
the last election, to put up every Tory organizer in this province in 
his other little hotel establishments, the Imperial 400s around this 
province. That kind of waste, that kind of mismanagement, and 
that kind of straight inefficiency is nothing more than an example 
of political bagmanship which this government is well noted for.  
 
(2045) 
 
We can look at the case, if we want to use the legal terms, of 
another robbery of the people of the province and that’s that case 
of Mr. George Hill, the president of Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation. Mr. George Hill who is taking, it is reported, 
$210,000 in salary each and every year from the treasury of this 
province. Mr. George Hill, who in order to cover up a 5 per cent 
increase — and a 5 per cent increase on $210,000 is over $10,000 
a year in terms of a salary increase — and in order to cover up that 
increase put forward a $1,000 buy-off bonus to the workers of 
SaskPower. And goodness knows the workers at SaskPower need 
it, as does every other worker in this province, but the political and 
economic justification for that act boils down to nothing more than 
an attempt by Mr. Hill and his gang of Tories at SPC to enrich 
themselves at the expense of the people of this province. 
 
But that, Mr. Speaker, pales, that pales when compared to what is 
the largest, the biggest, the greatest, the most magnificent political 
patronage and boondoggle that has ever been seen in this province, 
the shafferty project — the shafferty project — Shand, Rafferty 
and Alameda. 
 
Our leader, the member from Riversdale, has aptly termed it the 
shafferty project because each and every person in Saskatchewan 
is getting the shaft with that project. they’re getting it on the 
economic level. This project costs $1.2 billion — $1.2 billion. 
 
And let’s talk about what we get for that. That $1.2 billion is 
$1,200 for very man, woman, and child in Saskatchewan. And, 
Mr. Speaker, who’s going to pay for it? Is it going to be the 
George Hills? Is it going to be the Weyerhaeuser? Is it going to be 
the multinationals? Is it going to be whichever large company rips 
off Saskatchewan Minerals, takes it away form the people of this 
province? No. It’s going to the average citizen of this province 
who will see their taxes increase to pay for the shafferty. They’re 
getting the shaft; there’s no doubt about it. 
 
Who’s going to pay for it, Mr. Speaker? They’re going to pay for 
it when we see the power rates in this province double by 1993, 
double again by 1998. Those, Mr. Speaker, those are the figures 
given to me by people at SaskPower themselves. The people of 
this province are going to be hit with massive power rates the likes 
of which 
  



 
March 24, 1988 

 

95 
 

they’ve never seen. 
 
We have seen this government already, in order to pay off its 
mismanagement at SaskPower, in three years raise its rates by 
over 21 per cent. Well, I want to say this to the people of 
Saskatchewan. If you think that was bad, you ain’t seen nothing 
yet. Wait till they make and force each and every person in this 
province to dig deep to pay off the shafferty. Let me tell you, 
folks, they’re going to get the shaft — $1,200 for each man, 
woman, and child in this province. For what? For what? For a 
power plant that we do not need, that every independent engineer 
in this province says is not required for Saskatchewan. 
 
It is not needed for two reasons: one is because it is the peak-load. 
The peaking load of power can be purchased at 25 per cent of the 
cost from the North-East Basin Power Co-operative. Twelve cents 
from shafferty, 3 cents from north-east basin — one quarter of the 
cost. And when it’s peak time coming, we’re going to be paying 
base-load power when we need it for peak-load times — four 
times as much for power, each and every kilowatt, from shafferty 
as opposed to what we could purchase from a western power grid 
like North-East Basin. For what? For a power plant that we don’t 
need. 
 
In 1979, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Power put out a document 
from the conservation branch which Mr. Hill and the rest of his 
cronies destroyed after they had the coup at SaskPower — took it 
away, threw the engineers out, disbanded the branch. And why? 
Because the branch in 1979 put forward a program which would 
save Saskatchewan people 289 megawatts of power. Now for 
those who are not electrical engineers, and I’m not an electrical 
engineer, that’s basically one power plant, one power plant that we 
could save, which adds up to a total saving of close to — if you 
have a 300-megawatt power plant — 589 megawatts. 
 
And the electrical engineers tell me that the cost of production of 
power is about $3,000 a kilowatt, or roughly $1 billion for every 
300 megawatts — $1 billion which is, by the way, when we’re 
talking Shand and Rafferty . . . Excuse me, $1 billion for every 
600 megawatts, which is the cost of shafferty, the cost of shafferty, 
$1 billion. Not only would you save the billion dollars, we would 
reduce the consumption of electricity by that much, which would 
save consumers in total electrical costs literally hundreds of 
millions of dollars a year. 
 
There is no economic sense to shafferty. There is absolutely no 
sense to shafferty on an economic basis. 
 
Secondly, there is no sense to shafferty when we come to deal 
with the environment. You know, Nikita Khrushchev and John 
Kennedy had a discussion in 1960 in New York about who was 
the better politician, and Kennedy was talking about how they 
were much more representative. And Nikita Khrushchev’s reply 
was: 
 
You know, Mr. Kennedy, politicians are the same the world over. 
They promise to build you a bridge even when there’s no river. 
 
Well that, Mr. Speaker, is what the Conservative 

government is doing, promising the people of Estevan, Alameda, 
Oxbow, and Weyburn to build them a dam for no river. Here we 
are in the midst of a drought — the third lowest year in history for 
precipitation, less than one inch in the Regina area, no water, no 
run-off, no flood problems, as it has been year after year after year 
after year. And yet the government is proposing to spend $145 
million of our tax money to build a dam where there is no river 
and there is no water. 
 
This is not to count the environmental damage. This is the other 
environmental damage: the loss of productive agricultural land; 
the loss of the wildlife; the loss of the natural habitat; and finally 
the loss of what could be — if it was looked upon as a natural 
resource that could be used in a sustainable manner as a natural 
tourist attraction, as an area where we could show how agricultural 
development and wildlife habitat and wetlands development all fit 
in together — where we could use that as a tourist area where 
riding stables could be put up, where the ranchers would have 
some income. What do we have? Another government 
megaproject that makes no environmental sense whatsoever. 
 
You know, the hydrologists tell me that using the government’s 
own figures of rainfall in the century and water flows in the rivers, 
that if they built the Rafferty dam in 1912, that it would fill, and it 
would fill in 1940 — 28 years after it was built — but it would be 
empty again by 1944 and it would not fill again until 1974, the 
year of the last big flood, would be empty by 1978, and would 
remain empty to this very day. But still this government wants to 
build the dam where there is no river. 
 
Some kinds of politicians are all alike. We know what kind of 
politicians are all alike when it comes to robbing the pockets of the 
people of this province. They are called bank robbers. They are 
called PCs. 
 
And the last objection that I want to put forward, Mr. Speaker, on 
shafferty is a political objection . . . is a political objection. We 
have a situation in this province where the Government of 
Saskatchewan has gone down, or so it tells us — and I’ll get to 
that in a minute — so it tells us, has gone down to the state of 
North Dakota and negotiated a water apportionment agreement 
with North Dakota. Mr. Speaker, if such is the case it will be the 
first time in the history of this country that a province has taken 
upon it itself to sign an international agreement with a foreign 
power. What that does . . . And I have to ask you, Mr. Speaker, is 
where does that leave the rest of the people of Canada, the people 
of Manitoba for example, when it comes to talking about the 
sharing of water? 
 
The Tory Minister of the Environment, Mr. McMillan, in Ottawa, 
says that there is a national water policy; that we cannot export 
water to the United States. But that is precisely what this 
government has done. It has said it signed an agreement that will 
allow the United States and the United States army Corps of 
Engineers to control the Souris waters, the Souris River’s waters 
and the head-waters of the Souris River basin, to allow it to control 
it, to allow the Americans to control Saskatchewan water for the 
sum of $41.1 million which hasn’t come to Saskatchewan; not one 
penny of that money has come to Saskatchewan. But you know, 
Mr. 
  



 
March 24, 1988 

 

96 
 

Speaker, the government opposite told us they signed that 
agreement. Yet, when I phoned North Dakota, when I asked 
Environment Canada, and when I finally asked the minister 
responsible, he had to admit that no agreement is in place; there is 
not one legal document which commits North Dakota or the U.S. 
Congress to that $41.1 million. They’re gone ahead to build these 
dams without one piece of paper with anybody’s signature on it, 
guaranteeing not one red American cent — not one. 
 
That’s the kind of waste and economic mismanagement that we’ve 
come to expect from this government, and that’s also the kind of 
bank robbery that the people of this province have come to expect 
as this government dips into their pockets deeper and deeper for 
tax dollars for projects which make absolutely no economic, make 
no environmental, and absolutely make no political sense — and, 
in fact, are dangerous, are dangerous in terms of the precedents 
they set for the politics of this country. 
 
I don’t think Canadians, and I don’t think Saskatchewan people 
want to go holus-bolus in any agreement with the United States to 
shift water south of the border. And what we have here, what we 
have here is the first step in which this government, for $41 
million, have said to the Americans, okay, okay, for a promise of 
$41 million, okay, you can control our water in perpetuity. And I 
oppose that . This is a bad deal for . . . Outside any other reasons, 
this is a bad deal for Canada and a bad deal for Saskatchewan 
because it sets a dangerous precedent. For where is Saskatchewan 
water? 
 
I have a question that has yet to have been answered, and I have 
asked questions in this House on this project for the past 18 
months. For the past 18 months, we’ve asked the question, what 
happens if there is no water? Where are they going to get the water 
from? And you know what I’m finding out, Mr. Speaker? You 
know what people are telling me around? Is that people, the 
people are saying that they are going to have to fill the Rafferty 
and the Alameda dams by draining the Qu’Appelle lake chain, and 
lowering the water levels in the Qu’Appelle lakes. And I’m quite 
sure that the cottage owners along the Qu’Appelle lakes, and 
particularly in the constituency of Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, are going 
to love it when the Saskatchewan Water Corporation starts 
digging the ditches to drain their water out of their lakes, you 
know. And they have not denied it; despite we asked that, they 
have not denied it. 
 
(2100) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the final item I’d like to speak tonight 
concerns an item which is outside the partisan political level, and 
that is a question that was not addressed and a problem which was 
not addressed in the Speech from the Throne, and that concerns 
the drought which we in this province presently find ourself in. It 
is a problem which is not a political problem in the narrow 
political sense. It’s a problem which confronts each and every 
Saskatchewan citizen who is suffering from that drought: every 
farmer from Southey southward who’s having to haul water for 
their cattle; every farmer who is looking at their soil and saying, 
we don’t have the moisture for a crop; every farmer and every 
municipality in the southern part of 

Saskatchewan which is saying, what are we going to do if we 
don’t get the rains this spring. And it’s a problem that this 
government has not addressed. 
 
Now I’m not expecting the Premier of this province to make it 
rain. He’s rained on enough people’s parade. He has rained on us, 
he has rained on us from 1982. But I’m not expecting him to bring 
down the kind of rain that we all need. He has not . . . But he has 
not addressed the problem. Is there going to be some type of 
well-digging program? Is there going to be some kind of wetlands 
development program in a major scale? Is there going to be some 
kind of water catchment program to the creation of shelter belts? 
Is there going to be some kind of program put in place? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier says, we’re going to hold the 
water through Rafferty. That is precisely . . . According to the 
hydrological engineers and to every independent expert who has 
studied this program, what have they said, Mr. Deputy Premier? 
They said, in times, in the shallow valleys, in the Prairies, you 
don’t build dams and reservoirs to hold water. In the case of 
shafferty, normal rainfall . . . Seventy-five per cent, 75 gallons for 
every 100 gallons that flow in will be lost through evaporation. 
The way that you store water . . . The way that you store water is, 
you create and you enlarge the wetlands district that holds water 
the natural way, nature’s way, in order so the water can be held 
and dribble down and go down into the water table of the 
province. And that is precisely the kind of backward 1930s 
thinking . . . 1930s thinking that characterize this government. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, they have not had . . . They have not had 
and not said one word about what they’re going to do with the 
drought. They have not said one word about what kind of 
assistance they’re going to provide for farmers, either in terms of 
well drilling, or in the providing of hay, or anything else. They 
have not said one thing because they’re not aware of it; they’ don’t 
care about it; and they’re stuck in their 1930s thinking mentality, 
trying to pull blindly ahead with a project like shafferty which 
makes no economic, political, or environment sense. 
 
But I ask all members, I ask all members on this side and the other 
side, that they’d better wrap their minds around what this serious 
problem is going to entail for this province. Because in May, 
Environment Canada is coming out with a report that says in 20 
years southern Saskatchewan will be a desert, because in the last 
10 years 30 per cent of the wetlands have been drained off — have 
been drained away out of this province — and there are no natural 
catchment areas left; that the habitat . . . The woods have been cut 
down because agricultural programs based on acreage have 
demanded that farmers, have pushed farmers into trying to get 
every acre under cultivation that they possibly can. And the result 
of that’s been . . . The result of that, Mr. Speaker, is an ecological 
disaster which we are not going to face, that we’re already in. That 
the drought, the lack of rainfall, is being compounded by the 
government’s lack of action on things like wetlands development, 
on things like shelter belts. And they tell me that the government is 
even going to do away with its tree nursery program — this 
despite the fact that tree nursery development was one of the 
  



 
March 24, 1988 

 

97 
 

things which helped stop the prairie soil from blowing away 
during the 1930s. 
 
I haven’t got much more to say on that, Mr. Speaker. I think the 
record of this government is clear. The paucity of its ideas is there 
for everybody to see. The vast wasteland of nothing but political 
rhetoric which one finds in the throne speech speaks volumes as to 
why this is a tired and worn out government, interested only in 
enriching itself, interested only in enriching its friends, and 
interested only in acting as the bank robbers of the people of this 
province, dipping into their pockets . . .  
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order! I find that language 
unparliamentary. Order! I would ask that member to retract that 
statement and apologize to the House. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Bank robbers they are. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — I name you, Bob Lyons. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I want to raise a point of order with you. It 
has to do with the enforcement of the rules of this House. It is a 
long-standing rule of this House, and there is plenty of 
parliamentary precedent to back it up, that when a member is 
asked to withdraw some comment that the Speaker or Deputy 
Speaker finds unparliamentary, the member is given ample 
opportunity to withdraw the alleged unparliamentary remark 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps the member for Souris-Cannington would 
like to speak on the same point of order that I’m speaking on and 
direct himself to the point of order, which I’m doing. 
 
The member, by parliamentary tradition, is given ample 
opportunity to withdraw the remarks, and I suggest to you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, an examination of the record of the House at this 
point will show that you gave the member one opportunity to 
withdraw the remark, and then you named the member. And I 
think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I would like you to examine the 
record of the House and find out if that is in fact true, and bring 
back a judgement at a later point on this particular point of order. 
And I stress to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this is a most 
important point of order, and it is not something that can be 
dismissed lightly. That is my point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’ quarrel with 
much of what the member has raised in his point of order. The 
only thing that I would like to point out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
the fact that when the member was given his opportunity to 
withdraw and apologize, he instead chose to walk out of the 
Chamber. He instead chose, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to walk out of 
the Chamber after having been given the opportunity to withdraw 
and apologize, and Mr. Speaker, I think that, quite frankly, is 
contemptible. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I find the point of order 
not well taken. The member repeated the remark, defied the Chair, 
and removed himself from the Chamber, and I named him, Bob 
Lyons. 

An Hon. Member: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise on a further 
point of order. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Westmount. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I asked you if you 
would examine the record carefully. I think there should be a 
Speaker’s statement on this that is dispassionate and removed 
from the emotion of the moment. I asked you if you would 
examine the record of the House to establish clearly in your mind 
and subsequently in the ruling that what I suggested to you had 
happened did actually happen. And I want to know whether it’s 
your intention to examine the record and do that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — The point of order is not well taken. I 
have made my ruling and that will stand. I named him, Bob 
Lyons. 
 
Order. The member has been named. According to rule 24(3) of 
the handbook: 
 

If a member has been named under Rule 24(2), the Member 
shall be suspended form the service of the Assembly for the 
remainder of the sitting day. A motion without notice may be 
moved to increase the length of the suspension of (the) 
named Member and the motion shall be decided without 
amendment or debate. 

 
So I’d ask the member to remove himself from the Chamber. 
 
Mr. Gardner: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me to 
enter into this debate this evening, and I find it, I guess, somewhat 
interesting, to say the least, to see that it has been very spirited to 
this point in time, anyway. 
 
I would like to personally commend the Lieutenant Governor on 
his fine performance on behalf of the Queen, and I’d also to 
commend the member who opened this debate, my colleague from 
Rosthern, for bringing forward so many important points and 
underlying principles. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the one thing that I think bears emphasizing, 
and some members have alluded to this already, one thing that is 
essential in the conduct of public business is the exercise of 
fairness and balance in debating fundamental issues. 
 
There are a whole lot of things that we can fight about in this 
Chamber, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I know that we’ll be haggling 
over free trade, and welfare payments, and this or that interest 
group, and a great many other things. But one thing that we should 
not be fighting about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one thing that should 
go beyond partisan politics is the health care of our citizens. We 
all — and I mean we all in Saskatchewan, not just in this 
Assembly — we all must work together, searching for the best 
solution, the most effective methods, and the highest quality 
answers to the major challenges we face in health care. And every 
citizen of this province has a right to be heard, and I suggest we all 
have an obligation 
  



 
March 24, 1988 

 

98 
 

 to have our ideas heard, not in a fighting, combative, insulting, or 
frightening way, but in a reasoned effort to find answers. 
 
And I know as you do, Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of the 
Opposition has made a contribution to discussing what the 
challenges are and what some of the responses to those challenges 
might be. His participation on a major task force for the Canadian 
Hospital Association should, Mr. Speaker, make him well 
prepared to participate in the discussions without resorting to 
trying to divide the province as he seems intent upon doing form 
his remarks so far. 
 
Mr. Speaker, trying to frighten people, I don’t think is a 
contribution; denying his own former work on the subject is not a 
contribution; and becoming almost hysterical, I don’t think is a 
contribution. So I would ask him to show the leadership that 
should be expected of a man who so desperately wants to rule this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give him those thoughts because I think that when 
someone comes from a task force exercise the way that he did and 
tells us that we should not build more hospitals or other health care 
facilities, that that person clearly must think that there are serious 
challenges in the system, and clearly he has given some thought to 
those challenges. 
 
(2115) 
 
Is it too much to ask, Mr. Speaker, for this man, the member from 
Riversdale, to give the people the benefit of those thoughts when 
he wants them to elect him premier of this province. Can we not 
expect that he would be honest with the people? And, Mr. 
Speaker, quite frankly, do the media not have as much obligation 
to seek his solutions and present his state of policies as they do to 
seek and present ours? 
 
As for the solution of not building health care facilities, I am 
pleased that this government has not followed that advice. I am 
pleased because in the constituency of Pelly we have a new 
extension to the nursing home facility in Norquay. The total 
provincial commitment to that facility is in the order of $700,000, 
Mr. Speaker — $700,000 that was refused under the NDP because 
they imposed a moratorium on nursing homes. Seven hundred 
thousand dollars, Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of the Opposition 
has advised shouldn’t be spent. 
 
And while I’m mentioning my constituency, Mr. Speaker, let me 
just say how grateful I am that the government has seen the need 
for seniors’ housing in my constituency of Pelly as they have 
throughout the entire province. 
 
In our constituency, the communities of Pelly, Calder, Rhein, and 
Togo are all seeing the benefit of having a government that is 
committed to ensuring the independence and quality of life of our 
senior citizens. Among those four communities alone, Mr. 
Speaker, this Progressive Conservative government is committing 
well over $1 million to provide seniors apartments, that our 
parents and our grandparents may continue to spend their 
retirement years in their own communities. And yet another 
senior’s project is, at this very moment, under 

 construction in the village of Stenen. 
 
I’m also pleased to see the continuing commitment to Duck 
Mountain Provincial Park, a facility that is very important to me 
and to the rest of the people in our constituency and indeed the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan and right across western 
Canada and the northern United States. And this year our 
Progressive Conservative government will be providing extensive 
improvements to that park, and for that we are all extremely 
grateful. 
 
It is continuing to provide the necessary funds to maintain our 
highways, our smaller airports, and the other basic infrastructure 
of our communities. Just a few months ago, runway lights were 
added to the Kamsack airport with the help of a $25,000 
provincial grant from this government; the government’s general 
commitment to agriculture, it’s efforts at developing the social 
fabric of the province, including the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, 
which a large number of my constituents have taken advantage of 
and in its approach to trade and economic development — these 
things, Mr. Speaker, are all welcomed and encouraged by all of 
my constituents. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, as the chairman of the government caucus 
committee on public participation, I would like to focus on that 
subject for just a few moments. In this debate it was said public 
participation is about offering the greatest horizons of opportunity 
possible to our citizens. And that phrase stuck with me, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s very appropriate and in tune with what this 
government is doing. The member for Regina North East and the 
member for Saskatoon Nutana, and indeed the member for 
Riversdale, have all stated that they and their party are not really 
opposed to privatization, and the phrase that is supposed to 
characterize the NDP position is that privatization is okay when, 
and I quote, “the economic and social reasons for holding those 
shares is no longer there.” 
 
This is very interesting to me as being the chairman of this 
committee, Mr. Speaker, because the NDP is opposing any and all 
actual proposals for public participation including any that include 
privatization. They say that they want to deal with each proposal 
on a case-by-case basis, and that is of course exactly what we are 
doing. 
 
So let me ask the member from Riversdale: what are the social and 
economic reasons for the government to continue ownership of 
PAPCO? What was the social or economic benefit continuing to 
lose over $90,000 a day for Saskatchewan taxpayers? There was 
none. On the contrary, there has proven to be great economic 
value in that example of privatization, as the losses have been 
eliminated, new taxes and revenues have come to the government, 
the economic base has been diversified, new economic markets 
have been opened up, and the spin-offs to the surrounding 
communities have helped the local and the provincial economies. 
 
And I would think, Mr. Speaker, that the new jobs and the 
securing of existing jobs should represent a significant social 
reason for the privatization of PAPCO, even to the NDP. I would 
like to ask the Leader of the Opposition: what are the social and 
economic reasons for continuing 
  



 
March 24, 1988 

 

99 
 

 ownership of the uranium mines? The economic benefits of the 
move to the private sector are again, I think, very clear, so the only 
reason that there can be for the NDP to so strongly oppose this one 
is the social reason, which they are opposed to uranium mining 
and committed to closing the mines. Their argument is, the 
government should keep the mines so that the government can 
close the mines. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that it totally absurd, 
and again I guess one would have to have their mental faculties 
questioned, I think Mr. Speaker. I mean, after all, if all they want 
to do is close them, why did they borrow all the money to buy 
them in the first place. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition should tell us, Mr. Speaker, what are 
the social and economic reasons for the government to continue to 
own the computer utility? With the restricted mandate of serving 
government and government-related institutions, is there not a 
powerful economic motivation to expand that enterprise’s market, 
to expand its competitive base, to allow it to market its services 
around the world? The employees happen to think so, Mr. 
Speaker, and so do we. 
 
What, Mr. Speaker, could the Leader of the Opposition have in his 
mind when deciding what the economic and social reasons are for 
continuing to own the pension services of the employees of the 
government. Surely there’s a strong social argument that says that 
the people who depend upon those pension funds for the 
retirement income, that it is only right and appropriate that these 
people have the authority to manage those funds, to make the 
decisions that they will find in their best interest and have it 
removed from the political arena. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on a case-by-case basis, the NDP have no case. They 
have no case on any example of public participation that has 
occurred or that has been even proposed. Will the Leader of the 
Opposition please address his own policy? Will he answer the 
questions that have been asked about the social and economic 
reasons for these public participation initiatives? 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think he will answer these questions. He 
has not been prepared to answer the questions that have been 
asked of him on the issues of health care, on the issues of 
agriculture, on the issues of rural development, or on any other 
issue for that matter, because he has no answers, Mr. Speaker. He 
and the rest of his people have only condemnation, criticism, 
complaint, and hysteria. 
 
But I can tell them that the people of Saskatchewan expect 
something more of a potential leader than that, Mr. Speaker. They 
want honest effort and straight talk about honest options, so let the 
member for Riversdale continue in his ways. I encourage him to 
do so, and I consider it a great favour that he has chosen this 
course of action and this style of non-leadership. So I want to 
thank him again, Mr. Speaker, and of course I will be supporting 
the motion that my colleague from Rosthern has put forth. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure and an 
honour for me to be addressing this throne speech 

 debate tonight. There’s a number of topics that I want to cover. 
One of them, not surprisingly, is agriculture; not one of them, 
surprisingly, is jobs and the lack of job creation. Another topic I 
want to touch upon is piratization or, as the government prefers to 
call it, public participation. And I want to talk a little bit tonight 
about the deficit. I think I have some things that can help set the 
record a little straighter for some of the members opposite. And of 
course I would not miss an opportunity to talk a little bit about our 
highway system. 
 
I want to start off with agriculture, Mr. Speaker. It’s interesting to 
note that the farm debt in Saskatchewan took a hundred years to 
reach $3 billion, and it took less than six years of Conservative 
government and their acknowledged lack of effort in agriculture to 
see that debt grow from $3 billion till today it’s in excess of $7 
billion — small wonder farmers are out there and hurting, shaking 
their heads, wondering just what is it that this government says. 
They say, we’re behind you. Well indeed, they’re so far behind 
you . . . You’re so far behind the farmers they can’t find you. 
 
What’s their answer, Mr. Speaker? One of the answers that they 
have been touting is equity finance. Equity finance. That flies just 
about as high as a lead balloon, and the members opposite know it. 
I had the happy occasion to be at one of the equity finance 
meetings, one of the public meetings. I was amazed at how many 
times, when the government got into trouble, they would say, oh 
well, I’m sure that Mr. Trew and his colleagues in the opposition 
will have much to say abut that in the legislature. And you know, 
they were exactly right on; we will have much to say about it, lots 
more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Equity finance, Mr. Speaker, is simply a process to 
make farmers share-croppers. It is simply a method of making 
farmers no longer owners of their land. There will be absentee 
landowners. It gives up the control of the land and what the farmer 
can grow. 
 
Government members opposite will say, oh no, that’s not the 
intention at all. But you tell me why a bank, why a large 
corporation, or why a wealthy investor would invest in some farm 
land. Two reasons: profit — they’re going to make a dollar and 
it’s going to go in their pocket, so profit; and control of the land. 
When they have driven that farmer into destitution, when he 
simply can’t make the payments to this new landowner, this new 
shareholder in that farmer’s farm, when the farmer can’t meet the 
payments, who’s lined up to buy the farm? The person whose 
name is on the other side of the equity finance piece of paper, 
that’s who. And that’s who’s going to have the land, and farmers 
know it. 
 
I’ve obviously struck a nerve. I’m getting a fair reaction from the 
members opposite. I thank them for that. Obviously I’ve struck a 
nerve. Obviously you even recognize what equity finance is all 
about. I’m happy to report to you, farmers are recognizing it too. 
And if you’ve been doing any polling, which I suspect you have, 
you know very well what I’m saying is dead on. 
 
I want to talk a bit about the farm production loan 
  



 
March 24, 1988 

 

100 
 

 program Mr. Speaker. We have a situation where before the 
election the government says 6 per cent money, $25 per acre, your 
word is your bond, we trust you. Fair enough, fair enough, but tell 
my why now, why the turn-around? Why is it that before an 
election everybody’s word was as good as gold. As soon as the 
election is safely out of the way, you make farmers sign a security 
agreement that entitles the Government of Saskatchewan to take 
everything, in case of default of payment, can take everything 
including the farmers’ dirty socks — personal possession, 
vehicles, microwaves, ovens, fridges, stoves, literally everything, 
household furniture. Leave farm families with absolutely nothing 
in case of default. 
 
(2130) 
 
And the government says to farmers and says to us, oh but we 
would never, never use that provision of the agreement. Why, Mr. 
Speaker, why then have that security agreement written the way it 
is? Why that? If they have no intention of using it, don’t ask 
farmers to sign it. 
 
It’s interesting. I held a meeting out in Grenfell — the member for 
Indian Head would be most interested in that, I suspect — held a 
meeting in Grenfell on that very topic. And there were a lot of 
farm people there that are very, very angry, and rightly so, as they 
should be. So there’s some problems there. We will be dealing 
with that as legislation comes forward. I’m not going to dwell on 
that any more tonight. 
 
I want to turn, Mr. Speaker, to jobs and the lack of job creation 
that we have seen under this government. Saskatoon has an 
unemployment rate of 13 per cent — 13 per cent. I don’t see very 
many smug faces about that. Thirteen percent means that 13 
people out of every hundred that could be working, want to be 
working, should be working, aren’t able to. 
 
We also have, as evidenced by the throne speech, no summer 
employment program for students, no summer employment 
program whatsoever mentioned in the throne speech — none. I’m 
sorry to members opposite, there’s one — there is going to be a 
handful of students employed for the gas tax rebate program this 
summer. A handful — a handful of students for the gas tax rebate. 
 
The gas tax which the government promised, before they were in 
office, never will we ever see a gas tax imposed on Saskatchewan 
people while there is a Conservative government. Well what do 
you call yourselves now? What do you call yourselves now? Very 
interesting. Never a gas tax as long as there is a Conservative 
government. What have we got now? Seven cents a litre, that’s 
what we’ve got; a higher gas tax now than we had before the 
members opposite formed the government. 
 
While I’m talking about jobs and the lack of job creation, I do 
want to not just be so negative. There was a job creation program 
in Regina, and it was the oil upgrader, created a good number of 
jobs, but I . . . and my thanks for that, a good number of . . . the 
member for Regina South, former constituents, now my 
constituents, are employed there. I suspect the member for Regina 
South even has a few constituents from that end of the city 
employed up 

 there. 
 
But I want to point out to the government that the upgrader, the 
construction program is essentially done this fall. You’re going to 
have 1,500 people out on the street looking for work. Think about 
it now. Think about how you’re going to get some people to work, 
because the alternative is Regina will join Saskatoon with a 13 per 
cent plus unemployment rate. And that is simply unacceptable. 
Thirteen percent plus unemployment is a large part of why we 
have so many members herein the opposition now, and indeed my 
only sorrow is we couldn’t get a handful more and then we would 
be the government. Then we would see some real job creation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, there’s 40,000-plus unemployed 
people in Saskatchewan. That is a crime; that it totally 
unacceptable; that is something that we’ve got to be addressing. 
We’re here in the legislature now; let’s address the unemployment 
issue; let’s do some things to get Saskatchewan people working 
again. 
 
The government has done away virtually with any new jobs in one 
important engine of growth in our economy. I would be remiss, 
Mr. Speaker, if I didn’t talk, at least briefly, about the co-operative 
sector of our economy. We have a government that mouths nice 
words about co-ops — they say nice things — but what’s the 
record? They took the department of co-operation and 
co-operative development, moved it in with the department of 
tourism, small business and co-operatives with the “and 
co-operatives,” of course, the third and distinctly minor part of that 
portfolio. 
 
They transferred most of the employees into other departments. 
Then, within a year of doing that, they have another shuffle, 
another reorganization, and I defy anyone to find co-operatives or 
co-operative development, or even figure out who is responsible 
for co-operation and co-operative development in any government 
department. It’s just not there. Members opposite have turned their 
backs on any help in formulating new co-operatives. 
 
We have a desperate need right now, particularly in many of the 
members’ seats. There’s an opportunity for machinery co-ops, an 
opportunity to save many farmers tens of thousands of dollars per 
year — tens of thousands of dollars per year. You’ve chosen to 
turn your back on it and that’s a shame. Many farmers are losing 
money on it. Some farmers may wind up ultimately losing their 
farms as their debt burden grows and grows and grows. 
 
I had the happy occasion to be at the production co-operatives’ 
annual meeting in Kindersley three weeks ago, and one of the 
gentlemen there was telling me he has a total investment in farm 
machinery — he says, nobody believes me. But he’s got the 
books. “I know what my investment is. I know I have more than 
enough machinery to farm my land.” But his total investment in 
tractors and combines and swathers and rod weeders and 
cultivators and everything else that he needs — his total 
investment is just a tad over $27,000. Not one of them believe me, 
I bet. Not one of them believe me, I bet, but it’s there. 
  



 
March 24, 1988 

 

101 
 

That’s the record that this government refuses to even look at — 
just put the blinders on, put the era plugs in, hunker down for three 
more years. Hunker down, enjoy it for the next three years because 
it will be your last three years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, the government talks of public 
participation and how that is tied to job creation. We, of course, 
refer to public participation as piratization. I wonder how the 
government opposite can respond to the former employees of 
Saskoil. You’ll recall that Saskoil shares were sold on the open 
market. Within six months 25 per cent of Saskoil’s employees 
were let go — 25 per cent, one quarter of the work-force let go, 
that despite the promise when the share offering was going out 
that there would be no loss of jobs. Well, of course, there wasn’t 
for five months, but then the boom was lowered. 
 
Then what did they do? Four months later, invested over $60 
million for an existing oil company. Where? In Alberta. In 
Alberta. Why do we have Saskoil? It should be Alberta oil. The 
question I could ask is: what jobs were created by that? Not a 
solitary one. 
 
Then I read in the paper less than 10 days ago where Saskoil has 
just let go another 15 people — another 15 people from Regina let 
go — this despite the promises of no job loss under piratization. 
Wonder why the people of SGI are concerned, Mr. Speaker? 
Wonder about that? It’s not much wonder that they’re very, very 
concerned, and it’s not much wonder that they don’t trust this 
government in its piratization plans. 
 
I want to go back to Saskoil just briefly because I think there’s a 
fundamental problem with what the government has done, and it 
has very little to do directly with the money. It has everything to 
do with the mandate of Saskoil. 
 
Saskoil is set up — or was set up originally — to do two things. 
One was to find new oil and new natural gas, new deposits where 
they were not proven before, prove those deposits, then when the 
oil lease goes up, the oil company with the sharpest pencil would 
get it. And Saskoil was free to bid on that same lease to keep the 
prices up. Saskoil knew how much oil and gas there was in there, 
so they knew what they could bid and still make a dollar. And if 
an oil company bid more, good, they’re welcome to it, but we got 
the top dollar for the lease now. 
 
The second mandate of Saskoil, Mr. Speaker, was in research and 
development. In Saskatchewan we have the largest heavy oil field 
in the world — largest in the world. Currently, with current 
extraction practices, we’re getting somewhere between 6 and 7 per 
cent of the oil out of that heavy oil deposit. No small oil company 
will spend any meaningful amount of money on research and 
development on how they can increase that from 6 or 7 per cent to 
8 or 9 or 10 or more per cent of that oil that we could get out. 
That’s the mandate that Saskoil was ideally set up to do. And you 
think of it, Mr. Speaker; it would mean hundreds and hundreds of 
million of dollars every year for Saskatchewan. 

What did they do? Bought an oil company that pumped oil in 
Alberta. It’s a government, Mr. Speaker, that is totally devoid of 
any ideas. They’ve got the philosophical blinkers on, they want to 
go back to the 1930s. They want to, in fact, go all the way back to 
the 1700s and Adam Smiths. That’s what this government wants 
to do. And the people of Saskatchewan are really seeing through it 
now, and your days are numbered. 
 
Before I turn to the deficit, Mr. Speaker — I do want to talk a little 
bit about highways, and again I’ll throw something positive out to 
the government. I am pleased to hear the member for Melfort 
talking about introducing legislation regarding all-terrain vehicles. 
It is legislation that, without having seen it, I’m assuming it’s 
going to be good legislation and deal with the safety aspects — 
quite literally, tens of children, of Saskatchewan children, that are 
being killed on all-terrain vehicles every year. I am optimistic that 
this legislation will deal with that; my only regret is that it has 
taken six years for the government to wake up and realize that we 
have lost now close to 100 children in that time. That’s 
unacceptable. But I welcome the legislation. We’ll be looking at it 
very closely and indeed I hope, Mr. Speaker, that it is legislation 
that we can support. 
 
The member for Melfort also spoke of private road crews versus 
the Department of Highways road crews, and I say that’s a totally 
phoney issue, it’s just not here. The problem with the Department 
of Highways now is that the engineering department has been so 
gutted that they can’t get out and supervise the construction; they 
can’t see that what they’re paying for is what they’re getting; they 
can’t go out and provide the expertise on how to stabilize soil 
conditions and, Mr. Speaker, the Department of Highways, at one 
time prior to the members opposite forming the government, had a 
crew that would be called literally all over the world to stabilize 
hard-to-stabilize soil. The expertise of the Saskatchewan 
Department of Highways was recognized world-wide. There isn’t 
a continent in the world that they weren’t called upon to go and do 
something regarding soil. 
 
The question I have to ask regarding highways is: where is the 
twinning of No. 1 Highway to the Alberta border? Where’s the 
twinning of No. 1 Highway to the Manitoba border? Where’s the 
twinning of the Yellowhead, border-to-border, within four years, 
as promised in 1982? Elementary math tells you it’s 1988, and that 
should have all been completed by 1986. It’s unbelievable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m reluctant to use the old 18-holes to the mile joke, 
so I won’t. What this government is now doing, they’ve added an 
executive 9. 
 
I want to turn to the debt of the province of Saskatchewan and the 
debt of Crown corporations just briefly, Mr. Speaker. Government 
members are very fond of saying, oh, we ran up a huge debt in 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. For the record, Mr. Speaker 
— and we all have this, it’s in the Public Accounts — the total 
debt of Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan at December 31, 
1981, when we were in power, was $75 million — 475 million. 
The total debt at December 31 last year, $781 million — ten times 
the debt, more than $700 million of 
  



 
March 24, 1988 

 

102 
 

new debt in PCS, and they say we fan up the debt in PCS. Well 
the people of Saskatchewan know the truth; they know that it is 
your mismanagement, your incompetence; you’re the ones that are 
being hung with it. You’ll see it at the next election. 
 
(2145) 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, two more examples of Crown 
corporations. The government talks about us having run up a big 
debt. SaskPower borrows money when it builds dams, it borrows 
money when it has major line construction, amortizes it over 20 or 
25 years so that the power rates didn’t have to fluctuate up and 
down radically, just instead it was rather a steady increase in rates. 
 
In 1982, December 31, SaskPower’s total debt, total long-term 
debt, was $1.2 billion; the end of last year, $2.8 billion. That’s 
$1.6 billion more, more than double the debt, and what have we 
got to show for it? We’ve got a promise of the shafferty project; 
we’ve got the Nipawin dam, just over $500 million — $500 
million. Where is the difference? Stand up and explain it, where is 
the difference? Our power rates have certainly been going up. Tell 
me, is the difference going to George Hill? 
 
The total crown corporation debt, Mr. Speaker, has gone from 
$2.9 billion, total of all the Crowns . . . at December 31, 1981 it 
was $2.9 billion. The total debt of the Crowns has now jumped to 
$7.7 billion — $4.8 billion more. Almost triple, three times the 
debt in less than . . . well, in about six years. 
 
The total indebtedness of the province, counting the Crown 
corporations and counting our own annual budget, total 
indebtedness in 1982 was $3.2 billion; today it is $10.5 billion — 
more than three times. Put another way, Mr. Speaker, the per 
capita debt in 1981 for all items, every man, woman, and child 
owed $2,525 in 1981. This year every Saskatchewan resident, 
myself, my wife, and each of my three children, each of us owe 
$10,506. That is disgraceful. That, the people of Saskatchewan 
have seen through. That, we’re not going to stand for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because I respect the right of other members to say 
some things in this throne speech debate I will be ending my 
remarks, but you will be hearing much more on these and other 
issues as the session unwinds, as it progresses, and indeed, Mr. 
Speaker, it has been an honour for me to stand up on behalf of the 
residents of Regina North, my constituents. It’s an honour to speak 
to this throne speech debate. I only wish that there was something 
in the debate that made more sense than this. There was one piece 
of paper that was left with us that really had some meaning to it in 
the throne speech debate, and that paper, Mr. Speaker, was the 
order of leaving the Chamber opening day, and it outlines that the 
Speaker, and the Clerks, and the Sergeant-at-Arms goes first, and 
went right through the list. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech was totally, totally devoid of any 
new ideas. it was so . . . almost silly. I felt 

 embarrassed to have my guests here. I feel embarrassed for 
anybody watching the throne speech on T.V. For those reasons, 
Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the throne speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gerich: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to join the throne speech 
debate, but I have quite a few minutes in responding to this, and I 
would now beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:50 p.m. 
 
 


