


















































April 15, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 15, 1988 
 

605 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a good deal of 
pleasure today to introduce a group of students from a town 
called Wymark in my constituency. The name of the town was 
derived from a “Y” in the railroad track, and I believe that that’s 
the way a lot of towns were named — something unusual 
relating to the area, or somehow the railroad track had 
something to do with a lot of these places. 
 
However, that’s not the important part. These students are 
students who . . . a lot of them that I have met with earlier, and 
had a good deal to do with. They are accompanied by their 
teacher, Mr. Knelsen, chaperons Frieda-Marie Elias and Judy 
Neufeld. And Judy’s husband is also on the school board with 
my brother, so we have had a good deal of co-operation and 
interchange with this school, and I’d like the members of the 
Assembly to join with me and welcome them here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Saxinger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you, and through you to the members of this 
Assembly, 37 students, grade 10, 11, and 12 from St. Louis and 
St.-Isadore-de-Bellevue. They are accompanied by the teacher 
Eric Harder from St. Louis, Andrea Gareau, Euclid Gareau from 
St.-Isadore-de-Bellevue. They are here visiting Regina. I hope 
they enjoy their visit to the Legislative Building. I hope they 
have a good trip home, and now would you please help me 
welcome them to this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with 
my colleague, the member for Kinistino, in introducing to you, 
and through you to the members of the Legislative Assembly, 
the group of students from St Louis and St.-Isadore-de-Bellevue 
school. It’s certainly an area that I’m very, very familiar with. I 
have some cousins that have attended that school in St. Louis. 
And it’s just my pleasure to join with my colleague in 
welcoming those students from St. Louis and 
St.-Isadore-de-Bellevue. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m especially 
pleased today to introduce to the Assembly, through you, Mr. 
Speaker, some 20 grade 12 students from Bert Fox High School 
in beautiful Fort Qu’Appelle, Saskatchewan. They’re 
accompanied by principal Pat McNally and Dick Rathgaber; 
bus driver, Glen Cook. I will have the pleasure, Mr. Speaker, of 
visiting with the students after question period this morning. 
 
And I’d like to take the opportunity to invite all Hon. Members, 
and I know that the students will join me in this, in welcoming 
everyone throughout the province to visit  

Fort Qu’Appelle and the Qu’Appelle Valley this summer. It’s a 
very progressive, dynamic community, Mr. Speaker, and 
establishing a real mark in this province with their welcome for 
tourists, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all hon. members to join with 
me in welcoming the students, their teachers, and the bus driver, 
Glen Cook. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Farm Debt Crisis 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct a question to 
the Premier, and it concerns, Mr. Premier, your meeting with 
the Prime Minister yesterday. And everyone has heard about 
your discussion in respect to the French language rights, and I 
know because of your flip-flop you’ll need more time to give 
your position on that. 
 
But what the farmers of the province are asking, Mr. Premier, 
did you discuss with the Prime Minister yesterday anything 
with respect to the debt crisis and whether or not the Prime 
Minister is prepared to deal with the farm debt crisis? And if so, 
can you indicate any of the details in respect to addressing this 
very serious problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the Prime Minister and I did 
have the opportunity to discuss several issues, including 
agriculture. The Prime Minister was happy that they were able 
to increase the guarantee by the federal government on initial 
prices for wheat, which is up about $130 million, and that the 
signs look like that it’s increasing, and some good signals 
internationally that there may be room for co-operation so that 
governments like the United States and the European Economic 
Community will back away from subsidies to get the prices up. 
He does recognize that you can’t get the price of wheat up just 
in Canada, that we have to move internationally to be able to do 
that. 
 
We also talked about the science centre of excellence and the 
kind of research necessary at the University of Saskatchewan 
for farmers — a new agricultural building that we’re prepared 
to put 70 to $80 million into, plus western diversification 
money that he thinks and believes it would be important for 
new varieties for research, for biotechnology, because 
increasingly the success in agriculture will be based on 
management. 
 
He did go on to say that he was happy to be able to have now 
allocated to western Canada over $2 billion in deficiency 
payments and that he would stand with me in defending farmers 
against unfair practices abroad, and that if he can do anything 
with respect to providing more assistance, more help for 
farmers in terms of research, in terms of cash, in terms of his 
support . . . he did acknowledge the fact that he has written off 
much of the debt that’s in the grain stabilization; that he 
reduced much of the debt that was in Farm Credit Corporation 
so that they could respond in a larger fashion. It adds up to 
several billion dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
 
  



 
April 15, 1988 

 

606 
 

So, yes, he’s committed to western Canada. I think people last 
night, when they met with him, recognized that no Prime 
Minister in the history of the country has done more for 
agriculture than the Prime Minister that’s in Ottawa today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier. Mr. 
Premier, what you have said is all well and good. But the fact is 
that there are . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — . . . there are literally thousands of farmers on 
the verge of losing their land. They are ridden with $6 billion of 
debt. Farm families desperate for help in respect to the debt 
crisis. I’m asking you specifically, did you and the Prime 
Minister address that specific problem of the debt crisis and can 
you be more specific; what are the proposals that you can offer 
to the farmers who are desperate today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we talked about agriculture 
and debt and the amount of money that we are prepared and can 
provide farmers and the things that we can do, and we went on, 
at some length, talking about the billions of dollars. I will say in 
all seriousness that the solutions of interest rate protection, zero 
per cent interest rates for cash advances, billions of dollars in 
cash going out to farmers, setting up counselling assistance, 
protecting farmers, Mr. Speaker, so that they can have as much 
legal protection as possible when they’re facing difficult 
situations, are exactly what the Prime Minister wants to hear 
from premiers. 
 
He did point out, and I think I shared the observation with him, 
when you’re looking at the alternatives to looking at a PC 
solution versus an NDP, I think you’ll see across Saskatchewan, 
but even now as we speak, across the province of Manitoba, 
more and more people respect the fact that the Prime Minister 
has done more to help them in Manitoba than any NDP 
administration that they’ve . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Premier, obviously, is this correct, my 
interpretation that indeed you have not discussed, nor did the 
Prime Minister give you a commitment that he will deal with 
the debt crisis in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, what the Prime Minister 
said in public, and what he said to me, was that he was happy to 
be able to provide literally billions of dollars of cash — of cash. 
Almost half of farm income, almost half of farm income in 
Saskatchewan, half of farm income comes from government. 
Now that’s never happened before. And the Prime Minister is 
happy that he can at least stand there and say he has provide . . . 
at least half of the farm income — and you don’t have to pay it 
back; deficiency payments, Mr. Speaker — don’t have to pay it 
back. 
 

I will say to the hon. member, and I was in his riding night 
before last, I will say, Mr. Speaker, that they are very happy to 
see a Progressive Conservative government in the province of 
Saskatchewan, a Progressive Conservative government in 
Ottawa providing real assistance and not just buying their land 
through land bank, like the member from Quill Lake always 
wants the NDP to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Salary Increase for Staff Members 
 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Premier; it has to do with his government’s expenditure of 
public funds. Can the Premier confirm, that since January 1 of 
this year, that your government increased the salaries of cabinet 
ministers’ political staff, and can you also tell the taxpayers 
how much these increases were, in either percentage or dollar 
terms, and how you justify salary increases of any kind for 
political staff when your government has imposed a two-year 
wage freeze on the rest of the public sector? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t have specific 
information; I’ll take notice of the question. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. 
I’m shocked. You’re telling me, and you’re telling this House 
as Premier, that you don’t know whether your staff has had 
salary increases or not; you don’t even know what’s going on in 
your own government. No wonder this province is in such a 
financial mess, Mr. Premier. 
 
Who makes these decisions for you, if not the cabinet, on staff 
salaries? The public wants to know and has a right to know, and 
you should justify how their tax dollars are being spent. People 
are telling me that you are wasting their money left and right, 
and this is a matter . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Does the member have a 
question? Please get to your question. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — People are telling me, Mr. Speaker, and this 
is another example of what they are telling me. The question is: 
how much money, Mr. Speaker, have you spent on increasing 
the salaries of your political staff since January 1? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s the same 
question; I took notice, and I will be glad to provide the 
information to the hon. member when I can get the information. 
 

Vacant Rental Space in Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to reply to the 
question that the Premier took notice of some time ago 
regarding the amount of vacant space this government holds 
pertaining to the province as a whole and  
  



 
April 15, 1988 

 

607 
 

specifically to Regina, and also in dealing with the new trade 
and convention centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that the rules of the House do not allow 
one to say the word “lies,” but there are very blatant distortions 
of the truth, and we have certainly seen this from not only one 
member but very many members on the other side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Before the member 
actually gets into it, I’d just like to draw his attention that we 
don’t want to directly accuse or imply any members in the 
House of that sort of action. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That’s why I refrain from using the term. 
But I would like to get to the point now that the figure of 
$34,000 that has been cast around this province, in this House, 
and in campaign literature in two major cities, is certainly far 
from what is the truth. Thirty-four thousand dollars is more than 
seven times the amount of the vacant space for the entire 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and those are the facts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — And those are the facts. And I get 
annoyed, Mr. Speaker, when members opposite try to distort 
and try to confuse the people of the province of Saskatchewan 
with statements that are not correct. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 

Ward System 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the Minister of Urban Affairs, and it has to do with the ward 
system. A recent survey of 14 Canadian cities which have 
populations between 100 and 200,000 show that all but one 
have a ward system of local government. 
 
You will know that most cities that have a population of over 
200,000 also have a ward system, with the possible exception of 
Vancouver, where the people have asked for it but a right-wing 
government has refused to give it to them. Canadian cities have 
moved to the ward system because it gives local electors a more 
direct voice in their local governments. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is: why do you want to turn back the 
clock? Why do you feel that Saskatchewan cities should be 
marching out of step with other cities in this country? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of my critic, 
it’s interesting to notice that my old critic is back, but if and 
when this government chooses to deal with the ward system, an 
announcement will be made and all the explanations with it will 
be made at the time of the announcements. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 
minister on many times has talked about finances being at the 
heart of this. I ask him: why can’t you leave local  

government affairs to local governments and to local voters? 
Considering your government’s monumental mismanagement 
— monumental mismanagement — why do you think that you 
have anything to teach the voters in our cities about how to run 
their governments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, the ward system has been an 
ongoing battle in this province since 1959, and times change. 
You know, their best selling book, “An economic outlook for 
the ’70s,” is outdated now. Times change, Mr. Speaker, and as 
these times change, the taxpayers of the province, who are an 
intelligent, sophisticated group of people, are telling me that 
they want to elect their councils. 
 
They don’t want to just elect a narrow point of view person that 
. . . I have never condemned any alderman in the ward system 
yet for doing a bad job. But because of the system, Mr. Speaker, 
what happens is that alderman is automatically responsible for 
his own little turf, regardless of what the cost is to the taxpayers 
of the city at large, Mr. Speaker. And clearly they can’t function 
. . . they don’t function as this system does, Mr. Speaker, where 
we’re elected as a government and an opposition. And they 
keep yelling and they don’t want to listen. 
 
But in the meantime, in the council chambers, the aldermen that 
represent their narrow points of view and are not responsible to 
a government or an opposition, have a very difficult time in 
looking at the city’s management as an entire whole situation 
when they are responsible to just one tiny little section of their 
city. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — A new question to the Minister of Rural 
Development, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you have heard the 
Minister of Urban Affairs state his opinions on the ward system 
and why it should be done away with. You will know — at least 
I hope you know — that rural municipalities, the people in rural 
municipalities, also elect their councillors through a ward or 
division system. Are the people of Saskatchewan to assume 
what the Minister of Urban Affairs says with respect to cities 
will also be the case for rural municipalities? Will you also be 
pushing down the throats of rural voters an at-large system for 
electing councillors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — You talk about pushing stuff down 
people’s throats. How was the ward system in this province 
introduced in the first place? You rammed it right down 
everybody’s throat. And to compare apples to battleships is 
stupid. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — The Minister of Urban Affairs is 
pushing a double standard. What he’s saying, it’s okay for rural 
municipalities to have a ward system, but it’s not okay for the 
people in our cities to have a ward system. In this particular 
case, what’s good for the goose isn’t good for the gander. In 
plain English, explain this double standard to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I hope he’s not the critic for Rural 
Development, Mr. Speaker. 
 
  



 
April 15, 1988 

 

608 
 

Are you suggesting for a moment that the town of Hudson Bay 
or the town of Kindersley has a ward system? I mean, it’s 
ludicrous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this whole discussion of the ward system, I 
have never indicated that it won’t work. I have often cited 
Winnipeg as an example, where natural divisions, natural 
boundaries, natural communities exist, and all of the outlying 
subdivisions form the one great metropolitan Winnipeg. Now 
you’re talking of a city of a half a million people. Our two 
major cities are less than 200,000. And to start comparing the 
ward system of a city to the ward system of a rural municipality 
just makes absolutely no sense. 
 

Task Force on Health Care 
 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for 
the Minister of Health. To the Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker, 
with respect to the government’s proposed task force on health 
care in Saskatchewan, the minister will know that that was 
announced as the centre-piece in the throne speech now four 
weeks ago, and it was suggested nearly a year ago in the 
internal Coopers & Lybrand analysis of the Health department. 
I wonder if the minister could give us today a firm, specific date 
upon which he will announce the details of that task force? 
When will the minister reveal those details? Will he tell us who 
he is now consulting in the preparation of his task force, and 
specifically, who has he consulted since March 21? And what 
role is going to be played in this whole process by the Coopers 
& Lybrand study group upon whom the minister relied so 
heavily last year in making the health-care cuts that he made in 
1987? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, yes, the hon. member is 
right in saying that it was a major announcement in the throne 
speech. As the hon. member will know, and as all members of 
this House will know, the throne speech is the outline of the 
government’s intentions for the year to come, and certainly that 
announcement of the task force, it was included for that very 
reason. 
 
As we have said, as I have said on several occasions, and as I 
said in my speech during the budget debate here, the task force 
. . . and I gave some outline of what that would be about. And 
all I can say to the hon. member is, as we have said before, it 
will be announced in due course, and within a matter of weeks, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

Dental Plan for School Children 
 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, a new question, but also to the 
same minister, with respect to Health, and it has to do with the 
operations of the dental plan for school children. 
 
Mr. Minister, dentists in Saskatchewan are advising, at least 
some dentists in Saskatchewan are advising their clients and 
patients that they do not believe that there is any regular 
coverage for school children under your new dental plan during 
the summer months. And therefore, if parents wish to have their 
children taken to the dentist under your dental plan, they would 
need to do that before the end of June, whereas some parents 
have been planning to do it during July and August. 
 

Could you clarify that particular point for parents across 
Saskatchewan who may be waiting for a summer appointment, 
only to find that that appointment is not covered under your 
dental plan and they will have to have those appointments 
arranged before the end of June? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would be . . . I 
certainly do want to clarify that, because there was . . . last 
summer, during the transition period, there was some confusion 
as it related to the month of July and August. 
 
There should be no confusion at all, Mr. Speaker, now, and 
parents — in fact many of them — are planning to take their 
children to the dentist during the summer months, as they did 
during Easter holidays just past, and as they did during the 
Christmas holidays prior to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, children under the dental plan will be covered 
through all of the months of the year. And certainly we know, 
and the dentists in the province know very well — all of the 
dentists, I believe, know very well, at least through their 
college, and they can certainly find out through their college, 
and they can certainly find out through their college who 
administers the plan — that young people in this province are 
covered for 12 months of the year. 
 

Child Hunger in Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Social Services, and it deals with his attempts to trivialize the 
problem of child hunger in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you aware that the Saskatoon food bank has 
had a 25 per cent increase in requests for food baskets since 
January 1, and are you aware that that food bank now serves 
more than 6,000 people a month, 6,062 to be exact, in March; 
that 40 per cent of them are children; that another 10 to 15 per 
cent of them are teenagers? 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: when are you going to 
stop playing games with a serious problem and introduce a 
program to deal with the rising problem of child hunger in this 
province? When are you going to start introducing things like 
expanded school lunch programs in the schools, and increase 
social assistance rates and the minimum wage so that people 
have the financial resources to feed their children in this 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, look who is playing 
games. The NDP, last week, called people numbers, and they 
gave out numbers, saying numbers that were hungry. I have to 
know who they are, because I have to feed people. I can’t feed 
numbers. The NDP have had a week now and have not sent one 
name of one person in need to me, so that is what the NDP are 
interested in — numbers, playing games. We are interested in 
families, and if they will give me the names of families in need, 
I will help them. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister — a supplementary, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Minister, I’ll be on my deathbed before I’d give 
you an individual name, because I don’t trust you in terms of 
what you’ll do with that name. 
 
  



 
April 15, 1988 

 

609 
 

Mr. Minister, you already have the names. The names are a 
great many of the children that are on the social assistance lists 
of this province, because more than half the people who are on 
social assistance in Saskatchewan are children, and they’re 
living on completely inadequate social assistance rights under 
which families can never feed their children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is this: Mr. Minister, 
in light of the fact that a family of four in this province with the 
two children is now receiving in real dollar terms more than 
$3,600 less a year than they were in 1981, when are you going 
to stop playing political games with this question of child 
hunger and provide adequate social assistance rates to the 
people of this province so that families with children no longer 
have to be faced with living below the poverty line, as much as 
$5,000 below the poverty line, as a result of the policies of your 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP have not sent any 
names of people in need because they don’t have any. 
Saskatchewan has the highest rates for social assistance in 
Canada for families, the highest in Canada. The games will stop 
when the NDP stop playing games and send us the names of 
people in need. 
 
Every day I get letters, I get phone calls from a few people who 
are in need, and I try to assist them in every way possible. The 
NDP have had over a week and they’ve played games for 
another week. They do not care. They only want to play games, 
and that’s what they’re doing right now. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, I’m not interested in playing 
games with the minister . . . Supplementary. I’m sorry, Mr. 
Speaker, supplementary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question concerns, first of all, the fact that we 
on this side of the House, don’t trust the Minister of Social 
Services . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I think we’re getting into 
a political debate, and I’d like to have the member get to his 
question. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — . . . Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, Mr. Barry Earl, 
the deputy director of the Saskatoon public school board, is 
quoted as saying that “the breakfast program for hungry 
children . . . ” 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Unfortunately, I must interrupt 
the question here. He’s quoting, and I’m sure he can make his 
point without the quote. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A new question, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Barry Earl, the deputy director . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Sorry. Sorry . . . sorry. The hon. member . . . I 
ask the hon. member to place his supplementary without the 
quote. I’m sure he’s capable of that. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr.  

Speaker, the Saskatoon public school-board is noting that they 
have a breakfast program in Saskatoon which is now serving 
four to five public schools in the city. They’re anticipating 
expanding that to eight to nine schools in the fall. And they’re 
saying, Mr. — they’re saying, Mr. Minister . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The hon. member is 
getting into quite a lengthy preamble, and we’ve had two or 
three problems. I ask him now to simply put his question — just 
put his question. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, what we need is a long-range 
plan for resolving the problem of child hunger in this province. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: when are we going to see 
a long-range plan from your government to resolve the urgent 
problem of child hunger in this province with expanded school 
lunch programs, an increase in the minimum wage, and an 
increase in social assistance rates so that families have the 
resources to feed their children instead of having to go to you 
for hand-outs on an individual basis? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I asked him for the names 
of needy people; he gives me the name of a deputy director who 
probably makes $60,000 a year. I need the names of those 
people in need. 
 
I’ve met with the Regina school-boards . . . I’ll give you a name 
— Margaret Fern, three-time defeated NDP candidate in Regina 
South, on the Regina school-board. She starts a study on 
hunger. She has never sent me a name either. The NDP — none 
of them will send me a name of those people in need. I have 
met with the school-boards in Regina, and we are working on 
some pilot projects to look into the problem. 
 
But let’s not throw around the names of adults. Let’s throw 
around the names of needy — and don’t throw them in the 
House; send me a list; I will keep it confidential; I will help 
those people. But don’t come here and play political games with 
people, treat them like numbers and mould them for your 
political purposes. These are people. Send me the names in 
confidence and I will assist them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Farm Finance for the Future: Committee Report 
 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve taken the 
liberty of forwarding a copy to the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and I wasn’t sure who the critic would 
be. I sent it over to the member for Saskatoon South, but he’ll 
forward it to the proper person, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The minister is about to 
give his ministerial statement but cannot  
  



 
April 15, 1988 

 

610 
 

because of interference, and I’d like the co-operation of the 
House to allow him to do so. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I rise this afternoon to inform the members of this Legislative 
Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan that I will be making 
public the details of the Farm Finance for the Future: 
Committee Report. We believe it is extremely important to the 
people of Saskatchewan to have the opportunity to study the 
report and its recommendations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I first want to extend my appreciation to the nearly 
4,000 Saskatchewan farmers and business men who participated 
in our public meetings and who provided our government with 
their valuable input and advice hearing the farm finance issue. I 
also want to recognize the excellent work put forth by the MLA 
committee. 
 
Members of the committee travelled to all areas of our 
province, listening and talking to thousands of farmers. Mr. 
Speaker, I believe it is significant to note that members of the 
farm finance committees are farmers. They understand 
agriculture, and they understand the challenges confronting 
farmers today. 
 
As well, I want to thank the 200 representatives from 
Saskatchewan farm organizations, financial institutions, 
agri-business, educational institutions and government for 
participating in our two-day farm symposium we held here in 
Regina. 
 
We had to look at the agriculture programs in place now that 
have been made possible by our government, and talking with 
farm producers and listening to their concerns. This has been a 
process to which our government has been committed from the 
beginning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll make mention of a few programs just so you 
know what we looked at as we made our recommendations. The 
livestock cash advance program. The program alone saves 
Saskatchewan farmers an estimated 22.4 million in interest 
costs each year. 
 
The livestock facilities tax program, which was established in 
1986 to provide tax credits to farmers; this new program 
provided 2.6 million in tax credits to 1,200 farmers in its first 
year. 
 
The production loan program provided 1.1 billion in 
low-interest loans to 57,000 Saskatchewan farmers, and at the 
advice of farmers, we have provided a 10-year repayment 
option. As well, Mr. Speaker, we established the Agricultural 
Credit Corporation to provide additional low-interest loans to 
Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
There was other programs that we had to look at as well, Mr. 
Speaker, which included the feeder livestock loan guarantee, the 
livestock investment tax credit, and the farmers’ royalty refund, 
to name a few. 
 
In addition to this, Mr. Speaker, the efforts of our government 
has resulted in the special Canadian grains program which 
provided 447 million in deficiency  

payment to Saskatchewan farmers in 1987. 
 
Plus we’ve established a 200 million agriculture development 
fund for a variety of agriculture research projects and, as you 
know, the Prime Minister met yesterday, talking about 
extending that. 
 
We have undertaken initiatives to enhance rural economic 
diversification and to improve the delivery of services to rural 
people. We’ve also continued to promote our agriculture 
industry at a national level. 
 
We must continue our efforts to provide more secure access for 
farm products to the U.S. markets through the Canada-U.S. 
trade agreement. And we must continue to urge governments in 
the United States and the European Economic Community to 
address the problems of excess subsidization which has resulted 
in critically low prices for our grain. This is a very, very 
important issue to 68,000 farmers out there, Mr. Speaker, and I 
believe it takes some time to say why, and why the 
recommendations were made. 
 
As a result of the farm finance public meetings, the MLA 
committee has provided a number of debt financing 
recommendations to address Saskatchewan’s farm finance 
situation. Our government has already responded to three of the 
ideas gathered at the public meetings. 
 
First, I’m pleased to say that our government has responded by 
extending The Farm Land Security Act to provide legislative 
protection for farmers facing foreclosure. Second, we acted 
quickly to extend the counselling and assistance program for 
farmers to provide operating loan guarantees to farmers so they 
can have their spring seeding. Third, as I mentioned earlier, we 
have provided extended repayment period options on the 
production loan program from three to ten years for farmers. 
 
Some of the other recommendations contained in the farm 
finance report include: further protection with respect to the 
home quarters should be available to Saskatchewan farmers in 
the event of foreclosure. Mr. Speaker, this would be in addition 
to the extension of The Farm Land Security Act; the 
amalgamation of all Acts pertaining to debt protection, for 
easier understanding and utilization; a hot line, Mr. Speaker, is 
recommended to allow farmers easy access to legal direction in 
regard to their debt protection legislation; further mechanisms 
should be considered to strengthen debt mediation and to 
facilitate debts set aside in adjustment arrangements between 
farmers and lenders; the provincial government should impress 
upon the federal government the need for long-term loans of 25 
years at interest rates at or below 8 per cent for both existing 
and new loans; the provincial government should enable 
retiring farmers to leave as much of their capital in agriculture 
as possible, and to introduce a program to buy guarantees on 
mortgages or agreements for sales supplied by retiring farmers 
or other individuals to beginning or expanding farmers; the 
provincial government should continue to place priority upon 
solutions to the problem of low market returns to Saskatchewan 
agriculture; the provincial government should develop an equity 
financing initiative, on pilot  



 
April 15, 1988 

 

611 
 

basis, which meets these requirements: 
 

1. The farmer’s control of the production and 
marketing decisions must be safeguarded. 

 
2. The farmer must retain long term security of 

tenure. 
 

3. The farmer must have the right to repurchase 
land from the equity partner on a timetable which 
meets the farmer’s financial capability. 

 
4. The equity capital organization should be 

controlled by Saskatchewan residents with 
emphasis on local community level participation. 

 
5. The organization should be privately driven with 

governments only facilitating the start-up capital 
and regulatory framework, and 

 
6. Government should not offer incentives to attract 

outside equity capital unless farmers are assured 
of fair and corresponding benefits. 

 
 And finally, Mr. Speaker, an information and consultation 
process should accompany the implementation of this pilot 
project. 
 
During the farm . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. This is already a very 
lengthy ministerial statement, and I would just remind the hon. 
member that it’s not really acceptable to give speeches in 
ministerial statements, but to present material briefly and 
factually. I’d like to bring that to his attention so that he can 
kind of wrap up his remarks as soon as possible. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate 
what you’re saying. It’s just such an important issue out there to 
Saskatchewan farmers, I was trying to address the emphasis of 
our thing. 
 
I’ll end by saying, Mr. Speaker, that solutions to farm debt are 
not easy, and it will take co-operation of everyone, between 
farmers, lenders in agri-business and government, both 
provincially and federally, and further program initiatives are 
necessary. 
 
And I’m pleased to present this report to the Legislative 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make a brief statement 
in respect to the very lengthy statement by the minister. I 
imagine the farmers of Saskatchewan are jumping with glee 
after they heard that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That was one of the most profound agricultural 
statement of nothingness I’ve ever heard. The truth of the 
matter is that you have said nothing. You propose basically 
nothing, and you have solved nothing,  

and you don’t intend to do anything. 
 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, your little road show was a flop; your 
road show was a flop. It cost the people of this province close to 
a half a million dollars for you to come back and tell them that 
you’re going to set up a hot line to solve their debt crisis. 
 
And the other thing you’re going to do, is you’re going to 
amalgamate all the debt legislation. Well isn’t that helpful; it’s 
easier to get at, to watch to see how their farms are being taken 
from them. 
 
And then you’re going to further protection with respect to the 
home quarter. Well I’ll tell you what the Tories are doing 
federally and provincially. What they’re cutting out is a little 
section of a few acres on the home quarter, separating that and 
leaving those people that small portion of their buildings, and 
you’re taking the rest of the home quarter. That is the plan that 
is in operation today. And it’s not protection, it’s the destruction 
of the home-quarter rights, which you should be giving to the 
farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Isn’t this impressive? The provincial 
government should impress upon the federal government the 
need for long-term loans. Now isn’t that a tough approach? 
Now that is really fighting for farmers of Saskatchewan — we 
should try to impress the federal government to give long-term 
loans. Isn’t that wonderful, Mr. Minister? 
 
Who wrote this report for you? That would be the question, 
because you must not have been out and seen rural 
Saskatchewan. And now one slippery, sleazy part of this report 
is this . . . 
 
(1045) 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I won’t ask the member 
to withdraw that type of a statement. I realize that there was 
another member in the House that made a similar statement a 
couple of days ago, but I would like to bring to the attention of 
all members that the term “sleazy” if not unparliamentary, is 
certainly bordering on it, and I would just ask all members to 
refrain from using these types of inflammatory . . . 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I would not want to border on being 
unparliamentary, and I will be glad to see whether you called 
the other member to order in an important address of 
agricultural crisis. 
 
And what they have been doing here, Mr. Speaker, is they went 
out on a road show, and they said, what we’re going to do to the 
Saskatchewan farmers to get them out of debt is, we’re going to 
have outside investors come in here from Hong Kong and from 
eastern . . . from West Germany . . . 
 
An. Hon. Member: — East Germany! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well maybe. You might even do that, you 
might even do that. Foreign investment is what your  
  



 
April 15, 1988 

 

612 
 

solution to . . . have outside investors own the land and turn our 
farmers into share-croppers — tenants. That is the proposal. 
The farmers of Saskatchewan rejected the overall proposal of 
equity financing, and what they’re doing is . . . said, let’s open 
the door. And they’re going to have a pilot project. 
 
That is the essence of what you offer the farmers of this 
province. I say it’s a disgrace. You should apologize for the 
expenditures that you’ve made on this road show. And I’ll tell 
you, we will go to the farmers across Saskatchewan with this 
report, and I’ll tell you, we will get support from farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 
 

At 10:47 a.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bill: 
 
An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums of Money for 
the Public Service for the Fiscal Year ending on March 31, 
1989. / Loi portant octroi á Sa Majesté de crédits 
d’administration publique pour l’exercice se terminant le 31 
mars 1989. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:49 a.m. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Trade and Investment 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 19 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Minister, I don’t 
need an answer to this now, but I would appreciate being 
provided an answer, and that is with respect to your staff in 
your office, having to doing with this Department of Trade and 
Investment. Would you provide me with the names of your staff 
and their positions, their date of hiring, their present salary, and 
the dates and amounts of any salary increases they may have 
received over the past 12 months. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’ll undertake to send that to you. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Now, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, last 
year your government talked a lot about diversifying the 
economy and then, due to your own fiscal mismanagement 
leading to restraints on your side, we found that industrial 
incentives and business support programs were drastically cut. 
 
And in place of all the trade and business programs which were 
cut, your government announced a new, economic 
diversification and investment fund of $22 million. And last 
September I asked you about that fund, and you told us at that 
time that a large proportion of this so-called new  

fund consisted of the final pay-outs of grants under the previous 
and abandoned program such as the industrial incentive 
program. I think you said that 95 to 98 per cent of that money 
was to retire these obligations which had already been 
undertaken. 
 
Now I would like to repeat my request to you to account for 
those grants from the fund in 1987-88 for which your 
department was responsible at that time, and some of which is 
carried over into this year’s estimates. These were the industrial 
development grants and the export development grants. Were 
all of the funds voted for each of these types of grants in ’87-88 
spent? And if they were underspent, by how much? And for 
each classification, exactly how much of the funding was for 
new programming, entirely new programming, and how much 
was paid out under old programs like the IIP (industrial 
incentive program) and the small business interest reduction 
program and the export development fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — If you could . . . Perhaps I could ask for 
some further clarification so I understand, so the officials will 
understand, what figures you are looking for. You are talking 
about last year’s budget under the various incentive programs 
for business, whether by way of export or by way of 
diversification. 
 
And as I understood the question: how much of that money in 
last year’s budget was (a) spent, and in what areas was it spent 
with regards to new programs versus old programs? Is that fair 
to say what your question was? I will attempt to see if we can 
get that for you; it’s perhaps not quite in that form in the 
briefing book. So if we could go on, I will try to get that 
information back to you. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 
Minister. Obviously all of the money allocated in this year’s 
economic diversification and development fund is to be 
distributed under new programs. Presumably all the old IIP 
programs have been . . . or grants have been paid out by now. 
 
When we were discussing this question last year, you stated that 
the programs which were phased out needed to be evaluated and 
needed to be replaced. And you made quite a lengthy statement 
about that. 
 
I might mention, Minister, that I realize that some of this has 
now been hived off to another department, that the whole thing 
has resulted in a kind of confused situation. So I recognize 
when I’m asking these questions that I’m outside of the bounds 
of trade and probably outside the bounds of investment, 
although it’s hard to tell that until we hear from you just what 
the mandate of your new department is as it relates to 
investment. 
 
But my question for you is: what is the current situation? Is 
there a new program which indeed replaces the programs which 
were phased out? The last we heard of any new program 
guide-lines was that they were expected early in the new year; 
we read that in a clipping in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. 
 
Can you tell us when the criteria for the new export 
development program and the industrial incentive  
  



 
April 15, 1988 

 

613 
 

program, when the criteria will be available, along with the 
guide-lines and the application forms, when will they be 
available to the business community and to manufacturers and 
exports? 
 
Further to that, will the industrial incentive side of it be along 
the same lines as the previous IIP, which you seemed to be 
critical of last year? Will this assistance be targeted, and have 
you consulted the business community about the structure of 
these grants? 
 
Just to put that point a little further, Minister, before I ask you 
to answer, can we expect a more careful and cost-effective 
program which will be tailored to the problems that our 
business community is facing, and will the export development 
grants be available on a cost-shared basis? Is any aspect of it 
cost-shared? I suspect that these decisions have all been made 
by now, and I’d like to hear from you, Minister, as to what the 
situation is. 
 
(1100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — With regards to the first part of your 
question which related to the industrial incentive grant, or some 
program somewhat similar to that, those in the reorganization of 
the departments, that particular grant, that particular program, 
even though being phased out, was moved with economic 
development over to the Economic Development and Tourism 
dimension of it. 
 
And as I indicated, I think last year, that while that program 
when it was measured up, let’s say versus a lot of other program 
or assistance program that governments across the country or 
the federal government or previous governments have done, 
actually measured fairly well. But there was still . . . you always 
still face the question where you’re giving grants out to people 
that would have proceeded in any event. And that’s always a 
difficult line to draw. And that’s being reviewed now. I think 
that’s coming before cabinet in the near term. 
 
With regard to the export development grant, I can advise the 
hon. member of the following: that the department has just . . . 
there’s just a new deputy minister in the department, and over a 
very short period of time we are again reviewing that. We have 
consulted a great deal with the people involved in export, and 
that program we would hope will be in place within the next 
month or so. 
 
I might say that what we’re looking at or tend to look at would 
be a cost-share program. And that would be as a general rule. 
Now there could be exceptions to the rule, particularly if you 
find some very small companies, almost infant companies, who 
maybe have a specific product that could use some assistance to 
access some foreign market with that, in which case they might 
stand in a different, perhaps, light than others. 
 
But those that would traditionally look to expand their market, I 
think the view is that government should perhaps assist them in 
ways that they can, but the main initiative still must come from 
the company itself, and they would in fact be doing a fair 
amount of that. 
 
The problem we had before is not unlike the problem I referred 
to in the IIP, is if you ended up simply covering  

the cost of various companies to go to trade shows here, there, 
and the next place, the question became: was that the most 
effective way to spend those dollars? And if you ended up with 
sort of a standardized program, you ended up perhaps again 
financing people that were going to go to trade shows in any 
event, number one, or people going to trade shows, number 
two, and question whether or not you got value for your money 
of financing that trip to a trade show. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Now I’m going to ask you to be a little more 
clear about what this means in connection with the 
administration of this program. 
 
The question that I want to ask is: are you planning a program 
which is going to be administered against a certain set of 
criteria and in accordance with certain guide-lines, where 
people will be able to look at that set of criteria and guide-lines 
and determine, at least subject to approval of your department, 
that they are going to be eligible, or on the other hand are we 
talking about a kind of wide open sort of fund without any set 
and objective criteria, where you’d sort of have a lot of 
discretion as a minister to either support them or not support 
them? 
 
And I ask the question because I recall in our discussion last 
year, at one point you mentioned that model, which I think . . . 
which you referred to as a Manitoba model, I think, where 
you’d have a kind of open — a pool of dollars, where you 
could, with the approval of yourself or the approval of cabinet, 
just have money to give away whenever something sort of 
looked good to you. Which direction are you going, Minister, 
and when are you going to go there? I mean, when are the 
details of this going to be announced? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Two observations. When will the details 
be announced? I indicated, I think, that it would be . . . our 
target period would be a month to six weeks. Point number one. 
 
Point number two. We have developed several models, and I 
might say that each of those models have criteria or guide-lines 
to them. The question becomes, in each case, what degree of 
flexibility do you have in those particular cases? And I think 
that we would want to have some level of flexibility, otherwise 
it tends to be business men or businesses learning how to access 
government funds, and perhaps then you have a question of 
whether you get value for your money in the best possible way. 
We have a finite amount of money, and we would like to target 
that the best way possible. 
 
I think if you referred to last year, I indicated in the province of 
Manitoba they have a pool that is pretty much at the discretion 
of the cabinet as to whether this one is approved or not 
approved. That is also true in many other provinces. And so it is 
a balance, and all I’m saying is that they will be coming down 
soon, and when they do come down there will be guide-lines 
and criteria. 
 
We would not want to confine ourselves to the type of situation 
perhaps you find with the DRIE (Department of Regional 
Industrial Expansion) offices of the federal government, where 
they are so cluttered with red tape very often that (a) they take a 
long time to get an answer to  
  



 
April 15, 1988 

 

614 
 

the business individual, number one. And then number two, it 
becomes who is qualified the best to fill out the forms in order 
to get the grant. And that’s the type of thing we want to guard 
against. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — It was last year that you and I had an 
extended conversation about the sins of the federal government 
in the past, and particularly Axworthy and how he dispensed his 
largesse, and in the result focused most of it on his own 
constituency. 
 
And you and I agreed that that was a horrible thing, and that 
one of the essential requirements of these grant programs is that 
they be administered against a set of criteria and guide-lines in 
order to ensure that nobody’s playing political games, that 
nobody’s treating these funds of money as a kind of slush fund 
where you would have so much discretion that you could 
exercise in favour of your political friends and against your 
political enemies. 
 
And I’d like your clear assurance, Mr. Minister, the clearest 
possible assurance that the criteria and the guide-lines that you 
lay down with respect to this program are, while not cluttered 
with red tape, are at least going to be precise enough so that 
your . . . we can have assurance from that, that your government 
is not going to be playing political games with respect to the 
expenditure of this money. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Yes, I think . . . I’d like to answer the 
question this way. Remember what we’re talking about here is 
the assistance to exporters, primarily, and not assistance, let’s 
say, to a business looking to expand in the province. So our 
prime focus here is going to be on assistance to people seeking 
export market. 
 
And the dilemma you face is the following: if you’re to look at 
the market that is . . . that Saskatchewan business would maybe 
attempt to access, it would tend to be the U.S. market, the 
Pacific Rim market, and some into the European market. 
 
So you have those three identified markets as your largest 
potential market, perhaps some into some of the other countries, 
but not big in the sense of those other three. 
 
You then have, on the other side of the equation, assistance in 
the field of agriculture, in the field of resources, in the field of 
manufacturing, high technology, that type of thing, services. So 
you can appreciate that there is a large number of elements 
there with a finite amount of money. 
 
The problem we have in Saskatchewan, let’s say compared to 
Alberta who would have money for export assistance perhaps 
20 times greater than ours, we do not have that amount of 
money to commit to those programs. Therefore, the trick 
becomes how do you use it most effectively? So I think, in 
response — and I recall very well the conversation we had last 
year — I think it would tend to be fair to say that if it’s a new 
product developed, or there’s some chance of some penetration 
into the U.S. market, what we would like to do is co-ordinate 
the best we could, in this sense, that if we are giving assistance 
let’s say to a particular agriculture sector to access into the  

western United States, for example, for that assistance we 
would also like some intelligence back that could perhaps be of 
assistance to other people looking at similar or related type 
export so that we are co-ordinated as best as possible. 
 
What we would . . . and you look at various models, one being 
direct assistance to, let’s say, a group of industries. Let’s take 
the farm machinery manufacturers, for example. Could you 
work that with a group, as opposed to simply a contribution to 
Flexi-coil, for example, or to Leon’s Manufacturing, or 
something like that. So I think that you can appreciate that’s the 
type of policy line that we’re hoping to develop. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I’m glad you raised the subject of the 
commitment of Alberta to the export industries in that province 
because it’s a question that I want to raise with you. You've 
often spoken of the importance of finding and developing 
market niches and international trade connections, but as I 
observed last year, we witnessed cut-backs to the trade 
development program, and I wonder if I could get from you 
what you calculate to be the total figure on funding for trade 
and export development this year? And I see what’s in your 
estimate and I estimate — at least in total — that your 
department will spend about $2 million altogether, at least on 
trade-related matters, and there’s another 1.6 million in the 
economic diversification and investment fund. And while I’m 
glad there’s an increase instead of a decrease, it certainly 
doesn’t compare to the efforts made to promote trade in other 
provinces. 
 
Alberta, as you’ve observed, spends many times more than that 
— perhaps 10 or $12 million annually on trade and market 
development, and they’ve consistently outperformed us in trade 
with the Pacific Rim countries, the Asian and Pacific countries. 
British Columbia also spends about $12 million annually on 
trade promotion and Saskatchewan has just not made anything 
like that kind of an effort. 
 
And you yourself, sir, have repeatedly, repeatedly across this 
province, stressed the importance of trade to our economy, and 
so have I — probably in stronger language than you have — 
and the necessity for us to continue trading and to expand our 
trade beyond the agricultural and the raw resource areas where 
we’ve now been trading and to attempt to find other market 
niches which we have previously not occupied. 
 
It seems to me, sir, that this is not an adequate effort, either in 
absolute dollars or compared to the effort that’s being made by 
Alberta, which is a province only slightly larger than 
Saskatchewan, or British Columbia. The effort in these 
provinces are of a much higher order, and they already enjoy a 
much better penetration into the very important Pacific Rim 
market which is such an important market for the future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Let me make two observations. One, 
when you talk about the Pacific Rim and how much more 
successful Ontario or Quebec or in Alberta has been in that 
market than has Saskatchewan. If you are to look at federal 
trade numbers of Canadian trade into the Pacific Rim, you will 
find that of all provinces in Canada,  
  



 
April 15, 1988 

 

615 
 

the province of Saskatchewan exports more real dollars into the 
Pacific Rim than does any other province. That’s a fact. 
 
(1115) 
 
Here’s where that fact breaks down a bit. One, the largest 
export that Canada has to the Pacific Rim is obviously in the 
grain sector. And the second largest export is in the mineral 
sector, primarily coal from B.C. and Alberta, and potash from 
Saskatchewan, potash and uranium from Saskatchewan. Those 
are the largest markets that Canada has into the Pacific Rim. 
 
Where we in Saskatchewan, again we have perhaps 
one-thirtieth of the amount of money than an Alberta or an 
Ontario or a Quebec spent, and Quebec has some 49 offices in 
foreign countries — 49. Ontario has something like 30; Alberta 
probably 20. And we have three. Now I don’t think it’s a wise 
expenditure of a finite amount of money that we have to expand 
our number or offices to 20, for example. And I question 
whether they get total value for what they’re spending on those. 
 
Obviously if you are out into the world with many more offices, 
many more trade officers, then I think that you are going to 
probably do a better job than somebody that’s only out there 
with two or three. It is our hope and wish, and certainly our 
bargaining position at this point in time, that we make better use 
of the federal offices, either the embassy or the trade offices of 
the federal government. 
 
We are also exploring with the other western provinces the 
potential of being able to co-ordinate some of our offices, 
perhaps even share some of our offices, and in that sense being 
able to expend a little bit more money in a more broader sense. 
 
With regards to the expenditure, your numbers are in fact 
correct in the sense of . . . about $3.6 million devoted to trade. 
But I think you must also appreciate that you have a great deal 
of money in trade which we would hope to co-ordinate with, 
let’s say SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation) sales around the world. You have a great deal of 
money being spent through Canpotex, through the markets of 
the world of which, indirectly, I suppose, the Government of 
Saskatchewan makes its contribution through Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
You also have SaskTel International who is making an effort 
into the selling of technology, certainly into the PRC and to 
other parts of the Pacific Rim and some into Europe. You have 
Agdevco (agricultural development corporation), which is a 
small trading company in Saskatchewan, owned by the 
government, that again would have a budget of, I suspect, a 
million dollars, whose pure and only purpose, quite frankly, is 
to enhance that trade. 
 
So I think that there’s two things you have to look at: one, is the 
department would co-ordinate, or at least co-ordinate 
information from those various bodies or institutions or 
corporations — co-ordinate the flow of information so that 
we’re not trying to trip over each other or duplicate things that 
we are doing, and at the same  

deploy our dollars in the most appropriate way we can. 
 
So I don’t think the hon. member is asking that we up the 
expenditure here by some 10 or $15 million. I would not 
suspect that it would be his argument. Clearly we would like to 
have an extra $10 million here. We would do a better job with 
$10 million here. We would do a better job with $10 million, 
but as we always know, that there are priorities for dollars, and 
I would guess that if you sat around the table and 10 million to 
our department versus 10 million to another department, we 
might not come first. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I’m interested in what your numbers are with 
respect to our trade with the Asian countries. We call them 
Pacific Rim, but I think Asia would be a better way of targeting 
what I’m talking about. I don’t think we should take the time 
now to do it, but you can if you like, but I’d be satisfied if you 
sent me your numbers. 
 
I have numbers from the years ’84 to ’86, and I’m looking at 
the ’86 figures right now and it seems to me, from those figures, 
that Alberta is just whipping us into the ground on trade with 
the Asian countries. In some of them the numbers are quite 
startling, although when I look at Japan, we are second, we are 
behind Alberta, but proportionately probably not. 
 
But the problem there again, Minister, as with most of these 
Asian numbers, is that we’re talking about our resources, our 
natural resources, and our agriculture — nothing wrong with 
trading those, Minister — but the point I’ve been trying to urge 
on you last year and this year is that it’s just not sufficient to sit 
back and sort of go with the obvious and build on our natural 
advantages. We’ve got to get beyond that if we’re going to 
make this province get up and go. 
 
We’ve got to start using some imagination and some initiative 
and find ourselves some market niches and opportunities that 
just aren’t so obvious. And that takes a good effort on the part 
of all Saskatchewan people, including the Saskatchewan 
government. So that I would like to see the numbers that you 
have and put those in the context of the amount that we’re 
spending on our trade effort, as compared to what our sister 
provinces in the prairie rim are spending. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Let me try to give you the numbers that 
I have to the hon. member with regards to the top 10 export 
markets, so we can put into perspective, from Saskatchewan. 
 
Our largest export market is the United States, and we would 
see that market in 1987 at 2.4 billion, which is an increase of 37 
per cent — 2.4 billion. The second largest market that we then 
have is Japan at 490 . . . 
 
An. Hon. Member: — These are 1987 . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — . . . ’87, $491 million, and that’s an 
increase of 36 per cent. 
 
The third largest market is the PRC, the People’s Republic of 
China, 451 million. That’s an increase of 7 per cent. We then go 
to the following: Soviet Union at 298 million — and these are 
not necessarily in order of importance:  
  



 
April 15, 1988 

 

616 
 

Brazil at 111 million; United Kingdom at 72 million; France, 
139 million; Cuba, 102 million; Algeria, 73 million; Italy, 77 
million; all other countries, a billion. 
 
So what we’re seeing is a significant increase in our market to 
United States, to Japan, To Brazil; a smaller increase as it 
relates to France and Cuba; significant reduction — 38 and 19 
per cent, respectively — to Algeria and Italy; and a reduction to 
the Soviet Union. 
 
Now those last three reductions tend to reflect a weakening 
market in the grain market, particularly as you relate to 
something like Cuba, where we lost a goodly part of that market 
last year, and even more this year, to the EEC (European 
Economic Community) subsidized grain into Cuba, as well as 
the EEC subsidized grain into the Soviet Union, along with 
American subsidized grain into there. So there is increase. 
 
If you’re to look at Japan then, as to what we are increasing or 
decreasing in Japan, the largest increase is in canola, and as you 
know, the canola producers of Saskatchewan make two trips a 
year to Japan, and we assist them in that. That tends to fall 
outside the realm of the Canadian wheat board. With regard to 
our potash, our increase has been 32 per cent; our pulp has been 
156 per cent increase. So the Japanese market on those products 
has certainly increased. 
 
Now you make reference to the fact that we have to break down 
some of those barriers, or I think that’s what you are getting at 
with regard to some of those other markets, and I totally agree 
with you. Japan — we have the following problem with Japan, I 
suppose: is for a small business — or a Canadian or a small 
Saskatchewan business — even a large business, by 
Saskatchewan standards — it becomes very difficult for them to 
go to Japan for this reason. And if you just make one trip to 
Japan or two trips to Japan, you’re not likely to get too many 
orders, and therefore you have to be constantly into that 
Japanese market; and of course that is very expensive, into the 
Japanese market, if you have to go on an ongoing basis. 
 
Number two, there is a great deal of protectionism in Japan. The 
rules and regulations, or restrictions on imports — all the hoops 
and curves you have to go through to get the product into Japan 
is very difficult. 
 
Let me give you an example. A chap trying to export water, 
pure water, purified water in jugs into the Japanese market, 
even becomes difficult to do that, which you would think would 
be senseless. Our canola, again you can’t put canola oil into the 
Japanese market, only the raw canola. Firm government rules 
and a whole lot of other barriers or artificial barriers being put 
up. They’re not really tariffs, but they’re barriers. 
 
And all Canadians are trying to crack that same big market, but 
it is not easy, and it’s something that we must constantly work 
on. And I agree with you, you have to find the niche market far 
more than simply the bigger markets. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Can we go than to the mandate of your 
department, as you understand it, Minister. I refer to the objects 
and purposes, which use general terms, but I  

would like you to outline for the House how you see the 
mandate of your department and how you see its priorities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Again, I will take a bit of licence here in 
the sense that this has not totally been approved in the sense of 
the official stamp of the government as to what we would look 
at doing. 
 
I would see the mandate of our department being in the 
following areas. First of all, the main focus is going to be on the 
area of trade. That means trade policy and that means trade 
enhancement. What we’re talking about in terms of trade policy 
is the two most obvious cases are the free trade agreement with 
United States and the details of that, whether legal, quasi-legal, 
or whatever. 
 
And number two, the ongoing negotiations at the GATT where 
for the first time provinces, all provinces and particularly some, 
are quite involved in the development of Canadian policy or 
Canadian trade offset the GATT. And it’s an area that I think 
has received very little public attention in the sense of the 
media, but some very large issues loom as to a potential 
solution at the GATT and the ramifications of the GATT on 
policies of the Government of Canada, but also policies of 
provincial governments. 
 
And that’s a large issue right now, and clearly, I think, from a 
trade point of view, the largest issue that we face; also the 
largest issue, I would argue, that the Canadian government 
faces. So we have that. 
 
The second dimension that we would see as a mandate would 
be: how do we enhance trade into other areas? And that is what 
I’ve talked about before with regard to how do we access the 
three big markets: the EEC market, the American market, and 
the Pacific Rim markets. 
 
So what we would hope to be able to do, both through policy 
development and dollars, would be to identify where we should 
be going in a general way, and then allow the private sector, 
along with some assistance from us, to be able to use their 
wherewithall to try to penetrate those markets. 
 
That’s, I would say, overall what we’d be looking at from a 
trade point of view, and that’s a fairly large undertaking. 
 
With regards to investment, I think what we have to look at 
there, and our primary mandate there is going to be: how do we 
attract outside investment to Saskatchewan? And that’s 
primarily what our mandate is going to be there. 
 
That obviously will phase into other programs and other 
departments, whether in Agriculture, whether in Economic 
Development and Tourism, whether in Energy and Mines, or a 
variety of other areas of government. Our job is to co-ordinate 
that investment coming from outside of Saskatchewan. We 
would seek investment from other provinces, or companies in 
other provinces. We would seek investment from investors 
outside of Canada. 
 
(1130) 
 
And that, for the most part, is the largest group, right now,  
  



 
April 15, 1988 

 

617 
 

looking to invest in the world, for the most part is the Pacific 
Rim countries, which is Japan, Taiwan, Korea, and Hong Kong. 
That’s where the largest pool of money is. That’s where the 
money that is flowing into United States and Canada and into 
Europe is coming from. 
 
To a lesser degree, investment from United States, and then the 
growing area of potential investing is from Europe. And I 
would see the day, perhaps in Saskatchewan, where you would 
have your largest foreign investment would be Pacific Rim, 
followed by the Europeans, followed by the Americans. 
 
Overview of what we’re attempting to do as the two 
departments were originally put together . . . or the two levels of 
the department were put together. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I’m not certain at all, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 
Minister, that I understand how the objectives that you’ve 
described with respect to investment are going to translate into 
day-to-day activity within your department, or yourself. 
 
First, I could observe that it is . . . it seems clear from all that 
I’ve heard, including what I’ve heard today, that the promotion 
of investment is of lesser importance — it’s clearly the number 
two priority in your department. And I note there that the 
administration of the IIP program has been moved to another 
department, and in that regard is the promotion of investment 
still part of your mandate? 
 
We talked last year, when you were the minister of Economic 
Development and Trade, of the dividing line between you and 
the minister who was then responsible for small business and 
whatever he was responsible for. And I think at that time your 
description was that you were responsible for the big business, 
you were responsible for the big business, and he was 
responsible for the small business. You were responsible for the 
larger enterprises and the manufacturing sector, and he was 
responsible for small business. 
 
Now the administration of the whole program seems to have 
gone over to him or to the minister currently responsible. And 
what does that leave you with? And given that the large 
percentage of the funding under IIP went to what I would call 
large businesses, it’s ironic that this program is now going over 
to the department of small business and moving away from 
your department where one would have thought it would have 
remained lodged. 
 
So what we’ve had here, Minister, point I made last year and I 
can make again with increased validity this year, with a higher 
degree of validity, is that what we’ve seen during your six years 
is six years of trial and error about how you’re going to go 
about relating to and supporting the efforts of the private sector. 
And it seems clear to me that you still haven’t made up your 
mind. 
 
I have expressed my frustration earlier today, and on previous 
occasions, with the way these programs keep changing and we 
can’t keep track of. Nobody can keep track of how these grant 
programs relate to each other, and what happens when there’s a 
change-over, and what the change-overs mean in terms of 
government policy. 
 

And you know from your own consultations how this has been 
confusing to so much of the business community in 
Saskatchewan. It may be that the big movers and shakers that 
you talk to have a clear grasp of it, but the other people, the vast 
bulk of the business community in this province, just haven’t 
been able to keep up with what the government has in mind as 
reflected by its almost bewildering series of reorganizations and 
its bewildering changes to the grant programs as they go along. 
 
Can you explain this, Minister, and try and make more clear, 
just try and make more clear just what it is that your department 
is going to be doing as regards outside investors that you’re 
talking about — the flow of money from Japan and Europe and 
the like? Help to wipe away or to blow away some of these 
clouds of confusion that have arisen over the past and which 
continue down to the present day. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well let me make two observations. 
Number one, we would see exports and investment being of 
equal importance. I think that it would be fair to say that we 
have devoted a fair amount of time to the free trade agreement 
between Canada and the United States, and that’s taken a fair 
amount of time. We are devoting perhaps less time to the 
GATT; nevertheless, we are involved in the GATT and 
spending a large degree of work on that. 
 
Investment, I think that we would tend to look at in the 
following way. We need foreign investment in this country, and 
foreign investment is coming to this country and it is . . . you 
know, are we going to get our appropriate share of it? That’s 
point number one. 
 
There’s a lot of existing companies in Saskatchewan, as there 
are in Canada, that require additional equity, and can they get 
that equity in the Canadian domestic market or can the 
Saskatchewan firm get it in the Saskatchewan domestic market? 
And so our assistance would be in providing how they might 
get further equity, perhaps out of Hong Kong or Korea or places 
like that. 
 
And the other one is joint ventures — you know, you look 
towards joint ventures. As I say, our focus would be on . . . if 
you look at the Marubeni-Hitachi plant in Saskatoon, as an 
example, that’s the type of thing that we would wish to look for, 
as to how we might be able to attract that Japanese firm here, 
initially to provide services to, let’s say, some Saskatchewan 
projects. But if they are of a scale that they are there, and of a 
quality that they are there, we are very confident that they will 
also be able to find additional markets, both in Canada and 
outside of Canada, functioning out of Saskatoon. That type of 
thing is where we would be looking to assist in the investment. 
 
The other department, when you talked about IIPs or venture 
capital and that type of thing, falls in the other department. For 
the most part they are going to be looking at incentives for local 
businesses to start, perhaps attracting in a business from Alberta 
into Saskatchewan, looking very often for their equity or their 
investment coming out of the domestic market or domestic 
investment environment of Saskatchewan, or the prairie region, 
or perhaps some out of Canada as a whole. 
 
  



 
April 15, 1988 

 

618 
 

So while it’s never clear . . . as you know, having been in 
government, you can never make clear demarcations from 
department to department. There’s always going to be one that 
phases into the other. And I think the whole question is . . . and 
that’s not wrong; that’s clearly something that has to be 
managed in the sense that you don’t end up with territorial 
wars, one department to the other. 
 
It would be our hope that we would, in that sense, co-ordinate 
investment, co-ordinate all trade matters, but that’s not to say 
we would do all the trade questions. There’s other areas that 
would be also working in trade as well. 
 
So I appreciate your question, and I would hope you would 
appreciate the logistics of how it has to be done as well. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — But I want to lecture you again, Minister, 
with respect to this habit that your government has fallen into of 
constantly changing the nature of the program and the way that 
they’re delivered and the people who deliver them. The reality 
is that so much of the Saskatchewan business community just 
doesn’t . . . isn’t aware of what the latest game is or what the 
rules are with respect to the game, because they haven’t yet 
come to understand the past game. I mean, they’re still really 
trying to understand the game before that. 
 
You’ve been a moving target with respect to your assistance to 
the Saskatchewan business community. You’ve been a moving 
target because you change the nature of the program, and your 
bureaucratic arrangements for delivering those programs have 
been in a state of flux for a long time. 
 
And to us on this side of the House, and to a large part of the 
business community, they can’t understand what you’re trying 
to do. They don’t know what signals you’re trying to give off, 
and they don’t know what your objectives are. 
 
Too often it seems to me that a reorganization will take place 
just so that a certain minister gets a certain increased amount of 
programming, and that of course would be the most foolish 
reason for reorganizing the administrative arrangements for 
delivering any kind of a program. 
 
But in the result, you have created such a bewildering and 
obscure system that no one can come to understand it. Now I 
don’t think anybody cares how bewildering it is in the business 
community as long as it stays stable long enough for them to 
find out what the rules are, what the criteria are, what the 
guide-lines are, and they can then make their plans as to how 
they can fit into it. But in some cases, by the time they get that 
knowledge and find out, working with your people or with other 
consultants, how to plug into the system, you’ve changed the 
system. 
 
And what I’m lecturing you about here, and I’d like your 
response, is: slow down, stop for a while about making these 
changes; create some stability in your relationship with the 
business community so that they can start to work with 
government in order to assist them in the efforts  

that they’re trying to make; and stop changing the . . . you’re 
almost playing musical chairs here, and the programs are 
changing so often and in such an obscure way that we on this 
side of the House, who are following this on a day-to-day basis, 
just can’t keep up with what you’re doing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well you make an observation that, is 
there constancy within the department? There probably has 
been some confusion; I will not argue that that does not exist. I 
think that probably exists not only here but in many other places 
as well. 
 
Let me make a couple of observations. Number one. I think in 
the area of business and how you deal with business, and what 
assistance you give to business or what advice you give to 
business or how you can interface with business, is going to be 
a constantly changing thing. So I think necessarily that a policy 
put in place five years ago or 10 years ago for business 
assistance, you very often find that it’s not maybe appropriate 
for today. I think that in fairness would be . . . if you compared 
that, let’s say, to some of the programs on the social side of 
government, that that argument would not be near as needing 
the flexibility or the changing of policy near as much. So I think 
that would be fair to say. 
 
If you then go to business and if you say you’ve been and talked 
to a lot of business people, you’ll find also a changing view out 
there or a differing view out there in the business world. I dare 
say, if you asked a lot of business people as to what they would 
see the best thing for government to do, it would be: don’t do 
anything for us by way of grants or programs; just cut our taxes. 
All right? 
 
Others would say, no, I don’t want that simplistic way because 
we do need some help; we’re a fledgling industry, or we can’t 
afford to access into some of the more expensive foreign 
markets, and we need some help in those areas, and we need 
intelligence in those areas. 
 
It is our hope, as I’ve set out to you, it’s our view, that the 
model that we have now and the defined area to deal with 
primarily in trade, which goes outside (a) the province and 
outside the country, and investment as well coming back, that it 
is fairly defined. And it is our hope that we can communicate 
that to the business community and to consult with the business 
community. In fact, not only consult, but perhaps involve the 
business community in how we deliver our programs, or 
perhaps do it in a joint way very often with the business 
community so that you have that concern that you raised 
lessened to a degree. Of course, you always have a problem 
there, as you have a wide divergence of businesses out there, 
that what one might like, the other one doesn’t. So I take your 
point under advisement. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I want to go back to this question. I was 
talking about earlier about the program, the grant program that 
you’re going to be announcing the guide-lines about. You’re 
going to be announcing the guide-lines and the criteria within 
six weeks or so, and I had asked for a clear assurance that those 
criteria and guide-lines would be sufficiently clear, that they 
would be understandable to the people who would be interested  
  



 
April 15, 1988 

 

619 
 

in applying for them, and so that it would be administered on an 
objective basis, and free from political decisions. 
 
(1145) 
 
We talked about this last year, Minister, in conjunction with the 
western diversification fund. And as I told you about a half an 
hour ago, we talked about Lloyd Axworthy and what he had 
done in Winnipeg, and I agreed last year that that was a bad 
thing. And we agreed that under the western diversification 
fund it would be inadmissible if the federal minister, Bill 
McKnight, were to administer that western diversification fund 
in the same way. And I think we now have enough evidence in, 
to know the concerns expressed last year about the 
administration of that western diversification fund were well 
grounded. 
 
Let me just give you some aspects of the experience so that, 
when you’re drawing your criterion guide-line for this grant 
program, you will have that experience clearly in mind, and 
you’ll stay away from it because your fund ought not to become 
any kind of a political slush fund. I cite John Bulloch, the 
president of the Canadian Federation of Independent Business, 
and you were pleased to cite to me the day before yesterday, 
and I cite him to you now. And he has stated that the western 
diversification fund is close to becoming nothing more than a 
political slush fund — I get so angry about that concept that I 
can’t even say the words, Minister — a political slush fund to 
feather the nests of provincial governments. 
 
He goes on to say that the small-business community has had to 
stand by while western Canada becomes a pawn for short-term 
political advantage. Now those are not my terms. Those are the 
words of John Bulloch of the Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business. And this was precisely the danger that 
you and I were discussing in your estimates last year, and the 
worst has happened, according to Mr. Bulloch. And, Minister, 
you must be at pains to assure, to ensure that that does not 
happen under the grant program that you’re going to be 
administering out of this department. 
 
So I would like you to stand and give the House the clearest 
kind of assurance that your criteria and guide-lines are going to 
be clear and objective to the point where your fund will not 
become a political slush fund which you will use for political 
advantage. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I would give you this assurance that our 
fund will not be handled like the western diversification fund. 
And if it was . . . I won’t go any further than that. 
 
The reality is the western diversification fund has put virtually 
no money into Saskatchewan, to speak of. And the problem that 
we are experiencing with it, and I think many businesses are 
experiencing with it, is the fact that it is still being driven by so 
much red tape and rules and criteria that you end up becoming 
frustrated with not being able to get something done. It takes six 
months to go through the bureaucratic hoops. 
 
And so I think from looking at the western development fund, 
or western diversification fund, that’s the greatest  

criticism that I see, and I think one of the criticisms that John 
Bulloch was making is exactly that. 
 
Now that’s not to say that we would not hope to access some of 
that. I think the statement yesterday by the Prime Minister in 
Saskatoon with regards to the agricultural biotechnology facility 
in Saskatoon is perhaps an area where we could access a fair 
amount of that money. I would hope that nobody would see that 
as a political slush fund. I would think all sides would hope that 
in fact the federal government would see their way clear to see 
the University of Saskatchewan as the most appropriate place 
for that type of an institution to be, and to use their money that 
way. 
 
But I take your point with regards to the fund. It’s going to have 
some rules and criteria, but I would hope that it would not be 
constrained so much that it would end up that perhaps it can’t 
effectively and quickly deal with some assistance to 
development that we so desperately need in this province. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Well thank you for that, Minister. We share, 
apparently, very similar views with respect to the administration 
of that fund. I notice that of the Saskatchewan applications, 
only about 6 per cent of the total applications have been dealt 
with, and those people have had to wait for up to six months to 
find out whether or not their applications are going to be 
approved or not. 
 
I want to touch briefly on the question of trade offices and in 
particular, Minister, what has been the recent experience with 
our increased export trade, or our . . . the export trade being 
generated from our Vienna trade office. Its track record has 
been just really, really bad news. 
 
Now I realize that technically this department is . . . or this trade 
office has been administered by Agdevco, but you are the 
Minister of Trade, and that albatross of an office has been 
operating for a long time with practically no results at all. And I 
wonder if, at least in a general way, you could comment on that 
office, whether you intend to keep it going, and what its recent 
track record has been. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well again I don’t want to get into a lot 
of that, because that falls under Agdevco. I can say, though, that 
the Vienna office is primarily used as a launch into the eastern 
bloc countries. So it’s done a fair degree of work in the area of 
red meat, etc., into Bulgaria, certainly a hope that we can get 
further product into the Soviet Union and Soviet bloc countries. 
So we’re not directly involved with that. 
 
Perhaps that’s an area that we hope to become more involved in 
as time unfolds, so I perhaps would be able to give you a little 
better update on that in perhaps six months time. But right now 
it’s not under our jurisdiction, and it would probably not be 
proper of me to be the one responding to it. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I have two related questions with respect to 
other trade offices. First of all, are there plans under way to 
fund two new trade offices in the United States in this year’s 
budget, and if so, what are the details of that? 
 
  



 
April 15, 1988 

 

620 
 

And secondly, with respect to the Middle East and South and 
Central America, our trade profile there has been very low in 
the past; the numbers bear that out. Have these areas been 
examined for potential so far as a trade office is concerned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I think you asked three questions. With 
regards to the U.S. market, we are looking clearly at the 
California market. The economy of California is the sixth 
largest economy in the world and, therefore, I think is 
something that . . . and we have a proximity there. It’s 
something that we are going to develop. 
 
We have not yet taken a decision whether there would be an 
office there or we would simply perhaps have private 
companies in there and perhaps give them some assistance in 
doing that. We haven’t taken that decision yet. Many provinces 
have offices in California and Denver . . . or in Dallas. Again, 
there’s a fair cost to that, and we haven’t taken that decision. 
Clearly that’s a market, though, that we would identify in red 
meat and a variety of other areas that we think we could 
penetrate. 
 
With regard to the Middle East, there’s not a great deal of trade 
in the Middle East, and that’s still a rather volatile part of the 
world. It’s not a big area of trade for us, and where we do have 
trade in the Middle East, it’s primarily in the area of grains, 
handled for the most part by the Canadian Wheat Board, and 
therefore we wouldn’t see the Middle East as a large, growing 
market. They’re in the market these days for guns, perhaps 
more than anything, and we don’t produce them, so we don’t 
see that as a big market. 
 
South America is an interesting market. Clearly Brazil is the 
largest market. It is bigger than all the other markets put 
together in South America. It’s an area that we would look to 
develop through Agdevco perhaps more than this department. 
And while it is a large market, again it is — primarily buys 
primary product like grains and potash. Our potash . . . We have 
increased sales of potash substantially into that market now. 
 
A couple of problems there is if you go to Brazil, as perhaps 
you have, the protectionism in Brazil as well is very, very strict; 
in the sense of anything they produce there, they prohibit the 
importation of similar products from any other country. And 
that’s a very restrictive rule in a country like Brazil, which is 
obviously the largest economy in South America. So that’s an 
area that we can penetrate in small bits and pieces, but I 
wouldn’t see it as an area that we would look at putting a trade 
office in. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Now, Minister, we’ve got this document still 
outstanding, this trade deal. And we spent about two and a half 
hours on it the other day, and you made an offer to me at that 
time to go through this agreement clause by clause, and I want 
to do that. But I’m reluctant to put the House through the two or 
three weeks that that might take, and yet I am most anxious that 
that happen and that the public have an opportunity to hear us 
talk about it. 
 
In that connection, Minister, may I extend an invitation to you 
to join me in a tour of the province and do exactly that in six or 
eight of the large centres in Saskatchewan. We could have a 
debate; we could ask each other questions;  

we could answer questions from the audience and really bring 
the detail of this agreement home to the citizens of the province. 
Can I invite you to do that with me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Perhaps I would make a . . . I’ll respond 
to that in a couple of ways. I’ve been to 59 meetings in the 
province on that trade agreement. I spent a great deal of my 
time doing that. 
 
There are some further . . . With regards to what is unfolding 
right now with regard to the trade Bill, both in the United 
States, the federal government has announced that it intends 
very soon to introduce the legislation to parliament so one could 
clearly deal with that. 
 
With regards to the next, over the next few weeks, it’s 
somewhat difficult, in the fact that I have some other 
responsibilities to also be in the House, certainly doing the 
session. I would not think that you’d want me not being present 
in the House to answer questions, whether it’s on Justice or 
other related things. 
 
With regards to debating, I would certainly welcome that at any 
time. I think that very often when we look at this trade 
agreement — and I say this as honestly as I can to you — is too 
often when the agreement is being discussed or debated, quite 
frankly the debate has never been very detailed, and I think that 
perhaps we do a disservice to our population. 
 
My guess is that it has probably been more detailed in debate in 
Saskatchewan than it has probably been in any other 
jurisdiction of Canada. Nevertheless, there is a lot of detail in 
there that I think is worthy of discussion and debate, and I 
would certainly welcome that. 
 
The format very often drives people in this type of discussion 
on this trade agreement to strong rhetoric on both sides, and to 
avoid getting really down and talking about what the agreement 
actually means and the two various interpretations on a clause 
by clause basis, because clearly there are, there are two sides to 
the argument on it. 
 
But very often the detail . . . Let me get into what I’m talking 
about. If we were to talk about the details of the agriculture 
sector there, it can become very detailed, and it can be certainly 
of interest to a particular group in the farm community — 
whether it’s in the feathers industry or whether it’s in the hog 
industry or the red meat industry or in the grains sector, and that 
type of thing — and I think that’s worthy of debate. 
 
As it relates to the resource sectors — whether it’s potash or 
uranium, that type of thing — that deserves debate as well, and 
discussion. How the binational panel will function, I think that’s 
something that is worthy of discussing, and a whole host of 
other things. 
 
The reality of politics in this country and in this province is that 
very often because the media is not interested or not capable of 
understanding the arguments that it never really gets argued, 
and therefore the general population does not want to go 
through the details. It’s like you and I debating the regulation 
1061 of the Income Tax Act. While it might be important to a 
lot of people, you’re not  
  



 
April 15, 1988 

 

621 
 

going to draw much of a crowd if you want to get into that kind 
of an argument. 
 
I think it’s worthy of discussion, it’s worthy of debate, and I 
would certainly welcome that, given my time constraints that I 
have. 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Well I thank you for that answer, Mr. 
Minister, and I’ll be in touch with your office to try and 
negotiate the very things that you’re talking about, and 
hopefully we can get the debate out into the public in a way that 
is most beneficial to them. 
 
I was very critical of you the day before yesterday, and on other 
occasions, for the way in which you’ve been selling this 
agreement, for the way in which you’ve been explaining it to 
the public — you and your Premier and others — and arguing 
you to start telling the Saskatchewan people what’s in here. And 
I think that debates between you and I, or whatever the format 
is for these meetings, would be very, very productive, and I 
welcome it, and I’ll be in touch with your office about it. 
 
In light of that, I’ll leave a number of specific questions that I 
have under this agreement for that format, and I thank you for 
that answer. I’m finished. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 6 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — A question here, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister. 
This is investment services, which is the junior half of the 
department, I think, and it shows that in 1987-88, which is last 
year, there were person-years of 13 — 13 person-years, and that 
has not changed this year, and yet we find the estimate for 
personal services to have been more than doubled from 256,000 
to 574,000 — the same number of people getting more than 
twice the money. And what does that mean, Minister? Have we 
doubled everyone’s salary, or have we imported a bunch of 
new, high-priced help, or what’s the answer? 
 
While I’m on my feet, let me leave a second question with you 
under this same item, and that is other expenses have increased 
from 187,000 to up to about 460,000, which is an increase of 
about 300 per cent. And while you’re on your feet, could you 
explain what’s included in that increase? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Let me try to give you a bureaucratic 
response to your first question. That’s exactly what it is. 
 
I’ll try to explain it in this way. When the two departments were 
adjusted and changed, when Economic Development and 
Tourism was adjusted, that part of it changed, there was certain 
expenditures and people transferred over to Economic 
Development and Tourism and no longer in this department, 
and of course, with them went the money to pay for them, etc. 
 

Transferred back was a number of vacant positions, so the PYs 
(person-years) were transferred back with us. But because they 
hadn’t spent money on that last year, the money wasn’t sent 
back. And so we were not terribly interested in having a bunch 
of vacant positions that we would not be able to fill, and 
therefore Finance topped that money up, and that shows the 
increase so that we could in fact cover those positions that 
weren’t otherwise covered. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — And is the explanation the same for other 
services or other expenses that have increased by 300 per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — That’s the explanation I’m given as to 
why that is, as well. 
 
Item 6 agreed to. 
 
Item 7 agreed to. 
 
Item 8 — Statutory. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the item following is your 
estimates on Justice. I’m going to be asking you for your staff 
complement of your office, and I wonder if it would be more 
convenient for you to do it as a unit, so I raise the issue now in 
these estimates. 
 
In particular, Mr. Minister, I’m going to be asking you for the 
number of staff, broken down into Justice and this department; 
salary being paid presently, and salaries being paid at the 
beginning of the year; other perks and benefits; out-of-town 
trips and travel expenses. 
 
It may be more convenient for you, Mr. Minister, to give us . . . 
because you may not have your office neatly broken down into 
Justice and this department, so I’d . . . I want them for both 
departments, and I leave it to you as to how you give them to 
us, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’m advised that it’s easier because, 
through the departments, they calculate it separately, so I will 
. . . I know you’re trying to get at it, and I will try to provide 
them both to you at the same time so that they’re together and 
you know what it is. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, so far as you can, I would 
appreciate the information for Justice before Monday. We’ll be 
resuming your estimates Monday, and I’d appreciate what you 
can give us by Monday. 
 
Vote 19 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Economic Diversification and Investment Fund 

Vote 66 
 

Item 8 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The last item, I think the hon. member 
— maybe perhaps you could refer to the page. I think it’s under 
the development part that would relate to trade, that we spoke 
about before with regard to trade development. Page . . . 
 
  



 
April 15, 1988 

 

622 
 

Mr. Chairman: — It’s page 27, Item 8, under Trade and 
Investment, Export Development Grants. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Yes. Just confirm, Minister — this is what 
most of our debate this morning has been about, this very thing. 
 
Before we leave the Trade and Investment estimates, I’d like to 
thank the officials for their presence here today and on 
Wednesday, and for the assistance that they gave this 
committee in its work. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’m on my feet. I should also thank the minister 
for the way in which he has responded to our questioning, 
including particularly his agreement to join me in a tour of 
Saskatchewan to discuss this nefarious free trade agreement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’m just happy that the Deputy Premier 
was here to hear that compliment to me, thank you. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Justice 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 3 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Perhaps I could introduce my officials. 
The deputy is Brian Barrington-Foote; assistant deputy 
minister, Corrections and Justice Services. Terry Thompson; 
executive director of public prosecutions, Ellen Gunn; director 
of administrative services, Kathy Langlois; executive director 
of court services, Gary Brandt; executive director of public law 
and policy, Bob Richards; co-ordinator of legislative services, 
Doug Moen; director of policing, John Baker. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Shillington: — You have talented people, Mr. Minister. 
It’s amazing that you can’t do a better job of running this 
department than you do. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to begin with one of your most prodigal 
wastes and that is the money which you fork over, apparently 
without any question, to the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Minister, that last year the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation spent 23 per cent more than 
the old department of supply and services spent, and they’re 
doing virtually the same work. This year the spending is up 
another 18 per cent, a full $21 million. 
 
What I’m curious about knowing, Mr. Minister, is how many 
Renaissance hotels are there around the province? How on earth 
can the expenditure go up by 20 per cent per year when you 
apparently claim to be reducing the size of the public service? 
 
Mr. Minister, your government is spending 21 per cent more on 
the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation this year 
than last. That, I think, is the largest increase in expenditures in 
the entire government. It’s  

clearly a political boondoggle, Mr. Minister. It’s clear you are 
shovelling taxpayers’ money into the pockets of your friends at 
a time when it’s needed in so many other areas. 
 
You don’t have any money for a drug plan for seniors; you 
don’t have any money for a dental plan, but you got untold 
sums of money for your friends through this political 
boondoggle, the property management corporation. 
 
Mr. Minister, your particular department, your particular 
department has increased as well as everyone else, Mr. 
Minister. How, Mr. Minister, do you account for the increase, 
which I think is 21 per cent, in your department? Are you using 
21 per cent more space, Mr. Minister, or is this simply your 
contribution to Conservative friends such as those who own the 
Renaissance hotel and those who sign sweetheart deals with the 
government? 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — To the hon. member, if he wishes to get 
the details of where that increase is coming from . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, I will attempt to be patient with the hon. 
member. Where the money is being expenditured, is being 
expended as following: the largest part of it is being expended 
on a new correction facility just outside — a Regina correction 
facility, the new federal-provincial, where you have additional 
spaces there. 
 
The second dimension as being involved, the main dimension 
being involved, is Echo Valley camp which is going to be a new 
camp, again, for corrections. And virtually the whole other area 
involves either further expenditures to other facilities by way of 
capital repair or to upgrading and repairing of court-houses, and 
those court-houses being in the city of Moose Jaw, for the hon. 
member from Moose Jaw; the Regina Queen’s Bench member 
from Moose Jaw; the Regina Queen’s Bench court; and two 
other ones, one being Pine Grove Correctional Centre and the 
other one being Besnard Lake camp. 
 
So virtually all of that that the member wants to begin his 
debate with is for new facilities or improved facilities in the 
area of corrections. Now I think if you want to debate whether 
we should be spending money in the area of corrections, I 
always thought it was your view that we’re not spending 
enough. So we are spending it, so that’s what we’re doing with 
the money, and that’s where it’s going, and that’s why the 
money is higher this year than last year. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Am I correct, Mr. Minister, that those new 
facilities are not yet built? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well if you’re to look at the Regina 
Correctional Centre, the new facilities out there are virtually 
completed, and that’s the largest part of it. And perhaps it 
would be, if you have some time some day, to go out and have a 
look at them. And they’re fairly new facilities, and they are, for 
the most part, completed. 
 
The other stuff would be ongoing in this fiscal year, and would 
be expended in this fiscal year. 
 
  



 
April 15, 1988 

 

623 
 

Mr. Shillington: — I suppose it’s too much to ask that you give 
us a breakdown, specifically how much you’re spending, how 
much of that increase is being soaked up by the correction 
centre and how much is being soaked up by the renovations to a 
few court-houses. 
 
Quite frankly, Mr. Minister, I don’t think the renovations to 
those court-houses amounts to a hill of beans. That sounds like 
a very minimal amount of work. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Clearly the largest amount is in the area 
of corrections. What I’m saying is that there’s two primary 
things that we’re doing: (a) the largest part — and that’s what I 
said — is in the area of corrections; a much smaller part, but the 
second largest part, is in the area of court-houses. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Will the minister undertake to give me the 
breakdown on those increases? How much is for court-houses 
and how much is for the correction centre? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — We will arrange to send that to you. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I also want to deal, Mr. Minister, with the 
land titles office, Mr. Minister, it is just not satisfactory to have 
the land titles office in this province running two to three weeks 
behind. That is just not a satisfactory way to run a system. It 
imposes serious difficulties for people who deal with it. 
 
Mr. Minister, an associate of mine from our office, from our 
law office, and a number of other people who are out in B.C., 
everybody — and this is six weeks ago — everybody was 
enraged in B.C. because the land registry system in Vancouver 
was running seven days behind. All I can say is, the bar in this 
province would be delighted if it ever caught up to that point. 
 
Mr. Minister, the reasons why the land titles office runs an 
unacceptable time behind, I think, is fairly obvious if you look 
at the annual report which your department filed. And these 
figures are obviously for ’87-88 . . . ’86-87 because that’s the 
date of the annual report. 
 
An. Hon. Member: — Because ’88 isn’t finished yet. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That’s right. The member from 
Souris-Cannington is contributing brilliantly to this discussion, 
and I do trust you’ll stay around. 
 
The work-load, Mr. Minister, during that year, went up by 10 
per cent; the staff complement went down by 3 per cent, and I 
think that’s the source of the trouble. I think you need more 
staff in the land titles office so that work is processed in a 
timely way, Mr. Minister. 
 
There’s nothing we can do but put up with the system, and I 
suppose, therefore, it’s acceptable. But, Mr. Minister, it is just 
no acceptable to be running the land titles office in the fashion 
in which you’re doing it. It’s just taking too long to get that 
work through. It’s the subject of constant complaints by the bar. 
 
I know the public tend to blame the law offices rather than the 
government, and therefore the political pressure on this item 
may be minimal, but this is a very poorly run  

section of your department. I’m not casting any aspersions on 
the staff; I don’t think there’s enough of them. I think your 
annual report, which shows a 10 per cent increase in work and a 
3 per cent decrease in staff, tells us precisely where the problem 
lies. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well if you would . . . I will give to the 
member the turn around time in our various land titles offices 
across the province. The turn around time in The Battlefords is 
three working days; turn around time in Humboldt is the same 
day, if the member wishes to listen — the same day in 
Humboldt; Moose Jaw is five-day turn around; Prince Albert is 
one-day turn around; Saskatoon is now to one-day turn around; 
Swift Current is one-day turn around; Yorkton is the same day; 
Regina, where the problem is, is 10-day turn around, and that’s 
the one we’re working at. 
 
We have been putting in additional staff of late into that to try 
to address that question and hopefully catch up the backlog, and 
we’ve been working on backlog. If we get that caught up, then I 
think that we’ll do okay. I acknowledge that the turn around 
time in the Regina land titles office is problematic, and has been 
for a long, long time. I grant you that. And we’re hoping to 
address that. 
 
One of the problems we had was on the early retirement. A lot 
of the people on early retirement happened to come out as well, 
come out of that, that particular land titles, who were able to do 
it perhaps maybe more effectively or quicker than people who 
are now being put in to train, and that type of thing. 
 
I acknowledge your question. I think you also would 
acknowledge that Regina has the biggest problem relative to 
other land titles. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The problem, I think, is Moose Jaw and 
Regina. Moose Jaw may be up to five days now, but it hasn’t 
been five days consistently. 
 
Mr. Minister, I acknowledge there’s not a problem in some of 
the small land titles offices. I called Humboldt — this was 
about a month ago — and said, I’ve a piece of work, but I need 
to know how soon you can process it. And not realizing that I 
was out of town, he said, oh, I think it’ll take us about a half an 
hour, which someone from Regina is not used to framing the 
question in quite that fashion. I meant, what time of the month, 
now what time of the day. 
 
Mr. Minister, the problem, I think, is in Moose Jaw and Regina. 
For whatever reason, those land titles offices are running 
behind. Moose Jaw may be five days now, but it’s been a good 
deal more than that. Those land titles offices need more staff, 
and they need it permanently. 
 
I know the minister will probably get some people in and they’ll 
get caught up, but the first time there’s another rush — and 
these things tend to come in waves — it’ll get behind, and well 
be two and three weeks behind, and everybody will be 
complaining. 
 
Mr. Minister, you need more permanent staff in those two 
offices, and temporary help during times of trouble don’t solve 
it — it’s a Band-Aid and it’s inadequate. You need  
  



 
April 15, 1988 

 

624 
 

more people in those land titles offices, and you’re going to go 
on having a problem with them until you get them in there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, as I indicated to you, that we have 
more staff being now allocated to Regina. I think the hon. 
member would also recognize that you don’t necessarily look 
only to continuing to add more people as a solution to that 
particular problem. I could indicate to you that we will very 
soon be putting out for tender the concept of automation in the 
land titles office. And we would hope that that would go a fair 
distance as well to be able to accommodate and speed up that 
process so that a lot of the more technical things or clerical 
things could be done by machine, and leaving therefore the 
people working there to review it, to verify, and that type of 
thing. 
 
And I think that in the end a lot of other jurisdictions have 
moved to that and have found significant savings and increased 
time, and that would be the area we would, I think from a 
long-term point of view, look at as a solution as well. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Just on that point, it strikes me as being 
relatively simple to permit searches of titles by remote 
computers. We have in our office a program, difficult as can be 
to use — it could be simplified — but it’s a program which 
allows us to search the company records at the companies’ 
branch. It takes me a few seconds to search any company name. 
And for a nominal cost, I might add, it costs us less to do it that 
way than it does to send someone down to the land titles office 
or the companies’ branch to pick up a search. 
 
And that’s been going on for some time. It strikes me as being 
relatively simple to permit searches of the land titles office 
records by remote computer terminals. That, I think, would take 
a fair load off the staff if they didn’t have to deal with the 
routine searches. 
 
I grant you, it may be somewhat more difficult to allow a sort of 
a remote registration, but the searches, it seems to me, is 
relatively straightforward. I can’t believe it isn’t being done 
elsewhere, and it would take a fair load off the staff, particularly 
in Regina, which is such a huge land titles office. It must be by 
far and away the biggest office in the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well that’s fine to say that you have a 
remote terminal in your office and you can access the land titles 
office, but if the land titles are not computerized, then how do 
you access? You can phone your terminal down to the person 
working there and say, search this title for me, and he then 
phones it back to you. What we’re talking about in the 
automation process is automating the land titles so that you 
would come to the day where you would be able to take the 
remote terminal in your office, access directly into the 
information bank in land titles, hold the title out so you could 
see it right across your terminal and then, I agree with you, 
that’s exactly what you want to do. 
 
But in order to do that, you have to computerize the land titles. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — All you have to do basically . . . I don’t  

need a lecture, Mr. Minister, on how computers work; I’ve a 
working knowledge of that. All you need to do is to get your 
titles in the data bank. That’s really all you’ve got to do, and it 
isn’t an enormous chore. The companies’ branch did it a long 
time ago and, Mr. Minister, this is not an impossible chore for a 
government which cares to solve some problems, instead of 
trying to find victims. It would be, I think, relatively easy to get 
your titles. It’s a big chore because there’s a lot of titles, but in a 
conceptual sense it’s a relatively simple thing. Put your titles in 
a data bank, we can all search them, and the traffic in those land 
titles offices will clear out a great deal. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I can say to the hon. member, he 
might say that it’s a simple job — Alberta is now doing it, we 
are looking to do it, and the information we have from them — 
well it’s a simple job. You’re talking about a great deal of titles 
in this province, and you have to have them all onto the 
computer. You’re looking at minimum 12 to $15 million to do 
this. So I mean, to suggest somehow that this is just an easy job 
you can do in your spare time, I think would be exaggerating a 
bit. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Look upon it, Mr. Minister, if you might, 
as an investment. I think the land titles office will . . . the land 
titles office, first of all, makes money. You’re taking a fair 
amount of money in from those land titles offices — a lot more 
than you’re spending. I believe. It seems to me, Mr. Minister, if 
there were no staff time involved in doing the searches, you’d 
have still charged $4 for the search. I don’t think anyone would 
complain. In fact, the companies’ branch, I think, charged me 
more than that to search a company. You’d have still charged 
your $4, there wouldn’t be any staff time involved, and I think 
the net revenue to the province would increase considerably if 
you automated it. 
 
What we have now is a very, very archaic system whereby 
somebody runs back, picks up a piece of paper, runs back and 
gives it to them. It’s very, very time-consuming and I, Mr. 
Minister, I really worry when you say you’re studying it. For 
some two years you studied the problems with another section 
of your department, farm land security. What we got this 
morning was a report saying, gee, it is an awful problem, and 
that’s all we got out of a couple of years of work. You don’t 
give me a whole lot of confidence, Mr. Minister, when you say 
you’re studying it. I don’t have a whole lot of confidence it’s 
going to be solved within an acceptable time frame. 
 
(1230) 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to deal with something . . . I want to say, 
incidentally, I plan to leave what I think is the overarching issue 
in your department, the Farm Land Security Board, to Monday. 
I say so because I want to read — although I think there’s 
nothing at all in it — I want to read that report which we got 
this morning. 
 
So I will be dealing with that on Monday, Mr. Minister, and I 
would ask you to come with your officials, prepared to give us 
the statistics on that board’s operation, because I don’t think 
they do your government any credit. Now you be prepared to 
argue that Monday I just give you warning that that is the 
subject I’ll be dealing with, and I will not deal with it till 
Monday. 
 
  



 
April 15, 1988 

 

625 
 

Mr. Minister, I would also like to follow up on a question asked 
earlier in question period, which I think you didn’t do justice to, 
that is the cost of the translation statutes. This relates to Bill 2. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, since you have made an enormous issue 
out of this, I think you owe it to us in this Assembly and to the 
public of Saskatchewan to give us a breakdown. Anyone can 
throw around figures; I think you owe us some detail. I don’t 
necessarily need that now, Mr. Minister, but I do think that 
when, if ever, Bill 2 comes up, you should be prepared to give 
us a breakdown of what you think it’s going to cost us. A lot of 
people have expressed some real scepticism about your $15 
million figure. 
 
I would say as well, Mr. Minister, that when you give us that, 
we also will want to know what the federal government was 
prepared to contribute, because they say they were prepared to 
be fairly generous with you. I don’t think your skittishness over 
French language translation has anything to do with cost; I 
think you just haven’t got the nerve to do it. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’ll ask you that question now. You may take 
notice if you like, and give it to us when you deal with the Bill, 
because I assume it will be your department that’ll be largely 
handling this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Now let me deal with . . . let me deal 
with the three questions that he referred to. 
 
He indicates that he doesn’t want to have a study with regard to 
computerization of the land titles. I didn’t say we’re doing a 
study; I said we were very soon going to put it out to tender to 
begin the process of computerizing land titles. If he would listen 
to what the response is to his questions, then he would save 
himself some time. 
 
With regard to the land titles and the functioning of land titles 
in the province of Saskatchewan, last year we were able to 
increase the productivity of land titles by 20 per cent, and that’s 
to the credit of the people who work in the land titles’ system. 
Twenty per cent increase in productivity, I think, is something 
that should be commended. 
 
Third, with regards to The Farm Land Security Act, I would 
welcome that debate with the hon. member. Many of the areas 
of my constituency are involved with problems of farm debt, 
and I would very much like to debate the hon. member with 
regard to that issue. 
 
With regard to Bill 2, one would hope Bill 2 comes forward 
very soon, probably next week I’m sure, at which time I would 
clearly be prepared to debate all dimensions of Bill 2 with the 
hon. member. We will talk about how it will cost and what it 
will cost. 
 
To the hon. member, if he has been listening to that debate — 
and one wonders sometimes in the sense that he never asks any 
question in question period — but he has been listening to that 
debate, the issue for us in this province is not a question of 
money — that’s clearly part of it. There’s other issues involved 
in Bill 2 that we have  

stated ourselves clearly on, and we’ll be prepared to debate that. 
 
For the hon. member to somehow say it’s only a question of 
money and that’s all we’ve hung our hat on, I think he was 
being: (a) he’s not reading the debates or reading the 
newspapers; and (b) I’m glad to see him, for the first time, pose 
a question with regards to that issue he’s been somewhat silent 
on, surprisingly, over the last two weeks. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What the subject needs, Mr. Minister, is a 
little less debate and a few more facts, and that’s what I’m 
asking you to bring with you. I grant you, you will be prepared 
to debate it. What I’m asking you is: will you be prepared to 
give us the facts which we’ve been asking for, for two weeks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Chairman this is the first time 
he has asked me a question with regards to this. I can assure the 
hon. member I will be prepared to give him the facts, and I can 
assure the hon. member I will be prepared to debate him, and I 
would anticipate that the debate will probably run a week to 10 
days. And so one is clearly going to be prepared for a long 
debate in this Assembly, and I think that’s proper that it should 
be. The members opposite are opposed to it; government 
obviously supports that position. And I look forward to that 
debate over the next 10 days to two weeks. 
 
He will be provided with information; he will also be provided 
with the arguments as to why we’re doing this, and why this is a 
reasonable and responsible and pragmatic way to deal with the 
issue. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want to go on to the question of 
corrections, Mr. Minister. First, let me say that it’s somewhat 
disheartening to see an enormous increase in corrections with 
little increase in funding in areas which might go to preventing 
the problems which corrections are supposed to deal with. Mr. 
Minister, I think it’s fair to say that you’ve spent your money in 
a curative sense and not in a preventative sense. 
 
Mr. Minister, there are a number of programs, mostly in Social 
Services — where corrections once was and where it might 
perhaps logically still be — there’s a number of programs in 
Social Services which are intended to alleviate and reduce the 
rate of incarceration; those have been all cut. 
 
I don’t expect you to respond, unless you wish as such, because 
it’s not, strictly speaking your department, but there is a 
cross-over here. It appears the government has put a fair amount 
of money in corrections, and you have nothing for the kind of 
imaginative, preventative solutions which we once had and 
which were cut under your government. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ll stop and let you comment on that, if you wish. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, I mean, let’s look at corrections. 
And I’m not going to get into details of what’s in Social 
Services; that’s not appropriate, as you know full well. 
 
  



 
April 15, 1988 

 

626 
 

With regards to corrections, you can say, why don’t you 
manage it better? The reality is the court is where you have or 
do not have people going to correction centres. It’s up to the 
court to send those particular people to that particular 
institution. That’s point number one. 
 
Point number two, we had in the . . . which was a very 
successful program in corrections, which was the early-release 
program. It allowed people out earlier than perhaps some of the 
judges wished, allowed them to perhaps been more productive 
with their time than being in a provincial corrections centre; we 
identified which ones were most appropriate — many of them 
involved in drunk driving or that type of thing. And of late the 
court, as you are full aware, in Prince Albert basically struck 
down that whole program. And that program we believe to be a 
very, very good and competent program, and if you were to 
read, most people writing about the issue believe the same. 
 
Now that’s subject to appeal in the court and I suppose it’s 
improper for us to go into a great deal more detail than that. 
Although it strikes me that if we are going to be hamstrung on 
not being able to do those types of programs, what you’re going 
to find is having to build more and more and more jails whether 
we like it or not. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I don’t wish to give the 
impression that you’re not . . . that I think you’re spending too 
much on corrections. My point is, and I restate it and then leave 
it, is that if you spent some more money on social services 
trying to prevent some of these problems, you wouldn’t have 
the growth industry you have in corrections. 
 
And I want to deal with . . . just, Mr. Minister, for a moment, 
with the growth industry. I refer you to page 25 of the annual 
report. The prison population, according to that report, has gone 
up by 32 per cent since 1982. Now that is considerably more 
than the Canadian or North American average. 
 
It’s clearly something that needs to be redressed. And I think 
the problem here is that you’ve cut those programs in Social 
Services since 1982, and I think that’s why you’re having more 
people in jail because you’re doing a lot less to try to prevent it. 
 
Let’s take, however, the 32 per cent increase in corrections. The 
staff, Mr. Minister, has simply not kept track, has simply not 
kept pace. In the five years since . . . covered by the annual 
report, your prison population went up by 32 per cent; your 
staff population went up by three per cent. 
 
Now this year there’s another 10 per cent increase, so the total 
of the two is 13 per cent. But you still have a situation, Mr. 
Minister, where you have a 32 per cent increase in the prison 
population and, up to this point in time, a 3 per cent increase in 
staff. My guess is you’ve probably had a similar increase in the 
amount of physical facility. 
 
Mr. Minister, we hear reports of facilities being totally 
inadequate of people not being incarcerated because there’s no 
place to put them, and if there were, there’d be  

no staff to look after them. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you thought it appropriate to take away the 
programs in Social Services which might have prevented it, the 
very least you’ve got to do is spend a great deal more on 
corrections, both on staff and physical plant and facility, to 
accommodate this growth industry which you’ve got going. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member referred 
to, I think, the fine options program as one we had cut back on. 
I can tell the hon. member that when the NDP were in 
government in Saskatchewan — you can listen to this — 50 per 
cent was the number that were being incarcerated under, you 
know, as opposed to the fine option program — 50 per cent. We 
have reduced that to 35 per cent — 50 per cent down to 35 per 
cent. All right. Now that’s a significant decrease, I think. 
 
With regards to the prisons, we have spent 15 and a half million 
dollars in the Regina Correctional Centre. That gives 200 more 
spaces — 15 and a half million dollars for 200 more spaces. 
That will be open and in use this month. 
 
Now I think what that tells you is that for 200 additional beds in 
a new facility at a cost of 15 and a half million dollars is a 
significant amount of money. And so that if you’re suggesting 
somehow that we continue to build more and more facilities, 
you have to recognize that they do cost a lot of money. 
 
Now if you come to the program of saying, well let’s maybe 
then have — we can deal with it on two ends: send fewer 
people to jail or those that are in jail perhaps have their stay 
there for a smaller, shorter period of time. 
 
I think the hon. member, as a lawyer, recognizes that it’s 
somewhat difficult for a government or a department like this to 
instruct the court as to how many people we want to have in jail 
at any given time. And it’s going to be the court that makes the 
decision as to whether this person should go to jail. Is now the 
court saying, well we’re going to restrict on the early release 
program. And that obviously adds further pressure to the 
number of people that are going to be in an institution at any 
given time. So both of those pressures are clearly at work. 
 
With regards to are there more people going to jail today, here? 
Of course there are — clearly there are. And that is not a simple 
problem either, and I would think the hon. member would not 
try to make that into some type of a simple program that if we 
simply add a couple of other programs in the field of Social 
Services, that would not happen. 
 
And I think that he would be open enough to recognize that 
society is in fact changing and that there are pressures on 
society as to why that is happening. There’s perhaps a variety of 
reasons. But clearly, it is happening. There’s more 
incarceration, more people being sent to jail, and that’s a reality. 
 
(1245) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the largest single contributor 
to this growth industry you have in prisons  
  



 
April 15, 1988 

 

627 
 

has little to do with an increase in crime in the traditional sense 
and everything to do with a lack of alternate facilities. 
 
Any number of different groups, mental health people, tell me 
that their clients who used to go to other facilities now go to 
jail. Why? Because you’ve cut the funding for the other 
facilities. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you’re not prepared to use your imagination 
and develop at least — never mind your imagination, that 
would be asking the impossible. If you’re not prepared to 
maintain the programs which you found in place when you took 
office, if you want to cut those, if you want to cut funding to 
mental health and the other groups, then the very least you have 
to be prepared to do is to build the jails that you need to have to 
hold the people. 
 
It is a financially — it’s financial insanity and it’s socially 
destructive to be taking away other facilities which are 
low-cost, and relying instead upon jails which are extremely 
high-cost facilities. That’s financial nonsense and it’s socially 
destructive. But if that’s your path that you insist on taking, 
then the very least you have to do is to build sufficient number 
of jails. 
 
Mr. Minister, you spoke with enormous pride about 200 
additional facilities. I can tell you that this graph, which is so 
helpfully included, and it’ll probably be missing from next 
year’s annual report, that’s been the course around here. As 
soon as we find something useful in the annual report the 
information is out next year. But for this year, at least, we have 
it. 
 
The graph suggests, Mr. Minister, the population of the jails has 
gone up by 300. The bottom line, Mr. Minister, is that your 
facilities are outdated before they’re even built. Your 
population has gone up by 300; you’re building another 200 
spaces. Mr. Minister, you’re behind the eight ball before the 
ribbon is ever cut on the thing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I think the hon. member has raised 
several points with regards to the fact that we should be . . . 
what he’s saying is, we should be building more and more jails. 
If the hon. member wants to get into some of the statistical 
reasons as to why you see more and more people incarcerated, 
the fastest growing offence leading to incarceration is property 
offences — robberies, that type of thing. 
 
An. Hon. Member: — Right, and it’s hunger. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — It’s not hunger. The biggest part, and 
you can ask any criminologist that you want, the biggest 
problem is in the areas of alcohol and drug abuse —without 
question. Without question the problem is in drug abuse and 
alcohol abuse. 
 
The hon. member asks that we do something about it. When we 
set about to do something about it — the Minister of Health 
with regard to Whitespruce, where we’ve put a lot of money 
into it, and a good program — and the hon. member is not even 
prepared to stand up and acknowledge that that is a good 
program. He will not even stand up and recognize that. 
 

The fact is, is that there’s more and more property offences, and 
the reality is more and more of those property offences are drug 
related. Now that’s something that society must come to grips 
with. It’s not good enough to say, well let’s just disregard that, 
that’s not a fact. It is a fact, and it’s a fact here, and it’s a fact in 
other areas. And that’s something you have to come to grips 
with, and it’s not an easy problem to solve. 
 
Whitespruce will go a ways to help that problem. Whitespruce 
is not going to eliminate that problem either. That problem 
involves a whole lot more than simply saying, yes, we need 
something else. It has to be concerted effort by government 
obviously, and by various groups that have done very good 
work in this field, whether they’re non-government agencies or 
what. 
 
It also requires a concerted effort by our school system where 
you see a great deal of drugs still being used in our school 
system. And how do you deal with that? 
 
So the member opposite does not wish to deal with some of the 
factual realities that we face of people going into incarceration. 
That’s his problem; he does not want to deal with that, and he 
would rather want to get into some political diatribe as to why 
he would see everybody going to jail. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It’s a fact, Mr. Minister, that the rate of 
property crimes in the city of Regina doubled within nine 
months of the time you introduced welfare reform. A hungry 
man is a dangerous man; he has nothing to lose but his hunger, 
and that’s why the rate of the property crimes is up so 
dramatically, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, the largest single contributor to increasing 
alcoholism is the ads which you have on television, and the 
greatest contribution you could make to solving the problem is 
to get those ads off the television as we have been asking you to 
do for years. Those solutions, Mr. Minister, lie within your 
grasp, and it isn’t going to cost you a nickel. But you won’t do 
it because you’re in the hip pocket of the businesses who want 
to advertise, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to deal with another area that you’ve really 
excelled in, and that’s maintenance enforcement. Mr. Minister, I 
want to say in fairness that the notion of having government 
assist — basically wives, but spouses — assist them in 
enforcing it was conceptually sound. But as so many times as 
happened with this government, what is conceptually sound is 
destroyed by incompetent administration. Mr. Minister, the 
maintenance enforcement is, once again, unacceptably behind. 
 
I had a client, Mr. Minister, go over to maintenance 
enforcement in Regina with an order. She was told that it would 
be 18 months before they got to deal with it. So she came back, 
and I had to deal with it at her expense. Mr. Minister, I don’t 
think this is anything but more staff. I think all you need are a 
few more staff in the area of maintenance enforcement and you 
could solve the problem. 
 
  



 
April 15, 1988 

 

628 
 

I know you will have the assistance of the member from 
Weyburn, who no doubt could contribute to this, if only the 
minister would listen to him. Mr. Minister, when I sit down, if 
you wish to ask the minister a question, I cede the floor. I know 
that you’re keenly sensitive to this problem in Weyburn, and 
you’ll want to ask the question. 
 
Mr. Minister, maintenance enforcement was conceptually 
sound. It was a good idea. It was done in the ’50s, and the 
department should always have been involved in maintenance 
enforcement. Unfortunately, you’re fouling it up by 
incompetent administration. This section is unacceptably behind 
in their work. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well the hon. member . . . if the hon. 
member would read his budget he would find out that in fact 
it’s almost doubling the amount of money going into that 
program. And I can also advise the hon. member . . . 
 
An. Hon. Member: — So you admit you’ve fouled up in the 
past. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well the hon. member sits there, Mr. 
Chairman, and he’s not even prepared to take enough time to 
read what is in fact being done. He sits out there and makes 
false, rash, uninformed criticisms, and then sits down. It’s in 
fact almost being doubled, Mr. Chairman. The time is being 
reduced almost on a monthly basis. We’ve put a lot more 
money into this. We made a bigger commitment to this, and 
that’s in the budget. That’s one of the new initiatives in the 
budget, and the hon. member hasn’t even read it. 
 
With regard to his allegation that somehow the only reason that 
you have an increase in a number of people going to jail is 
because people are hungry out there and they’re out breaking 
into places, that is absolutely unfounded — that is absolutely 
unfounded — no evidence to suggest that whatsoever. And the 
hon. member is simply again, like he always does, stand up and 
make some wild statement not based on fact, not based on 
statistics, not based on anything else. 
 
Then he goes and says, well the other problem you have is 
because there’s booze advertising and therefore booze crimes 
are up. The reality is, consumption of booze is down. The 
consumption of liquor in the province of Saskatchewan is 
down, Mr. Chairman. What is not down though, is the 
consumption of drugs and the use of drugs, primarily by our 
younger people. And that is up, and that is one of the major 
areas contributing to further crime in this province. 
 
And we’re trying to deal with that at a national level, we’re 
trying to deal with that at a provincial level, and I find it 
incredible that the member opposite does not even recognize 
that it’s a fact and an issue — doesn’t even recognize it to be a 
fact and an issue. I find that shameful from the member 
opposite, that he can at least have the decency, at least have the 
decency to do a little research and have the honesty to deal with 
the issues of the day, rather than simply drawing stuff out of a 
comic book like he is usually accused of doing by everyone, 
and we would get on far better with debating some of the issues 
present in the justice system today. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:57 p.m. 

 
 


	The Assembly met at 10 a.m.
	Prayers
	ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS

