


















































March 31, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 March 31, 1988 
 
 

249 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Muller: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 
pleasure today to introduce through you to the members of the 
Assembly and all the guests here today, 17 students from 
Choiceland, grade 12 students, their teacher, Larry Gill, who are 
seated on the Assembly floor, and Murray and Donna Lee, who 
are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
I really want to wish them an enjoyable day today in the 
legislature. I hope they have a good trip home, and with that I’d 
ask all members to greet them in the traditional manner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon I will 
have the honour on this side to represent our party in 
responding to the budget speech, and I want to welcome here to 
listen to me my son Douglas, another Koskie, and his friend 
Michael Wourms from Annaheim, I welcome you here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would too like to 
welcome some guests to the Assembly this afternoon. They are 
14 high school students from the Kamsack Collegiate in 
Kamsack. They are seated in the west gallery. They’re here with 
their teacher, Gary Alzomal. 
 
They are also members, either in all or in part, of the high 
school debating team and/or their business club. So we would 
anticipate from this group of students that’s here today that 
we’re going to see either some future stockbrokers and/or 
politicians. And I would hope that everybody here would help 
me in welcoming them in the usual manner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to 
you, and to all members and guests in the Legislative 
Assembly, a delegation from Trinidad & Tobago. And they are: 
first, the Hon. Dr. Albert Richards, Minister of Labour and 
Minister of Energy from Trinidad & Tobago; Dr. Jeff Davidson, 
and Dr. Davidson is chairman of the Tobago House of 
Assembly, and in addition is chairman of the Prime Minister’s 
committee on reconstruction. We have Mr. Michael Barzey, a 
consultant to the government; and Mr. Nathaniel Crichlow, 
who’s a union leader and member of the planning commission 
in Trinidad & Tobago; and Mr. Patrick Kangalos, managing 
director of security and investment and a member of the 
planning committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this delegation has been in Saskatchewan since 
last Sunday, spent the last four days here visiting with people at 
Public Participation, at SaskPower, at Agdevco, and others, 
with a view to exchanging ideas as  

it relates to reconstruction and public participation, etc. 
 
I do sincerely hope, and I have confidence in the fact, that the 
exchange has been useful, Mr. Speaker, and I would as the 
members of the delegation to rise and be recognized, and I 
would ask all members here to join me in a tropical 
Saskatchewan welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Proposed Private Pension Corporation 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question today is to the Premier, and it relates to today’s 
Leader-Post story dealing with a proposed new private pension 
corporation. Mr. Premier, in view of the fact that important 
details about this new pension corporation have apparently been 
revealed on the front page of the Leader-Post, but not other 
important details, and also in view of the fact that thousands of 
families have a direct stake in this through their pensions and 
the eventual outcome of the program, I wonder, sir, whether 
you will undertake to table in this House on Monday the written 
details with respect to this new proposed investment 
corporation, including the shareholders’ agreement, the mandate 
of the corporation, and the management structures. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — As minister responsible, I will advise the 
Leader of the Opposition that there are still negotiations going 
on with the representatives of the various pension funds. I can 
assure the hon. Leader of the Opposition that if the 
superannuation boards accept the request that the agreements all 
be released when they are signed, I am more than pleased to 
respond to that. 
 
As well, I can advise the hon. member that when negotiations 
are completed - and I must say that they are, I believe, very 
close to being completed - legislation will be required. I’m sure 
there will be ample opportunity at that time to discuss it. I 
would like to be able to make the commitment of releasing that 
information, but I think it would be proper that I get the 
approval of the pension funds and their representatives. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question either to the 
Premier or the Minister of Finance. I think the request for the 
release of the information is a reasonable response. I would 
urge the government that, given the details of the story, this 
request be made early and the details be made public early, 
since it’s the subject of a lot of rumour and other thoughts in the 
absence of the full details. 
 
But my question to the Premier or to the Minister of Finance, 
pertaining to this story, also relates to the question when put to 
the Minister of Finance about the auto fund, and other aspects 
of it. And the Minister of Finance is quoted in the paper as 
saying that he misunderstood - this is the exact quotation - the 
plans for the new pension corporation. I might say, Mr.  
  



 
March 31, 1988 

 

250 
 
 

Speaker, a rather surprising admission by the Minister of 
Finance, but not such a surprising fact to those of us who know 
how he estimates on budgets, and the like. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — But nevertheless, with respect to the 
confusion question, Mr. Premier, will you clarify this, because 
the Minister of Finance is somewhat confused. It is true or not, 
that the administration of the auto fund, our car insurance plan, 
is being transferred out of government hands and being placed 
in the care and the trust of this new pension corporation? And if 
this is true, why is it that your government has been denying 
this up to now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Far be it for me to talk to the hon. member 
about confusion as we try and find his stand on the free trade 
agreement, which varies depending where you are in the 
province and who’s listening. 
 
But having said that to the Leader of the Opposition, what I 
indicated to the reporter when the discussions began, as to both 
the need and who or which plans would be involved in the new 
pension corporation - and understand that the pension 
corporation is strictly the administration; the carriage of the 
plans is still with the superannuation boards or the boards that 
presently manage the pension plans - that the auto fund would 
not be involved because of the discussions of privatization. We 
didn’t want them to be related or seem to be related. 
 
That’s my fault; I didn’t communicate that as strongly or as 
well as I should have to my officials. They went through the 
normal discussions with all parties, all administrators of pension 
funds, and when it came to the final conclusion, it was 
recommended that that be in. Keep in mind that it’s not taking 
possession of the funds; or, the possession of the funds still 
remains with those presently administering the funds. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question. I thank the 
minister for that slight clarification of the problem, but I want to 
speak to the question of the auto fund more particularly by 
asking you, sir, or the Premier, if you’ll advise the House who it 
is that will actually manage the funds of the new investment 
corporation. 
 
Is it not correct to say that the management of these funds will 
be, in effect, in the hands of - and I don’t mean this in any 
pejorative sense - but the large companies in pension business 
or financial operations who’ll be doing the actual investment of 
the funds that will be transferred over to the new investment 
corporation, and that includes auto funds? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That’s not correct. There are two objectives 
overall with regard to a new pension corporation. The difficulty 
that we face is that right now under government administration 
there are pension funds of roughly $3.6 billion. Because of the 
pension changes made in 1979, that will rapidly escalate, so that 
our estimations about 1991, that the funds under  

administration could be anywhere up to 8 or $9 billion. 
 
What we want to see are two things: one, we want to ensure that 
we have the professional expertise here in Saskatchewan to 
manage those funds; secondly, that as a result of the expertise 
that we hope to be able to attract here, not outside the province, 
that there will be a - it’s to be expected and hoped - a higher 
rate of return for the employees who have moneys in the 
pension corporation or in the pension funds. 
 
Keep in mind what I said in an answer earlier, that the actual 
possession of those funds will remain throughout with the plan 
members through their superannuation boards that they have 
selected for some considerable period of time. They will still 
have the override to the operation of this plan. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier 
or the Minister of Finance. I hear the Minister of Finance, but 
the reality is that somebody or some agency will actually be 
responsible for the task of managing the funds, the day-to-day 
decisions, that won’t be the board of directors of the new 
investment corporation or the constituent elements of it, and 
somebody is going to have to be responsible for the 
administration of the relevant legislation. 
 
To give you but one example: take The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Act - someone will have to administer that; or the 
workers’ compensation fund; or the teachers’ superannuation 
fund. When claims are being made on pensions, when 
adjudications are being, from an injured worker or from an 
aggrieved motorist or from a concerned pensioner, who makes 
those decisions if not the large corporation that actually does 
the administration of the legislation and the funds. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The hon. Leader of the Opposition doesn’t 
understand that there are two aspects: one, the actual 
administration of pension funds is altogether different than the 
operation, for example of the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
The Workers’ Compensation Board will continue to act as the 
Workers’ Compensation Board, or the automobile fund will still 
continue to operate, do the adjudication where it’s appropriate. 
That has nothing to do with the moneys that these organizations 
have for investment purposes. They are completely separate 
from their operations. 
 
Right now the investment of those funds - and as I say the 
amounts are rapidly escalating - are done by their investment 
boards in conjunction with the Department of Finance. All that 
we’re doing, in a nutshell, is taking what Finance has 
traditionally done, putting it in a new pension corporation 
owned by the pension funds of Saskatchewan themselves so 
that we can, through that vehicle, enhance the ability of 
Saskatchewan to manage the funds in the best interest of the 
employees of the province. That’s the objective. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, again I thank the minister for 
the objective. I repeat again that it would be to the benefit of all 
the members of the House and to the families  
  



 
March 31, 1988 

 

251 
 
 

involved to have the documents tabled as quickly as possible to 
make sure that interpretation by that Minister of Finance and 
that government is accurate. I won’t make my usual, but, I 
think, factual comments about the political accuracy of the 
government made there in other areas. 
 
But let me direct this one question directly to the Premier of the 
province of Saskatchewan, and it pertains to the SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) and the developments in 
today’s story. Mr. Premier, my question is this to you: given the 
facts that the general commercial side of SGI is now on the 
auction block, that very unique Tory auction block on 
privatization or piratization - that’s one arm of SGI - given the 
other fact that the auto fund will now be administered, not by 
SGI but be a new corporation - according to the newspaper 
reports, that’s what it said today; table the documents; it says it 
in the newspaper reports - isn’t it a fact that there’s nothing left 
of SGI? And you’ve accomplished something that Ross 
Thatcher himself even couldn’t do - you’ve done away with 
SGI. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition finally got to his political point. I mean, he’s been 
laying with it for some time. Let me make it clear, the Minister 
of Finance has said the two operations are completely separate. 
 
I’ll say it again for the hon. Leader of the Opposition. We are 
encouraging the development of an investment corporation here 
to take the funds that we have in pension corporations and in 
pension plans and invest them by Saskatchewan people with the 
best expertise we can find, so that they don’t have to go to 
Toronto and get somebody else - or - or New York - to do all 
the investment. We want to do it here for Saskatchewan People. 
That is completely separate from the operation of ongoing 
activities, whether it’s the Saskatchewan auto fund, or whether 
it’s workers’ compensation, or any of these things. 
 
Secondly, let me also say, Mr. Speaker, that we are actively 
involved in having the people of Saskatchewan participate in 
government, and we’re very proud of that - from Sask bonds, 
from SaskPower bonds, from Saskoil shares. And we will 
continue to offer them, Mr. Speaker, and they like it. They 
invest hundreds of millions of dollars. I go back, and I’m sure 
the hon. member knows, when you look at the co-op movement 
here in the province of Saskatchewan, they’ve allowed people 
to have shares all over, and everybody participates. 
 
I feel exactly the same way about government. We want the 
people of Saskatchewan to participate, and they will have the 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker, and that’s what we’re providing them 
right now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, new question to the Premier. I 
note the Premier’s talk about participation by Saskatchewan 
people, but the reality is, when you see the evidence of the Sask 
Minerals sales, that the only people who are participating are 
the big corporations of eastern  

Canada and outside this country, and that’s the case with 
Saskoil too. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — There is absolutely no doubt that the 
privatization that’s taken place so far has given the highway 
workers the freedom to go without a job, with no new highways 
built. That kind of privatization we don’t accept. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — But my question is this. If I am in error, 
then I ask, as I did in the first question, which you solve very 
easily by tabling the documents: don’t hide; table the 
documents. The Regina Leader-Post says this -I quote: 
 

Although technically a separate entity from SGI, the auto 
fund is administered by SGI (is administered by SGI, we 
all know that) and its financial statement is included in the 
SGI annual report. 

 
Now if the administration of that auto fund is no longer SGI’s - 
as the Minister of Finance says, it now goes to the new 
investment corporation, and if the general insurance is up for 
sale and being privatized, what’s left of SGI? You succeeded 
where Ross Thatcher couldn’t. You’ve done away with SGI. 
That’s what I’m saying to you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member wanted me 
to tell him whether he was in error or not. I’ll tell him. You’re 
in error. You’re wrong. You’ve got it. You wanted to know? 
You’re wrong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The answer is that they are separate. You 
have the administration, and you have the investment of the 
pension funds, and you can’t seem to separate those in your 
mind. I believe that you can, but you don’t want to. Okay. It’s 
like an awful lot of other things when it comes to public 
participation. You say, well I’m kind of for it, and they you 
stand up and say, but I’m against if for these reasons. I mean, 
you want to be on both sides of the fence; well, fair enough. 
That’s the legacy of your political life, I suppose. 
 
I will just say, Mr. Speaker, they are separate. The minister has 
said they’re separate. I’ve said they’re separate. Even the people 
who are managing the pension funds here in the province and 
administering those various kinds of activities have asked for 
Saskatchewan’s own investment corporation. That’s what we’re 
going to provide. And you can call it public participation, or 
you can call it anything you like, but it will return a higher 
benefit to the people of Saskatchewan who don’t necessarily 
want to go to New York or to Toronto to have somebody else 
invest their money when they can do it right here at home. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
March 31, 1988 

 

252 
 
 

Water Shortage in Southern Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for 
the Premier, and from previous correspondence the Premier will 
know of my concern about what appears to be a very severe 
water and moisture shortage problem that’s looming over a 
great portion of southern Saskatchewan this spring, and I’m 
sure the Premier appreciates the magnitude of that problem. 
 
Mr. Premier, apart from just monitoring the situation or 
surveying the situation, I wonder if you can tell us what specific 
plans your government would have in mind on a contingency 
basis to deal with that situation which could be extremely 
serious in just a few weeks from now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there are a 
combination of things that we can do in the province of 
Saskatchewan to deal with the conservation of water and the 
use and the prudent management of water as a resource. 
 
The first is: we can initiate projects like Rafferty and Alameda 
to conserve water when we know that drought is a cyclical 
problem here in southern Saskatchewan. Every once in a while 
we’ll get fortunate and a lot of water will come in, and then we 
just let it go into the United States or run into the ocean. We 
want to conserve that water and to manage it so that we can use 
it year-round. 
 
Secondly, we are expanding the use of irrigation and the 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation, as well as the Department of 
Agriculture and PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 
Administration), are working with farmers in municipalities and 
ranchers right across the province. 
 
Third, I’m sure the minister responsible for Sask Water can 
stand in his place and talk about the negotiations and the plans 
and the contingency efforts that are in place, strategies to help 
municipalities and farmers and ranchers have access to water 
despite the fact that we don’t have the spring run-off to speak 
of, or any rain to date. 
 
So clearly, Mr. Speaker, we can’t make it rain or snow, but in 
the event people need access to water, there are several things 
that we’re doing with municipalities, farmers, and ranchers that 
would allow them to have access to as much water as we can 
get our hands on in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, unfortunately none of the things 
just mentioned by the Premier are going to help in two or three 
or four weeks when we’ve got a major problem potentially on 
our hands. And I wonder if the Premier or the minister 
responsible for the water corporation could indicate some 
specifics. For example, will there be a program for transporting 
feed or livestock or water supplies for the livestock sector? And 
will the Saskatchewan Water Corporation be providing pipes 
and pumps free of charge, which the PFRA used to do before 
the water corporation took over that part of the operation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to respond 
to the hon. member. The water corporation is  

fully aware that we have a shortage of snow across most of 
Saskatchewan this year. As far back as two months ago, the 
corporation started to look at the communities that would likely 
face the most difficulty. They are putting in place contingency 
plans that can be used in many of the communities who now are 
finding that their wells are running low on water. The 
corporation is looking at the availability of other water sources 
in the area where they could tap a vein at a different level, and 
in some communities that’s being done. 
 
With relation to the providing of pipes to pump water from one 
reservoir to another, we have done that for many years. It’s 
been a very effective program; the program is available and is 
being utilized. Even now we have a number of sets of pipes out 
being used by different individuals and different communities. I 
believe the corporation is responding as well as anyone could to 
a serious situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sale of SPC Building in Moose Jaw 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
Minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 
 
This week in the House, you told us of a novel PC way to save 
money. You sell a building for $280,000 and then rent half of it 
back for $370,000. I’m referring of course to the sale of the 
SPC building in Moose Jaw, and I’m asking, can you today 
confirm that the purchaser of the building, one Garth Rattee, is 
a well-known Moose Jaw Tory who nominated Keith Parker, 
your party’s candidate in the last provincial election, and can 
you confirm that the only real estate agency which was given 
the opportunity to list the building for sale is one run by Mr. 
Rattee’s wife? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t personally know 
this Mr. Rattee that the hon. member talks about. My 
recollection, Mr. Speaker, of how the building was sold was 
that it was offered to the Moose Jaw Real Estate Board as a 
listing for all realtors in Moose Jaw, and that seems quite 
appropriate to me. And it’s not, I suppose, totally surprising to 
see members opposite take small-business men and drag their 
names through the gutter and smear them all over the place. 
 
And the other point that should be made, Mr. Speaker, is yes, 
we sold a building. At SaskPower, we sold a building in Moose 
Jaw for, I believe it was $280,000, that I sent in the letter to 
your colleague from Moose Jaw. And yes, we are renting less 
than 50 per cent of that building back; I think it’s about 48 per 
cent of the square footage. And we’re not in the property 
management business. We don’t want to be in the property 
management business. 
 
We are trying, Mr. Speaker, to produce electricity and distribute 
gas at the cheapest possible rate to the consumers of 
Saskatchewan and we have done that, Mr. Speaker. If you take 
a look at the latest annual report where we had a 36 - a $36 
million turnaround with a 35 to $36 million profit, I’ll stack that 
up against fair business acumen any day, Mr. Speaker. And for 
him to suggest that $280,000 in the hand isn’t worth something, 
he doesn’t  
  



 
March 31, 1988 

 

253 
 
 

understand anything about the cost of money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, you can say what you like, but you’re not fooling the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — The people see many small businesses 
in desperate trouble; they see a select few with Tory 
connections that seem to be benefiting from sweetheart deals. 
They call it patronage, they see the waste, and they smell the 
corruption. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, why not come clean on 
this particular issue so you can restore some trust and 
confidence in your government and tell us: was this sale ever 
tendered, and if so, can you lay the bids on the Table in this 
House? Will you table also the independent appraiser’s report in 
this matter which sets out the building’s worth? Can you do 
that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, he asks the question, but 
he doesn’t listen to the answers. The listing was given to the 
Moose Jaw Real Estate Board. He’s suggesting that the Moose 
Jaw Real Estate Board is a Tory organization. I think if you do 
a blood test on the membership you’ll find that that’s likely 
true, but there is no direct connection between the Moose Jaw 
Real Estate Board and SPC. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Restoration of Prescription Drug Plan 
 

Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. 
Mr. Premier, when your Minister of Finance brought down his 
budget last year, he talked in glowing terms about the protection 
of health, and then you turned around and destroyed the 
prescription drug plan, forcing many people in this province to 
make a choice between groceries and prescription drugs, and 
many of these people were seniors, Mr. Premier. And you’ve 
betrayed them and they know it, and nothing short of restoring 
the prescription drug plan will be acceptable to them. 
 
Mr. Premier, can you tell us whether today in your budget you 
will restore the prescription drug plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows, if 
she’s concerned about the poor, that the prescription drug 
program that we have in the province of Saskatchewan protects 
the poor. And, Mr. Speaker, for senior citizens, for those that 
are on low income, for those that need income help, Mr. 
Speaker, we have the best program in North America, and the 
hon. member knows that. And for many, as in institutions, it 
didn’t change at all, Mr. Speaker, so don’t let the public be 
confused, Mr. Speaker. She knows that that’s the case. 

I will say with respect to getting people that have money to 
think about prescription drugs and the drugs they use, it’s a very 
good idea. Mr. Speaker, we know the number one problem 
facing society today, and particularly among the youth, is drug 
abuse and crimes linked to drugs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they don’t want to admit it. They have the 
audacity to stand and say they support health care, but they 
never did have the courage to fix it and make it stronger and 
stronger, and we do, Mr. Speaker, and we’re proud of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Premier, there are many people who are 
not being helped by your so-called prescription drug plan, who 
have great difficulty paying the up-front costs. And if you don’t 
believe us, Mr. Premier, call the by-elections in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Now last year in your budget, Mr. Premier, 
you privatized the school-based children’s dental plan, the best 
dental plan in North America, firing some 414 dental workers 
and closing down some 578 dental clinics, many of which were 
in rural Saskatchewan. And later you admitted that it was a 
mistake. You admitted that, Mr. Premier, and I think that was in 
November. 
 
Now you have instructed your ministers, Mr. Premier, to 
reinstitute the dental program, or at least will you please tell us 
what you are going to do to provide adequate, and I say 
adequate, dental services in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Again, Mr. Speaker, if I could just correct 
the hon. member. When you had dental therapists in rural 
Saskatchewan, they weren’t serving the adult public in rural 
Saskatchewan. So families and farmers and seniors and their 
wives, husbands, and adults, Mr. Speaker, didn’t have access to 
a dentist. They didn’t go into the schools, Mr. Speaker, and get 
access to the therapists. That’s not right. 
 
Right now we’re having more and more dentists go into rural 
Saskatchewan to serve all of the public, Mr. Speaker -that is the 
seniors, the adults, and the students. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think anybody can 
complain and say that a dentist can’t provide the service as well 
as a therapist or as an assistant. Obviously, a dentist is the 
appropriate person to provide that service. 
 
And third, Mr. Speaker, third, we know that the young people 
of today can go and get access to a dentist in rural 
Saskatchewan, all over Saskatchewan, and it’s fully funded by 
the province of Saskatchewan, with access to a dentist. Before, 
Mr. Speaker, they didn’t have that quality, and now they’ve got 
the best quality you can buy in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
  



 
March 31, 1988 

 

254 
 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY 
ESTIMATES 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I have a message from His 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — This is a message from the Lieutenant 
Governor, dated March 31, 1988: 

 
The Lieutenant Governor transmits estimates of certain 
sums required for the service of the province for 12 
months ending March 31, 1989, and supplementary 
estimates of certain sums required for the service of the 
province for the 12 months ending March 31, 1988, and 
recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. 
(Signed) Frederick W. Johnson, Lieutenant Governor, 
province of Saskatchewan. 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move, seconded by the member from Indian Head-Wolseley: 
 

That His Honour’s message, the estimates and 
supplementary estimates, be referred to the Committee of 
Finance. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to present the second budget of this Progressive 
Conservative administration. 
 
In last year’s budget address I indicated that this government 
was determined to take up the challenges and opportunities 
presented by a world economy in transition. I indicated that we 
believe Saskatchewan could grow and prosper in this new 
global environment if we utilized the innovative spirit and 
vision of the people of Saskatchewan, and I indicated that we 
would work co-operatively with individuals and communities to 
adapt our society to this new environment. 
 
We believe in Saskatchewan’s future, and we’re convinced that 
the fiscal and economic blueprint that we have put in place 
provides us with a solid foundation to get on with the job of 
building for the future; accordingly, this budget reflects our 
government’s determination to stay the course established last 
year. 
 
We’re reaffirming our commitment to protect and support 
health care, education, family services and the family farm; to 
diversify and develop the economy, and to improve the 
efficiency and effectiveness of government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are uncertain economic times, as  

demonstrated both by the October 19, 1987 stock-market 
decline and continued oil price instability. In this difficult 
environment, it is not surprising that there are strong 
disagreements among economists and business analysts as to 
the future direction and health of the world economy. 
 
Many experts are convinced that the world economy is at 
serious risk. For example, the Conference Board of Canada has 
warned that the world economy is being drawn closer to the 
edge of a global recession. There are, however, analysts who 
suggest that the international economy, and the Canadian 
economy in particular, will grow at a healthy pace. One Major 
Canadian bank recently stated that the Canadian and 
international outlook remains constructive, and that we 
anticipate a sixth year of uninterrupted expansion and generally 
high levels of economic activity. 
 
These conflicting economic forecasts underscore the present 
state of uncertainty in world markets. In the face of such 
uncertainty, the C.D. Howe Institute cautions that the economic 
environment for policy-making will continue to be volatile in 
1988. In shaping our economic future in this difficult 
environment we must recognize that there are important lessons 
to be learned and applied. 
 
First, it is no longer possible for any nation to achieve sustained 
growth and prosperity by isolating itself from economic events 
beyond its borders. Canadians cannot afford inward-looking 
policies. We must look outward to the world and develop 
policies that are responsive to the changing global economy. 
 
Secondly, world-wide prosperity depends on the growth of 
trade. Between 1950 and 1973 there was a steady expansion of 
world trade. This led to a substantial rise in living standards for 
the major western economies, including Canada. Since that time 
trade barriers have been erected with increasing frequency. This 
has slowed the growth of volume of trade, resulting in a 
reduced rate of growth and living standards in these countries. 
Opposing freer trade is, therefore, a self-defeating and 
backward step, as it would deny us the economic growth 
required to finance better health and education services. 
 
Third, the use of protectionist measures leads to inefficiency 
and lower productivity by artificially propping up otherwise 
uncompetitive industries. As we in western Canada know, 
consumers are required to pay higher prices for the products of 
these industries. 
 
As well, protectionism invites ever-intensifying cycles of 
retaliation. For example, American, European and Japanese 
government subsidies to farmers have now grown to over $80 
billion annually. Mr. Speaker, protectionism obstructs healthy 
competition and economic development. 
 
Saskatchewan’s response, Mr. Speaker. The Premier has 
represented Saskatchewan’s interest in many international and 
national forums. He has repeatedly demonstrated through his 
actions that we can shape our future, and he has demonstrated 
that Saskatchewan can make a difference on the world stage. 
Saskatchewan must  
  



 
March 31, 1988 

 

255 
 
 

continue to ensure its future prosperity by realistically 
addressing the global forces that are now affecting our 
economy. 
 
It is up to us to develop a set of practical initiatives that will 
provide us with the flexibility to deal with changes in the 
international market-place, and to ensure the building of a more 
diversified Saskatchewan economy. That is why we fully 
support the Canada-United States Free Trade Agreement. This 
agreement will strengthen Canada’s position in the world 
economy by offering us new economic opportunities. It reduces 
the threat of protectionist measures from our largest trading 
partner by establishing a set of fair and predictable trading 
rules. In addition, the agreement will expand our common 
economic interests. This will place us in a stronger bargaining 
position relative to other trading regions as we continue to 
negotiate the elimination of world trade barriers. 
 
Our future prosperity also depends on our actions here in 
Saskatchewan. We must diversify the Saskatchewan economy 
by building on our natural advantages to provide new economic 
opportunities and to protect ourselves against global 
uncertainties. This will create new jobs and ensure a higher 
standard of living for the people of our province. 
 
But economic development is more than the formation of 
capital. It is also the creation of knowledge and the 
development of a skilled and educated work-force, and this is 
one reason why we have made education a high priority. We 
believe that the free trade agreement and the diversification of 
the Saskatchewan economy are the most realistic approaches to 
deal with the changes occurring in the world economy, and this 
practical strategy provides us with the means to control our 
future in very uncertain economic times. 
 
This afternoon I will be announcing new initiatives to 
strengthen the Saskatchewan economy, to position it to take 
advantage of the free trade agreement, and to capture economic 
opportunities in the international market-place. 
 
In last year’s budget address I reviewed some of the measures 
that this government had taken to provide the people of 
Saskatchewan with a more efficient and productive 
government. These measures included the relocation of 
government offices to Moose Jaw, Melville, Swift Current, and 
Saskatoon; the strengthening and upgrading of regional offices; 
the establishment of the property management corporation; and 
the increased use of the private sector. These innovative 
measures have eliminated much government waste, and they 
have improved the quality of service by bringing government 
closer to the people. 
 
We are pursuing further opportunities in these areas. In March 
of last year I presented my economic and financial report, a 
four-year plan to significantly reduce the deficit. I indicated that 
if no action were taken, the deficit for 1987-88 would be $1.5 
billion. The financial plan called for this deficit to be cut in half 
in 1987-88, and halved again in 1988-89. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we have achieved our first objective. The deficit 
for 1987-88 will be $568 million, and this is substantially less 
than the target we set in our economic and financial report. 
 

(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, reaching our fiscal target for 1988-89 will require 
further efficiency measures within government, responsible 
wage agreements, and a continuing commitment by third parties 
to spend moneys wisely. For our part, we are continuing to 
improve the management of expenditures under our direct 
control by reallocating funds from less critical areas to higher 
priority areas through consultations with individuals and 
families, interest groups, and communities across this province. 
We have identified clear priorities, and we have addressed these 
priorities. 
 
This has required us to make choices, Mr. Speaker, but making 
choices is what government is all about. We have made the 
choice to reallocate social assistance funds to support our 
welfare reform, employment and training programs, and we will 
continue to redirect funds in this manner. 
 
We will continue to reassign staff from processing welfare 
payments to delivering programs that enable our welfare clients 
to become more productive and independent. 
 
The success of our welfare reform initiatives has allowed us to 
focus on other priorities. In this budget we have made the 
choice to redirect savings from the reduction of welfare fraud 
and abuse to the areas of foster care and family support. 
 
This government has also listened and responded to changing 
community standards. With respect to the care of the mentally 
handicapped, we are moving away from institutional care. For 
example, most North Park Centre residents are now living in 
group homes and private homes. In addition to being 
progressive social policy, this decision frees up funds for new 
community initiatives for other handicapped individuals. 
Accordingly, I’m pleased to announce that we have made the 
choice to fund two new group homes in 1988-89 for autistic 
people. 
 
Last year we amalgamated several agencies into the Department 
of Human Resources, Labour and Employment, thereby 
significantly improving the co-ordination and effectiveness of 
these agencies. 
 
We subsequently created an employment opportunities branch 
through the realignment of existing resources in that 
department. The branch will focus on increasing job 
opportunities in the private sector for Saskatchewan residents 
through a new “Hire Saskatchewan” initiative. 
 
We have also amalgamated the administration of the seniors’ 
bureau, the seniors’ heritage grant, and the Saskatchewan 
income plan into a new, more effective seniors’ directorate. By 
making the choice to place these programs within one agency, 
we have been able to achieve savings while improving the 
delivery of our seniors’ program. 
 
  



 
March 31, 1988 

 

256 
 
 

Mr. Speaker, protecting the environment is an important 
priority for this government. Last year we made the choice to 
phase out our participation in a metal recycling program. This 
program is now operated by the private sector. 
 
This year, by reassigning the money saved, we will initiate, 
with the city of Regina and other interested parties, a three-year 
program to obtain and interpret information on ground water 
quality and to monitor possible sources of contamination. We 
will allocate funds to address the recommendations of the 
national task force on the environment and the economy, and 
we will establish a new program to develop alternatives to deal 
with the number of abandoned mines in high population areas. 
 
I’m also pleased to announce that we will establish a new oil 
and gas environmental fund. In the past, insufficient revenues 
were collected from individual companies for the cost of 
cleaning up abandoned oil and gas well sites. The new fund will 
ensure that these sites are cleaned up and that the cost is paid by 
industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to the conservation 
and development of our forest resources. Under previous 
administration, insufficient funding had been allocated to forest 
renewal. We have increased funding to reforestation programs 
to cover their omissions. I am pleased to announce the funding 
for a new five-year, 50 million seedling reforestation program. 
 
And for 1988-89 we have made the choice to pay for this new 
program through a portion of the revenues earned from the 
softwood lumber export tax. This year we will spend a total of 
$8.5 million on forestry initiatives. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — As these examples demonstrate, we have 
listened to the people of Saskatchewan in developing this 
budget. We have learned that they want to continue with the 
process of welfare reform, and they want our seniors to have 
easier access to the programs they require and deserve. And 
they want Saskatchewan’s environment and forests to be 
protected. In this budget we have made the choice to address 
these and other concerns while remaining equally vigilant in our 
management of the public purse. 
 
Last year 14 government departments and agencies received 
budget reductions; this year 11 will receive a decrease in 
funding. We have held down the growth in government 
operating and program costs for 1988-89 to only 3.6 per cent, or 
$127 million, by reallocating moneys through a careful ordering 
of priorities. I am proud to announce that 82 per cent, or $104 
million, of this program spending increase is committed to 
health and to education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The remaining $23 million, $10 million is 
directly attributable to increases for three important family 
programs - the Saskatchewan Pension  

Plan, the Saskatchewan income plan, and the mortgage 
protection plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government will continue to ensure that the 
people of Saskatchewan enjoy the best health care system in 
Canada, and this is our number one priority. Because of our 
commitment over the past six years, health care expenditures 
have increased by $510 million, or 68 per cent, and this is a 
record in which we can take pride, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have dedicated funding to an impressive array of new and 
rejuvenated health care facilities. Over the last six years we 
have built over 1,700 special care home beds for our senior 
citizens. We have built or are building over 600 new acute care 
beds, which can accommodate 600 new acute care beds, which 
can accommodate 26,000 additional patients per year. In 
Saskatoon, a large new wing will soon be opened at University 
Hospital, and construction is underway to expand St. Paul’s 
Hospital, and we fully expect that these major projects will 
substantially reduce waiting lists in Saskatoon. 
 
We have taken other steps to address the waiting list problem. 
In 1987-88 we funded an additional 2,000 operations in 
Saskatoon. Last July we opened a new day surgery unit at City 
Hospital, which has the capacity to perform 3,500 operations 
annually. As well, the Department of Health is now working 
with the hospital administrators in Saskatoon to computerize 
their waiting list to improve the efficiency of assigning beds. 
 
Since coming to office we have targeted over $15 million to 
reduce hospital waiting lists. Because of our efforts, Mr. 
Speaker, the number of operations performed annually in 
Saskatoon has increased by 42 per cent since 1983. People from 
all over Saskatchewan are increasingly using Saskatoon’s 
hospitals, and we are responding to that need. 
 
In Regina the improvements to the General Hospital will 
continue with the opening of a new wing in April. And the first 
phase of the expanded Wascana Rehabilitation Centre will be 
completed early next spring. I’m also pleased to announce, Mr. 
Speaker, that the construction of a new pediatric wing at the 
Pasqua Hospital will begin this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — This government is committed to the 
maintenance and rejuvenation of our health care system. This 
year budgetary spending on health will exceed $1.2 billion, an 
increase of 65 million or 5.6 per cent. 
 
In addition, capital funding of $63 million will be provided for 
the construction of health care facilities, including major 
renovation projects to upgrade hospitals in Davidson, 
Humboldt, Shaunavon, among others; a new 140-bed hospital 
in Estevan to replace St. Joseph’s; and new nursing homes in 
Elrose and Wadena; and a 40-bed addition to the nursing home 
in Nipawin. 
 
Many smaller Saskatchewan communities have found that 
facilities which combine both long-term care and acute-care 
beds under one administration and one physical structure 
provide the most efficient use of their  
  



 
March 31, 1988 

 

257 
 
 

resources. This year, Mr. Speaker, integrated facilities of this 
type are planned for the union hospitals in Cabri, Loon Lake, 
and Montmartre. Mr. Speaker, integrated facilities demonstrate 
that we can allocate resources more efficiently while 
maintaining quality health services in our smaller communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Similarly the Department of Health is 
engaged in discussions with representatives of St. Anthony’s 
nursing home, Providence Hospital, and the Moose Jaw Union 
Hospital to explore opportunities to co-ordinate and combine 
services among these three Moose Jaw Institutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1988-89 our hospitals will receive $33 million 
in new funds - an increase of 6.2 per cent. This will provide 
increased funding for existing operations and for the new beds 
now being added to the system. 
 
But we haven’t concentrated solely on hospitals. Over the past 
five years we have improved the quality of long-term care by 
adding 420 new staff physicians in nursing homes at a cost of 
$10 million. In addition, $25 million and 800 staff positions 
have been provided for the operation of new and upgraded 
nursing home beds. In 1988-89 additional funding will be 
provided to further enhance the quality of care in our nursing 
homes. 
 
We are also committed to assisting people who want to 
maintain their independence by remaining in their own homes, 
and this year additional funding will be provided for home care 
service. And these moneys will be targeted to areas in the 
province where there is a high proportion of seniors or disabled 
persons. 
 
Saskatchewan is a leader in the provision of quality out-patient 
mental health services, but financial resources must be 
increased if services are to be maintained. Additional funding 
and new patient care positions are allocated in this budget for 
mental health services. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan, particularly parents with young 
children, have expressed their support for this government’s 
efforts to address the growing problem of substance abuse. The 
Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission is playing 
a key role in addressing this problem, and this budget will 
provide that commission with over $15 million -a 16 per cent 
increase, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We have also begun the process of 
upgrading our drug and alcohol treatment facility in Saskatoon 
by relocating the Calder Centre program to the Frank Eliason 
Centre; as well, Whitespruce, our government’s innovative drug 
and alcohol youth treatment centre in Yorkton will be allocated 
$3.4 million - an increase of 125 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, in the last three years we  

have doubled the funding to combat the serious problem of 
alcohol and drug abuse. 
 
Recently, as part of our emphasis on preventative health care, 
we increased grants by 54 per cent to the cities of Regina and 
Saskatoon for the provision of public health services. Today 
I’m pleased to announce that we will undertake a public 
education campaign that will focus on healthy life-styles and 
personal responsibility for good health. This is in addition to the 
funding that we have provided for an ongoing public 
information campaign on the dreaded disease AIDS. 
 
Our health care system is costly to maintain. Health care costs 
for a family of four are now almost $5,000. The average 
Saskatchewan family’s provincial income taxes now cover only 
65 per cent of that cost. 
 
In addition to current high costs, our health care system must be 
prepared to face the challenge of our future health care needs. 
 
Saskatchewan’s senior population, for example, is expected to 
increase by 50 per cent over the next 20 years. This dramatic 
increase will result in additional funding pressures in the not too 
distant future. We cannot in good conscience, Mr. Speaker, 
ignore these increasing pressures. This would be both 
imprudent and irresponsible. 
 
Every province in Canada is confronted by the challenge of 
adapting its health care system to the changing needs of its 
population, while maintaining quality care in the face of higher 
cost. This government has begun the process of reforming 
Saskatchewan’s health care system to ensure that the quality 
services we have come to expect are maintained for the benefit 
of future generations. And we are determined to take the lead in 
meeting this important social challenge right now. 
 
(1500) 
 
But Government cannot and should not do the job alone. We 
must call upon the skills of our health professionals, the 
experience of the various groups with an interest in the health 
care system, the expertise of researchers in the academic, 
medical, and social service areas, and the understanding and 
participation of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
As we announced in the throne speech, we are establishing the 
Saskatchewan health care task force to take up this challenge. A 
task force will ensure that the widest possible cross-section of 
Saskatchewan people have an opportunity to express their 
views on the changing needs of their health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I urge everyone in this province - social or 
religious leaders, government and opposition members, 
workers, manager, farmers, and health professionals - to 
become involved in the task force discussions on the direction 
that our health care system should take into the next decade and 
beyond. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no institution is more important than the family. 
This government recognizes that fact. We  
  



 
March 31, 1988 

 

258 
 
 

introduced the mortgage protection plan to protect families 
from high interest rates, and this year, Mr. Speaker, we are 
increasing funding to this plan by over $4 million. 
 
We introduced the seniors’ heritage program to recognize the 
contribution and sacrifices our seniors have made. In 1987 over 
100,000 Saskatchewan seniors took advantage of this program. 
 
we eliminated the sales tax on purchases of clothing and 
footwear at a cost of $47 million a year. We more than doubled 
day-care expenditures in recognition of the needs of the 
growing number of working families. We created the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan to enable our residents to save for 
their retirement. Over 40,000 Saskatchewan individuals, of 
whom 80 per cent are women, are enrolled in the Saskatchewan 
Pension Plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — we significantly enhanced and restructured 
the Saskatchewan tax reduction to provide tax relief to almost 
350,000 lower- and middle-income individuals and families, 
including a special provision for single parents in recognition of 
the difficulties they may face. These initiatives are protecting 
and are enhancing family life in our province. 
 
Saskatchewan families need quality day-care services. In 1982 
there were only 3,900 licensed day-care spaces in 
Saskatchewan. Today there are over 5,700 spaces, nearly 2,000 
more, Mr. Speaker. Demand for day care continues to grow in 
response to changing employment patterns, and this year we 
will provide an additional 600,000 to improve the availability of 
day care to the working families of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We are also examining initiatives to extend 
affordable day care to rural families and to families who have 
children with special needs. Over the course of this year my 
colleagues, the Minister of Social Services, will be announcing 
new initiatives in this area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has always recognized the 
contributions made to Saskatchewan by our senior citizens. This 
budget provides $40 million through the senior citizens’ 
heritage grant program which will benefit over 105,000 
Saskatchewan seniors. In last year’s budget I introduced a $200 
personal income tax reduction for seniors, and this 
supplementary tax benefit will assist over 10,000 seniors this 
year. 
 
Since 1982 this government has increased the senior citizens’ 
income supplement from 25 to $65 a month. I am pleased to 
announce that we will increase the supplement by a further $15 
a month, effective this November. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — This will raise the maximum Saskatchewan 
income plan benefit to $80 a month for a single senior and $135 
a month for a married couple. This  

initiative will provide many single seniors with nearly $1,000 
and many married couples with over $1,600 annually, to assist 
them in living with dignity and independence. 
 
This benefit, along with the old age security, the guaranteed 
income supplement, and the senior citizens’ heritage grant 
program will ensure a minimum income of nearly $10,000 per 
year for our seniors. 
 
A little more than a year ago, Mr. Speaker, we created the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan because many Saskatchewan 
people did not have the opportunity to save for a more secure 
retirement. In a short space of time, over 40,000 Saskatchewan 
home-makers, farmers, self-employed individuals, and 
small-business employees have enrolled in the plan. More than 
1,200 members of the plan are already receiving benefits, and 
this year we will contribute $20 million in support of the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 
 
Five years ago this government developed a long-term strategy 
to address family violence. We have stepped up enforcement of 
existing laws, improved the co-ordination of existing services, 
and provided more family support services across the province. 
And this year we will allocate almost $3 million to direct 
services to victims of family violence and to the rehabilitation 
of batterers, and this will include funding for a new safe home 
in the Swift Current area, the tenth such facility in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, foster families deal with special problems which 
require extra support. We will provide $625,000 to establish a 
new training program and a new payment schedule for foster 
parents to reflect more accurately the important services that 
they provide. 
 
The Minister of Social Services will provide details of a new 
program called “Families Matter,” which will encourage 
community agencies to develop innovative programs that 
promote positive parenting. 
 
Welfare reform, Mr. Speaker, when we took office in 1982, the 
welfare system in Saskatchewan offered little hope to the 
people it was supposed to help. It encouraged dependency and 
abuse. 
 
In 1984 we began the process of welfare reform to provide 
training programs and work opportunities to those who are 
employable. Since that time, 8,500 welfare recipients, about 
one-third of them single parents, have successfully completed 
short-term productive job placements. A further 11,000 social 
assistance recipients have enrolled in educational upgrading and 
skills training programs. More than half of these, Mr. Speaker, 
have been single parents who have received special allowances 
to cover child care costs and other expenses related to their 
participation in the programs. 
 
In this budget we will allocate $6 million for the Saskatchewan 
skills development program to provide welfare recipients with 
marketable job skills. In addition, the Saskatchewan 
employment development program will receive $11 million to 
enable welfare recipients to gain work experience and job 
placements. In total, more than 6,000 individuals will benefit 
from employment and  
  



 
March 31, 1988 

 

259 
 
 

training programs in the coming year. 
 
Another component of our welfare reform initiatives is the 
intensive on-the-job training provided by the New Careers 
Corporation. Almost 800 welfare recipients have participated in 
this corporation’s programs. It has made a lasting contribution 
to the people of Saskatchewan in the form of enhanced park 
facilities, such as marinas, camp grounds, access roads, and 
beach landscaping. 
 
The corporation has also undertaken a major restoration of the 
eroded river bank in Saskatoon for the Meewasin Valley 
Authority, and has constructed a young offenders’ facility in the 
Moose Mountain Provincial Park. 
 
The New Careers Corporation has received wide public 
acceptance because it successfully combines job experience and 
necessary educational upgrading into an 18-month career plan 
for its trainees. To date, 86 per cent of those trainees completing 
their career plan have found permanent employment . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — . . . a record of successful partnership of 
which we can be proud. And in 1988-89 we will provide an 
additional $1 million to the New Careers Corporation. 
 
In 1987 we introduced another work-for-welfare initiative in 
conjunction with Par Industries of Prince Albert. Par has 
provided productive work experience in the forestry sector for 
200 employable welfare clients. Virtually all of the single 
employable welfare clients in Prince Albert are gainfully 
employed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — In Regina our job search training program 
has successfully helped welfare recipients develop job search 
and interview skills, and we will expand this program to other 
locations. In La Loche we are co-operating with the village 
council to train and employ local welfare recipients on a road 
construction project. This initiative will encourage further 
economic development in the North and demonstrates our 
commitment to use existing funds in a wiser, more effective 
manner. 
 
Since we began to place a priority on educational upgrading, 
skills training, and job placement for our employable welfare 
recipients, the number of single employables on welfare in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, has declined 20 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Our investment in their future has paid off 
for them, for their families, and for our society as a whole. And 
we are also concerned about the prospects of people who are 
part of the long-term welfare case-load. This year we will 
expand our welfare reform programs to include more heads of 
families who have been on welfare for longer periods of times. 
 
As part of welfare reform, an automated social assistance  

system is being introduced province-wide to provide improved 
service for clients, and this system will also provide more 
rigorous financial controls to ensure that only those entitled to 
benefits receive them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the welfare reform initiatives undertaken by this 
government have reduced social assistance costs by $65 million 
relative to the previous government’s system. We have 
reinvested those savings to provide training, skills upgrading, 
and employment opportunities to people who need a second 
chance. This government will continue the process of welfare 
reform, Mr. Speaker, because welfare reform is working. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, education is one of the 
highest priorities of this government. Since 1982 provincial 
government spending on education has increased by $259 
million or 48 per cent. And we will maintain our commitment 
to excellence We will launch several new initiatives and 
increase funding by $39 million or 5.2 per cent. 
 
In Saskatchewan there is a growing realization that as our 
economy diversifies we will become more dependent on our 
informational and intellectual resources. Mr. Speaker, this is 
why we continue to dedicate substantial funds to maintaining 
and improving our education system. We must respond to the 
changing needs of our students who are facing an increasingly 
technological society. 
 
We must utilize the new technologies to enhance lifelong 
learning and to increase educational access for our rural 
residents and for our disadvantaged students. Important steps 
have been taken to ensure that the people of this province have 
access to an education system which meets their needs for today 
and for tomorrow. 
 
In the elementary and high school system, many of these 
initiatives stem from the recommendations of the Directions 
report on curriculum and instruction. The basic 
recommendations include an emphasis on quality instruction, 
consistent standards for evaluating students, a renewed 
emphasis on basic skills, lifelong learning, and respect for the 
individual student. 
 
In 1985, we established the educational development fund to 
provide the assistance necessary to implement these 
recommendations. For the past three years we have provided 
almost $50 million to school boards to improve library 
resources, to acquire computer technology, and to introduce 
new programs for gifted and disadvantaged students. In 
1988-89 a further $14.5 million will be provided to continue the 
upgrading of the programs and tools available to our young 
people. 
 
The decision to implement the new core curriculum followed 
extensive consultation with parents, students, educators, and 
people from business, labour, and industry. The implementation 
will begin in September 1988 and will be phased in as new 
programs are prepared and as teachers and schools make 
arrangements to provide, Mr. Speaker, the core curriculum will 
place a stronger emphasis on basic learning, and on key subject  
  



 
March 31, 1988 

 

260 
 
 

areas, while maintaining flexibility for both teachers and local 
school-boards. The time allotted for key subjects in required 
areas of study will be standardized across the province, a move 
which is widely supported by both parents and educators. 
 
(1515) 
 
Successful implementation of the core curriculum will depend 
on the efforts and skills of each teacher working with our 
students. In recognition of the central role played by teachers, 
$1 million will be provided for in-service training to help 
teachers introduce the core curriculum. As well, increased 
funding will be provided for special education programs to 
ensure that the benefits of this initiative are shared by all 
students. 
 
Since 1982 this government has increased funding to school 
divisions by over 56 per cent, and this year we will provide 
$337 million in operating grants to school divisions - an 
increase of $7 million, Mr. Speaker. And in addition, $31 
million in capital assistance will be spent on the construction 
and renovation of schools. 
 
Since my budget address of last year, this government has 
launched a number of initiatives to ensure that the people of this 
province have access to an education system which recognizes 
the changing demands of the work place. We reorganized rural 
community colleges into nine regional colleges to enhance the 
provision and delivery of skills training and university 
extension programs to rural people. 
 
We amalgamated three community colleges to form the 
Northlands Career College to maximize the linkages between 
training and employment in the North. We took a national 
leadership role by establishing the $3.2 million education 
outreach fund to address the problem of adult illiteracy and to 
expand the availability of university extension and institute 
courses to smaller centres. 
 
We amalgamated four technical institutes and four urban 
community colleges into the Saskatchewan Institute of applied 
Science and Technology to develop areas of excellence and to 
focus on skills that are in demand. And in 1988-89 the 
Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology will 
receive over $67 million. 
 
Our efforts to provide more educational opportunities will 
continue. We will allocate new funding to develop training 
programs for disabled students to increase their access to 
mainstream educational programs. 
 
Last fall we established the Saskatchewan Literacy Council to 
begin a three-year campaign to overcome illiteracy in our 
province. In the past three months 700 adults have enrolled in 
literacy programs. As well regional and northern libraries have 
received additional funding for literacy materials. 
 
We are working with Saskatchewan people who recognize the 
importance of basic reading and writing skills. The people of 
Saskatchewan have indicated they need access to more courses 
as near as possible to where they live and work, and we are 
answering that need through our new regional college network. 

Last year regional colleges delivered over 170 courses to 2,100 
students in 76 different locations, and this included the delivery 
of 18 new courses to students in 25 smaller Saskatchewan 
centres. 
 
Last year our support for distance education using fibre optics 
and satellite systems provided for the delivery of 24 university 
extension courses in 19 communities. And this year we will be 
working with the Saskatchewan Tel-Learning Association to 
expand the satellite network to 10 new communities. 
 
We are also working towards the development of a standardized 
first- and second-year university Arts and Science program to 
be delivered using distance education technologies. 
 
Since 1982 operating grants to our universities have increased 
by almost 45 per cent, and over that period provincial spending 
on university capital projects has totalled nearly $100 million. 
In 1988-89 our universities will receive an additional $2.8 
million in operating grants for a total commitment of $146 
million. And in addition, $25 million will be provided for 
capital projects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not enough to make post-secondary and adult 
education available to the greatest possible number of 
Saskatchewan people; we are also sensitive to the need to 
improve financial accessibility. 
 
In 1988-89, 12,300 Saskatchewan students will receive over 
$24 million in subsidies. This government is building a tradition 
of quality education in Saskatchewan. The new initiatives and 
funding support I have announced today will further ensure that 
our education system can provide our students with the 
necessary tools to build a more prosperous Saskatchewan way 
of life. 
 
In developing our 1988-89 fiscal strategy, we consulted with 
and listened to the people of our province. They told us that we 
must adequately fund our health, education, and essential 
family service programs, and we have responded to these 
priorities. 
 
Of the $127 million increase in program spending, 82 per cent, 
or $104 million, is directly attributable to health and education. 
We were able to hold down all other increases in program 
expenditures to $23 million, of which $10 million is directly 
attributable to increases to the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, the 
Saskatchewan income plan, and the mortgage protection plan. 
 
However, because of the $65 million increase in health care 
program costs, and the $39 million dollar increase in 
educational program costs, we have had to introduce some 
moderate corporate and personal tax increases. 
 
Effective July 1, Mr. Speaker, large resource corporations liable 
under the Saskatchewan corporate capital tax will be subject to 
a surcharge of 2 per cent on the value of their production. 
 
Effective midnight tonight, the tobacco tax will be increased by 
1 cent per cigarette, with similar increases  
  



 
March 31, 1988 

 

261 
 
 

for other tobacco products. 
 
And effective January 1, 1988, the Saskatchewan flat tax will 
be increased from 1.5 per cent to 2 per cent of net income. 
However, Mr. Speaker, the tax withholdings from pay cheques 
will not be retroactive to January, and this will avoid a one-time 
application of the flat tax in July. Further, this change will be 
implemented in conjunction with national tax reform, Mr. 
Speaker, so that over 95 per cent of Saskatchewan individuals 
and families will see an increase in their take-home pay 
commencing this July. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Relative to last year, these and other 
measures will increase corporate tax revenues by $40 million, 
personal income tax revenues by 22 million, and tobacco tax 
revenues by 18 million. In total this will raise $80 million of the 
$104 million in needed funding for the increases to our health 
and educational programs. 
 
By holding government expenditures to a minimum, except in 
the key areas of health and education, and by introducing the 
offsetting revenue measures just announced, the deficit for 
1988-89, Mr. Speaker, will be reduced by 42 per cent to $328 
million, a $240 million reduction from our 1987-88 actual 
deficit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, as Saskatchewan’s personal 
income tax system is dependent on a federally defined tax base, 
any changes to the federal tax system will affect our own 
system. 
 
I’ll take a moment to distribute a copy of a tax reform paper to 
the opposition critic and to the leader of the Liberal Party. 
 
For example, since the federal reforms were introduced this 
year, we’ll reduce federal revenues. There will be automatic 
reductions in Saskatchewan’s personal income tax revenues of 
about $30 million a year. In addition, these reforms will also 
redistribute income tax liability among Saskatchewan 
taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, federal tax reform presents us with both a 
challenge and an opportunity, a challenge to ensure that the 
Saskatchewan vision of fairness and protection is reinforced, 
and an opportunity to undertake meaningful personal income 
tax reform in Saskatchewan to ensure that our family life is 
further supported and enhanced. 
 
We propose to introduce reform measures for 1989 that will 
enable the province to respond to the economic and social 
challenges facing our families over the next few years and 
beyond. And I’m tabling a discussion paper entitled A Dialogue 
on Saskatchewan Income Tax Reform with this budget address. 
The paper discusses four alternatives for personal income tax 
reform in Saskatchewan. 
 
These alternatives represent a broad spectrum of choices and 
each blends the principles of fairness, support for the family, 
economic development, simplicity and harmony in a different 
manner. 

For example . . . I urge the hon. critic to listen. For example, 
one alternative emphasizes support for the family such that a 
family of four earning $35,000 would save $760 in taxes. 
Another alternative emphasizes fairness through the use of a 
three-tier tax rate structure with enhanced support for federal 
tax credit. I invite all members and the public to read this paper 
which sets out, in some detail, alternative approaches to reform 
of our personal income tax system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, changes are also required to our corporate tax 
structure. Saskatchewan’s corporate tax rates are among the 
highest in Canada, and the absence of a level playing field has 
created competitive imbalances in certain industries, and as a 
consequence our corporate tax revenues are an unstable source 
of government funding. A competitive tax environment must be 
fostered to build the basis for economic diversification and to 
position us to take advantage of the new economic opportunities 
that the free trade agreement will bring. 
 
As well changes are needed to ensure that our tax base is not 
undermined by interprovincial corporations allocating income 
and capital to lower taxing jurisdictions. 
 
I am therefore announcing the following changes in 1989: 
effective January 1, 1989, the general corporate income tax rate 
will be lowered from 17 to 15 per cent - a level competitive 
with other jurisdictions; effective July 1, 1988, federal 
commercial Crown corporations will be liable under the 
corporation capital tax as they are in Ontario, Quebec, and 
Manitoba; and effective January 1, 1989, the manufacturing and 
processing tax reduction will be repealed, and the two-year, 
small-business tax holiday will be extended until March 31, 
1990. The details of these revenue measures are set out in 
technical papers appended to the budget address. 
 
The concerns of the Saskatchewan small-business community 
have not gone unheard as we have adjusted our corporate tax 
system. The local business tax, Mr. Speaker, currently generates 
nearly $40 million annually, of which almost 40 per cent is paid 
by the Regina business community. We propose to address the 
concerns of small businesses throughout the province regarding 
this tax. It is only fair that local governments, which impose the 
business tax, assist in reducing the burden on small business. 
 
In 1989 we will set aside up to $10 million of the revenues 
generated from the corporate tax changes to assist in this effort, 
subject to the following. Local governments will be encouraged 
to match provincial assistance dollar for dollar. Special 
recognition will be provided to communities which have 
already reduced or eliminated their business tax. Local 
governments must not raise residential property taxes to provide 
funds for their matching assistance. Transfer payments will not 
be increased to offset costs incurred by local governments, and 
the benefits must be targeted to small business. 
 
This approach challenges local governments to reduce the 
business tax by cutting expenditures, and I would add that the 
Department of Public Participation is prepared to  
  



 
March 31, 1988 

 

262 
 
 

assist local governments in identifying the possible use of 
private sector delivery mechanisms to reduce costs. Assuming 
local governments choose to take up this government’s 
challenge, Mr. Speaker, this initiative can result in a 50 per cent 
reduction in the business tax for the small businesses of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Discussions will be undertaken with local 
governments and small business to determine the most 
appropriate mechanisms to implement this proposal. 
 
This year’s corporate tax measures, including increases to 
uranium royalties, will increase provincial corporate tax 
revenues by $40 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In summary, the corporate tax package that I have just 
announced provides us with a solid basis for economic 
development and diversification. It also positions us to take 
advantage of the new economic opportunities that the free trade 
agreement will bring. 
 
It is a priority of this government to facilitate economic growth 
by working co-operatively with our partners in the 
Saskatchewan manufacturing, small business, and resource 
sectors. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the longer term, the new jobs and prosperity 
generated by ever-increasing levels of economic activity will 
ensure that we can continue to provide the funds necessary for 
social programs such as health and education. And that’s why 
we developed an economic diversification strategy, Mr. 
Speaker. This government wants to build, not to buy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We want to implement new initiatives that 
will encourage the people of Saskatchewan to build our natural 
advantages and invest in the future economic growth of our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to improve the overall strength of our 
economy, and thereby significantly enhance our quality of life. 
In spite of the difficulties that our agriculture and resource 
sectors are currently experiencing, our economic strategy has 
produced some significant results. New capital investment in 
Saskatchewan’s manufacturing sector has increased 
dramatically, from $91 million in 1984 to $510 million in 1987. 
The provincial unemployment rate has decreased from 8 per 
cent in 1984 to 7.3 per cent in 1987, which is the second lowest 
in Canada and well below the Canadian average. And 
Saskatchewan’s output in the service, producing, and 
manufacturing sectors has increased by over 13 per cent from 
1984 to 1986. 
 
The development and diversification of the Saskatchewan 
economy is due, in large part, to the economic policies initiated 
by this government, and these policies have resulted in new jobs 
and a stronger, more mature Saskatchewan economy. 

In the manufacturing sector we have encouraged economic 
development and diversification by selling PAPCO (Prince 
Albert Pulp Company), the Crown corporation, and other assets 
to Weyerhaeuser Canada Limited for $248 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of poor public sector management, this 
commercial Crown corporation was costing the taxpayers of 
this province over $90,000 a day to operate. Weyerhaeuser 
turned that situation around, Mr. Speaker, and production at the 
P.A. pulp mill increased by 10 per cent in 1987, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Weyerhaeuser has spent $40 million on 
pulp mill improvements, Mr. Speaker, and their $200 million 
paper mill, that members of the opposition said would never 
happen, is now well under construction. The paper mill, when 
completed, will create over 200 permanent jobs and is 
providing additional employment and diversification 
opportunities for other Saskatchewan businesses. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — For example, about 80 per cent of 
construction employment and construction purchases are being 
obtained from within the province of Saskatchewan. In 
addition, long-term industrial activity has also been generated. 
The $7 million Steel Brothers chemical plant now under 
construction in the city of Prince Albert will provide production 
inputs to the paper mill. 
 
The $745 million NewGrade heavy oil upgrader is yet another 
major project that illustrates our policy of building upon our 
rich natural resource base. In addition to 1,000 jobs in the oil 
industry, the project has acted as an economic catalyst. Over 
250 local Saskatchewan firms have been awarded contracts. 
These contracts have enabled many of them to diversify into 
new product lines suitable for other projects across the 
province. 
 
Vanguard Motor Homes is now employing approximately 160 
million . . . or 160 people in North Battleford. The positive 
economic impact on the community is already noticeable. For 
example, Lift Systems International of North Battleford, 
Lancashire Saw and Unitex of Saskatoon are all now providing 
goods and services to Vanguard. 
 
We in Saskatchewan, and indeed throughout western Canada, 
have long sought to diversify away from our resource base and 
to increase the value added component of our resource exports. 
As I have just demonstrated, Saskatchewan has had some recent 
success in this area. However, a constraint we have constantly 
faced is the Canada-United States tariff schedules. These tariffs 
have impeded our ability to export value added products to the 
United States and have raised the costs of material and 
equipment inputs to Saskatchewan industries. 
 
The free trade agreement will eliminate these tariffs,  
  



 
March 31, 1988 

 

263 
 
 

giving Canada preferential access to the world’s largest and 
most affluent market. This will provide a stable framework for 
our industries to expand their existing operations, and it will 
create new investment opportunities and encourage companies 
to locate here in Saskatchewan. This is why we support the free 
trade agreement. It’s one of the corner-stones of this 
government’s economic diversification strategy. 
 
I’m pleased to announce that an additional $1 million has been 
allocated to our economic diversification and investment fund, 
to build on this strategy and strengthen Saskatchewan’s trade 
development efforts. 
 
The recent and impressive gains that we have made in 
developing our red meat processing industry will be enhanced 
by the free trade agreement. Under this agreement the beef 
industry will be exempt from the United States meat import 
laws and tariffs; tariffs on some port products will be eliminated 
on January 1, 1989; moreover, trade barriers resulting from 
technical regulations will be reduced, and the United States will 
maintain an open border policy for meat inspections. These 
changes will permit easier access to the United States market 
for our red meat producers. 
 
In spite of the benefits that our agricultural economy will derive 
from the free trade agreement, depressed world grain prices 
continue to place many of our farmers in serious financial 
difficulty. Many of our farmers face difficulties in maintaining 
adequate cash flow to operate their farms and to retire 
outstanding debt. This government will not back away from that 
issue, Mr. Speaker. We have reaffirmed our commitment to 
protect the family farm by extending the counselling and 
assistance for farmers program, by continuing the farm land 
security board, and by establishing an extended repayment 
option for the production loan program. 
 
In national and international forums the Premier will continue 
to push for the elimination of subsidized over-production and 
predatory pricing in world grain markets. Recently the Premier 
has again emphasized in discussions with the Prime Minister of 
Canada the importance of resolving these issues through an 
international process. It’s now evidenced that some modest 
recovery in grain prices has begun. We welcome this 
developments but we will continue our efforts to ensure that 
these early signs of recovery do not fade. We will continue to 
participate in the federal government’s efforts in international 
forums to reduce American, European and Japanese farm 
subsidies. 
 
We applaud, Mr. Speaker, the federal government’s actions to 
support Canadian agriculture for the 1987-88 crop year through 
a $1.1 billion deficiency payment and a $330 million provision 
to write down farm debt. However, we will continue to press for 
ongoing federal support until other nations begin to eliminate 
their price support mechanism. 
 
The successful conclusion of the free trade agreement will offer 
Saskatchewan agriculture new development and diversification 
opportunities. The agreement will create new markets for our 
canola products and other agricultural commodities and 
processed goods. We will  

enhance our diversification activities to take advantage of these 
agricultural opportunities. 
 
We are reaffirming our commitment to support the continued 
growth of Saskatchewan’s red meat industry. We will pursue 
opportunities to further assist this industry in improving its 
competitive position both nationally and internationally. In 
1986 we made a commitment to increase Saskatchewan hog 
production. Our efforts to diversify the livestock industry have 
begun to show a significant return. Hog numbers have increased 
by 10 per cent, Mr. Speaker, and since 1986 the number of 
feeder associations has increased five-fold due to our feeder 
association loan guarantee program. These associations have 
significantly increased the number of calves fed and marketed 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m pleased to report that our commitment to livestock 
diversification will be further enhanced with the introduction of 
a lending program that will increase the availability of credit to 
farm partnerships and farm corporations. The Agricultural 
Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan will operate this program 
in conjunction with our other existing credit programs for 
capital loans. A new program will provide loans of up to $8 
million for livestock operation at an interest rate of 9.75 per 
cent. An eligible investment includes livestock buildings, 
equipment, and breeding stock. 
 
This program will be of special interest to traditional grain 
farmers as it increases their opportunity to both diversify their 
production and to take advantage of new markets opening up 
under the free trade agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our agricultural lands represent one of our most 
valuable resources, and soil conservation has always been a 
high priority of this government. We have made a major 
commitment to develop innovative means to ensure the 
preservation of our land resource. Over five years, Mr. Speaker, 
we will be spending $15 million from the agricultural 
development fund to provide opportunities and research and 
development for new farming techniques and alternative crop 
production to promote better soil management. 
 
Recently, as part of the special grains program announcement, 
the federal government committed $75 million for 
federal-provincial soil conservation projects. It’s our intention 
to take part in this new initiative, Mr. Speaker, through the 
development of a Saskatchewan-Canada soil and water 
conservation agreement. 
 
We are also negotiating with the federal government to create a 
world-class centre of excellence for agricultural research and 
technology at the University of Saskatchewan. If these 
discussions are successful, Saskatchewan can look forward to 
new diversification and development opportunities in the area 
of agricultural research and technology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has provided our rural 
communities with the means to enhance and develop their 
economic base. In 1986 we announced funding to rural 
municipalities interested in establishing community 
development corporations for the purposes of identifying  
  



 
March 31, 1988 

 

264 
 
 

local economic development opportunities. Four corporations 
have now been established and 15 others are in various stages 
leading to incorporation. In 1988-89 we will provide a total of 
$400,000 to support this exciting initiative. 
 
To ensure that our rural communities can develop new 
businesses and create jobs, it is essential that we upgrade our 
transportation infrastructure. I am pleased to announce that we 
will implement a new three year, $30 million highway 
rehabilitation program, and that this new initiative is over and 
above the approximately $100 million that we spend annually 
on capital improvements to our highways. 
 
The first phase of this new program will include improvements 
to our highway systems in all regions of our province, including 
Highway 17 north of Lloydminster in the north-west heavy oil 
area; Highway 23 near Porcupine Plain in the eastern forestry 
area; Highway 9 south of Carlyle, an important north-south 
thoroughfare for our tourism and potash industries; and 
Highway 11 between Prince Albert and Saskatoon, one of the 
province’s principal economic and tourist arteries. 
 
Capital spending in 1988-89, Mr. Speaker, including this new 
highway construction program and other major projects such as 
hospitals, special care homes and schools, will total $430 
million. When combined with Crown corporation spending, the 
government’s capital expenditures will be almost $1 billion this 
year, Mr. Speaker, and this capital program is expected to create 
9,000 jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the small-business sector is 
responsible for the majority of new jobs in this province. There 
are many small businesses across this province which have 
recently expanded and created jobs, such as Precision Service in 
Engineering in Prince Albert, 7 Oaks Manufacturing in Watson, 
B & D Plastics in Moose Jaw, Prairie Cab Sales in Runnymede, 
and Leon’s Manufacturing in Yorkton. Our government’s Buy 
Saskatchewan program has supported this development. During 
1987 the Buy Saskatchewan agency assisted in securing more 
than $59 million in contracts for Saskatchewan firms, resulting 
in the development of more than 40 new product lines. 
 
And we’re trying to help small business in many other ways. 
We are providing funding for the establishment of an 
entrepreneur institute. The institute will enable our 
small-business sector to identify and develop new business 
opportunities. We introduced the venture capital credit program 
to encourage public participation in the small-business sector. 
Over $53 million has been invested in Saskatchewan small 
businesses by venture capital corporation, and over 1,000 jobs 
have been created. 
 
I am pleased to announce today a new program to assist small 
businesses in conducting feasibility studies for new equity 
issues. In addition, we will be restructuring the venture capital 
program to ensure that it is more responsive to government 
priorities as established on an  

annual basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the tourism industry is a key sector of our 
economy. New tourist initiatives such as the $23 million 
Saskatchewan Place in Saskatoon, the $35 million 
Saskatchewan Trade and Convention Centre complex in 
Regina, and new resorts at Duck Mountain, Cypress Hills and 
Moose Mountain Provincial Parks demonstrate that the tourism 
industry is thriving in this province. And we will ensure that 
Saskatchewan develops its full potential as a tourist destination. 
 
(1545) 
 
We will continue to work with TISASK (Tourism Industry 
Association of Saskatchewan) to further strengthen our tourism 
industry through joint initiatives, including the provision of 
$320,000 this year for the new Tourism and Hospitality 
Institute. 
 
When we came to office we were also determined to encourage 
the growth of the province’s high technology centre. In 1982 
there were less than 40 firms, with total annual sales of only 
$81 million. Today, Mr. Speaker, there are approximately 170 
high technology firms in Saskatchewan, with total annual sales 
of over $400 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The creation of WESTBRIDGE Computer 
Corporation, through a partnership involving two provincial 
Crown corporations and two private sector technology 
companies, now means that Saskatchewan has a fully integrated 
major Canadian computer company with its head office right 
here in Regina. This new company will create over 250 new 
jobs in the next few years and will provide new diversification 
opportunities for our high technology sector. 
 
Resource development, Mr. Speaker. This province’s rich 
natural resource base provides many opportunities for the 
people of our province. It has always been the policy of this 
government to facilitate such development by ensuring that our 
natural resource commodities remain internationally 
competitive. 
 
In January of 1987 we responded to the uncertain world oil 
markets by restructuring the province’s oil royalty system. The 
oil industry has reacted positively to these changes despite 
continued low international prices for oil. In 1988-89 we will be 
initiating a new five-year, $23 million heavy oil recovery 
program. This program will assist oil companies in carrying out 
enhanced oil recovery projects, and this program will be funded 
in concert with the federal western diversification fund. 
 
In 1987 we accelerated natural gas development by deregulating 
the natural gas industry. Over the next five years deregulation 
will be responsible for the creation of 600 additional jobs, the 
drilling of 1,100 extra wells, additional industry investment of 
$200 million, and incremental royalties of $18 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the oil and gas industry will be one of the major 
beneficiaries of the free trade agreement. Its future  
  



 
March 31, 1988 

 

265 
 
 

development is now assured as Canada will be exempt, under 
the agreement, from the threat of United States fees or import 
restrictions based on national security grounds. 
 
On September 1, 1987, Mr. Speaker, we introduced The Potash 
Resources Act. Because of this government’s actions, expected 
long-run price stability at higher prices will protect 
Saskatchewan jobs and result in a healthier Saskatchewan 
potash industry. For example, Canpotex offshore market sales 
increased by 18 per cent in 1987 to a record 4.2 million tonnes 
of potash. And further aggressive marketing in Asia will result 
in over 600,000 tonnes of potash being delivered to China over 
the next several months. 
 
The recent development of a gold industry in Saskatchewan has 
focused international attention on the potential for new mineral 
discoveries in our North. With the assistance of this government 
through targeted geological surveys and tax incentives, 
exploration spending for gold and other precious metals almost 
tripled in 1987 to $48 million, and more development is 
expected. Besides gold, Mr. Speaker, northern Saskatchewan is 
believed to have potential in platinum. 
 
Without the free trade agreement, our uranium industry could 
have been subject to United States ban on the importation of 
uranium ore. This would have had an immediate negative 
impact on the uranium industry and on the economy of northern 
Saskatchewan. However the agreement will protect our uranium 
industry from this potential United States protectionist measure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed merger of Eldorado Nuclear Limited 
with the Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation is 
further good news for Saskatchewan’s uranium industry. It will 
create the world’s largest uranium mining and processing 
company, with its headquarters in Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The corporation will have a positive impact 
on our uranium industry and on the Saskatchewan economy, 
and it will, through public share offerings, give the people of 
Saskatchewan an opportunity to invest in their world-class 
Saskatchewan enterprise. Public participation, Mr. Speaker, in 
government enterprises can make a major contribution to the 
economic development and diversification by providing 
government assets with new growth and expansion 
opportunities. 
 
This common sense approach will assist in the development of 
capital formation in our province. Many Saskatchewan people 
have now participated in the development and diversification of 
the provincial economy through the purchase of SaskPower and 
Saskoil securities. We expect increased participation as a result 
of the public share offerings in Saskatchewan-based uranium 
company and WESTBRIDGE, the Saskatchewan-based 
computer corporation. We will encourage every Saskatchewan 
resident to take advantage of these and other share offerings 
through such innovative incentives as the stock savings plan 
and the labour-sponsored venture capital program. 
 

Mr. Speaker, our current fiscal situation. This government is 
committed to improving the financial management of the public 
sector and committed to reducing the deficit. Last year we 
budgeted for a deficit of $577 million, a reduction of 53 per 
cent from the ’86-87 actual deficit. Mr. Speaker, we have met 
that objective. The deficit for 1987-88 fiscal year will be $568 
million - $9 million under our budget target. For 1988-89 we 
have carefully balanced expenditure priorities with increases in 
certain taxes. as a result we will make another substantial 
reduction in the provincial deficit. the deficit for 1988-89 will 
be $328 million - a $240 million or a 42 per cent reduction in 
the ’87-88 deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget reaffirms the government’s 
determination to the fiscal and economic plan that I set out in 
my March ’87 economic and financial report and initiated in 
last year’s budget. It reflects the views of the people of 
Saskatchewan that health and education are the highest 
priorities. 
 
The actions and policies I have set forth today enable us to 
continue to work with the people of Saskatchewan to build a 
foundation for a better tomorrow. This budget sets out a 
practical set of social and economic policies that allows us to 
look outwards to the world with the confidence that we will 
meet its challenges and seize its opportunities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 
That this Assembly do now resolve itself into the 
Committee of Finance. 

 
Seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just want 
to say first of all in respect to the Minister of Finance’s 
comments this afternoon when Michael Wilson gave his 
address, budget address, they called that a rather listless and 
boring presentation. I didn’t think it could be equalled, but I’m 
convinced this afternoon we got a fair presentation here, so I 
would invite anyone who can stay that I’ll try not to bore them 
to the extent of the Minister of Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to 
respond to the government’s budget on behalf of the official 
opposition, and to say that this is clearly a budget of a 
government which hasn’t learned its lesson. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — This is a budget of a government which won’t 
listen to the people of this province. 
 
At the beginning of his address, the Minister of Finance told the 
people of Saskatchewan - and I wrote it down - he said he was 
going to stay the course. It seems to me that that means exactly 
this: more of the same tax increases for  
  



 
March 31, 1988 

 

266 
 
 

average people, and tax breaks for big business; more of the 
same cuts for essential services - like of health care and 
education and agriculture; more of the same wasteful 
mismanagement. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people have gone 
through a year of hurt, and I want to say that this budget shows 
the government is blind to that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about some of the 
essential services that the Minister of Finance talked about this 
afternoon, like health care and education, because as usual the 
government is trying today to mislead the public about its real 
plans in respect to health care and education. 
 
I’ll tell you the most dependable sign of spring in Saskatchewan 
used to be the farmer working out in his fields and seeding. But 
I’ll tell you, since the PC government came into office there’s a 
new sign. And every year at budget time the government claims 
that it’s going to spend more money on health, and it’s going to 
spend more money on education, and it’s going to make them 
top priorities. And I invite the press, and I invite the public to 
review this government’s past budgets. Each one of them 
promises to spend more on health and education, but it’s the 
same old song again. If only it were true. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every spring at budget time this government 
promises more for health care and more for education. But 
every summer the waiting lists of our hospitals and the closed 
schools and the university students that are not allowed entrance 
puts a lie to these promises. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Today again the Minister of Finance, I believe, 
is misleading the public in respect to the funding. I suggest that 
there’s fudging of the numbers in respect to the budget. He talks 
about a 5.6 per cent increase in health care, but I’ll tell you that 
when you compare what he promises to spend this year with 
what actually he spent last year, compare it, and I’ll tell you, 
you’ll find that there’s no 5.6 per cent increase in respect to the 
increase in health budget. I’ll tell you it’s more or less like 3.5 
per cent, and not 5.6 as the Minister of Finance tried to indicate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And I say, Mr. Speaker, with inflation in 
Saskatchewan the highest in Canada, nearly 6 per cent, that 
means our health care system will lose ground in respect to 
improvements. This means only one thing Saskatchewan 
families are going to suffer. People needing surgery will be on 
long waiting lists. Overworked nursing staff won’t get the extra 
help they need. And communities hoping for improvements and 
upgrading of their hospitals and nursing homes will be 
disappointed. 
 
I noted that the Minister of Finance bragged about the fact that 
his government has put in a number of beds each year, annually 
- 100 beds I believe he said. Well do you  

realize that in the city of Saskatoon alone there’s over 10,000 
people on hospital waiting lists - in one city, Saskatoon, and this 
government says it’s meeting the need by adding 100 hospital 
beds across the province. 
 
I say that that’s the PC record in health care - big promises that 
sound good on budget day, but which always turn out to be a 
political smoke and mirrors. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You know, the Minister of Finance said last 
year that he had increased the budget. And when that budget 
was analysed, do you know what it was? - $18 million less than 
what he said, and he couldn’t deny this. 
 
I just note that the minister of Finance didn’t say a word about 
two health care programs - the prescription drug program and 
the children’s dental program. Of course he wouldn’t, because 
he knows that the people across Saskatchewan are still angry in 
respect to the destruction of those very important health care 
programs, and I’ll tell you that this budget doesn’t rectify those 
programs. 
 
So thousands and thousands of families and seniors across this 
province are still forced monthly to make a choice, a choice 
between getting their medication or putting groceries on the 
table. And I say, shame to such a government, shame to such 
heartlessness. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And young people out in Saskatchewan, the 
children that receive the dental program, the school-based 
dental program are still let out - no dental program, even though 
the Premier himself promised a new rural school dental 
program, or a new rural dental program, last November. And 
the budget fails to keep that promise, and I say that’s a shame - 
a promise from the Premier, another promise broken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Another corner-stone of this budget, 
apparently, is education. Well let’s take a look at education. 
Let’s take a look and see if their spending is keeping up with 
the needs in education. 
 
Here again the Minister is indicating that there is going to be 
something like a 5.2 per cent increase. Well I’ll tell you, again 
take and compare, compare what is being estimated this year 
with what indeed is the actual that was spent last year, and it’s 
not 5.2; it’s closer to 2 per cent. That’s about what they’re 
promising in education. And for our universities, the operating 
grants - take a look at the operating grants in universities. Here 
there is less than 2 per cent operating grants to the university. 
 
And if you look at the amount that is provided for the operating 
grants for the schools, that is about 2 per cent. So much for the 
big promises, Mr. Speaker,. So much for health and education - 
this great commitment of this government. 
 
  



 
March 31, 1988 

 

267 
 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — But you know, I thought maybe the members 
opposite would also deal with another matter here today, and 
they did. And they talked about highways. Now they have a 
commitment to highways, the like you have never seen. That’s 
what they said. 
 
We are going to set up a little fund of $30 million over three 
years, 10 million each year, and boy, are we going to improve 
those highways! 
 
Well I’ll tell you, I figured they may be trying to brag today 
about how much they’re going to spend on highways, and so I 
went back to 1981 and I looked up the figure, and do you 
realize in 1981 the expenditures on highways is more than $5 
million more than what they’re offering in this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — So for $5 million more in 1981 than what 
they’re promising here today. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Privatize some more highway workers, 
boys. We’re back to golf courses - 18 holes to the mile. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That’s what I say, Mr. Speaker. Now that is 
really building highways. 
 
But you know, there’s another area that I though for sure this 
government would address. And I thought that indeed they 
would address the question of agriculture, because last year in 
his budget the Minister of Finance said - he said the debt of the 
farmers is a crisis. That’s what he said. Today . . . last week, 
rather, in the throne speech, they said again; the debt is at a 
crisis proportion. 
 
Obviously they have identified the problem. They know that it’s 
a crisis. And I’ll tell you today in this budget not one single 
policy to address that crisis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’ll tell you, the farmers across this great 
province were certainly looking for some leadership and some 
hope. And I say that in this budget there was not any help. They 
were hoping for some kind of a debt adjustment that the 
Premier would initiate. 
 
The Premier was down to Ottawa recently; one knows that we 
have a debt crisis, that about one-fifth of our farmers are on the 
verge of losing their land, and this government sits idly by and 
allows it to happen. 
 
The farmers were asking this Premier, this government, to 
address the production loan that they received some years ago. 
They asked this government not to increase the interest rate 
from 6 per cent to nine and three-quarters. They’ve asked this 
government to allow it, to extend it, and not force them to give 
all their personal property for security. 
 
But I’ll tell you - I’ll tell you that . . . What have they done in 
agriculture? Last year they brought in a budget, and the  

Premier, the Minister of Agriculture, cut the budget by $25 
million - last year. Now he’s . . . This year, another cut - another 
cut of $8 million - $8 million, that’s what it is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thirty-three million dollars cut from the 
agricultural budget in two years. And the members laugh - 
laugh. 
 
I want to say also, Mr. Speaker, that you take a look at 
financing for rural development and you find that that remains 
frozen; if you take a look at the urban affairs, it remains less 
than last year. What I’m going to say is that what happens is 
there’s going to be a major tax shift, a burden, on to the backs 
of property owners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want also . . . The minister seemed proud of his 
tax increases and his tax giveaways. I’ve talked about this 
budget, it fails to adequately meet the health care, and 
education, and highways, and agriculture, and certainly one 
would think that with essential areas of the economy like health 
and education and highways and agriculture being cut or 
inadequately funded, that this good government could at least 
be able to hold the line on taxes. Not this bunch of uncaring 
people. This budget carries on the PC government record of tax 
increase piled upon tax increase. The flat tax has been increased 
to 2 per cent. That may not sound like a great deal, but I’ll tell 
you that it’s a significant amount if you take a family with an 
income of $25,000 - the Finance minister just cost him another 
$125. 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Finance Minister, a senior citizen in my 
constituency told me a few weeks ago that she didn’t like your 
flat tax, and she says that it seems that the only one that pays 
the flat tax . . . or the only ones who do not pay the flat tax are 
really the fat cats. 
 
and then there’s the PC gas tax. This budget leaves the PC gas 
tax at 32 cents a gallon, and that takes about $150 out of your 
pocket, and if you want to go through all of the red tape of 
getting that back, sometime, somewhere in the future you may 
get it back. 
 
I want to say that this budget contains no increases, as I said, for 
urban or rural municipalities, and certainly taxes will be going 
up. 
 
Small business, hoping for a solution to their local business tax 
problem, got nothing. The government says that it will share the 
cost of reducing the business tax with the local municipalities, 
but where are the local municipalities going to find the millions 
of dollars needed to take up the offer? That’s the problem. 
 
So I say, Mr. Speaker, that what we have here is income tax is 
up, the gas tax remains, property taxes will be going up - all of 
these taxes are on top of the utility rates increases and all of the 
license and fee increases. 
 
Is it any wonder that a Saskatchewan family with an income of 
$35,000 a year has the second highest personal income tax in all 
of Canada. Taxes of ordinary people continue to rise. 
  



 
March 31, 1988 

 

268 
 
 

But what about taxes on corporations like oil companies and 
banks? Today they get two new tax cuts. Corporate income tax 
has been cut from 17 to 15 per cent. That will save big business 
millions of dollars, and is set out in the budget - millions of 
dollars. There is also the new resource royalty reduction which 
will be worth additional millions of dollars. 
 
Tax increases for Saskatchewan families; tax cuts for big 
business - that’s the Tory style. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Just to explain to the people of Saskatchewan 
the Tory tax policy, I want to demonstrate to the people who’ll 
be watching here today the unbearable tax burden that has been 
placed upon the people of this province. And when you look at 
the personal income tax that is paid by individuals, and compare 
it to the personal income tax of corporations, and I’ll tell you 
the comparison is this. In this hand, in the right hand, is a dollar 
bill, and I’ll tell you that dollar bill represents for every dollar 
that an ordinary citizen pays into the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. The hon. member is 
aware that the rules of the House do not allow for exhibits to be 
used. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Let me just go on to say, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Each individual, for every dollar that they pay 
in personal income tax, big corporations pay 16 cents. One 
dollar for ordinary citizens; 16 cents for big corporations. 
That’s the Tory fairness in taxation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to you that in respect to the fact 
that . . . in respect to taxation, that what this government has 
done is to remove some of the benefits that were of great 
interest and assistance to the farming community and to all 
taxpayers. And they took away the property improvement 
grants, and that, I’ll say, has been a tremendous hardship on 
many Saskatchewan people. 
 
If we go on to look at this budget, I want to say, Mr. Speaker, 
that there is one other aspect that should be recognized. The 
Minister of Finance is indicating that, oh well, we are starting to 
manage, we are cutting back the deficit. I want to indicate that 
in three budgets that this Minister of Finance brought in to this 
legislature, the first one was 1.2 billion, the second one was 
over 500 billion, and today 350 billion. In total tax, deficit is 
close to $2 billion in three successive budgets combined. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — $2.1 billion. And I say, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
moving to be world class though, Mr. Premier, because what we 
have done under your stewardship and management of this 
province is to take this province into the debt unequalled before. 
Today we have the highest per capita debt in all of Canada. 
Today we have the highest  

per capita debt in all of Canada. In respect to your fiscal 
management, Mr. Premier, today, after this budget, just 
servicing the debt of your deficits, the people of this province 
will have paid over $1 billion just paying the interest charges 
alone on covering finance charges - $1 billion covering the 
interest. I say to the people of Saskatchewan what could we 
have done with $1 billion? We could have built schools and 
hospitals and highways; we could have helped our farmers in 
need. 
 
But this government chose to run up debt, to give away money 
to the oil companies in the tune of $1.7 billion. They have opted 
to give to the Pocklingtons of the world millions of dollars. And 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are sick 
and tired of the mismanagement of this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: - I say, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance said 
his government had made choices. I say they have made 
choices. The PC government has chosen oil companies over 
families; he has chosen banks over farmers; it has chosen its 
corporate and political friends over ordinary people that depend 
on essential public services like health and education. Those are 
the Tory choices, and this side of the House say those are wrong 
choices, Mr. Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to say, Mr. Speaker, in looking at this 
budget and the previous budgets of this administration, one can 
only conclude that what has happened is that they have 
mortgaged our future with almost $4 billion of deficit. They 
have squandered our heritage in health and education and social 
programs with savage cuts. They have picked the pockets in the 
biggest tax grab in the history of this province, something like 
over $500 million in the past three and a half years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, when the minister began his speech, it 
reminded me of a little poem which said: 
 

“Give me a theme,” the minister cried, 
“And I will do my part.” 
“It’s not a theme you need,” the people of 
Saskatchewan replied, 
“It’s a heart.” 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate that this is a 
hopeless budget and a very heartless budget. And nothing sums 
up better the philosophy of the members opposite than these 
words: But I, being poor, have only my dreams. And if there 
were dreams to sell, the Minister of Finance would tax them all 
as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance has 
nothing to look backward with pride, and I’ll tell you that the 
people of Saskatchewan have nothing to look forward with 
hope. And as the unemployed worker said: Dinner  
  



 
March 31, 1988 

 

269 
 
 

for the rich folks, but just 6 o’clock for me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the third budget that the Minister of Finance 
has brought in. He has given this province over $2.1 billion in 
debt in those three years. He has massively increased the taxes. 
He has devastated the health care program of this province and 
decimated the drug program, the dental program. He has taken 
away opportunities for young people going to university, where 
the doors of opportunity have been closed because of quotas. 
 
And I say, Mr. Premier, if you’re proud of this budget, if you 
think it represents what the people of this province are asking 
for, then I ask you and I challenge you to call a by-election and 
let the people of Saskatchewan have a voice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I will want to say more in respect 
to this budget, and I, at this time, would like to move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resumption of Budget Debate 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 
by the member from Indian Head-Wolseley: 
 

That the debate on the motion that this Assembly do now 
resolve itself into the Committee of Finance be resumed 
on Monday, April 4, 1988. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:25 p.m. 
 


