


















































May 19, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 May 19. 1988 
 

1455 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Mitchell:  — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am delighted to 
introduce to you, and to members of the Assembly, a group of 
students from Saskatoon. They are 63 grade 8 students from the 
Confederation Park School in my constituency. They are 
accompanied today by their teacher Mr. Mantyka, and Barry 
Colson, as well as by Loyal Schultz and Jane McLeod. 
 
I’ll be meeting with them following question period for pictures 
and for refreshments, and I’d like all members of the Assembly 
to join me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale:  — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. it’s my 
pleasure to present to the Legislative Assembly today a group 
of students, some of whom come from Limerick, Saskatchewan, 
and some of whom come from Nova Scotia and are visiting our 
province on a student exchange program. 
 
The students are grade 9, 10, 11, and 12 students, as I said, half 
from Limerick, half from Whycocomagh on Cape Breton Island 
in Nova Scotia. They are accompanied today by Mr. Ray Emde 
and Terry Emde from Limerick, their bus driver Mr. Herb 
McMillan from Limerick, and by Burton McIntyre and Cathy 
McMillan from Nova Scotia. 
 
And I would ask all members to join me in welcoming not only 
our students from Limerick but their special guests from Nova 
Scotia. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew:  — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. it gives me great 
pleasure today to introduce to you, and through you to members 
of the Legislative Assembly, a group of 28 students from 
Robert Usher Collegiate seated in the east gallery. These 
students are accompanied today by Fred Steininger, the teacher. 
 
Of some interest, this group has requested an additional 15 
minutes to watch the proceedings after question period when I 
believe we’ll be proceeding to Education estimates. I hope that 
they find the decorum reasonably suitable during those 
estimates. 
 
I look forward to having pictures with them at 2:45 followed by 
drinks and a question and answer period between them and 
myself. So please join me in welcoming this grade 12 class 
from Robert Usher, seated in your east gallery. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
add a word of greetings with my colleague from  

Regina North, to the students from Robert Usher. Many of them 
live in Regina North East constituency and I want to, as well, 
extend my greetings. 
 
And I also want to say, as we all know, student-sin grade 12, if 
not almost, are about to graduate. I would like to, on behalf of 
all of us, extend our congratulations to them on this 
achievement and wish them the very best in all of their dreams 
and endeavours in future years to come. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. it’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to members of the 
Assembly, a special guest sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
we have with us this afternoon the Consul General of Italy in 
Vancouver, Mr. Gianfranco Manigrassi. Mr. Manigrassi is in 
Saskatchewan for the first time, and while in Saskatchewan 
he’ll be meeting with representatives from Agriculture, 
Education, Trade and Investment, Parks, Recreation and 
Culture, and others. 
 
I would welcome you, sir, to Saskatchewan. I hope you find 
your stay enjoyable, and I hope that the visit is fruitful between 
our province and your country. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Recommendations of Schwartz Report 
 
Mr. Romanow:  — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question, I believe, should be to the Deputy Premier, and it 
concerns the long-kept secret Schwartz report on the closing of 
rural hospital beds in the province of Saskatchewan. I have to 
direct this to you, Mr. Deputy Premier, in the light of what I 
think can only be summarized as pretty unsatisfactory answers 
by the Minister of Health on this report yesterday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:  — My question to you, Mr. Deputy Premier is 
this: the Minister of Health yesterday attempted to represent the 
report as merely a discussion paper. If that is the case, how does 
the government explain the fact that the Schwartz report was 
kept secret for at least five months, if not more; only uncovered 
because of the reporters on the Regina Leader-Post; and by 
keeping it secret for five to six months, is this not really a 
confirmation of the fact that the agenda of your government is 
to close down large numbers of rural hospital beds in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod:  — Mr. Speaker, I welcome this question, 
and I welcome it from the particular member, the hon. Leader 
of the Opposition, who had a good deal to say about the 
operations of the former government that was in power as he sat 
in the deputy premier’s chair at that time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the words of the report, that portion of the  
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1456 
 

Schwartz report which refers to where anyone could draw any 
kind of a suggestion of a closure of rural hospitals, are the 
following. Mr. Speaker, and I just would like to read those or 
quote those just to put this into context. And I quote: 
 

The report makes the observation that if one was to 
eliminate . . . 

 
Remember now, Mr. Speaker, I’m quoting what it said in the 
report, from here. 
 

The report makes the observations that is one was to 
eliminate all hospitals of 49 beds or less, 94 per cent of the 
population would still have access to a hospital within 50 
miles. 

 
That’s what it said, and that was widely referred to in the press, 
and so on. It also goes on to say, Mr. Speaker . . . It also goes on 
to day, and I continue to quote . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
No, Mr. Speaker. It also goes on to say that Mr. Schwartz was 
summarizing . . . Mr. Speaker, I’m having some difficulty with 
these folks over here not allowing me to answer the question. I 
wonder if I could have a little order, please. 
 
Thank you, sir. Anyway, Mr. Speaker, the point I want to make 
here, the point I want to make as it relates to that portion that I 
quote him  — and it’s very interesting, Mr. Speaker  — the 
report that Mr. Schwartz was summarizing was a report called 
the thrust group task force rural health policy report, which was 
commissioned in 1980 by the NDP. Those words that I quoted, 
that were widely quoted as having Mr. Schwartz as the author 
of those particular words, those words were in the 1980 report 
and reported in a summary in this report, of various reports that 
had been done. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, one more thing, Mr. Schwartz . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . No, Mr. Speaker, this is very important and 
pertinent to the issue. 
 
Mr. Schwartz’s summary goes on to say that in fact this is what 
was essentially suggested as one of the criteria by the 1961 
Saskatchewan Hospital Survey and Master Plan Report, chaired 
by Dr. McDonald. This too! That commission as well was 
established by the NDP. All of those words referring to the 
hospitals’ closing and so on, that Mr. Schwartz was 
summarizing former reports, where reports that were 
commissioned by them when that Leader of the Opposition was 
the deputy premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:  — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary of a new 
question either the Deputy Premier of the Minister of Health. I 
find it interesting that the government, whenever it gets caught 
red-handed or flat-footed with an initiative of its own, it seeks 
to somehow concoct an answer which dates all the way back, in 
this case to 1961. 
 
My question to the Deputy Premier or the Minister of Health is 
this. You told this House yesterday, and you told the media 
subsequently, that the report was to be a discussion report only. 
If that’s the case, why didn’t you make It public at the time that 
the report was handed to  

you so the everybody could discuss it rather than keeping it 
secret. And I say to you, sir, the logical conclusion is that you 
have an agenda to close down rural hospitals beds in 
Saskatchewan, and make no mistake about it. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod:  — Mr. Speaker, as the member will know, 
the report, I said, was a discussion paper inside the health 
sector, not just necessarily the Health department  — the health 
sector. As I said yesterday, Mr. Schwartz gave a very clear 
outline of his report at the Saskatchewan Health Care 
Association convention in a public speech. It was all done there. 
All hospital administrators and board members across this 
province wee there, it was all part of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another point. The two reports to which I have 
referred, both commissioned by the former government in 
another day, both commissioned by the former NDP 
government  — one on a much earlier day, and one in 1980  — 
neither of those reports were public either. They were 
discussion papers, so the speak, Mr. Speaker. They were inside 
the health sector. Both of those were done inside the health 
sector to an understanding of what was going on. That’s 
responsible. I don’t say there’s any problem with that. And 
there’s no problem with this report being done for the purposes 
for which it done. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the difference is . . . there’s a clear 
difference here. 
 
Mr. Romanow:  — Mr. Speaker, I have another question to the 
Deputy Premier, but I see I’m not going to succeed in getting 
him to answer this question. And if I was the Deputy Premier in 
these circumstances, I wouldn’t either, so I think he’s very wise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:  — I want to come back to the Minister of 
Health. We’ve heard the arguments that the Minister of Health 
advances  — by the way for the first time today, presumably 
having been caught flat-footed and, as I say, red-faced in this 
regard. 
 
But leaving that as an aside, Mr. Speaker, this government’s 
record is a record of hide-and-seek. It’s a record of making 
statements on the one hand and acting in an entirely different 
way. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Speaker, is this, Mr. Minister: why 
don’t you admit right out that you made a mistake in 
commissioning this report in closing the rural hospital beds that 
the report says that it’s going to do? Why don’t you wipe the 
slate clean, admit that you made the mistake, try to restore a 
little bit of credibility to yourself and this government, and then 
get on with the business of fashioning a proper health care 
policy for the farmers and the people of Saskatchewan? How 
about that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod:  — Mr. Speaker, I said very clearly 
yesterday, and I say very clearly today, that the report was not 
commissioned to deal with the closing of rural hospitals; it was 
to deal with the changing role of rural hospitals  — something 
that we are doing, something  
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1457 
 

which you never, ever, ever did. That member over there who is 
the Leader of the Opposition never dealt with it that way . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  — Order. Order, please. The minister’s having 
some competition, and I ask the hon. members to allow him to 
continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod:  — Mr. Speaker, we have responded to the 
changing role of rural Saskatchewan and the changing 
demographics in rural Saskatchewan with the building of 
integrated facilities in rural Saskatchewan, and I went through 
that yesterday. 
 
Those folks have been opposing the integrated facilities in rural 
Saskatchewan. At no time did they build integrated facilities in 
this province in terms of . . . and further to that, Mr. Speaker, 
which is even immoral, I would say almost, to not build nursing 
home beds when that was the demand of health care. Through 
the years 1976 to ’82 they built no nursing home beds in this 
province, in the rural parts of the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that moratorium was not only poor policy, 
was not only insensitive, I suggest to you it was immoral, given 
the way that things were going in rural Saskatchewan with the 
demographics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one more quote that I would like to read to the 
House, which is very pertinent to this issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a . . . The following quotes are from a speech 
given by the now Leader of the Opposition in August and 
September of ’85, and it was reported in the hospital products 
and technology magazine. Mr. Speaker, this speech was made 
to the Canadian Hospital Association by that member who just 
asked this question. 
 
Here is the quotation, and I quote: 
 

He did not pull any punches when he told an audience of 
hospital board members and administrators that if 
politicians try to cope with the sickness problem of our 
ageing population by building more hospitals or similar 
facilities, the costs will be prohibitive and the results 
disastrous. 

 
He said the results of building more hospitals and nursing 
homes would be disastrous. And now he stand up here in his 
sanctimonious, double-standard way and says that we are 
closing hospitals, when in fact we are integrating facilities 
across this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker:  — I’d like to remind the hon. member that his 
answers are getting excessive. And I realize that there’s a great 
deal he could give in his answers, but I think I should remind 
him that there is a reasonable length and I’d like him to adhere 
to that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:  — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to the Minister of Health, whose answers are, as they 
say in Alice in Wonderland, getting curiouser  

and curiouser as he goes along. 
 
And by the way, I still subscribe to that speech made to the 
hospital directors, and so should you, if you believe in giving 
seniors independent living outside of institutions, which is the 
position that we have here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:  — But my question, new question, Mr. 
Speaker, to the Minister of Health is this. Yesterday, sir, you 
told the journalists outside of this House after question period 
was over that the new, yet long to be awaited, announced task 
force on health  — which is now two months in the 
announcement, by the way, in terms of intent but not in terms of 
detail  — you told the journalists outside the Assembly 
yesterday that this new task force report would still hear the 
views of rural people in rural Saskatchewan about the 
possibility of closing down rural hospital beds. In fact, you 
compared going to a hospital like shopping in a small town in a 
small community. 
 
My question to you is this, Mr. Minister of Health: will you 
confirm that, in the light of that statement, it is a fact  — I 
repeat, a fact  — and a determined policy of your government 
that closure of hundreds of rural hospital beds is still going to 
be on the agenda? It may not surface directly through Schwartz, 
but it’s going to surface directly by his proposed new task force 
on health. Isn’t that the reality? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod:  — Mr. Speaker, two things. I was pleased 
to hear the Leader of the Opposition, not pleased on behalf of 
the people of Saskatchewan, but from a purely political point of 
view I was please to hear the Leader of the Opposition confirm 
the NDP’s policy of a continued moratorium, a continued 
moratorium if they were ever in a position of having to deliver 
these beds, Mr. Speaker. and, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  — Order. Order, order. We’re once more having 
difficulty hearing the minister, and I would ask the House’s 
co-operation. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod:  — As it relates to his representation of 
what I said as it relates to the closure, and what he says are the 
closure of rural hospital beds, not only is it a misrepresentation 
of the facts, Mr. Speaker, but it’s a clear misrepresentation of 
anything that I said, either here or outside the House. 
 
Mr. Romanow:  — Mr. Speaker, I have one last, final question 
on this subject matter, with your permission, sir, and this, Mr. 
Speaker, deals with the way in which the Schwartz report was 
handled by this government, namely kept secret from the public 
for five months-plus, rather confusing and contradictory 
defences of the report yesterday and today  — and we’ll hear 
some more as the future goes on  — all of which, I think, 
indicates that we have little confidence that the future activities 
of the task force on health, yet to be announced, is going to 
handled any more competently or any more differently. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is this: in view of your 
statements of the last few days, and in the light of some 
obviously well-motivated concerns by the public of your  
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1458 
 

party’s intentions toward health care, namely, the introduction 
of premium health care premiums and also deterrent fees as 
suggested by some of the front-benchers, in view of all of this, 
will you clearly tell the House today, Mr. Minister of Health, 
that the terms of reference for this new, yet-to-be-announced 
task force on health will specifically exclude that body from a 
consideration of health premiums, deterrent fees, and the 
closure of rural hospital beds? Can you give us that assurance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod:  — Mr. Speaker, the NDP, any time when 
there’s a discussion of any kind of management or 
administration of the Department of Health, they will always 
refer back to what I call, and what has been called before, the 
“mediscare” tactics and so on, and they will always revert to 
that. And we see it again, the Leader of the Opposition reverting 
to his political rhetoric and his mediscare tactics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no intention  — and I’ll say it very clearly  
— there is no intention of the Department of Health under this 
Progressive Conservative government, under this minister for 
closing hospital beds . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  — Order. Order, order. Hon. members are once 
more interrupting the minister, and I don’t think it’s in the best 
interests of the House for me to have to continually interrupt, 
and therefore ask for the co-operation of all members. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod:  — Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that this 
Department of Health under this government has no intention, 
and I say it very clearly, of closing hospital beds in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What we have a very clear intention of doing, and what we have 
done through action  — which is something that you never did  
— is introduce the concept of integrated facilities to deal with 
the true demographics that are out there, with the support of 
communities in rural Saskatchewan who are saying, what we’re 
doing is operating in a way in which rural Saskatchewan 
hospital boards, rural Saskatchewan nursing home boards, rural 
Saskatchewan councils of the R.M.s and of the rural 
communities have asked for this kind of initiative, and we have 
responded in spades with that kind of initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll give the assurance of the House, we will 
continue to respond in that way because that’s what they’ve 
asked for, and that’s what we will be building. We are this year, 
and we will be next year, and into the next year after that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Task Force on Health 
 
Mr. Romanow:  — Mr. Speaker, this will be my final question 
on this very important topic. Mr. Speaker, I say to the Minister 
of Health and to the members of the House and the people in 
the province of Saskatchewan, if you listen carefully to the 
answers the minister has failed to tell this House that the 
mandate and the terms of reference of the task force on health 
will exclude from its  

consideration health premiums, deterrent fees and the closure of 
rural hospitals. 
 
I say that they are going to be included and studied by that task 
force. That is a shame; that’s a hide-and-seek game of this 
government. I say to the Minister of Health, will be now 
reconsider and clearly tell us that the terms of reference will not 
include those; and moreover, will you table those terms of 
reference so that we can study them before the task force is set 
up? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod:  — Mr. Speaker, when the task force is 
announced, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member will have an 
opportunity to see the terms of reference. Those terms of 
reference will be very broad to give that independent task force 
the way to look at it, there’s no question. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let me be very clear. Deterrent fees are not on 
the agenda, nor will deterrent fees by introduced by this 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner:  — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
this issue I have a question to the Minister of Health. Could the 
Minister of Health please inform this Assembly: what year 
under the NDP administration was the hospital in my riding in 
the community of Lashburn shut down for ever? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod:  — I can’t remember the precise year, but I 
know I’ve been to Lashburn and heard the consternation of the 
people in that community about what the former government 
did to their hospital. 
 
Mr. Anguish:  — Mr. Speaker, if the member knew his 
constituency well enough, he’d know the answers to those 
questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sale of Indian Artefacts to Alberta 
 
Mr. Anguish:  — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister 
of Economic . . . Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Parks, Recreation and Culture. The most valuable collection of 
privately owned Indian artefacts in the province of 
Saskatchewan was recently sold to the Alberta Historical 
Resources Foundation, with funding from the department of 
culture and multiculturalism within the provincial government. 
The artefacts were owned by a Mr. Doug Light and sold for 
substantially more than the $200,000 that was asked from this 
provincial government from your department. 
 
How can the minister stand by and allow a collection so 
valuable, of Indian artefacts, to go to another province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell:  — Mr. Speaker, I welcome the 
opportunity to address this in the House. It didn’t come up in 
estimates last year, which kind of surprised me, because that 
member represents the very community  
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1459 
 

where this incident took place. And I don’t remember . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  — Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell:  — Mr. Speaker, I welcome the 
opportunity to address it today. We tried very hard to come to 
an agreement with Mr. Light, yet every time we negotiated with 
him something changed, circumstances changed, criteria 
changed. We’d make the offer. He’d come back, counter offer. 
We though we had a deal cut. We couldn’t deal with him. The 
Alberta government had about $130 million surplus in their 
lottery fund. They used it for a variety of purposes. This is one 
of them. 
 
Mr. Anguish:  — Mr. Speaker, what the minister says is 
contrary to the facts, and the fact did come up in estimates last 
year, and the minister should come clean with that. The fact 
remains that the minister does not honour his responsibilities 
and allowed this collection to leave the province. 
 
My supplementary is to the Minister of Economic Development 
and Tourism. In a recently commissioned report by your 
department, Madam Minister, called The Heart of Canada’s 
Old Northwest, Battleford is recommended, amongst others, as 
part of a tourist destination through a certain corridor of the 
province. 
 
Now the Fred Light Museum in Battleford has lost this valuable 
collection of Indian artefacts. Is the minister going to stand by 
and allow the Minister of Culture to send our tourists to the 
provincial museum and archives in Edmonton where the display 
is now on display? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad the hon. 
member has read the strategy report on the old north-west. It’s 
an interesting concept, a concept that has gained wide support 
throughout Saskatchewan. Presently we are holding meetings to 
get input from the public and how that overall strategy can 
benefit the whole of the province. 
 
Mr. Anguish:  — Supplementary. The minister’s own 
department acknowledges that there should be money available 
to make sure that artefacts and things that attract tourists stay in 
the department. Why do you allow a collection like this, and the 
minister to allow that collection to leave the province and send 
our tourists elsewhere? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  — Mr. Speaker, it is unfortunate that at 
times some artefacts do leave the province. However, when you 
travel around our province  — I can take my area as an example  
— we have many museums that are filled with priceless 
artefacts relating to the history of our province, and we would 
encourage the continuation of that type of thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet:  — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister in 
charge of Economic Development and Trade. I would  

say, Madam Minister, that when the question was asked to the 
Minister of Parks, he said he’d tried very hard on negotiations 
in regards to that. I might say that Peter Pocklington didn’t have 
to try hard to get $20 million in regards to the whole thing. 
 
What I want to know from you, Madam Minister, is that you 
spend over $20 million on advertising, and questionable 
advertising in the case of the Sitting Bull situation. But you will 
not provide dollars to work with Indian people, which states, 
according to your report, that you will work with Indian people 
to be able to deal and preserve the cultural heritage in that area. 
What are you going to do? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: –Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to be able 
to respond to the hon. member on this particular issue because 
my department was the one which was negotiating with the 
Lights for this collection. Mr. Speaker, I want to make this very, 
very clear. The Lights, after we negotiated at some length, came 
back and made it obvious that they wanted to get into a bidding 
war, putting our treasury against the treasury of Alberta. It was 
that simple. They went back to Alberta and they said, we’ll give 
you a better deal, in fact, than we can give the folks in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And when the member from Battlefords stands up and talks 
about tourism and artefacts and coming through there, Lights 
also made it clear that that museum was not making any money 
whatsoever, and they were looking for subsidies from our 
government just to keep them in business. And the member 
from Battlefords should turn to some of his other colleagues, 
especially from the North, and ask where and how the Lights 
acquired the collection. 
 
Mr. Goulet:  — Madam Minister, new question. Since you 
refer back to the Minister of Parks, you do have the dollars for 
economic development. One of the precise type of 
recommendations in this report was to integrate, you know, the 
tourism in relation to what was happening with the Indian 
community in The Battlefords area. 
 
I would like to know what are your precise plans to be able to 
get back and work with the Indian people in that community 
and be able to get back the cultural heritage that rightfully 
belongs to them and this province? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan:  — Mr. Speaker, I would like to correct a 
statement made by the member in his previous question when 
he indicated that we spent $20 million on a marketing strategy 
to get tourists into Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that figure was 
misleading. Our whole tourism marketing budget is $2.4 
million. 
 
With regards to tourism and what our province has to offer, 
Tourism Canada did a massive study a number of years ago, 
and that study clearly indicated that there are two things, two 
major things that attract people to an area: one is the culture of 
the area, and one is the history of the area. We, in 
Saskatchewan, are fortunate to be blessed richly in those both 
areas. I can look at a dig site in Saskatoon, the Wanuskewin 
site, the oldest known  
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1460 
 

habitated site in North America, 4,000 years older than King 
Tut’s temple. Our province has a lot to offer. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think a point should be made: for the first 
time in the history of our province, we have entered into a 
tourist sub-agreement with the government of Ottawa to 
develop these type of things and to make sure these type of 
things stay in our province. That government, when they were 
in power, not once did they put any emphasis on tourism and 
what the impact of tourism does for our local communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Destruction of College Mathieu 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  — Mr. Speaker, all members of this House 
will all be too familiar with the tragic fire that destroyed the 
College Mathieu in Gravelbourg last Saturday. First struck a 
blow to the French community of Saskatchewan and to all the 
residents of Gravelbourg and surrounding area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has made clear its commitment to 
the reconstruction of this important and historical Saskatchewan 
institution. But another important institution is involved in this 
situation and that is SGI, which is the sole insurer of the college 
building and contents. I’m pleased to advise this House that on 
Saturday, May 21, SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) 
will make the first payment on that claim in the sum of 
$500,000. 
 
The cheque will be presented by my colleague, the member for 
Shaunavon, during the college’s ceremonies honouring this 
year’s grade 12 graduating class in Gravelbourg on Saturday. 
The cheque, Mr. Speaker, represents only the first stage of the 
government’s plan to assist in the reconstruction of the college. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that everyone involved is pleased that SGI 
was able to respond so quickly to this tragedy. I am certain that 
the college is assured of the commitment to building a new 
school by this prompt action. 
 
Clearly, money alone cannot heal the grief and remorse at the 
destruction of a historical landmark and an excellent school. 
However, I know that this announcement will strengthen the 
resolves of the students and the teachers to rebuild an even 
greater education facility to serve the French community of our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SGI adjusters are in the process of determining the 
full value of the property destroyed, and I am confident that this 
can be done completely in the future. In the meantime, students 
at the school . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  — Order, order. Order, order. We’re having some 
difficulty hearing the minister. Order, order. Order, order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  — It’s rather disappointing to be talking 
about something so dear to the hearts of the students and the 
teachers and having the opposition interrupt all the  

time, but I’ll try to continue. 
 
I want to say that in the meantime the students at the school 
should know that SGI’s coverage will pay to transport the 
students to nearby schools, should it be deemed necessary by 
school officials. 
 
SGI’s quick response, Mr. Speaker, is another example of the 
sensitivity of this government and of the commitment of SGI to 
providing the highest level of service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is ensuring that the day is near 
when College Mathieu will again open its doors. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. First of 
all I’d like to say to the minister that I’m somewhat surprised 
that we have a ministerial statement on the SGI pay-out to 
College Mathieu. 
 
It does, however, indicate that SGI, as a Crown corporation, a 
publicly owned asset, can respond very quickly to tragedies in 
this province. Had this corporation been a privately owned 
corporation, I’m not so sure that we would have seen the quick 
response. 
 
Some Hon. Members:  — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  — I’m not so sure we would have seen a 
ministerial statement in this legislature today. I’m not to sure 
that we would have seen an announcement of a pay-our five 
days after the tragic event. 
 
So I think that the minister’s statement today is an argument for 
maintaining SGI in the public sector, maintaining SGI as a 
Crown corporation. Because there will be other examples of 
tragedies in this province, we will have other catastrophes, and 
we will need a publicly owned corporation, a publicly owned 
insurance corporation to respond to the kind of catastrophes and 
tragedies that can hit the people of this province. 
 
So I congratulate the minister and I congratulate SGI, a publicly 
owned corporation, in being so quick to respond to the 
horrendous tragedy that happened to the school at Gravelbourg 
and to the French people in our province. 
 
I would urge the minister not to give away this publicly owned 
asset and to keep this publicly owned asset of SGI in the public 
sector. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker:  — Order. Why is the hon. member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Goodale:  — Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that the 
ministerial statement just made relates directly to an incident in 
my constituency, I wonder if there might be leave of the House 
for me to have the opportunity to respond in a few words to the 
minister’s remarks. 
 
Leave is granted. 
 
Mr. Goodale:  — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and  
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1461 
 

I thank members of the House for their indulgence. Certainly of 
course the announcement of a very prompt payment from the 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance in respect of the College 
Mathieu fire is something that will be very welcome to the 
college itself, to the students, to the staff, to the board of 
directors, and to the community of Gravelbourg as a whole. 
 
This has been a very serious blow in that community, Mr. 
Speaker, as I’m sure all members of the House would 
appreciate, and it is exceedingly important that government 
agencies and others respond in a prompt way in dealing with the 
aftermath of that tragedy. And certainly the delivery of the 
cheque as promptly as this coming weekend will be very 
welcome. 
 
But I would want to say, Mr. Speaker, to the government and to 
all embers of this Assembly, that in all of the circumstances of 
this case, much more is required than we’ve seen to date. The 
initial indications have been encouraging, but more indeed will 
be required to repair the damage that has been done. 
 
And I would just suggest to the government, and I do so 
carefully and with all due respect, that showmanship and 
gamesmanship is no substitute for substance in respect of the 
rights and interest of College Mathieu and the people of 
Gravelbourg, and I trust the full measure of substance will be 
forthcoming. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Education 

Ordinary Expenditure  — Vote 5 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Ms. Smart:  — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, my 
first question to you is that I phoned your office and told them 
that the library estimates would be up this afternoon. I would 
like to know if the Provincial Librarian is coming. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — Mr. Chairman, and hon. member, I 
thank you for providing my official with that advance notice, 
and she should be here shortly. 
 
Ms. Smart:  — That’s good. Mr. Minister, I’d like to begin the 
discussion of the estimates with the issue that was discussed in 
question period here a couple of weeks ago, but which I would 
like to question you on further, and that’s the issue of the 
Wheatland Regional Library Board  — the Wheatland Regional 
Library, and the executive director of that library, writing a 
letter on library letterhead to the president of the PC Party, 
Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. Enclosed with that letter 
was a cheque made out to the Progressive Conservative Party of 
Saskatchewan for $30,000. And the address on the cheque 
indicated that the Progressive Conservative convention 
committee was the same address as the Wheatland Regional 
Library, 806 Duchess Street,  

Saskatoon. 
 
Now it’s obvious to me in looking at the way this letter was 
written to the president of the part, and the fact that the cheque 
has the address indicating the PC convention committee was 
running out of the Wheatland Regional Library. I would like to 
ask you if you condone this use of the public’s money to run the 
PC Party convention committee out of the Wheatland Regional 
Library? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — Well the hon. member asks me about 
an employee of the Wheatland Regional Library. And as I think 
the hon. member would know, the Wheatland Regional Library 
employees work for the Wheatland Regional Library Board. 
That board, not its employees, are not appointed by me nor 
hired by me nor this government. They are appointed by the 
various constituent municipalities. So if you have any questions 
relative to one of their employees, you might be best to put it to 
them directly. 
 
Having said that, however, if you’re asking me if this was a 
business of mine whether I would condone that kind of 
behaviour, I would not. 
 
Ms. Smart:  — Well I’m glad to hear that, Mr. Minister. But 
I’d like to know what you intend to do about the fact that the 
taxpayers’ money, for which you are responsible, was being 
used in this instance. And I suggest to you by the nature of the 
fact that the PC convention committee’s address was the 
Wheatland Regional Library, that there was a great deal of 
activity going on there, at the taxpayers’ expense, in a publicly 
funded institution, related to the party that you represent in this 
legislature, the Progressive Conservative Party. 
 
(1445) 
 
Now it’s obvious that the staff were not only typing up letters 
regarding the Progressive Conservative Party business, but they 
were also opening the mail, because these cheques that came in 
addressed to the PC convention committee at 806 Duchess 
Street, would have been opened by the staff at the Wheatland 
Library, paid for out of the taxpayers’ money. 
 
Now that is the money that you’re responsible for. It’s the party 
that you represent. And I want to know if you have any 
intention of disciplining the . . . or of making submissions to the 
regional library board regarding this, or in some way taking 
some action about the fact that the taxpayers’ money is being 
used in this regard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — Well I’ve already stated my position 
on . . . my view of that kind of activity. And secondly, you are a 
member who in this House has asked on more than one 
occasion that I respect the autonomy of boards, whether it be 
university boards or others. Are you reversing your position 
now and asking that I should interfere? Is that what you’re 
saying? 
 
Ms. Smart:  — No, I’m asking you that you make 
representation to the Wheatland Library board regarding this 
issue. Because for all I know, they may be PC Party 
conventions being run out of school boards or wherever else in 
this province. This is a very serious issue to say that  
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1462 
 

the taxpayers’ money is being used for this. The PC Party 
convention was obviously a big event, and it was run out of the 
Wheatland Regional Library offices with the taxpayers’ money. 
What are you going to do about that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — First of all I would repeat again, as I 
said earlier, if this was a business that I operated I would not 
condone this kind of behaviour. I have a fair amount of faith in 
the board. For all I know, it was an isolated incident. 
 
If you’re asking me if I don’t have faith in that board or in other 
duly elected or appointed boards across this province, then I 
guess you and I will have to agree to disagree, because I do 
have faith in school boards, university boards, hospital boards, 
etc., across the province. I doubt that they condone that 
behaviour at all either. 
 
As I understand it, the person that you referred to has 
apologized. And I have every faith that that board can discharge 
its duties honourably, and the expectations that they would have 
of their employees is a matter for them to deal with, and I 
suspect they have dealt with it. 
 
Ms. Smart:  — And I suspect that you haven’t taken the time to 
find out enough about this issue, and it’s a very serious issue, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
The person involved dismissed this letter as a clerical error, that 
it happened to get typed on Wheatland Regional Library . . . the 
letter from him to the president of the PC Party. He said it was a 
clerical error. 
 
That is not acceptable when he was using the Wheatland 
Regional Library as the office and the address for the PC 
convention committee. That was a deliberate decision made by 
this person. And it was not just one clerical error or one minor 
mistake. 
 
Now you’re the minister that’s responsible for paying grants to 
these libraries to run their systems, and that taxpayers’ money 
should be used to run the library system, not to run the PC Party 
convention committee. 
 
And you have some responsibility, I suggest to you, to make 
some representation to the Wheatland Regional (Library) Board 
about this issue. Because you may want to dismiss it as a minor 
thing that happened, just a minor accident or a 
once-in-a-lifetime mistake, that this letter got written in this 
way and these cheques got made out and that the Wheatland 
Regional Library was being used as a PC convention 
committee. 
 
But that’s not acceptable to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, and 
you’re responsible for the money that you grant to the regional 
libraries. And I suggest that you have some responsibility, since 
you’re a member of this party, to make some representation to 
the library board regarding this issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — As I understand it, the board has 
accepted his apology. I have every confidence in those board 
members duly appointed by each of their municipalities. And if 
they are happy with the apology and the employee enjoys their 
confidence, then why  

would I interfere? I’ve already told you about my view of that 
kind of behaviour, if that was my business, if you like. And I 
don’t know as I can say much more without being repetitive. 
 
Ms. Smart:  — Well I think you could be more involved in 
this, because it’s definitely an issue that is really almost . . . well 
it is immoral for a library employee to be using the public 
facilities in this way, and using the staff available to him in this 
way. 
 
And there’s another issue in connection with this letter that I 
would like you to address in the House today, and that’s the fact 
that this letter, written on the library letter-head  — typed up by 
staff, paid for by the taxpayers  — to the president of the PC 
Party, suggests that the PC Party might like to get some money, 
some free advertising regarding the convention from the 
advertisers who also do other business with the party. 
 
We in this House have said that that smacks almost of extortion 
and almost in a need for a judicial inquiry to look at this issue. 
Are you not concerned that there’s staff in a public library 
system writing private letters on library letter-head to the 
president of the PC Party suggesting that: 
 

I should observe that Smail Communications gave us a 
15,000 dog and pony show for nothing. And perhaps 
Dome Advertising, with its far greater share of the 
provincial advertising budget, should be expected to 
donate the cost of this particular bill to the party. 

 
Do you have any concerns about this? And, knowing, do you 
have any intention of making an representation to the 
Wheatland regional board about that issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ve already 
explained what my view would be in so far as the Wheatland 
regional board, their autonomous nature, and the confidence 
that their employees enjoy. And I’ve also given my comments 
about my view on that kind of behaviour. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank:  — Mr. Minister, I’m not satisfied with your 
answers. You suggest that this is an isolated incident, that just 
an unfortunate use of the wrong stationery. 
 
This PC Party cell in the Wheatland Regional Library had 
cheques printed up with the same address as the Wheatland 
Regional library. Now you don’t go to the bank or your credit 
union and you say, print me up one cheque because I need to 
have this address on it. You get a whole bunch of cheques, 
hundreds of cheques printed up. 
 
The minister suggests this is an isolated incident, just an 
unfortunate clerical error that $30,000 in one lump was passing 
through this particular office. That explanation doesn’t wash. 
 
I want to know from this minister, Mr. Chairman, what are the 
size of the grants that are paid to Wheatland Regional Library 
last year, and in this budget? 
 
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1463 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — For the year ended December 31, ’87, 
the provincial operating grant was $580,087.38; the provincial 
book grant was $30,750. 
 
And I want to add one other comment, Mr. Chairman, and I 
pick my words very carefully. This hon. member, is indeed he 
said that I characterized that behaviour as an unfortunate 
clerical error, if he says I said that, the record will clearly show 
I never, ever used those words, “unfortunate clerical error.” And 
if he says that, then he is misrepresenting my remarks, sir. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank:  — Mr. Chairman, this minister is 
portraying this whole thing as being just an unfortunate incident 
that happened in a semi-autonomous body that he has no 
concern in  — it’s their business; they’re going to handle it. The 
PC party is involved at the highest levels in this province in this 
particular incident. The minister cannot deny that. The minister 
says $580,000 and $750,000 was paid to Wheatland Regional 
Library. We’re talking about over a million dollars, well over a 
million dollars. 
 
This minister, Mr. Chairman, has a responsibility of 
stewardship for the taxpayers’ dollars. I want to know what 
steps this minister has taken to ensure that his stewardship of 
the hard-earned taxpayers’ dollars of this province, of over $1 
million in this case, is being spent properly, where he’s sending 
it to Wheatland Regional Library? What communications has 
the minister had with Wheatland Regional Library about the 
responsible spending of the grants they receive, and what has he 
done above it? 
 
I do not accept that fabrication you’ve given us up to this 
moment about this being an isolated incident, an unfortunate 
misuse of stationery. Of all the tissue that you’ve put up, this is 
the most transparent that I’ve seen in this House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — Well if the hon. member is again 
trying to characterize my view of this situation as somehow it is 
unfortunate in a cavalier sort of sense, he again would be 
misrepresenting my view. And I would clearly state that if he is 
suggesting somehow that I condone this kind of behaviour, I do 
not, period. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank:  — Mr. Chairman, the minister hasn’t 
answered the question. What are doing about it? We’re talking 
about a million dollars, over a million two  — $1,200,000 plus. 
What are you doing about it? You’re the steward of the 
taxpayers’ dollars; what are you doing about it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — Well your numbers are wrong. Just 
for the record, I read into the record and I’ll provide them for 
you again. The provincial operating grant is slightly over 
$580,000 and the book grant from the province was $30,750. 
But the point . . . the same whether the money is $580,000 or a 
million, and what we . . . we have the same expectation for 
accountability of those dollars for Wheatland as we do for every 
other jurisdiction. 
 
And if you’re somehow suggesting that somehow this 
accountability process, of which part of is audited  

statements, and how they expended their money and their 
operations and their equity and the summary of financial 
statement, isn’t somehow (a) satisfactory, or that somehow 
municipalities; appointed representatives aren’t somehow men 
of principle, then you should transmit that to those appointed 
representatives. You can’t have it both ways. 
 
You can’t sit on your hands in this legislature and say somehow 
that governments ought not interfere with boards and boards’ 
autonomy when it comes to students caught in the middle of a 
faculty-management strike, and then now somehow all of a 
sudden suggest I should be in with a judicial inquiry in a board 
that enjoys equal autonomy. You can’t have it both ways, hon. 
member. 
 
You can sit there in a pompous, righteous sort of way, but it 
won’t wash with me personally, to be honest with you. And you 
can try and make this some kind of political issue for your own 
gain. You can try that if you want. You can try and tar me with 
somehow condoning that kind of behaviour, and if you do, you 
are misrepresenting my view. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank:  — Mr. Chairman, the minister is trying to 
turn the sword away from himself, and he’s having very little 
success at it. I asked the minister: what was the total grants that 
went to Wheatland Regional Library last year and this year? He 
gave me some figures that amounted to more than a million 
dollars. I say that’s a lot of money being sent to that particular 
library. Now if he gave me the wrong figures, that’s another 
problems which the minister has to straighten out. 
 
The money sent to the library, I asked the minister, what have 
you done about it? He says, well the same procedures apply to 
all the libraries all over Saskatchewan. Well that’s fine. We 
have no evidence that all the other libraries are running a 
Conservative Party con game out of the library office. And we 
want to know what you’re doing about it. 
 
Have you been in communication? Table the letters you’ve sent 
them. Tell us what you’ve done about this situation, a place 
where we’re sending over a million dollars of taxpayers’ 
money, where there’s a $30,000-a-crack Tory Party operation 
going on, with cheques printed out with the same address on the 
cheques as the regional library, the minister giving the 
impression this is an unfortunate incident. 
 
(1500) 
 
My God, the headlines, Mr. Minister, have you read the 
headlines? “Use of library stationery ‘clerical error’  — clerical. 
Can you believe that, Mr. Minister? I’m not trying to get some 
political advantages out of this, I’m saying you’ve got to clean 
up the mess you’ve got, and you’d better do it soon. And we 
want an explanation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — Well I’ll go through these points once 
again. First of all, and I read it into the record a second time in 
the event that you hadn’t heard it clearly the first time, it is not a 
million dollars, it is something in excess of $610,000 in total, 
point number one. 
 
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1464 
 

Point number two, you continue to use the words and suggest 
that I have characterized this as some kind of unfortunate 
clerical error. You, sir, know full well that I have never used 
those words. You have used them; your colleague has used 
them; I have not. That would be a representation if, in fact, that 
is your view, a misrepresentation. 
 
The third point I would make is I would reiterate that I don’t 
condone that kind of behaviour, never have, and never will. 
 
And the final point I would make in response to the 
back-benchers: what am I going to do about it? I am satisfied, I 
have confidence in that board (a); and (b) it has been suggested 
to me, or made known to me, that the board has confidence in 
their employee and that the employee has apologized to them. 
now if they’re satisfied with that, and I’m satisfied with the 
behaviour of the board as principled individuals. I have no 
reason to cast aspersions on any of them, and if you wish to, 
you go outside the House and case aspersions. They enjoy my 
confidence. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank:  — Mr. Minister, you won’t get me in the 
position that I’m attacking the board of Wheatland Regional 
Library. I am quite clearly saying that the correspondence that 
took place in this regional library was between a regional 
library staff person and the president of the PC Party of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This just wasn’t an accidental letter. It had a $30,000 cheque in 
it coming out of the regional library. The minister has yet not 
answered what he’s done to satisfy himself. I want to know in 
this operation what the minister’s done to satisfy the taxpayers 
of Saskatchewan that he is a responsible steward of their 
taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
And it’s a sensitive issue because the president of the PC Party 
and one of the people that works in that library staff are 
involved  — $30,000 operation that is not just a one shot, but 
something that has obviously been going on for sometime  — 
with the same address as the regional library on the cheques of 
the PC Party. And the minister has yet to explain to this 
Assembly what the situation is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — Well the board has my confidence, 
Mr. Chairman, and the same accountability check will be 
applied to that board now and in the future as is applied to all 
other boards. And when we’re satisfied with their audited 
statements again next year, as we are this year, their cheques 
will be in the mail as usual. 
 
Ms. Smart:  — Mr. Minister, it is absolutely shocking that you 
have accepted this kind of a situation in the regional library and 
that you would let the taxpayers’ money be spent for this sort of 
activity. And you stand up in this legislature and say you don’t 
condone it, but you also say you can do nothing about it. 
 
Will you describe for me, what sort of words would you use to 
describe this kind of activity, if you say that you don’t describe 
it as a clerical error or as one mistake along the way? How do 
you describe it when the director of a regional library uses that 
building and that staff, paid for out of the taxpayers’ money, to 
run the PC Party  

convention committee, and to write letters to the president of 
the PC Party, of which you are a member and the minister 
responsible for the libraries? How do you describe that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — The hon. member said that what I 
have said is shocking. It would be shocking if I had accepted, 
and did accept, what you have said. And I agree that this 
behaviour is something that no one can condone. I have said I 
do not condone it, and I have said that on numerous occasions, 
and I say it again now. 
 
Ms. Smart:  — That’s not enough to stand in this House and 
say you don’t condone it. What have you done about it? It’s not 
enough to describe it just as some kind of bizarre behaviour. 
This was an activity that went on for some time, and it involves 
the top management of a regional library and the top person in 
the PC Party. What are you doing about it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — If I didn’t think that the board had the 
matter in hand with the employee, then there might be some 
basis for me to do something more. What that something more 
could or would be, would be probably be based on the 
provincial library act and that sort of thing. However, being that 
I am satisfied that the duly appointed representatives of the 
municipalities are (a) men of principle, and (b) have the 
situation in hand, I intend to do nothing more about it. 
 
Ms. Smart:  — Well I think you should figure out exactly how 
much money has been spent by the taxpayers to run the PC 
Party convention out of the regional library and see if you can’t 
somehow retrieve some of that money, or somehow have some 
accountability for this kind of activity beyond saying that you 
don’t condone it buy you accept that there’s been an apology. 
 
That is not enough for this kind of activity. It’s not acceptable. 
It shows the kind of corruption of the PC Party that you would 
have a director of a regional library, a card carrying member of 
the PC Party, and running the PC Party business out of the 
regional library. That is corrupt. And that is the money of the 
taxpayers of this province, money very badly needed to run 
regional library systems. 
 
Regional library system across this province are desperate for 
funds, and here’s one regional library who’s using the taxpayers 
money to run your party’s convention out of the regional 
library, and that is not acceptable  — not acceptable at all. And 
I will give you one more opportunity to tell me what you’re 
going to do about it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — Does the hon. member have no faith 
then, I take it, in the boards that have been duly appointed by 
the constituent rural municipalities? Is that what she’s telling 
this Assembly  — point number one. And point number two, I 
would say to you, hon. member, and to your party, this is 
another example of the double standard; this is another example 
of how you talk out of both sides of your mouth. On how many 
occasions have you chastised this government for interfering; 
for interfering with the bargaining process and teachers; of 
interfering with the operation of the university? How many 
times have you used that argument, hon. member? 
 
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1465 
 

And now all of a sudden, when it suits your purpose for some 
cheap political gain, I would argue, all of a sudden there’s 
sanctimony dripping out of every pore. Why is that, hon. 
member? 
 
And another example, we had another example today of your 
double standard and talking out of both sides of your mouth. 
When your party was in government in the ‘70s, you had a 
moratorium on nursing homes. And when your party was in 
government you had a moratorium on building integrated 
nursing home hospital facilities. Now all of a sudden, because 
of the story in the Leader-Post that talks about rural hospitals, 
all of a sudden  — no, you would build hospitals and build 
more hospitals and build them in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And yet, what did your leader say, and what did your party do 
when you were in government? He said we’d build no more 
hospitals at all because they cost too much, and that was in fact 
what your policy was when it came to nursing homes. 
 
So you have a double standard, hon. member, and you speak 
out of both sides of your mouth, I would suggest, on issues like 
autonomy and others. So you tell me what you’re doing to tell 
the people that are duly appointed, principled people, I would 
suggest to you, that run that library? Tell us what you’re going 
to tell them if they’re such awful individuals and don’t have 
control of the situation? 
 
Ms. Smart:  — I’m telling you, Mr. Minister, that you should 
take responsibility for the way in which these libraries . . . that 
library grant money is given to libraries, to spend it on the 
books and on running the library system, not on running your 
party’s conventions out of the regional library system; and that 
you interfere far more in the way in which these institutions are 
run by inserting your provincial . . . your Progressive 
Conservative Party into the regional library system than any 
sort of thing that I could be suggesting. 
 
And I’m saying you should be accountable for that and that you 
should explain to the taxpayers why you’re allowing this to 
happen  — that’s what I’m saying. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — I don’t know if I can add anything 
more, Mr. Chairman, without being repetitive and repeating 
myself probably for the eighth or ninth or tenth time. Perhaps 
this is at a point that the hon. member and I will have to agree 
to disagree on. 
 
Ms. Smart:  — Mr. Chairman, it’s a very sad day that this sort 
of issue can happen within a regional library and be raised in 
this House and be responded to so inappropriately and so 
unsatisfactorily. 
 
This is the man that says that he’s really supportive of the 
information age, and yet he will allow this kind of 
disintegration of a library system to be used as a political party 
headquarters. That, within librarianship, within the public 
service, among the people that I know and work for, is one of 
the most unacceptable kinds of activities that a public institution 
cold get into. And I’m not surprised that you support it by 
refusing to take any action regarding the funds that you put 
forward for the libraries. 
 

And, Mr. Minister, the second issue that I want to talk to you 
about this afternoon is the issue of what’s happening at the 
University of Regina Library. I want to talk to you about the 
proposal that the University of . . . it seems a bit ridiculous to 
try to talk to the minister when he’s turned his back on me, so I 
will sit down until he’s prepared to listen. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to talk to you about the University of 
Regina, scheme for the university library to sell off the library 
books and to lease them back, to sell them off to, as I 
understand, an investment company in Toronto called MedCan. 
 
Now this is an issue again that I questioned you about in 
question period. It’s a serious issue for the librarians. It was 
very much discussed in detail at the library association 
conference up at Waskesiu which I attended. The proposal has 
resulted in an editorial in the Leader-Post which I would like to 
quote to you because I think it’s a very important editorial. The 
proposal is that the library of . . . the University of Regina 
Library sell off its books . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  — Oh well, who cares about that rag? That 
isn’t a bit . . . an example of serious journalism in that thing 
since I’ve been reading it. 
 
Ms. Smart:  — Mr. Chairman, if the minister is going to yell at 
me from his seat when he’s sitting and I’m standing up talking 
to him, I wish you would bring him under control. 
 
Mr. Minister, the proposal is to sell off the library resources for, 
as I understand it, some $20 million and lease them back. The 
Regina Leader-Post says about this kind of proposal. 
 

There is no free lunch. The extra cash in hand for the 
institutions means less tax money flows into the coffers of 
government, and it is generally the latter which is the 
major source of funds for hospitals, schools and public, 
non-profit bodies. In that sense, such lease-backs become 
a means of robbing Peter to pay Paul. 

 
The only Peter that I can think would be worth robbing would 
be Peter Pocklington. 
 
But I want you to respond to this proposal, because when I 
questioned you in question period, you said that you hadn’t 
talked with anyone about it at that point. And I want to know if 
you have talked to anyone about this scheme and what your 
response is to it  — whether you’ve expressed concern to the 
university. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — Well since this question was raised 
with me in question period  — was it earlier this week or last 
week, Mr. Chairman  — I have met with the president of the 
University of Regina and, as well, the chief librarian there, 
Ernie Ingles, and had some fair long discussion with them on 
the notion of a lease-back. 
 
And I must say, after meeting with them, I think the proposal 
has considerable merit. 
 
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1466 
 

An Hon. Member:  — Oh, for Heaven sakes! 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — And the hon. member from 
Saskatoon says, oh, for Heaven sakes. And you see, Mr. 
Chairman, what these hon. members are really saying, when 
they decry and belittle the proposal that’s being looked at at the 
University of Regina, is that they are trying to say that they are 
somehow smarter and know more than the president of the 
university and the chief librarian. 
 
They are somehow trying to tell the people that they have it all, 
they know it all. I mean, I perhaps have hit a nerve here; I 
recognize that. They’re trying to suggest that: well, we’re 
smarter than the librarian there; we’re smarter than the president 
and the board of governors; we know it all. 
 
Yes, here’s another example of something in the newspaper  — 
and any other day, don’t interfere with the autonomy of the 
board of governors of universities, but a little article in the 
newspaper or on the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 
and  — boom  — raise it in the House, and are you prepared to 
interfere and stop this, and all this rhetoric that we hear. 
 
When I first heard of this, I would frankly say I had some 
reservations. But after visiting with these individuals whose 
dedication to libraries and books if every bit as strong as the 
hon. member’s, I would suggest . . . Ernie Ingles, I think he 
lives and breathes it. I think they’re so very fortunate to have an 
individual like that out at the university. 
 
The president, I’m sure he has the same sort of sense of what 
would be important in an arrangement like this. And they’ve 
satisfied themselves on every count. Will the books be there? 
Will the students have absolute rights to them? and in fact the 
proposal has much more to do than just with books anyways, 
but it’s the books part that’s made the headlines. 
 
They see some fair advantage for them in entering into a 
negotiation like this. Now whether it will come to pass or not is 
another matter. But certainly it has some merit, and I for one 
wouldn’t stand in their way from putting that deal together now 
that I’ve had a chance to talk to them  — talk to people like 
librarians over there who, if there was nay whiff of suspicion 
that this wasn’t a good deal for the students or the university, he 
would be the first to be raising that. And I find exactly the 
opposite. 
 
In fact I see this as yet another one of the measures that they 
have put in place over there, some rather innovative measures  
— the books for bushels, the deal they put together with UMI 
(University Microfilms International) last year. I think this 
library ought to be congratulated on what they’re doing, not 
stabbed from behind with somebody who probably hasn’t 
discussed it with them and is prepared to pick holes in it based 
on an article in the Leader-Post. 
 
I ask you: have you met with the president and the officials over 
there? Have you talked to them about the iron-cladness of the 
guarantee for students that the deal  

would have and at the same time see some obvious benefits for 
the university? 
 
Ms. Smart:  — Mr. Minister, this is the same sort of deal that 
the Ontario government said was completely unacceptable. And 
the Ontario government has moved to deny grants to 
universities that consider the proposal to sell off their library 
resources and lease them back from private investors. 
 
Now there’s several reasons why this kind of proposal is, in the 
eyes of many, many librarians, a completely idiotic idea. And 
I’m not surprised that the university if looking at issues like this 
as a way to get money, because you have chronically 
underfunded the universities to the point where you’ve driven 
them to look for money in all sorts of ways, which you describe 
as innovative but which are basically very destructive. 
 
Now one of the reasons why these investment companies are 
eager to look at this buying of the books and leasing them back, 
is because of the tax credits that they get. It’s a way to avoid 
paying tax. If they avoid paying tax, there’s less money 
available to buy new books in the future. That’s one reason why 
it’s a dumb idea. 
 
Another reason why it’s a dumb idea is because you lose 
control of the collection. This is a collection that’s already been 
bought by the people of Saskatchewan. they shouldn’t have to 
buy it back again at the end of the lease term. There’s all sort of 
reasons why it’s a bad idea. There’s all sorts of reasons why the 
Ontario government has moved against it. 
 
It doesn’t surprise me one bit to hear you stand up and 
demonstrate no awareness of these concerns, and no 
understanding of why librarians across this country are, in large 
majority, opposing the idea. 
 
Now if you want to respond to what I’ve said so far, I’ve not 
asked you a question but I will give you the right to respond. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — Well the hon. member has described 
this deal as idiotic, as dumb, has even suggested that some of 
the officials that might look at it, characterized them in an 
unfortunate light, I would argue. 
 
She also suggested that the university would lose control of the 
books, which is untrue. I doubt that the hon. member has talked 
to any of the officials, because those kinds of questions are 
germane enough, and if the answers were “yes” to some of the, 
I too would be worried. But long before I would be worried, 
librarians like Ernie Ingles would have been in shock. Any deal 
that would have jeopardized that collection in a real and 
tangible way, neither he nor the president nor the board of 
governor would have gone for. These are intelligent, sensible, 
responsible individuals. 
 
Ernie Ingles, who you have some doubts about, in fact his peers 
do not. He’s been the president of the Saskatchewan Library 
Association for the last year, highly regarded across Canada, in 
my view, making a mark for this province and that university 
across North American, I might even be prepared to say. 
 
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1467 
 

So I think there’s nothing . . . and as far as why Ontario and the 
Ontario government might be against it, I doubt that they’re 
against it for the reasons that you would suggest  — because 
anybody who supports it is an idiot or that it’s dumb. I would 
suggest the reason the Ontario government is against it is 
strictly financial. It’s an Ontario company, and guess who 
would lose provincial tax revenue if somebody was to have 
some tax advantage in the deal, where the company is indeed 
residing in that province, being Ontario. I would suggest maybe 
that is where their concerns are. 
 
Ms. Smart:  — Well I’m sure their concerns are the tax base. It 
would be both federal and provincial, and it’s an issue that you 
should be concerned about too. 
 
Mr. Minister, I should also remind you that I’ve been president 
of the Saskatchewan Library Association and I have served in 
that capacity myself. And I know from talking to a lot of people 
that there’s a great concern about this proposal to sell off the 
books at the university. 
 
Also, there’s a concern about the proposal for Bushels for 
Books. My point that I want to make to you is that both of these 
schemes indicate the chronic underfunding that you have given 
to the university and to the university library. You’ve described 
the Bushels for Books program as innovative. 
 
The director of the libraries has been described as getting the 
idea from Brazil where the government schemes to trade cocoa 
to aid its universities. Now the government in Brazil, as I 
understand it, is a lot different from the kind of government we 
have here, and it doesn’t surprise me that universities in Brazil 
would be having rouble getting public money because my 
understanding of the Government of Brazil is a dictatorship. We 
have here a democracy. We have here a government where 
these kinds of resources are publicly funded, where the 
universities are publicly funded and supported, where they’re 
paid for by the taxpayers’ money. 
 
What Bushels for Books proposes is a barter system for the 
province of Saskatchewan to pay for the resources in the 
university library. It’s basically a barter system. It’s a cute idea 
for one year. it’s interesting that the wheat pool has participated 
in it. But if you start having farmers brining bags of grain to pay 
for library books one year, what are you going to have the next 
year? are you going to have people dragging cows into the 
library to pay for their books? 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like you, because we’re talking policies 
of funding libraries basically, we’re talking about a policy . . . 
You see nothing wrong with a private company buying a 
library’s resources and allowing the library to lease them back; 
I’ve established that. You think that’s a good idea. You think 
it’s a good idea to start a barter system for funding libraries, 
where people who have something to contribute will be hauling 
it into the library in exchange for permission to use the books 
and as a way of paying for books. 
 
I want to know if this is a policy . . . Is this a policy change that 
you’re prepared to establish? Are you prepared to  

think through the implications of what you’re touting as an 
innovative way to fund the libraries? 
 
I suggest to you that funding libraries on some kind of a barter 
system is a primitive system and, far from taking us into the 
21st century, it’s dragging us back to days long gone. But if you 
want to bypass the money system in this province as a way of 
funding things, will you please let us know so that we know that 
the policy for funding the universities is going to be based on 
something different. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member used 
the word “shocked” earlier. I have to admit I’m shocked, 
amazed, and disappointed at this attack by a person who herself 
says that she was a president of the Saskatchewan Library 
Association. I’m surprised, dismayed, disappointed, and 
shocked at her attack on the University of Regina and its library 
and its officials. 
 
She says there’s concern about Bushels for Books. Well if there 
is, she is the first person that has raised it with me in this 
province. I’ll tell you that. Most others have seen that as another 
example of some pretty creative thinking and some pretty 
innovative thinking. It’s not somehow that you take grain in 
and, by doing that, you’re allowed to use the books at the 
library. Give me a break. 
 
It’s an innovative scheme where once again rural 
Saskatchewan, farmers, farming, who play such a dominant role 
in our economy, can help with an institution who itself is giving 
back to this economy. 
 
And in the pamphlet on Bushels for Books, it gave an example, 
some of the research that’s going on that will help farmers and 
farming in this province  — linear tracking devices for fields, 
planting and those kinds of things, biological research in terms 
of using insects to our benefit as opposed to having to use 
chemicals. 
 
Here is an example of the marriage, again, between one of our 
major educational institutions and agriculture. In fact, I’m 
advised that if you examine the history of this province, there 
was a time, Mr. Chairman  — and I’m sure you may even 
remember this  — there was a time when you could deliver 
wheat; if you didn’t have money, you could deliver wheat to 
pay tuition. 
 
Well now, yes, maybe Mr. Ingles got this idea from Brazil in 
cocoa plantations, but the concept in a sense was there earlier 
when people recognized that, yes, we didn’t have much grain 
. . . or we didn’t have much money, but we had lots of wheat, 
and they could deliver that on account and it would pay their 
tuition for their children. 
 
I say to the hon. member, and I say to her party, you have no 
sense, you have no sense of the Saskatchewan way, the 
marriage between urban Saskatchewan and rural Saskatchewan. 
and what is good for rural Saskatchewan can indeed be good for 
the university, and what’s good for the university can be good 
for our farmers. That’s the Saskatchewan way in this province, 
hon. member. That’s how we do things in this province. There 
is no concern, there is congratulations. 
 
And I’ll tell you  — and I suspect some of my colleagues will 
do the same thing  — when I have the next quota  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1468 
 

come up, I’m going to deliver some wheat in the truck down 
there in Assiniboia, Saskatchewan, and I’m going to earmark 
some of that grain for the Bushels for Books program because I 
think it’s deserving of our support, not our condemnation. 
 
And the attack, this vicious attack you’re mounting on the 
University of Regina library and its officials, I think it’s 
shocking, that’s what I think your attack is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  — Thank you. I want to continue the line of 
questioned by the member from Saskatoon Centre as it pertains 
to the privatization of the University of Regina library. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell me whether or not the university of 
Regina has purchased any books yet with the Bushels for Books 
program that has been carried on in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — I discussed this program briefly with 
Mr. Ingles when he was in yesterday, and my recollection was 
that that there had been no books yet, but that was of no 
concern to them at this very moment in that it was early in the 
program and they were just gearing up some advertising to go 
out to farmers and to elevator agents and those sorts of things. 
And in fact I made the observation myself that since they’d 
announced it, at least in our area, we really hadn’t had any 
quotas particularly, that even if people were aware of it, that 
they’d been able to deliver against. 
 
And you know, I think this is a bit . . . you’re being a bit cute 
here, and cut by a half I might add, by trying to suggest . . . by 
trying to use your privatization rhetoric and like it to a Bushels 
for Books program. That’s pretty transparent, I would argue, a 
good try but one that the people of Saskatchewan will see 
through and that I see through. And if you want to, as well, 
mount an attack on the University of Regina and the officials 
there, fine, but it’s pretty transparent, I would argue, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
(1530) 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  — Well, Mr. Minister, this is the first time that 
I’ve ever been called cute, so I really do thank you for that 
compliment, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you’ve advised the House that we no longer 
. . . or we don’t know yet whether any books have been 
purchased from the bushels for Books program. Mr. Minister, 
can you tell whether or not there are people in this province that 
donate books to libraries, particularly university libraries, and in 
particular, the University of Regina library? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — Yes, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  — Mr. Minister, how do you think the people 
who have donated books to the university of Regina library will 
feel one those books that they have donated to the library, at no 
tax advantage to themselves, I suspect, those books become the 
property of some Ontario company and are no longer the 
property of the  

University of Regina and, therefore, the people living in the 
Regina and area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — Well I don’t know as the hon. 
member fully understands  — and I can understand your 
apprehension because the same kinds of questions went through 
my mind before I had a chance to . . . and in fact those were the 
kinds of questions I had answered by Dr. Barber and Ernie 
Ingles when they were in. Yes, the concerns, the normal kinds 
of concerns  — will somehow this corporation in the middle of 
this deal walk off with the books?  — you know, or any of the 
kinds of concerns that one might have relative to a book 
collection. 
 
And the reality is, they’ve covered all of these off, it’s an 
ironclad deal; it’s a win-win situation. The deal in fact is only 
about . . . it’s about half books; the other half is computers and 
software and steam valves and you name it. Yet somehow it’s 
the books that have made the headlines, okay? 
 
And the reality is that there’ll be no loss of ownership of the 
books; they’ll be there for the students; there’s a complete use. 
It’s an ironclad deal. 
 
And I guess what I would say to you, not only am I satisfied but 
I have a fair amount of faith in the judgement of guys like Ernie 
Ingles and Dr. Barber, and they’re satisfied that it’s ironclad. 
It’s a win-win situation for the university; it’s a win-win 
situation for the library; it’s a good deal for the students  — just 
like the donation of about a million-plus by UMI was a good 
deal for the students, and a good deal for that university. 
 
And that library over there is getting just quite a reputation, 
certainly in some categories of their collection. And they are no 
more interested in seeing that jeopardized than you or I. The 
deal is ironclad. 
 
And I don’t know how much more I can tell you, except that it 
may be worth your while, if you have lingering concerns, to 
visit with the president or the librarian. And I’m sure that they 
would be put to rest, because they could probably explain them 
even more eloquently than myself. 
 
Ms. Atkinson:  — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m surprised that you 
would say the deal is an ironclad deal because, as I understand 
it, they haven’t yet made the deal. 
 
Now I just want to talk about why it is the University of Regina 
would be interested in privatizing their book collection. The 
reasons that they are looking at this kind of process, as other 
institutions are doing across this province, is because you 
people are underfunding them. You people have consistently 
underfunded post-secondary institutions in this province. 
 
Now we have a situation in Saskatoon, for instance, where there 
are journals that the university library can’t purchase because 
they simply don’t have the funds to do that. So I understand full 
well why the University of Regina, why Dr. Barber and the 
chief librarian would be looking at ways and means to get some 
cash into the university, because they have some cash flow 
problems. 
 
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1469 
 

The issue here is not Dr. Barber, it is not the chief librarian, it is 
not the University of Regina; the issue here is yourself and your 
government. Your government is ideologically committed to 
the whole notion of privatization. It is a concept that is totally 
foreign to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I note here that you call it public participation in this little 
pamphlet: Questions and Answers  — The Saskatchewan Way. 
It is no more the Saskatchewan way tan Oliver Letwein is in 
terms of this province. The mixed economy, public ownership, 
private enterprise and co-operatives  — the mixed economy is 
the Saskatchewan way. And, Mr. Minister, that public 
participation, as you describe it, privatization, is not part of the 
tradition of this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have had several people raise with us this 
problem. The University of Regina is cash starved; it’s looking 
for ways to fund its operations, a la the decision to look at the 
possibility of privatizing the University of Regina library 
collection. 
 
Who are the winners? You say it’s a win-win situation. The 
winners are not the people of this province, who have paid for 
that library collection, the winners are not the individual donors 
who have donated to that library collection; the winners in this 
situation is the company that’s going to own that library 
collection and lease it back to the University of Regina. 
 
And how do they win? They win because they buy the 
university library collection and then the University of Regina 
rents that collection from them over a long period of time; they 
wind through the tax system, and by being able to do that, the 
people of this country lose revenue from the tax system. The 
only winners in this situation are the company and I guess, to a 
certain extent, the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
So the public loses in two ways; they sell off a collection that is 
already bought and paid for; the public loses because this 
company is able to take advantage of the tax system, and by 
being able to do that, the people of this country lose revenue 
from the tax system. The only winners in this situation are the 
company and I guess, to a certain extent, the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan is not collecting revenues in 
this province that are available, and consequently individual 
institutions, like the University of Regina, have to look at other 
ways to fund their operation. Mr. Minister, you will be able to 
have privatization in this province by the very reasons that you 
are unprepared, totally unprepared, to fund the institutions and 
all of the services that go with those institutions that provide 
services to our people. 
 
And it seems to me, Mr. Minister, that, just so it’s very clear, 
we are not being critical of the University of Regina  — not 
whatsoever, no whatsoever. They have no alternative. They 
have no alternative; they have to look for ways to find revenue, 
and the reasons they have to do that is because your government 
is not prepared to fund post-secondary institutions in this 
province. They’re not prepared to do that. 
 
The losers in this situation are the people of the province  

because we give away a valued collection of books; we give 
that away or we sell it off, and then we lease it back. Why, on 
earth would you sell of something that you already own? The 
reason you do that, in the University of Regina’s case, is 
because your government refuses to properly fund the 
University of Regina, along with a whole host of other 
post-secondary institutions in this province. 
 
Isn’t that the real reasons why the University of Regina is 
privatizing their library collection  — because your 
government, you, Mr. Minister, who are responsible for 
post-secondary education in this province  — because you 
people refuse to adequately fund those institutions that serve 
our people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to call the 
hon. member on her bluff here, and her rhetoric that she tries to 
slide by the people, two points that are very significant here. 
First of all, we see now some back-pedalling on behalf of the 
hon. member. She knows that they have  — and her colleague, 
particularly, the library critic, has seen . . . for the most part, 
mounted a pretty vicious attack on the U or R today  — 
described this scheme, this proposal, as idiotic, described it as 
dumb. 
 
Now the hon. member gets up and attempts to salvage this by 
saying, we’re not trying to be critical of the U of R. but I’ll put 
this on the record: the reality is, Mr. Chairman, we did not go to 
the U of R with this scheme; they came to us. And you know 
why they came, Mr. Chairman? Out of courtesy. 
 
It’s entirely within their autonomy to make this operational 
decision  — entirely, entirely within their domain. So did we go 
to them? No, they came to us out of courtesy. And now that 
they’ve mounted this vicious attack, they’re trying to 
back-pedal, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Point number two, and I ask you, Mr. Chairman, and I ask 
every member in this Assembly, and I ask everyone out at the 
university who’s been involved in this: has this ever, has 
anybody else ever in this province or in that university or in this 
Chamber, other than that member, described this proposal as 
privatization? No. 
 
She is trying to scare the people of Saskatchewan, trying to put 
this label on it. That’s cheap politics; it’s nothing more than 
cheap politics. And nobody else has used that word at all 
because it doesn’t have a place here. That is all she is trying to 
do, Mr. Chairman  — nothing more, nothing less  — 
sensationalism of the worst kind, fear mongering of the worst 
kind, scare mongering of the worst kind. 
 
First they attack the university for being innovative and 
creative, first they attack the university for being innovative and 
creative, and then they try to put this black mark on it  — that 
they view, at least, as some kind of a black mark  — 
privatization. Well I’m telling you, Mr. Chairman, I’m calling 
her bluff here and now, and she will not get away with it. 
 
Then she uses the other thing. The issue, she says, is not what 
the universities were doing; it’s all my fault, the government’s 
fault, in underfunding. Okay? Once they  
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1470 
 

see that they’ve lost the arguments that they’ve tried to scare the 
public  — by saying the public won’t have access to the books 
if this deal goes through, or the public will have to pay for the 
books if it goes through, or the public will have to deliver wheat 
just to get the right to use books  — after they find that all those 
arguments have been dismissed for good reason, Mr. Chairman, 
then they say the sold saw of underfunding by myself and this 
government. 
 
Well what is the record on funding of universities by this 
government? And I challenge the hon. member to dispute these 
facts. The reality is, over this last half decrease, there is no other 
administration in western Canada whose increases to 
universities, operating and capital, that have exceeded this 
government’s commitment, this premier’s commitment, the 
minister’s commitment in this province. There is none other. 
And the hon. member says she doesn’t believe that. She doesn’t 
believe that. 
 
But don’t buy, don’t buy me just saying so, Mr. Chairman. I 
happened to be reading the Toronto Star, April 17, 1988, and 
they had an article in there, Mr. Chairman. The headline was, 
“University no longer promised for all. And they had a chart in 
there, the head of which said, “What we spend on universities,” 
and its estimates for full-time students. And the source of this 
chart was the council of Ontario Universities. 
 
Now the hon. member and her colleagues would have us 
believe that somehow the government, the Progressive 
Conservative Government of Saskatchewan, since it’s been in 
power since 1982, has somehow not funded universities 
acceptably. I have consistently said that our record is second to 
none in western Canada, Mr. Chairman, second to none. They 
consistently do not believe me. 
 
So what did the Council of Ontario University study show, Mr. 
Speaker? if we’re so underfunded, are we in 8th or 9th or 10th 
place across the country when you line up the provinces? Are 
we . . . and the hon. member from Saskatoon Westmount says 
yes. Well once again he is wrong. He has been consistently 
wrong. He never does his homework. He too tries to scare 
monger, doom monger and fear monger the people 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . That’s right, he does it. 
 
Well if their arguments are correct, Mr. Chairman, if their 
arguments are correct, then Saskatchewan should show up in 
7th or 8th or 9th or 10th place on this chart  — right?  — if 
they’re so underfunded. 
 
But here is this third party, independent third party, the Council 
of Ontario Universities, and what does it show? Where is 
Saskatchewan on the chart relative to funding per full-time 
student, Mr. Chairman? We are in second place, Mr. Chairman, 
second place. And I’m proud of that and that’s as it should be 
because that’s the kind of commitment we have to universities 
and to post-secondary education in this province. 
 
(1545) 
 
An independent third party, the Council of Ontario Universities, 
Saskatchewan proudly in second place. I  

might add, ahead of Manitoba, ahead of Ontario. Ahead of 
B.C., Quebec, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward 
Island and Newfoundland, Mr. Chairman. Ahead of all of them 
and I am proud of that, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And they can consistently in this legislature misrepresent the 
facts, and it’s time you were called on some of this. We’re tired 
of this fear mongering. You consistently get away with 
misrepresenting the facts in this legislature and we’re calling 
them. from now on, we’re going to call them and call them 
every time. Those are the facts. 
 
We heard it yesterday in kindergarten to grade 12, they tried to 
mount up the same old arguments for the last 20 years and they 
were wrong, wrong, wrong. Today, you try and say universities 
are underfunded and you’re wrong, wrong, wrong again. 
 
I don’t mind, Mr. Chairman, engaging in some rightful debate 
in these estimates, but if we’re just going to go through these 
same old saws with the same old misrepresentation of facts, I’m 
telling you the public of Saskatchewan are not well served by 
Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. 
 
We spent the first hour in this legislature on this examination of 
library estimates, Mr. Chairman, of an employee of an 
autonomous board. I would suggest to you that there are much 
more substantive issues as it relates to libraries in this province 
than that issue. Important enough, Mr. Chairman, but if that’s 
the best they can do, I say to you the public are not being well 
service. That’s what I would say, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And as it relates specifically to the libraries and the funding at 
the university libraries in this province over the last few years, 
what do we see. In library acquisitions alone, we see over a 
million dollars in expenditures at both universities, Mr. 
Chairman, and you’ll see more in the future I am sure of that. 
 
Ms. Smart:  — Mr. Chairman, I’m sure that my colleagues are 
going to have a lot more to say about the situation at the 
universities in these Education estimates. I will get back to 
looking at the way in which the minister in charge of libraries 
has given grants to the libraries, and I’m referring under that 
item to the grants for the regional libraries and the two 
municipal libraries, the Regina Public Library and the 
Saskatoon Public Library. 
 
In 1983 to ’84, the grant amount of moneys for those libraries 
was $5,109,760, between 1983 and 1984 and on until now . . . 
last year the regional libraries experienced a 10 per cent cut in 
their money. And now in 1988 to ’89 the amount of money on 
the grants for libraries is $5,197,700. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, this is $87,940 more, six 
years later. Six years later the regional libraries get a little over 
one and a half per cent increase in their budget. I told you last 
year when you gave a 10 per cent decrease to the regional 
libraries and the municipal libraries, that that would be the base 
amount for this year’s money. And I was right. So there was a 
huge slash last year, but between now and six years in the past, 
the total increase has only been a little over one and a half per  
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1471 
 

cent of money. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you may not be aware of it, but the inflation 
rate alone has been over 31 per cent in the inflation rate, and 
one and a half per cent increase in the amount of money that 
you’ve given to the regional libraries in the grants to the 
municipalities. 
 
And just to put that amount of money in perspective, let’s look 
at what the increase was in cost of books from 1973 to 1976. As 
a background to 1977, where we say it’s 100 per cent index, by 
1983 it had gone up to 141.6 per cent from 100 per cent in 
1977. And by 1986 it had gone up to 162 per cent. That’s 62 per 
cent increase in the cost of books. And it has gone up more this 
year. the cost of children’s periodicals has gone up 181 per cent 
since 1977, according to the information I’ve had from the 
Legislative Library. And the cost of general interest periodicals 
has gone up 74 per cent since 1977. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I put it to you that giving the libraries, the 
regional libraries and the municipal libraries, a little over one 
and a half per cent increase in the last six years is not a move 
into the 21st century, but it’s a helluva big move backwards. 
 
Stand up now and justify to the taxpayers and to the librarians 
and to the people in the rural areas why you have seen fit over 
the last six years to give the regional libraries one and a half per 
cent increase when the cost of living . . . the inflation rate has 
gone up 31 per cent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — Mr. Chairman, I’d want to see the 
hon. member’s arithmetic, because she’s saying, as I heard it, a 
one and a half per cent increase over some several years. And as 
I read the blue book this year, there was a 2 per cent increase 
this year alone. So I’d have to go . . . I’d want to understand 
your arithmetic a little bit better. 
 
But all of that arithmetic aside, the essential point I think the 
hon. member is trying to make, Mr. Chairman, is that we’re 
underfunding the libraries. And I, like every other citizen in this 
province and, I suspect, every other municipality that 
contributes to it, I’d like to say . . . I’d like to be able to give 
more to libraries too. I think that’s a powerful service in rural 
and in urban Saskatchewan, and I, too, would like to be able to 
give them more. 
 
But if the hon. member, Mr. Chairman, is trying to suggest that 
somehow, with the several millions of dollars that libraries have 
across this province to spend, that somehow that there are no 
books out there because of inadequate funding in the hon. 
member’s mind, that the usage has somehow gone down in the 
face of this so-called underfunding, the opposite is true. 
 
In fact last year, the two years which we have most recent 
numbers for, ’86 and ’87, there was nearly a 9 per cent increase 
in circulation across this province in our regional library 
system. 
 
Now I say, yes  — could they use more money? They could 
always use more money. Book collections could be added to, 
etc., etc. we could always use more money.  

But I say the fact that, given what they had to work with, which 
is still a fairly princely sum, that circulations have gone up, 
libraries obviously haven’t been shut down, usage hasn’t gone 
down. People are using them more than ever, and I say that’s a 
tribute to the stewardship of these boards, but perhaps, even 
more importantly, the work of the faculty and staff of these 
libraries across this province. And I say, we should be 
applauding them for what they have done. I think they’ve done 
just extremely well, and I expect to even see bigger and better 
things in the future. 
 
So yes, we’d like to see them have more money; I am among 
those. But if you’re suggesting that somehow, with the level of 
funding that they have, that usage is going down and they’re not 
being able to buy books and programs are being cut right, left 
and centre, you’re wrong on every account. 
 
In fact I just this morning ran into somebody who’d been down 
at a conference in Weyburn  — a writers’ conference. It’s been 
a tremendous success, and that’s with the writer in residence 
down there. 
 
Yes, you know, it’s very easy to stand in your place there and 
say: spend more, spend more; do more, do more, do more; 
spend more here, spend more there. But the reality is, it’s 
always a balance between, you know, increasing taxes, cutting 
back on other programs of lower priorities or letting the deficit 
rise. 
 
This time in this budget, because we think libraries and 
education are important, education and libraries did get, were 
one of the winners in the budget, and did get some of those, a 
large share of those tax dollars, those new tax dollars, that were 
raised. Hopefully we can even do more in the future. 
 
Ms. Smart:  — Well I’m not surprised that you have trouble 
with arithmetic, Mr. Minister. It seems to be something you 
haven’t learned very well. 
 
The figures that I look, I took out of the Estimates that were 
prepared by your government’s Department of Finance. I took 
the figure from 1983-84 for the grants to the libraries and I 
compared it with the figure of 1988-89. And you can do that 
too; it’s fairly simple. 
 
It’s also true that it’s a 2 per cent increase over the base amount 
of money that you gave the libraries last year, but that’s an 8 
per cent decrease still in terms of what they had three years ago. 
 
And that’s not enough money when the circulation’s going up 
and they need the resources  — and you want this province to 
go into the information age and you want it to go into the 21st 
century. You’re not demonstrating it in terms of the amount of 
money that you’re giving to the regional libraries and to the 
municipal libraries. 
 
I have a specific question to ask you regarding the city libraries. 
I would like to know what percentage increase of the provincial 
grant will the public libraries  — the Regina Public Library and 
the Saskatoon Public Library  — be getting this year. What will 
they receive? 
 
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1472 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — Mr. Chairman, 2 per cent. 
 
Ms. Smart:  — Thank you. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to turn to the Saskatchewan Library 
for a minute, and I want to compare some of the figures in the 
budget estimates. In 1987 to ’88 you had in the budget 
estimates that there were 41 person-years at the Saskatchewan 
Library; and in 1988 to ’89, when the budget estimates came 
out, that figure’s changed to 47 person-years. Can you explain 
that, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — It’s a transfer . . . It’s actually just a 
bookkeeping measure. Those six positions were last year shown 
under finance and administration, and now they show under this 
subvote. 
 
Ms. Smart:  — So does the 47 person-years include the total 
staff of the Saskatchewan Library, including the administration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — Yes, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Smart:  — Can you explain why the amount of money in 
the estimates for these 47 people is down this year than last 
year? According to the estimates, you had $1,332,500 last year 
for that staff, and this year it’s reduced by a few thousand 
dollars. Can you explain that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — Well I am advised that, for the most 
part, it’s due to deletion of one time severance costs; I think we 
had a couple of early retirements. I think that’s the basis for it 
as I understand it. 
 
Ms. Smart:  — Do you still have the same number of persons 
employed full time, or are these 47 person-years now more 
part-time people and contract people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — No, it’s the same number of 
person-years full time. 
 
Ms. Smart:  — Mr. Minister, in August of ’87, during our last 
estimates, I asked you about the Saskatchewan library board, 
and you said that your expectation would be that you would 
have a Saskatchewan library board. You told me that cabinet 
has not yet considered it, but that that would be your 
expectation that we would have a library board. Will you please 
tell me what’s happened with that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — Well just a few weeks ago, or maybe 
even less than that, I sent out invitations to regional libraries, 
and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), 
and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities), the city libraries to send nominations into 
myself for that board. 
 
Ms. Smart:  — Well I asked you about it nearly a year ago. 
What’s taken you so long to get around to naming a new library 
board? Most of those appointments were up last summer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — Well when you asked, at that time, 
there were incumbent members whose terms expired since we 
last did estimates, I’m advised. 
 

(1600) 
 
Ms. Smart:  — Yes I know that; they’ve been expired for quite 
a while, and it’s taken you a long time to get around to even 
sending out letters inviting for the names for the new library 
board. Why have you taken so long? Is this a policy that you’re 
stalling on appointing a library board? 
 
And I want to also ask you now, Mr. Minister, whether you’re 
going to have an annual report for the Saskatchewan Library for 
1987 to ’88? I got the ’86-87 one. But I have some concern, in 
disestablishing the Saskatchewan library, whether there’s going 
to be an annual report this year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — Well, Mr. Chairman, yes, there’s 
going to be one. And in fact we were under the . . . we though 
we have tabled it, but . . . we’re rechecking that, but certainly 
there will be one. 
 
Ms. Smart:  — You tabled the ’86-87 report. I haven’t received 
an ’87-88 report, and those are years that I am asking for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — And the hon. member from 
Saskatoon South says, that’s enough time. Well if it was, I’d 
like to know what annual report he ever tabled 45 days past the 
year end. 
 
Ms. Smart:  — Mr. Minister, I want to just know whether 
you’re going to have an annual report. I’m not asking you to 
table it right now, but it was one of the issues that concerned me 
last year when you disestablished the Saskatchewan library. I 
had a concern about whether there would be a library board and 
whether there would be an annual report forthcoming. Because 
the library is now subsumed under the Department of 
Education, it’s not standing on its own. I gather that you’ve 
assured me that you’re going to have an annual report. 
 
I have another question about the Saskatchewan library. I’m 
concerned in the annual report that I did get for ’86-87, to look 
at the statistics regarding the reference service. Now according 
to these statistics, the total reference questions have gone down 
quite a bit from ’85-86 to ’86-87. So have the total computer 
searches; they’ve gone down from 980 to 886. The computer 
searches with the public library have dropped down for the 
Saskatchewan government, and also for others. 
 
Now when we’re talking about the computer search component 
of the Saskatchewan Library we are talking about one of the 
innovative programs, one of the programs that brings the library 
into the information age. And I want to know, why the decrease 
in the use of the computer searches, and whether it’s the 
intention of the Saskatchewan library to continue to decrease 
the number of searches that they do for people, under some 
rationale that it can be done at the regional libraries, because 
that’s a specialized service? It’s one that was quite valuable,  
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1473 
 

one that deserved to be promoted and funded, and I would like 
to know what is happening to that program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — Well I know on the surface, Mr. 
Chairman, and hon. member, that when you look at the statistics 
and that the total reference questions have gone down from 
16,000 to 13,000, that on the surface that could look like 
something horrific. 
 
The reality is in that apparent bad news it is really good news, 
because what is happening there is that more questions and 
inquiries are being handled right at the initial point of entry; that 
is to say, they’re not having to go forward to Regina to be 
answered. More issues are being handled right in the Weyburns 
and the North Battlefords of the world, or even, for that matter, 
I suppose, right in the bookmobiles in some instances. So 
although on the surface it could look troublesome, in reality it’s 
that more are being handled at the first point of entry. 
 
Ms. Smart:  — Well I didn’t understand that the regional 
libraries were already hooked up to computer searches, and that 
was a particular service that I was questioning you about in 
detail. I’m please that more work is being done at the regional 
library level, but it’s all the more of a concern because you’re 
not funding them. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have three more questions I want to ask you 
quickly. One is about northern library services. I want to know: 
what are the plans for developing northern library service in 
greater detail? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — Well, Mr. Chairman, relative to 
northern libraries, there’s been some fairly exciting stuff under 
way there. And as a result of now, I think, something in the 
order of a couple of years of consultations with people in the 
northern part of our province, and very shortly what you will be 
seeing is the . . . or a sort of northern library book collection 
moved truly into northern Saskatchewan, out of Regina, out of 
that building here in the north end of Regina, and truly into 
northern Saskatchewan, in fact into La Ronge. 
 
But even more exciting than that, you’re going to see that 
library system link into our regional college, our Northlands 
Career College, into the public system and into the school 
system. So you’ll have, if you like, a fully integrated system. 
 
Now this won’t all happen overnight, but the move certainly is 
planned for very soon. And I suspect in the year and two and 
three down the road when these estimates are examined, you’ll 
hear continued exciting things about this  — putting library 
facilities and resources truly into northern Saskatchewan and 
hooking into that school and regional college network that’s 
going to be so important. 
 
And . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Did I hear the hon. member 
say, ask about the money? Well I’d be happy to report on that, 
and that’s what I was getting the numbers for particularly. 
 
The budget has been in the order of a hundred thousand dollars 
and, on an annualized basis, because of some of these initiatives 
you’re going to see that go up to  

something in the order of 260-265 thousands of dollars. And for 
one who likes to get into the mathematics of 2 per cent 
increases and 8 per cent decreases and 9 per cent increases or 
not increases or cutbacks, I think you’ll . . . Even by your 
mathematics, going from 100,000 to 260,000-plus is significant. 
 
And I might add, last year, you may recall, Mr. Chairman, 
because we saw the North as an area of higher need, we 
doubled the size of the book grant that was available to those 
communities relative to the rest of the province, so that we 
could help them catch up, if you like. 
 
And, as well, another initiative that’s come out of Education 
that’s been particularly important for that area, and other areas 
of the province I might stress, is the whole literacy initiative 
and the literacy grants that have been made available to 
communities in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So a lot of exciting things, and I would suggest to you, Mr. 
Chairman, that this is just the tip of the iceberg in so far as what 
you’re going to see in the weeks and months ahead. And I am 
particularly proud. 
 
I had occasion to visit our provincial library headquarters here 
in Regina and meet staff and officials there, and including those 
who have been working on this exciting initiative, and I can tell 
you that they are excited, and I think all people in northern 
Saskatchewan will be excited, and indeed all people in 
Saskatchewan should be proud of the work and the initiative 
that’s gone into this project, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Goulet:  — Mr. Chairperson, I’ll be directing my 
questions, of course, to the minister on a couple of areas, one in 
the area of finance, you know, for northern schools, and also the 
proposed task force and its implications in regards to 
curriculum, and so on. 
 
But first, in the area of finance I was looking at your figures on 
the foundation’s grant on the . . . you know, on Creighton, 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, Northern Lights, and uranium, and notice that, 
particularly in the case of Northern Lights, the figures are 
$17,982,260 for ’87, and ’88 it’ll be $18,119,120. 
 
Now when I looked at the April 27, 1988 news release by the 
Northern Lights School Division treasurer, these are the 
comments that he makes on the paper, and maybe the minister 
could provide us with information that would contradict that 
information on the paper. And this is the information anyway. 
 
According to Percy Chin, treasurer of the Northern Lights 
school board, the board won’t be any richer for the increase. He 
says that in fact they end up with less money than last year to 
operate their programs. That’s because the government’s 
contribution to the board’s total budget has been reduced by 
$300,000 over last year. Then over the next column it also 
states that the amount by which the government has reduced 
your grant is . . . leave a shortfall of $400,000 which is . . . 
which the board has had to cut from his expenditures. 
 
I was wondering, Mr. Minister, whether or not you would  
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1474 
 

elaborate for me on what appears to be a discrepancy of 
information as what I see in the foundations, and also the 
statement by the Northern Lights School board 
secretary-treasurer. 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — Okay, the hon. member, Mr. 
Chairman, raised some questions about operating grants for 
Northern Lights School Board and as well some question on the 
task force. Maybe I’ll deal with that first. 
 
I’ve tended to look at this in two stages, and I think you and the 
other hon. member have been involved in some of the meetings 
with my former legislative secretary, the member for Regina 
Wascana, who’s largely spearheading much of our northern 
education initiatives. 
 
We dealt with the governance issue, the Scharf report, and then 
subsequent to that Jack Lloyd as the special superintendent  — 
or whatever his title officially was  — in terms of looking at 
that whole governance question. And I think substantive 
headway has been made there with the move of the school 
board now, or the proposed move, out of Prince Albert. 
 
But in so examining that dimension, it became apparent to me 
that there were some other, perhaps in many ways in terms of 
the children and the parents who live there, every maybe more 
substantive issues than governance and administration, and it 
had to do with some very substantive educational issues such as 
high drop-out rates and post-secondary education opportunities 
and those kinds of things. It’s for those reasons that I put the 
northern task force in place. So I would just share that with you. 
 
Relative to the Northern Lights School Board, what I would 
advise you is this year over last year the budget numbers look 
like this: 17.9 million roughly last year was the provincial 
expenditure; this year, 18.1. that would be on the operating side. 
 
As well, you may be interested to know  — and this is for the 
most part due to the mining activity in the location of new 
companies, etc., in La Ronge, the assessment has gone up 
substantively. In fact, it will provide for nearly a $7 million 
increase to their coffers just on the assessment base increasing 
alone; in fact that’s nearly a 20 per cent increase for them. So 
there’s a substantial amount of money available to . . . in terms 
of increase in their budget, it’s going to be well over 7 million 
overall, it looks like to me, between those two sources. 
 
Over and above that, the task force I mentioned  — I’m not 
asking for that to come out of this money  — I’d earmarked 
$50,000 out of our operational funds for that. And as well, 
because there are some capital costs associated with moving out 
of Prince Albert and into La Ronge and into the sub-offices, 
perhaps Beauval for sure is one, we’ve earmarked something 
close to $700,000 to accommodate that. And as well, I can tell 
you, although these numbers have yet to be agreed upon, there 
will be substantial funding to facilitate in the move itself. 
 
So yes, many issues ahead of us relative to northern education, 
but I feel very good about what’s gone on over 

 the last year in terms of getting some substantial issues dealt 
with in terms of governance, and I think the funding is there to 
accomplish some of the board’s objectives. And I hope that that 
northern task force can provide us with some additional 
direction on how to deal with some of the other substantive 
issues relative to northern education. 
 
Mr. Goulet:  — Mr. Minister, I attended a meeting with the 
urban municipalities about two weeks ago, and the same type of 
concern was raised there in regards to the assessments that you 
were talking about. It’s not only in relation to the mining 
company but there’s reassessment in regards to the 
communities. 
 
The the greatest concern that was raised was that there was a 17 
per cent increase in regards to the mill rate. If you compute the 
figures, there is a six mill increase, you know, from thirty-four 
and a half to 40.5. You know that six mill increase is a 17 per 
cent increase to the local taxpayers in northern Saskatchewan, 
and very especially strongly affecting Creighton and La Ronge 
and the other communities as well. 
 
And so, you know, the real question that was raised by the 
people is: why is it that they’re paying a lot more out of their 
own system at the school level, while a lot of tremendous 
resource development is taking place in the North, and that only 
a smaller amount, you know, from that development accrues to 
the local level? The people are asking, why such a huge 
increase for us in the North? Why does the mill rate . . . why 
could not the government look at a formula that would offset 
such a huge increase of 17 per cent? Could the minister 
comment on this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — Just to go over the issue raised 
relative to mill rates and assessments and what not, since some 
of the . . . because of the history and past practice, some of the 
same general comments one might make relative to the rest of 
the province aren’t applicable here. 
 
As I pointed out earlier to you, the assessment base in ’88 over 
’87 went from 39 million 372, to 46,289 roughly  — a 17.57 per 
cent increase. And incidentally, for . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . that’s right, for Northern Lights. Incidentally, in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, the same number there was a 25.56 per cent 
increase and assessment base. And Creighton had a 20.6 per 
cent increase. 
 
And why those numbers are relevant, because past practice was 
that our formula that we used didn’t apply to the entire 
assessment base, perhaps because probably common sense 
would tell us that it probably was . . . you could have applied it 
but it probably wasn’t realistic. 
 
Now we have moved to the same as the rest of the province for 
the most part. And hence you see the point you have raised. 
Now if anyone doubt, does that mean to say that the provincial 
government somehow doesn’t have the same commitment to 
northern education, I think the other number that’s useful to 
share with you is, if you look at the last, say from ’82 through 
’87, the government grants have increased by 67 per cent, 
would be point number one. 
 
And point number two that’s very relevant, has there been  
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1475 
 

the economic development to broaden the assessment base and 
to broaden it in such a way that it’s realistic to tax it and tax it 
in a normal sense, if you like? And the answer there is yes. And 
I say yes because of the fact that we’ve seen assessment, for 
example, in La Ronge, or in Northern Lights, that area, go from 
39 million to over 46 million in one year. Other communities 
have shown . . . or the other boards have shown ever larger 
increases. 
 
So good things are happening  — yes, lots of work ahead of us. 
But good things are happening for the most part. 
 
Mr. Goulet:  — Mr. Minister, in regards to the assessment, in 
regards to the revenue base for the North, what people in the 
North at that meeting were raising and what a lot of school 
boards have raised is that in terms of the revenue, we shouldn’t 
be relying so much, you know, on increasing to such a great 
extent 17 per cent of the mill rates, that indeed while part of the 
assessment takes it from the taxation and the lease arrangements 
with the mining companies, the true amount of dollars that 
accrue from the mining companies is not taken into real 
consideration. 
 
I’ll give you an example. The royalty structure in the North in 
regards to mining is exempt from that assessment, and that’s 
where the largest amount of dollars come in. Last year the 
Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation doubled their 
amount of money that they got out of the North from $30 
million to $60 million profit  — double the amount. And that’s 
what they took from the North. 
 
The question is that double the amount  — I mean, we haven’t 
got . . . the school boards are crying for more money in regards 
to programming at the school level, which you yourself 
recognize that needs to be done. 
 
So I’d like to clarify the financial aspect that the people are 
saying, look, fine we’d like to pay for part of the increase, but 
not at 17 per cent. That’s way too high. Why won’t you take a 
quarter of a per cent from the royalty rates of the mining 
companies and that’ll give you the couple million that you 
require, you know, at the school level. That’s all you would 
require. A very little . . . just a quarter of a per cent. And when I 
look at the . . . so that’s what people are saying. I’d like to move 
on to another issue because of the time factor. 
 
Some educators are concerned in regards to the task force. I 
mean, I know it’s just starting, but it’s very important to relay 
the feedback to you in regards to what is happening. Some 
people are concerned that there is . . . 
 
In regards to the failure of the school system at the . . . with the 
great numbers of drop-out rates are still high at the elementary 
and high school level  — that some of the focus has been on 
adult education, quite a bit in the initial stages this past year. 
and some of it . . . some elementary and high school teachers 
are worried about the filtering of adult education principles in 
regards to dealing with an elementary and high school question. 
 
They’re a little bit concerned about that aspect and they feel 
there is too much of an adult education, theoretical and practical 
view, which a lot more should be directed at  

the various levels  — you know, primary, middle years and 
junior high and high school levels in that we need to have that 
significant impact and input by the teachers. And the teachers 
are saying aren’t we moving a little but too much to the adult 
education direction? They want to have a refocus at the 
elementary and high school level. 
 
(1630) 
 
We’d like to hear from you in regards to what your officials 
have told you, as to where you see the input. And what 
assurance can you give the teachers in northern Saskatchewan 
that you will indeed have that real consultation that is implied 
by the task force, that you will indeed have great concern, you 
know, to the elementary and high school level? I’d like to hear 
your comments on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — Well I thank the hon. member for 
raising these points with me and then providing me with this 
kind of feedback, because it is indeed useful for me. 
 
And I might even go so far as to add, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I 
might go so far as to add that I would like to thank the hon. 
member and his colleague from Athabasca for their helpfulness 
over this past year, relative to the northern governance issue and 
northern education, and on those occasions when you’ve met 
with my Legislative Secretary and passed on your views. And I 
thank you for that helpfulness. 
 
First of all, in terms of . . . I know what you’re saying, that over 
this last year, certainly because of the reorganization in 
post-secondary education and the development of the 
Northlands Career College, I think a lot of legislative attention, 
perhaps wrongly to some degree  — there was an 
over-emphasis in a lot of the discussion that went here on 
post-secondary education versus K to 12. It wasn’t necessarily 
right, but that was sort of what people chose to talk about, I 
suppose, and what people chose to report on. 
 
But let me be clear. This task force is for kindergarten to grade 
12. The views of the teachers will be very important to us and 
the educators very important (a) because I have . . . some were 
on the task force to start with, and specifically I asked that they 
consult with educators. And I will leave it at that. I know they 
have a busy agenda ahead of them. 
 
The other point I would want to make is to just give you another 
example. I think I may have shared it with your colleague from 
Saskatoon South yesterday. He was making the case that, for 
example, a school board, one particular school board in the 
province, because of the equalization formula, had seen the 
provincial share of their operating funds go down. And of 
course Northern Lights No. 113, the exact opposite has been the 
situation because of equalization formulas, albeit a modified 
situation, in the North. 
 
And what we have seen over the last six, seven years in the 
North is that the provincial share of the funding went from 66 
per cent to 80 per cent. And so there you see a very good 
example of how a formula, albeit in this case modified, can 
work and work right and fairly and  
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1476 
 

equitably, and all the rest of it. And it’s the same formula, of 
course, that your colleague was attacking yesterday. 
 
Now as it relates to royalty rates, you always have to find the 
right balance between the public purse getting its share and yet 
if not being so high that you drive away, or it’s a disincentive to 
investment. Yes, one could raise royalty rates, whether it’s for 
oil or uranium or whatever, so high that you would end up with 
no activity, and then it wouldn’t matter at all how high the 
royalty rate was, because if there’s nothing coming out of the 
ground, you get no gain. The policy . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  — Oh boy, that’s brilliant. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — And the hon. member from Quill 
Lakes says that’s brilliant. And it has been . . . that is an 
established fact and the numbers are there to show it. It’s a 
pretty straight-line relationship. 
 
The numbers are also there, as I read into the record, to show 
that this policy has been working right. Because it is because 
that industry has been very much a part of an explosion, if you 
like, in northern economic development, that you’ve seen the 
assessment bases rise like they have. And although the 
simplistic answer might be to raise it a quarter of a point, or 
whatever the hon. member suggested, is that it is because of that 
policy that we see the assessment bases rising, not by a quarter 
of a point, but by 17 and 20 and 25 per cent, and largely 
because of the mining development and the very progressive 
policies of this government. 
 
Mr. Pringle:  — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. 
Minister, I’ve been looking forward to talking to you for about 
10 months, Mr. Minister, and so I’m delighted to be here. I only 
have a couple of questions. But I’d like to make a few 
comments first if I may. 
 
An Hon. Member:  — We prefer multiple choices  — true or 
false. 
 
Mr. Pringle:  — Well whatever you find the easiest  — 
multiple choice?  — I’ll give you some of those then. 
 
Mr. Minister, on a very serious note, education was a very 
important issue in the Eastview by-election, Saskatoon 
Eastview by-election. In fact it was a central issue. 
 
I knocked on 14,000 doors over the last 10 months, so I’m well 
aware of the concerns about your leadership, or lack of 
leadership in education. Mr. Minister, we have some 2,000 
teachers in Saskatoon and almost 20 per cent of them live in 
Saskatoon Eastview. We have many, many students who go to 
the university and to the technical institute and they’re also 
concerned about your leadership in education. 
 
In fact concerns about education, Mr. Minister, are right up 
there with concerns about this government’s financial and 
economic mismanagement, concerns about your dismantling of 
the health care system. And the concern about education is right 
up there with your record level tax increases and your poor job 
creation performance records, and of course, up there with 
concerns about government waste as well  — the $34,000-a-day 
famous  

example is something that’s a big concern in Saskatoon 
Eastview; and of course the record level patronage of this 
government. One example, where we of course spent $30,000 
on an untendered private school study that didn’t tell us 
anything we didn’t already know. And that’s the kind of waste 
and mismanagement that people in Saskatoon Eastview are 
concerned about. In fact they’re . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  — You’re just new. Don’t get off the track 
right off the bat. 
 
Mr. Pringle:  — Yes, I’m new here, but as I said, sir, I have a 
new mandate. You couldn’t get a new mandate today; I 
guarantee you couldn’t get a new mandate. It was no fluke in 
Saskatoon Eastview that you lost your deposit. It was no fluke. 
 
Mr. Chairman:  — Order, please. Order. I’m calling for order, 
please. I’d ask members from both sides of the House to try to 
contain their enthusiasm just a little bit here while the member 
is making his comments, please. 
 
Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Pringle:  — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do appreciate the 
applause I’m getting from the other side though. As I tried to 
say, it was no fluke that you lost your deposit in Saskatoon 
Eastview. I hope though that . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle:  — I hope that that was a humbling experience for 
you. I hope that was a humbling experience for you. It pointed 
out the need of this government to listen, to seriously listen, 
because there are some major concerns abut your record and no 
where is that more evident that education, Mr. Chairman. I’ll 
repeat, education was an issue in this by-election, I would say to 
the member from Meadow Lake. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are used to good government. 
They’re used to honesty and they’re used to working 
co-operatively, and that’s something that we found out that 
hasn’t been happening in education, as was so eloquently put 
yesterday by the member from Saskatoon South. This 
government, particularly in education, particularly with this 
minister, says one thing and does another. Chart your own 
course, Mr. Minister, without co-operation. 
 
You mentioned yesterday that you’ve met with some thousands 
of students and many teachers, trustees, but you failed to listen, 
and that’s what people are concerned about. 
 
You talked about your commitment to education. Last year the 
budget was cut by 1 per cent; this year the increase is less than 
inflation. Again you attempted to portray that the increase was 
much more than it really is. It represents another cut to 
education. You talk about . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  — Is that a slur on my integrity? 
 
Mr. Pringle:  — That’s right. I’m talking about your integrity, 
Mr. Minister. You talk about co-operation, then  
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1477 
 

you force or impose your own view on school boards and 
teachers. 
 
There are many example of this: your amalgamation of the 
community college system with technical institutes, your 
centralized control of those systems, the way you’ve handled 
the core issue. These are concerns that people have in 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
We are used to in this province to having a high quality 
education system; that’s one of our trade marks. It was the best 
in Canada; now you say we’ve slipped to second best. Well I 
agree with you; we’ve slipped. Young people are our future. 
I’ve heard you say that, and sincerely believe that you feel that 
way, and I hope that you will start responding with more 
concrete action in the Department of Education. 
 
The residents of Saskatoon Eastview and Regina Elphinstone, 
Mr. Minister, have said no to your record in education, and I’d 
just like to review some of that record. I know you deny it, but 
we stick by our strong view that you are continuing to shift 
education costs t local governments through tax increases, 
reduced programs, whether it be special education programs or 
band programs. We know, the people of Saskatoon Eastview 
know, that those programs are being reduced, and we also know 
that the school board is less than happy about the increase that 
you gave them this year. 
 
The people of Saskatoon Eastview have said no to your 
changing funding formulas, no to reduced capital projects. They 
said no to putting the University of Saskatchewan into financial 
crisis. 
 
You talked earlier today about the per student . . . 
7,200-per-student cost, that Saskatchewan ranked second. We 
used to rank higher than that, Mr. Minister. In 1982 we funded 
the university through the grant of 9,016 per student. We’ve 
reduced that since 1982 down to . . . our figures show 6,907 per 
student. That’s a 23 per cent per student decrease, Mr. Minister. 
 
The residents of Saskatoon Eastview have said no to your 
tuition fee increase, an average of 45.5 per cent at the 
University of Saskatchewan since 1982. 
 
One of the issues that came up repeatedly when I talked to 
students during the by-election, Mr. Minister, was the situation 
that the library  — there was a poor selection, there were not 
enough books to go around with the increasing numbers of 
student s over the last few years, and the stress and anxiety 
created in trying to get sufficient books and resources to prepare 
essays and prepare for exams. 
 
Mr. Minister, what they were stressing to me is there’s already 
enough stress and anxiety about your tuition fee increases and 
your cutting down on summer job programs and quotas and so 
on, thanks to programs of your government . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . I know he’s not paying attention. That’s one of 
his problems  — he doesn’t pay attention to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The residents of Saskatoon Eastview, Mr. Minister, have said 
no to quotas on College of Arts and Sciences. I know  

the member from Swift Current said at the time that these 
people probably wouldn’t get jobs anyway. It’s that kind of 
arrogant attitude that the people of Saskatoon Eastview were 
concerned about, were trying to give you a message in this 
by-election. 
 
Students have also expressed concern to me, Mr. Minister, 
about the complexity of the student loan program and the way 
the students are forced to go increasingly into debt under that 
program. Also there are concerns about the changes to the 
bursary program. 
 
Residents are concerned about, as I indicated earlier, the 
amalgamation and the way you did it, of the community college 
system and the technical institute system and your centralized 
control. 
 
We’re also concerned, Mr. Minister, about the way you treat 
people: the way you fired the technical institute staff  — the 
manner in which you did that, the cold-hearted manner in which 
you did that; the way you phased out central office people in the 
manner in which you did that, 1,100 training spaces in the 
technical institutes in this province. People know about that and 
they’re concerned about that. 
 
We’re also concerned  — as I indicated earlier, 20 per cent of 
the teachers in Saskatoon live in the riding of Saskatoon 
Eastview, and they’re concerned about the way you treat 
educators; about the way you make fund of them, about the way 
you pit faculty against students, and the way you try and, as was 
demonstrated yesterday, try and have some sort of a survey that 
pits rural people against teachers. 
 
(1645) 
 
The people of Saskatoon Eastview are concerned about that 
kind of lack of integrity, Mr. Minister. Teachers are concerned 
that you’ve painted them as being greedy when they were really 
concerned about the quality of education. 
 
Also we’re very concerned . . . As I indicted earlier, Mr. 
Minister, we have may, many students in Saskatoon Eastview, 
and they’re very concerned about your summer job program 
that . . . It was made clear yesterday that you’re not going to 
reinstate some of that funds that you cut from the 1986 
employment opportunity program, and you created 6,000 fewer 
jobs last year for these students that you did the year before. 
 
With the money that this government has allocated this year, 
you’re also going to create 6,000 fewer jobs than you did in 
1986. That’s a 38.1 per cent decrease from 1986, Mr. Minister, 
and students are concerned about being able to return to school 
in the fall. 
 
I could go on and on, Mr. Minister, but I won’t. Okay, in 
summary, what I would like to say, though, Mr. Minister, is that 
your approach in education, your approach in education  — and 
you can call this rhetoric if you like  — but is not appreciated. 
Your lack of leadership is not appreciated by educators. 
 
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1478 
 

Parents are concerned about the disarray that education is in. 
And you force your own agenda on people. You do not consult, 
even though you say you talk to people. They feel that you 
don’t listen. Basically you’re shifting the burden from 
provincial funding to the local level; there’s no question about 
that. 
 
You’re cutting back; you’re phasing out program; you’re 
forcing school boards to be the bad guys in doing that. You say 
one thing and do another, and you pit one element of the school 
system against the other. That’s a summary of your record in 
education, Mr. Minister. No wonder people of Saskatoon 
Eastview and Regina Elphinstone were upset about your record. 
 
Mr. Minister, you talk about us  — as does your government  — 
about us being resistant to change. We’re well aware, Mr. 
Minister, that society changes, that new realities emerge, new 
challenges face us, and that new techniques and solutions have 
got to be found to the new situations. We’re well aware of that. 
 
But certain fundamental principles, Mr. Minister, never change. 
And that’s something that you need to realize about 
Saskatchewan. You talked earlier today about the New 
Democrats not understanding the history of Saskatchewan. I 
think we understand it fairly well. 
 
The fundamental principles never change, Mr. Minister  — 
principles of co-operation, which you need to learn something 
about; principles of openness and competence in government. 
Those principles are as important as they were 20 years ago. 
 
Yesterday you were told, you were reminded, Mr. Minister, that 
it was us that initiated the review in education, not you. Okay? 
So remember that. 
 
An Hon. Member:  — Like the closure of hospitals, eh? You 
initiated that, eh? 
 
Mr. Pringle:  — Well we asked you questions about hospitals 
today and you didn’t answer them. you didn’t answer the 
questions today about closing of hospitals. If you’d like to talk 
about that tomorrow . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Yes, they 
liked that, yes. When we asked you questions on hospitals, 
close those. We’re on education right now, Mr. Minister 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . They’re not voting for you this 
time, I don’t think. 
 
An Hon. Member:  — I was in Carnduff, biggest meeting in 
this history of Carnduff, 400. 
 
Mr. Pringle:  — The member from Souris-Cannington says 
that they’re not voting for us. I think you’ll find it different next 
time, sir. 
 
As I tried to say, Mr. Minister, your record in education is 
dismal, and I want to ask you a question . . .(inaudible 
interjection). . . I’ll maybe wait till the Minister of Education 
listens, because I want to ask him a question now. I know he 
hasn’t been listening and I know he’s going to pay for that, 
because residents of Saskatoon Eastview and other ridings are 
listening. They’re not  

impressed that you don’t listen, Mr. Minister. 
 
I want to ask you: when will you make a real commitment, sir, 
to education in this province, and back up your rhetoric with 
concrete, constructive action, including consultation, which is 
one of the failures of your leadership in education, and 
sufficient money to do the job? When will you make that 
commitment, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: –Well our commitment is there today, it 
was there yesterday, and it’ll be there into the future. 
 
And the hon. member talks about what he found when he was 
knocking on doors in Eastview. Well I’ll tell you one thing I bet 
he found for sure, Mr. Deputy Chairman, and that was students 
at the door, saying when it came to choosing between students; 
lives and their rights to have their exams and finish their 
courses, did the ND stand behind the students, Mr. Chairman? 
No, sir, they did not. They abandoned the students and they are 
the ones that talk about a commitment to accessibility to 
education. They denied those students accessibility in the worst 
form, Mr. Chairman, by denying them the ability to write their 
exams . . . those students caught in a labour dispute between 
two parties. 
 
I expected to hear more from the hon. member. I welcome him 
to the examination of Estimates, and that was a very good 
speech, and now maybe we can return to an examination of 
Estimates, or if he wishes, I’ll be happy to get into an 
examination of patronage that he got into, relative to this party 
versus his. 
 
I’d be happy to get into that. I’ve got a 10 or 12-page list here, 
and after you get past the first two or three pages, then you’ve 
got an entire page almost of Koskies. If that’s the biggest issue 
in his mind relative to education, I’ll get into it if he wants to. 
 
An Hon. Member:  — Let’s hear it. Come on, let’s get into it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:  — Oh, the hon. Leader of the 
Opposition want s to hear a little bit about patronage. Well you 
know, the seat I came from, the seat I cam from, was elected 
here, was formerly held by Auburn Pepper. He was a fine 
gentleman, and had a daughter, Janet. Guess what? She was 
appointed secretary to the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. 
And her husband, Harvey, had a princely salary of $4,450, was 
an OC (order in council) appointment  — $4,450 per month, an 
OC appointment to Revenue. 
 
Doug Archer, Pat Atkinson, Chris Banman, Curtis Bowerman, 
Frank Buck, George Burton, Zennie Burton, Eric Klein, Don 
Cody, Russell Eaton, Vic Ellis, Don Faris, Margaret Fern  — 
that’s a common name  — Carla Funk. Well look at this one. 
Can you imagine this one? We got the member for Moose Jaw 
North  — Moose Jaw North who was the NDP candidate in 
Moose Jaw North in April ’82, now the MLA for that area. 
Guess who was at the patronage trough in the NDP years? 
Okay. And guess where he got an honorarium from  — the 
Department of Education. Well, imagine that. This squeaky 
clean group over there that the new member from Saskatoon  
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1479 
 

Eastview, in his first debut here in the legislature, who does he 
choose to defend? His colleagues who have been at the trough 
in years past in a very substantive sort of way. 
 
You know, we expected more of you. You’re a new guy. We 
though you wouldn’t sort of get caught up in that 
backwards-looking group there. They’ll drag you backwards 
into the future if you stick around that bunch too long, let me 
tell you. 
 
And I say the same thing to you as I said to your colleague 
yesterday, who you’ve just turned out to be just an echo for, 
we’re going to bring this NDP Party and these NDP members 
into the 21st century whether you like it or not. And if we have 
to bring you kicking and screaming into the 21st century, you’re 
going to come, let me tell you. We’re going to bring you 
whether you want to come or not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
Mr. Speaker:  — Order. Order. I think the debate has 
concluded and we’re trying to conduct the business of the 
House and I would ask for your co-operation. You can discuss 
the other issues later. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson:  — Mr. Speaker, I move, by leave of the 
Assembly, seconded by the member for Weyburn: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3, of the Rules and Procedures 
of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, when this 
Assembly adjourns on Thursday, May 19, 1988, it do 
stand adjourned until Tuesday, May 24, 1988. 

 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


