


















































March 28, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

March 28, 1988 
  

129 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 
legislature, some 60 students seated in your gallery, sir, 60 
students from the Weyburn Junior High School in Weyburn from 
Grade 8. They make it an annual part of the school program there, 
Mr. Speaker, to bring these students to the legislature for a day, 
and I commend the teachers and the students for that initiative. 
 
Today along with the students we have Mr. Nedelcov and Mr. 
Liddle as teachers, along with bus drivers, Roy Loos and Wayne 
Vilcu. As well, there’s one exchange student, Ann Mylin, as I 
understand it, from Denmark, who is here with the students, Mr. 
Speaker. I’ll be meeting with them after question period for some 
pictures and some refreshments and a chance to answer some of 
their questions. 
 
I hope you have enjoyed your tour. I look forward to meeting with 
you after. I wish you a safe trip home, given the way the day is out 
there, and I would ask all members of the Legislative Assembly to 
join with me in welcoming these young people from Weyburn 
Junior High, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to the members of 
the Assembly, 14 students from Quebec who are here on a curling, 
I presume, a curling competition, and I want to wish you all 
welcome to Saskatchewan. I’m sorry, I don’t know much French 
other than bonjour, and we hope you have a very good stay in 
Saskatchewan and in Regina, and good luck in your curling. They 
are here, along with Marcel Léveillé, and I would ask all members 
of the Assembly to please welcome these students from Quebec. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: — They’re over in the other gallery there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Sale of SPC Building in Moose Jaw 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
direct my question to the minister responsible for the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation. Mr. Minister, will you confirm 
that Saskatchewan Power has sold the SaskPower building in 
Moose Jaw to a local firm for $280,000, and entered into an 
agreement to lease back half of that building from that same firm 
for $37,000 a year, plus half the total operating costs of the 
building for 10 years? 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I will confirm that the 
building in Moose Jaw has been sold. I don’t have at my fingertips 
the numbers. I will confirm as well that the Sask Power 
Corporation has a leaseback arrangement for almost 50 per cent of 
the total space, and there is some agreement, as well, as it relates 
to operating costs. I will take notice of the question and provide 
the answer in some detail, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, let me 
give you some help with the numbers. In a letter received last 
Friday and dated today from you, you say that SaskPower is 
renting half the building back for $37,000, plus half the total 
operating cost. In Friday’s Moose Jaw Times-Herald, SPC 
spokesperson Bob Rempel says it costs SaskPower $65,000 a year 
to operating the whole building. He also says that the operating 
cost part of the lease is now $16,000. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you know that these figures don’t jibe, but no 
matter which ones you use, SaskPower has either gone from 
$65,000 a year for a whole building to $69,500 for half of it; or 
from $32,000 a year for a whole building to $53,000 for half of it. 
Either way, Mr. Minister, you’re now paying more to rent half a 
building than you used to pay to operate a whole one, and I ask 
you, Mr. Minister, will you tell power users in Saskatchewan how 
this latest example of piratization is in the best interest of the 
people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, if he’s standing there with a 
letter in his hand that I’ve signed setting out those numbers, why is 
he asking the question? It seems to me rather stupid if he . . .  if I 
have to . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We could meet behind the rail a little later 
and I’ll read the letter to you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the sale of the building in Moose Jaw and the 
leaseback of 50 per cent of the space, I don’t know why we want 
to have a building that we only need half of, Mr. Speaker. It was 
driven, Mr. Speaker, as a cost-cutting measure. Later today, Mr. 
Speaker, I might talk a little bit about that when I table the annual 
report for SaskPower for this year. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I 
would assume that you would read your letters before you sign 
them, and this is a forum for answering questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Let me understand this, Mr. Minister. You sell an 
asset for $280,000 and then your rent it back for either 530,000 
. . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. Order, please. The 
hon. member realizes that a supplementary does not allow for a 
long preamble and it certainly seems to me that you’re getting into 
one right off the bat. So 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

 

130 
 

please get to your question with just a very few remarks prior to 
the question. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, straight to the question. Mr. Minister, 
will you tell this House whether or not the sale of this building 
was tendered, and will you lay on the Table all tenders you’ve 
received and prove to the people of Saskatchewan that you got the 
best deal you could swing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m very confident, Mr. Speaker, that we 
got the best deal. Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I did say in 
response to the first question that I would take notice of the 
question and provide the member some detail. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Final supplementary. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Final supplementary. With this example of 
management, is it any doubt that we have the kind of deficit in the 
province of Saskatchewan that faces us today? 
 
Mr. Minister, could you tell this House whether your government 
intends to do the people of Saskatchewan any more favours like 
this in the near future? Is the SaskTel building in Moose Jaw up 
for sale? Are SaskPower buildings around the province up for 
sale; and is it your intention, Mr. Minister, to enter into the same 
kind of give-away deal when you sell off those buildings that 
belong to the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We’re looking for a buyer for the Sturdy 
Stone Building. We’re looking for a buyer for — what’s that one 
in Prince Albert? 
 
An Hon. Member: McIntosh . . .  
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — McIntosh Mall, whatever. Where it is to 
the advantage, Mr. Speaker, of the corporation and the people of 
Saskatchewan, where cost savings in the long haul can be 
demonstrated, Mr. Speaker, we will take a look at what 
opportunity exists for disposal. 
 

Sale of Sask Minerals 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister of 
privatization. Mr. Minister, you announced this morning your 
government’s plans to sell the sodium sulphate division of Sask 
Minerals to an Ontario firm, Kam-Kotia Mines, and the peat moss 
division to a Quebec firm, Premier Canadian Enterprises Ltd. Can 
you tell this House today if these two sales were tendered, and will 
you table the tenders in this House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s correct that one 
part of Sask Minerals, the Chaplin mine, as well as the Fox Valley 
and the other two mines that were shut down have been sold to 
Kam-Kotia minerals, a company headquartered in Ontario that has 
put in $12.5 million 

into the project here in Saskatchewan, as well as the sale of 
Premier peat. And I’ll have more to say on this in more detail, Mr. 
Speaker, in a ministerial statement following question period. 
 
However the question of the member opposite was: were there 
tenders and would I table the tenders. No, there were not tenders. 
There were a number of companies that the Crown Management 
Board had looked at, different options, weighed carefully, and the 
two that we felt that were in the best interests of the people of 
Saskatchewan, the future diversification and development of this 
province, were the two in which we entered in negotiations that 
resulted in the final sale. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you 
tell us there were not tenders. That tells me you pick and choose 
your friends in the purchase of Saskatchewan assets. Mr. Minister, 
we are very anxious to see the details of this deal. 
 
I’m going to ask you: will you table the deal because we want to 
know if your friends in eastern Canada have paid cash, or is there 
some kind of a long-term payment arrangement? We want to 
know if you have guaranteed any loans to these firms, and we 
want to know, Mr. Minister, what about the long-term debt of 
Sask Minerals? Is this being taken over by Kam-Kotia, or will 
Saskatchewan taxpayers be left? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, Mr. Speaker, there are no 
loans or anything of that nature. We feel that these are the deals 
that are in the best interest, as I said previously, for the 
development and the diversification of this province. I have more 
to add in a few moments about this type of diversification and 
value added activity. 
 
Certainly there were no loans, and as to aspects of the deal, I will 
be tabling in this House what is normal to table. I do not have that 
prepared for today, but as soon as possible I will have it prepared. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Further supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, are you aware that Kam-Kotia’s parent company, 
Dickenson Mines, has had a history in our province. I understand 
that Dickenson Mines opened a uranium mine in the 1950s; it was 
closed by 1961. I understand they reopened that mine in the 
1970s; it closed shortly after. Given this company’s track record in 
our province, how can you assure Saskatchewan people of those 
jobs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly, Mr. Speaker, when you see a 
company coming and buying an asset for $12.5 million, I don’t 
think they spend the money just to lose it. They see an opportunity 
in this province, as do I and many others in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So certainly if you want to look at Dickenson Mines — and I was 
just looking at their prospectus there the other 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

 

131 
 

day; holdings across Ontario and in the United States and in 
British Columbia and now in Saskatchewan — and I’m proud to 
welcome those kind of corporate citizens to this province. I think it 
shows some faith in this province, shows faith in the 
diversification and the future of this province, and they’re glad to 
come here when they won’t have a chance to be taken over by 
people like those opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, new question. Mr. Minister of 
privatization, Regina Leader-Post business editor Bruce Johnstone 
writes this, and I quote: 
 

Whether you agree with privatization or not, most people would 
agree there’s a right way and a wrong way to privatize a Crown 
corporation or government service. 

 
If you took a poll in Saskatchewan today, my guess is that most 
people would say the Progressive Conservatives are doing it the 
wrong way. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — That’s the press, Mr. Minister, and I couldn’t 
agree more. 
 
Can you tell this House why, Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan 
taxpayers should be happy with a deal which nets this province 
less than $16 million, well less of the book value of these 
companies, while selling off a Saskatchewan corporation that has 
yearly, year after year, shown a profit and returned profits and 
dividends to this province of well over $50 million? Why should 
Saskatchewan people be happy with this deal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 
people will see that there is value added activity, diversification, 
bringing in a corporate company that is interested in other types of 
mineral development within this province. I think that in itself is 
an indication that there was the possibility for growth and 
expansion. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite talks about a return 
on investment. And then if you want to look at . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — If you want to look at return on investment, 
it’s the same sort of thing that the members opposite had when 
they had PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company), the same thing 
with Sask Minerals. There was never any interest charged — 
interest-free loans, things of this nature. 
 
I think if you take those away from the net earnings over the 
period of time that Sask Minerals has been in place, divide that by 
the number of years, you will see a return on investment of about 
$800,000. I can take the money that was invested today and put it 
in the bank and get better interest rate, year after year return on 
their investment and their government passion at owning and 

taking over things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will see a new . . .  (inaudible) . . .  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I think you made your point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Status of Jobs at Carrot River Saw Mill 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. New question to the 
minister of privatization. I see that part of your deal with Premier 
Cdn calls for the closure of the Carrot River saw mill, throwing 
some 50 people out of work. For that, your government, Mr. 
Minister, will receive $50,000 — $50,000 in exchange for 50 jobs. 
Mr. Minister, do you feel that that is a good deal for the citizens of 
Carrot River, and also do you feel that that is a good deal for the 
citizens of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — With due respect to the member opposite, 
his facts are wrong. There is no planned closure, and one knows 
that the supply of wood in the Carrot River area is certainly not 
there for ever. It’s limited in the soft woods, and there may well be 
. . .  there can be changes in technology to use hardwoods more so 
than soft, which can give further life to the saw mill at Carrot 
River. 
 
I don’t know those types of things, but I do know this, that in the 
peat moss there is an opportunity for expansion; there is more peat 
moss that can be used. We’ve brought in a company that has 50 
per cent of the market in North America and the potential to gain a 
lot more — value added, diversification, research with the 
University of Saskatchewan which I’ll be glad to explain 
following this question period. 
 
And I believe those are the things that are of interest in Carrot 
River, and I believe the people in Carrot River will be able to get 
added jobs as this resource and this development takes place. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — New question Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you 
indicate that I do not have my facts, and I want to quote and by 
way of information, Mr. Speaker, and in the background 
information: 
 

Premier will also purchase Saskatchewan Forest Products 
Corporation lands near the plant for $50,000. The company 
will provide a transferable lease to lease land back to 
Saskatchewan Forest Products to allow orderly shut-down of 
the Carrot River saw mill operations. 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, that is in black and white, and I want to ask 
you again: do you consider this a good deal for the citizens of 
Carrot River and Saskatchewan? And did you consult, Mr. 
Minister, with the workers of the Saskatchewan Forest Products 
mill in Carrot River? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Simply put, yes, I feel this is a good deal. If 
you look at the land transaction, it is that there is 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

 

132 
 

some trade in the amount of land there to locate the new peat moss 
facility on and a leaseback for the saw mill and, as you know, the 
building of the new planer. So I believe it is a good deal, and yes, I 
did go to Carrot River. I was there on Thursday. I talked to the 
people in the town. I talked to the workers there, and I believe it is 
a good deal, and I believe when you can see value added — 
maybe you’re against this. It seems that he is against any kind of 
diversification, any type of new product that can be brought on-
line. I’m not opposed to that, and we on this side of the house 
stand for that, and I can see that there will be diversification, new 
products and new companies that will come into Carrot River, and 
I think that will augur well for that town, as well as the rest of the 
province. 
 

Compliance with Court Order re Rafferty-Alameda Project 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My question 
today is to the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation. Mr. Minister, you will be aware that on Friday the 
courts of this province made an unprecedented ruling when it 
came to developing a true public participation in the affairs of 
government. I am referring, of course, to the order of the court to 
open the books of the Saskatchewan Water Corporation, against 
your wishes and against the wishes of your closed, secretive 
government. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is to you, is this: will you promise to 
provide full and complete compliance with the court order and 
open the books on the Rafferty-Alameda project to all citizens 
who want to be able to check the files? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member makes a few 
allegations that I don’t think were fact. 
 
To begin with, the court did not order Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation to open its books to everybody for every piece of 
paper that they have; rather, what the court indicated was that the 
information needed to certify the operation of the development of 
the Rafferty project should be made available. 
 
That was offered to the people prior to the matter even going to 
the courts. The people in Sask Water have been offering that kind 
of information right from day one, when the first request came. 
They will continue to offer that kind of information, and it will be 
open to the public, whoever needs the information, but you can’t 
simply go to a corporation and say, we want to go in and go 
through all of your files. No, that doesn’t happen, but if they 
would be specific and say what they would like to have, that will 
be made available. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Supplementary, Mr. Premier. I was listening to the 
minister — it’s now the people’s fault, it’s the people’s fault that 
we have a closed and secretive government. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, in the spirit of the ruling of the 
courts which have been made, will you let all the people of the 
province know, through tabling the 

documents in this House, to provide us with a complete, the 
complete set of files on the economic analysis underlying the 
Rafferty-Alameda project: Will you let all the people of the 
province know by tabling it here in this House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, the question that the member 
asks is almost laughable. If I were to bring that amount of paper to 
this House, it would be most awkward to find a place to put it. 
There’s an awful lot of information been gathered over many, 
many years dealings with the Rafferty and Alameda project. When 
you come to the information that he’s requesting about the 
financial operation and the financial need of the project, that 
would more properly be asked of the minister responsible for the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I ask 
the minister this: he says there’s a lot of information, and he’s 
correct, and every piece of independent information and every 
independent study has shown that this is nothing more than a 
political boondoggle, that they don’t have an economic analysis. 
 
I ask the minister, Mr. Speaker, this: if you have that economic 
analysis, will you once again table it before the members of this 
House? Let us look, if you have that analysis. I say you don’t. 
Prove it to us by tabling it here today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, the environmental impact 
assessments that were done have been made available to the 
public. There’s been a very major public review of the whole 
project, and the member is quite capable of waking across from 
his office to the Legislative Library where most of that 
information is filed, and he could have a look at it there. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’ve spent the last eight months of my life reading that. That’s 
something obviously the minister and his officials haven’t done. 
What I want to know, Mr. Speaker, is this: in the light of the fact 
that every — every — independent study of this project which has 
been done says that it makes no economic sense and it makes no 
environmental sense, and in light of the fact that the courts have 
ruled that we open the books, will the minister, until the 
international joint commission has studied this project, put a 
moratorium on the construction of the coffer dams which are the 
first step in the construction of this boondoggle? I ask you, Mr. 
Minister, put a moratorium on if you can prove in fact that this 
project will stand by itself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — I guess the simple answer to the question 
would simply be no. 
 

Funding for the University of Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

 

133 
 

Minister of Education. It has to do with the underfunding to the 
University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, your underfunding and the underfunding of your 
government to the University of Saskatchewan, and under your 
guardianship, has led down to a breakdown of negotiations for the 
first time ever in the university’s history, and this is putting the 
education of this year’s students at risk. People in Saskatoon and 
16,000 students at the university and people across the province 
are asking what you are going to do about it, Mr. Minister. What 
have you got to tell them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, in response to 
the first part of the member’s question relative to funding, I think 
it’s useful to point out that between . . .  since this administration 
formed government in 1982 and this very day, our commitment to 
university education has been clear in every which way. And I 
would remind the hon. member that the increase in operating and 
capital funding to our universities, we have increased by a greater 
percentage than any other province in western Canada, Mr. 
Speaker, in the last six years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: —  Mr. Speaker, the issue that the students 
at the University of Saskatchewan are facing this very day isn’t an 
argument that simply revolves around the debate over government 
funding levels; it’s not even an argument that revolves simply 
around the right to strike or not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What is at issue here is the fact that some students are being used 
as pawns and as bargaining chips in the dispute between two 
parties, Mr. Speaker, and I take a very, very dim view of that. 
 
These students are heading into the last two weeks of their classes. 
They’re embarking on . . .  after that, and to their exam schedule; 
it’s a very high-stress, emotional time for them, Mr. Speaker, and 
it’s very unfortunate that they are being used as pawns in this 
dispute. 
 
In so far as what we can do, knowing full well, Mr. Speaker, that 
the university has a board of governors, it has some autonomy, and 
that this is an issue between the faculties and, as well, the 
university board of governors’ administration. But having said all 
that, I, as Minister of Education, because I have the students’ 
interests at heart, am not about to stand by and be a disinterested 
spectator, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Over the weekend, I have talked with all three parties. I have 
talked to Professor Millard on behalf of the faculty association . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The minister’s question is getting 
quite lengthy, and I certainly want to allow him to answer fully, 
but give him a few more seconds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: —  I have talked to all three parties, Mr. 
Speaker: Professor Millard, on behalf of the faculty association, 
the president, members of the board of governors; and, as well, the 
president of the students’ union. We will monitor very closely, Mr. 
Speaker, the 

situation. The university has announced a contingency plan and, as 
well, there has been a call on behalf of the administration for a 
third party intervention. And I am led to believe at this very 
moment that that has been accepted. 
 
I’m hopeful that that can bring some results . . .  
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
Next question. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, the minister acknowledges that 
he has a responsibility to the students; and I would like to remind 
him that his responsibility shouldn’t have just started at this 
moment. There was a first time in history that we’ve had a quota 
on university student entrance to the College of Arts last year. 
 
The problem is that there is underfunding because there’s been a 
50 per . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Now the hon. 
member is getting into a long preamble to the supplementary. 
Please get to your supplementary. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I would ask the Minister whether he would 
think it advisable at this time to let the university administration 
know what they can expect in the budget so that they can proceed 
with negotiations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I already outlined in some 
detail what our commitment has been to universities over the past 
five or six years. I think you’ll see that commitment continued in 
this next budget. If that somehow was going to have made a 
difference, it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that the strike mandate 
would not have been utilized — such was not the case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly my interests lie with the students. I am not 
going to see their educational lives or their careers jeopardized. 
We will watch this extremely closely to see: (a) how the 
contingency plan works; and (b) if in fact third-party intervention 
could help, Mr. Speaker. We are not going to be a disinterested 
observer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Sale of Saskatchewan Minerals Corporation 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise today and announce to my legislative colleagues 
and the people of Saskatchewan, the sale of the two Saskatchewan 
mineral’s corporation to two vibrant, well-established Canadian 
companies. 
 
The sodium sulphate division, with its operating mines at Chaplin 
and Fox Valley, and the two closed mines at Mossbank and 
Gladmar, is being sold to Kam-Kotia Mines, an associated 
company of Dickenson Mines Limited of Toronto for $12.5 
million cash. 
 
Following my consultation with the employees at 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

 

134 
 

Chaplin last week, I am pleased to report that employees of the 
sodium sulphate division will be offered continuing employment 
with Kam-Kotia. Wages and union contracts will also remain 
secure. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, Kam-Kotia will offer a profit-sharing plan 
to employees, allowing them to share directly in the growth of the 
company and the minerals industry. Mr. Speaker, that is giving 
employees a stake in their own operation, and that is public 
participation. 
 
In coming to Saskatchewan, Kam-Kotia will explore new 
investment opportunities in sodium sulphate operations in the 
province. Mr. Speaker, this investment will lead to further 
economic and employment opportunities for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
I’m also pleased to announce, Mr. Speaker, that Premier Sask Inc., 
a wholly owned subsidiary of Premier Canadian Enterprises Ltd. 
of Quebec, has purchased the peat moss division, with operations 
in Carrot River, for $3.4 million cash. Following my consultations 
with the employees in Carrot River, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 
report that all employees will be offered employment with the new 
company. As well, wages and a union contract will remain secure. 
 
In coming to Saskatchewan, Carrot River will be Premier’s head 
office for their western Canadian operations. As well, Mr. 
Speaker, Premier Sask Inc. has immediate plans to launch the first 
in a series of phases to expand and modernize the Carrot River 
facility. Totalling $2.5 million, the plan will bring considerable 
new investment dollars into the Carrot river community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this upgrading and expansion will mean additional 
employment opportunities for Saskatchewan men and women, 
increased economic activity and jobs — two fundamental 
principles of the public participation initiative. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, Premier Sask will fund a half-million-dollar 
project in research over the next three years in conjunction with a 
Saskatchewan research institution such as at the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Kam-Kotia Mines and Premier Sask Inc. are leaders 
in their field and will bring needed investment, state of the art 
technology and new markets to Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this is 
a good financial deal. It is the highest of several offers and is 
above appraised values. The government is getting good value for 
its assets, and it will continue to receive tax and royalty payments. 
 
This sale recognizes that the proper role of government is to 
facilitate growth in the economy. Operating salt mines in peat 
bogs is not an essential function of this government. Mr. Speaker, 
when government financing is scarce and choices are necessary, it 
is clear that the public’s tax dollars should go toward the essential 
services such as health and education. 
 
Over the last several years it became apparent that both the 
Chaplin and the Carrot River operations required new investment 
and new markets to protect jobs and to 

achieve growth. 
 
In this deal, Mr. Speaker, the public interest is clearly served by 
realizing the value of the public assets and attracting new 
economic development, investment research, and secure jobs for 
our Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today’s announcement shows once again how public 
participation will bring new growth to this province. It shows our 
commitment to public employees. The rights of the employees 
have been at the forefront of this deal. Their employment is 
secure. Their benefits and wages will be carried forward and 
collective agreements are honoured. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the net result of this sale is that we have now a new 
investment of $15.9 million in Saskatchewan that will work 
toward building and diversifying our economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the minister’s 
statement — and I’m sorry that he couldn’t have provided this side 
of the House with a copy of that statement — Mr. Speaker, in my 
view this is privatization of the worst possible kind, of the worst 
possible kind. 
 
We learned in question period today that there were no tenders 
offered on the assets of Sask Minerals, no tenders offered, which 
can only lead us to the conclusion that this government, when it 
intends to sell off Saskatchewan assets, then will just hand them 
over to their hand-picked friends — not a tender, just pick your 
friends and give the Saskatchewan assets away. And in addition, 
Mr. Speaker, in this case I would submit that these assets have 
been given away to firms with a less than positive reputation in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is privatization of the worst possible kind. In the 
40-year history of Sask Minerals — and you will recall, Mr. 
Speaker, that Sask Minerals was founded to develop a resource in 
Saskatchewan, and with the alternate goal of employing young 
men coming home from the war. Well the sons and the daughters 
of those young men now need employment, Mr. Speaker, and the 
resource still needs to be developed. In the 40-year history of Sask 
Minerals, Mr. Speaker, this small corporation, on an investment of 
no more than two and a half million dollars from the people of 
Saskatchewan, this corporation has returned, paid out, over $61 
million in wages; it has paid over $2 million in grants in lieu of 
taxes to the communities where the plants are located; it has paid 
over $12 million in royalties to the Government of Saskatchewan; 
and it has paid over $40 million, Mr. Speaker, to the people of 
Saskatchewan. And I say that’s not bad on a two and a half million 
dollar investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that success has been much due to the employees 
and the management of Sask Minerals, and they must be a group 
of people, very disappointed and very discouraged by what 
they’ve heard from this minister, and this Premier, as they’ve 
described Sask Minerals in this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to say that this minister gave a 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

 

135 
 

commitment to the people of Saskatchewan that the people of this 
province would be consulted — consulted — before any further 
moves in privatization. Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, this 
minister has made a mockery of the process of consultation — a 
mockery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I watched this minister in action out at Chaplin. He 
flies into the community at 11 o’clock. He meets with employees 
. . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. I think the member should be 
directing his remarks to the ministerial statement itself, not into 
. . .  Order. Order, please . . .  not into a meeting that took place in 
Chaplin, which I’m sure also has its own particular interests, but 
. . .  Order. Order, please. Order, please. Ministerial statements and 
replies to ministerial statements are not a forum for a debate, and I 
would just like to bring that to the attention of the members, and 
I’m sure they themselves know the rules. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I would find it a little easier to be 
very specific in referring to the minister’s statement today if I had 
a copy of that statement. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, then . . .  The minister, in this statement, 
referred to the book value of Sask Minerals — the market value. 
Mr. Minister, last year in Crown Corporations estimates a request 
was made by my colleague from Moose Jaw North for a copy of 
the appraisal, a copy of the independent appraisal of the value of 
the assets of Sask Minerals. To this . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: Was it promised? 
 
Mr. Calvert: — It was promised, and to this day we have not 
received a copy of that appraisal. So we are asked to believe the 
minister when he says that we have received better than book 
value. Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ll want to see that appraisal, we’ll 
want to see it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the minister made his statement, I did not hear 
him, I did not hear him give us any real assurance that 
Saskatchewan jobs would be protected in the long term. The 
employees of Sask Minerals may have a contract now. That 
contract will run out. What then? What then, Mr. Speaker? I have 
no assurance of a guaranteed expansion. I heard him give no 
assurance that the head office of Sask Minerals will remain in 
Chaplin. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, let me say that this is, in my 
judgement, the worst kind of privatization — piratization as my 
colleague from Moose Jaw North says. Saskatchewan assets 
which have belonged to all of the people of this province, which 
have benefited all the people of this province, have been sold out 
at a fire sale price to eastern interests, friends of this government. 
Mr. Speaker, with privatization the rich are getting richer, the poor 
are getting poorer, friends of the PCs are prospering, and the 
people are being asked to pay. That’s PC privatization, and we’ve 
seen it again today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order. 
Before we move to the next item of business, I would like to just 
make this comment regarding 

ministerial statements and replies to ministerial statements. 
 
I think that the ministerial statement today was a little long. I 
timed it and it was four ministers and 25 seconds; and I believe 
that the response to the ministerial statement was also a little long; 
in fact, a little longer, somewhere over five minutes. 
 
I don’t believe that ministerial statements and responses should be 
times for debate, and I hope that in the future both sides will 
shorten the statement and the answer to the statement 
. . .  (inaudible interjection) . . .  Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Neudorf and the amendment 
thereto moved by Ms. Simard. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
begin by bringing greetings on behalf of the people of Regina 
Centre, the riding that I have represented. I have said on a number 
of past throne speeches that it’s a riding in may ways unique: an 
inner city riding, a large measure of low-income people, but a 
significant number of upperly-mobile people living in the 
apartment blocks. It’s a riding with as much diversity of people 
and incomes as, I think, any in the province. 
 
I want to discuss the throne speech. It will be brief, Mr. Speaker, 
as befits the throne speech. the Lieutenant Governor, at the 
banquet in the evening, bordered on making a political comment, 
although he didn’t, but he bordered on making a political 
comment when he said it was the shortest one that he had read. I 
think it’s accurate to say that he has read . . .  this is his fifth throne 
speech. I think this is my sixteenth, and it’s the shortest I think 
I’ve heard. 
 
(1445) 
 
Not only was it short, Mr. Speaker, it highlighted trivia and 
ignored the substantive issues of the day. Any number of people 
and editorials and cartoons have commented, mostly humorously, 
at the government’s obsession with mad dogs, or angry dogs, as 
the case may be. We heard in some considerable detail what 
they’re going to do with angry dogs; we heard nothing about some 
very substantive issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had, this morning, in the office downtown, no less 
than three people, three young people, all of whom were under 20, 
who came in looking for employment. That’s three in one 
morning, Mr. Speaker, not a word in this throne speech about 
unemployment. The word “unemployment” did not appear in the 
throne speech. It’s a government that finally thinks it’s got its 
mind wrapped around angry dogs, dealt with a terribly serious and 
difficult issue but hasn’t, apparently, anything 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

 

136 
 

to say about the number of young people who are unable to find 
work. 
 
In short, Mr. Speaker, this throne speech is a product of muddled 
thinking and a product of a government that’s run out of 
inspiration and run out of ideas. And, Mr. Speaker, given its 
reluctance to call the by-elections, it seems to have run out of time 
as well, and run out of public sympathy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of this side of the legislature have been 
saying for some years that your . . .  this government’s waste, its 
inefficiency and its incompetence, are going to bring some dire 
results. I think it’s fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that we’re beginning to 
see that. We’re beginning to see it in the underfunding of our basic 
services — health, education. 
 
We have, Mr. Speaker, the spectre of a strike at universities. I 
don’t think, Mr. Speaker. . .  I think it’s fair to say, Mr. Speaker, 
that the people who undertook that did so with great reluctance. I 
think they would have given virtually anything to have avoided 
that action, but this government and its underfunding of 
universities left them no alternative. 
 
We’re faced with some very serious problems with respect to 
negotiations with teachers. While I don’t wish to comment on 
those problems or exacerbate the difficulties the government has, 
suffice it to say that the problems stem from exactly the same 
source — a lack of resources given to schools to do that all-
essential job. 
 
The incompetency and the patronage, Mr. Speaker, is also 
showing up in the area of health. Mr. Speaker, I think all members 
of this Assembly meet and talk to large numbers of people, and so 
do I. Mr. Speaker, I haven’t met or talked to a single, solitary soul 
who is anything but critical of the changes to the health care that 
took place last year. 
 
I have not met a person who’s prepared to defend the changes to 
the drug plan, and I’ve not met a person who’s prepared to defend 
the changes to the dental care plan. This government’s response to 
an angry citizenry is to set up a task force. It’s obvious, Mr. 
Speaker, to the people of this province, that this government’s 
simply attempting to shelve the problem while giving a false 
impression of doing something. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that the senior citizens in my riding and many 
others, who are facing drug bills of hundreds of dollars per month 
on incomes that sometimes are not much larger than their drug 
bills, aren’t going to feel any better about their situation, knowing 
there’s a task force which will report at some distant time in the 
future. 
 
The parents who have to drive their children long distances for 
dental work aren’t going to feel any better about that, knowing that 
this government has attempted to cosmeticize the problem by 
appointing a task force. 
 
As the Leader of the Opposition so correctly pointed out, the 
health care system has been studied to death. What this health care 
system of ours needs is some resources; it does not need any 
further procrastination. And that’s all 

the task force is — it is just simply an attempt to procrastinate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a moment talking about agriculture. 
That’s not the prime industry of my constituency, but no one in 
this province who takes an interest in public affairs can help but be 
interested and concerned, I might add, about the problems in 
agriculture. 
 
That was illustrated, Mr. Speaker, a few months ago. I was leaving 
the court-house. Unlike some members opposite, I was not leaving 
as a participant in the affairs there. Mr. Speaker, on the way out I 
stopped to talk to someone who I regard as a thoughtful and 
disinterested observer of elected office — that person said to me, I 
really don’t envy you. I said, why? with a note of disbelief, 
because that person had sought, unsuccessfully, public office. That 
person said, well, he said, I can say it but you can’t. He said, you 
know and I know that within a few years we’re going to reach a 
situation in this province where there’ll be 10,000 farmers farming 
10,000 acres each. I don’t know if the numbers work out or not, 
but he made his point. I didn’t say anything at the time, but as I 
left and drove across the Wascana Creek to the Legislative 
Building, I thought to myself, is this what has happened in a 
hundred years? 
 
My grandparents, and the grandparents of many people here, 
suffered incredible hardships, travelled half way around the world 
on the crudest of transportation, faced enormous difficulties. Why? 
It can all be summed up in one word . . .  two words — free land 
— a chance to own their own land. That great migration, one of 
the great migrations of history, began about a century ago. I 
thought to myself, is that all it’s taken is a hundred years. One 
century later are we going to be no different than the countries that 
my grandparents left, with a few large estates farmed by a few 
wealthy people? Well I think he may be right, if something isn’t 
done, and if some assistance isn’t provided to the agricultural 
community. 
 
The government’s response has been to throw money at it. I want 
to talk for a moment about the production loans. It was obvious, 
Mr. Speaker, to thoughtful observers at the time, that one of the 
primary problems in agriculture is that it’s overcapitalized. Given 
the prices to be obtained, the farming industry was carrying farm 
more debt than it could service, and that is one of the primary 
problems the agriculture industry had. 
 
It was apparent to thoughtful observers when the production loans 
came out that if you add a billion dollars in debt to the farming 
industry, you add very significantly to the problem. 
 
That was apparent, Mr. Speaker, to people at the time. It’s 
apparent to almost everyone now that that was the case, that that 
program was badly thought out, badly put together, and very badly 
flawed. None of that, however, Mr. Speaker, lends us much — 
because that’s done and behind us — none of that lends us much 
assistance in knowing what we should do today. 
 
About a month ago I attended, with the member from 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

 

137 
 

Kelvington-Wadena, a meeting in Yorkton of farmers who had 
just received their notices from the government, a government 
which before the election, Mr. Speaker, promised them, and I 
think the phrase the member from Weyburn used was “hassle-free 
cash” in his . . .  And I had an opportunity to reread the member’s 
statement; only once did the word “loan” appear. 
 
The member from Weyburn who — the minister of Agriculture at 
the time — who made the announcement was at pains to assure 
farmers that they’d never have to give another thought to this 
production loan because their friends were in office. 
 
But I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s fair to say that they found out how 
good a friends they were. This government, behaving in a fashion, 
I think, which would embarrass private bankers, have increased 
the interest rate and increased the security which they have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we still await . . .  although we know with great 
certainly what you’re going to do about angry dogs, we have not 
as yet had the Premier’s statement on the production loans. I will 
venture to say to the member from Meadow Lake that I could find 
more of his constituents who are interested in what the Premier is 
going to do about production loans then he can find who were 
interested in what we’re going to do about pit bulls. 
 
I suspect that if the member from Meadow Lake spent any time in 
his riding, he’d find out that pit bulls are not a burning issues in 
Meadow Lake or in Regina Centre, but that production loans are. 
 
The farmers of this province need and deserve a definitive 
statement from the Premier. 
 
I can say, Mr. Speaker, that this is a loan which was ill-conceived. 
When private bankers make a loan which is ill-conceived, I think 
it’s fair to say they’re happy enough to get their interest, at least 
until things improve. I find it surprising, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government would deal with farmers in a way which is harsher 
than I think most private bankers would. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government, in my view, ought not to have 
increased the interest rate, ought not to have requested the 
principal back, and ought to have been satisfied to get six per cent 
interest on the loan until that desperate situation out there 
improves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make a comment about privatization. It is 
our view, Mr. Speaker, that not all services have to be provided by 
the public and not all Crown corporations are for ever fixed in the 
public sphere. Times change, circumstances change, and all things 
— all things — reach a stage where they might be re-evaluated. 
 
In determining, however, what should be privatized and what 
shouldn’t, I’ve developed four criteria — others might add to it — 
but I’ve developed four tests which I think are a minimum that any 
privatization scheme should meet. Firstly, is there genuine 
competition in the field? The privatization of the British Telecom, 
which turned a public monopoly into a private monopoly to the 

distress of virtually everyone in Britain, I think illustrates what 
happens when you create a private monopoly. They are even less 
accessible and less responsive than a public monopoly. 
 
Secondly, is a fair price being obtained for the assets that are being 
sold. Is the public treasury getting a fair price? I was distressed to 
read of Mr. Perry’s comments and his suggestions when speaking 
to a Conservative banquet, that in fact you ought to sell the assets 
for less of what they’re worth, so that shortly after you sell them 
the price of the stock will go up and the public who bought them 
will think they’ve got a hold of a really good deal. Might be a 
good deal for the money . . .  for the people with the money to buy 
the stocks, but it’s a very bad deal for the taxpayers of this 
province. And I predict, Mr. Speaker, that, as I think some of the 
media have reported, that there’s lots of bad news for the 
taxpayers in the weeks ahead without adding and contributing to 
the problem with these ill-advised deals. 
 
Thirdly, will the public treasury lose revenue? If it is, how is that 
to be made up? If the public treasure is going to lose revenue, 
who’s going to pick it up? Is it to be the taxpayer? 
 
Fourthly, does it provide a necessary public service, and will that 
be lost? I just want to run over, for a brief moment, some of the 
privatizations which this government has undergone, the latest one 
of which I heard about for the first time today. And the question 
posed by the member from Moose Jaw North and South, but 
particularly the member from Moose Jaw North — the sale of the 
SPC building in Moose Jaw. I’m astonished that that building — 
and I know a little bit about that building, I grew up in Moose Jaw 
— I’m astonished that that building would sell for $200,000. 
 
(1500) 
 
I just simply fail to understand how you can sell a building of that 
size and that quality for $200,000. Mr. Speaker, that’s the price of 
a small office building; that’s the price of a decent sized house that 
you can convert into an office building. That SPC building, I 
believe, is worth many times that price. 
 
And I say to Mr. Speaker, and to members opposite, that those are 
some facts which we are going to want to know. We’re going to 
want to know why the people who . . .  the public of this province 
who depend on SPC for their power should pay for this kind of an 
ill-advised transaction. I say to the minister opposite, if there’s an 
appraisal available which suggests that building is worth 
$200,000, I want to see it, because I don’t think anyone should 
make an argument that that building’s worth a quarter of a million 
dollars. It’s worth a great deal more than that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to spend a moment reviewing others of 
this government’s sales: Saskoil was a fair price obtained? Of 
course not. Shares were sold for less than their book value at the 
time they were being sold. Did the public receive, did the public 
treasury receive less income? Of course it did. Saskoil has paid 
dividends to the Minister of Finance almost from its beginning. 
Saskoil bought in a depressed — at a time when the oil patch was 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

 

138 
 

depressed, Saskoil bought all of the leases of Atlantic Richfield, 
and they had a large presence in Saskatchewan. Almost from day 
one Saskoil returned significant profits back to the treasury, and 
those were lost. 
 
Sask Mining also fails the same tests — the public did not get their 
money out of it, and the public treasury is receiving a lot less 
income. Mr. Speaker, we don’t stand opposed to every sale of 
public assets. Circumstances change — sometimes they’re not 
necessary. We do stand firmly opposed to this government selling 
assets owned by the taxpayer at far less than they’re worth without 
any thought of where the revenue’s going to be made up. I think, 
Mr. Speaker, the public are going to see in a few days where the 
revenue’s going to be made up; it’s going to be made up in 
increased taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a couple of moments talking about 
issues which have arisen in the area of human rights. I do so, Mr. 
Speaker, knowing that by its very nature, human rights deals with 
the rights of minorities. If those minorities were popular with the 
public, there’d be no need for human rights legislation. Therefore 
our essence of human rights legislation is that it provides 
protection to people who cannot depend on public support to 
protect their rights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s one of the incontrovertible facts of 
Saskatchewan’s history that almost all significant advances in the 
area of human rights have taken place when a CCF or an NDP 
government is in office. It is also an incontrovertible fact that the 
abuses of human rights by the government has taken place when a 
Liberal or Conservative government is in office. 
 
A few days ago the Canadian public were treated to the spectacle 
of a former federal cabinet minister’s diaries being made public — 
Don Jamieson. And thus I think it’s timely to review the events of 
1971 and the implementation of the War Measures Act. 
 
I want to remind members opposite, the War Measures Act was 
introduced in 1971. Four hundred people were arrested without 
any of the usual protections. In Quebec, not a single, solitary 
convection ever took place out of those 400 arrests. A handful 
were charged; all were acquitted. 
 
We know now from Don Jamieson’s diary that the federal cabinet 
knew at the time it introduced the War Measures Act that it could 
not be justified, but it was a politically expedient thing to do. I 
remind members opposite that that which must now rank as the 
most serious violation of civil liberties in this country’s history 
was done by a Liberal government, but supported by every 
Conservative member of the House of Commons, and only the 
NDP in the federal House of Commons had the courage to say, no, 
this is not right. 
 
Two issues have arisen in this province that I want to comment on. 
I want to begin with a comment on the Premier’s reaction to 
Svend Robinson’s statement. Fair-minded people throughout this 
province were embarrassed to hear the kind of comments that we 
did coming from the office of the Premier. They were 

embarrassed to hear someone so apparently narrow-minded and 
shallow holding the office of Premier of this province. The 
comments which he made would have been out of place in a bar, 
much less a news conference given by the Premier. 
 
Whatever we may think about Mr. Robinson’s life-style — and we 
will have different views on that — he showed considerable 
courage in making the statement that he did. And I think had it not 
been for the Premier of this province, the Premier’s reaction to it, 
the whole issue might not have attracted anywhere near as much 
attention as it did. If the Premier was intent upon stirring up public 
sentiment, he was certainly successful. 
 
I may say, Mr. Speaker, that I got a good deal of correspondence 
on the issue. Many people included what one might, I suppose, for 
lack of a better term, educational material, background papers on 
homosexuality. Some of it was pure trash, but among the letters 
some people included some material which was scholarly and 
reliable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was surprised at how little scientific data there is on 
the subject, but what I got suggests to me that a couple of 
conclusions can be drawn, one of which is that if it’s an acquired 
trait, it’s acquired at a very early age in life and is irreversible. 
Secondly, it appears that it is not something that can be learned; 
and thirdly — this was a revelation for me — it appears in 
sociological studies that have been done, that the incidence of 
homosexuality does not vary from societies which are very 
tolerant of it to societies which are very, very intolerant. It is in all 
societies throughout the world, something that occurs in about 10 
per cent of the population. 
 
One has to ask, therefore, if it’s something that can’t be learned 
and can’t be acquired and won’t increase with tolerance, one 
wonders what the Premier hoped to accomplish with his tirade and 
his actions which whipped up public sentiment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that fair-minded people everywhere were 
horrified at the Premier’s discussion of a member of parliament, 
who had done nothing illegal, in the same context as bank robbers. 
As any number of people pointed out, Mr. Speaker, robbing banks 
is illegal. Being homosexual is not, has not been for several 
decades, and when that change was made in the Criminal Code, all 
Conservative members of the federal parliament voted for it. 
 
A great number of people have called the Premier a bigot. I just 
wish, Mr. Premier, I could be that charitable, because being a 
bigot implies a certain degree of ignorance. I don’t think for a 
moment the Premier made that statement out of ignorance. I 
believe that he cynically saw a minority who were out of favour 
and therefore unable to protect their rights and call upon public 
support. The Premier, who was blind and uncaring to the 
difficulties he caused that community of people, took advantage of 
the situation to ingratiate himself with those people whose 
intolerance and narrow-mindedness feeds on the abuse of other 
people. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to make a comment as well, and I 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

 

139 
 

shall have to do so relatively briefly. I want to make a comment on 
another issue in the area of human rights, brought to us this time 
by the Supreme Court, and I refer to the Mercure decision. I regret 
very much that I cannot give any portion of this speech in French. 
There’s those who say that I haven’t quite mastered the English 
language, much less the French, but I do want to make a comment 
on it. 
 
The decision, I might add, has yet to be explored in full detail, but 
it appears that the decision establishes the principle that the current 
law of the province requires that laws, both past and present, Mr. 
Speaker, and the proceedings of this Assembly, appear in both of 
Canada’s official languages. At the same time, a decision of the 
Saskatchewan Queen’s Bench provided, states that parents, 
French-speaking parents who want to send their children to a 
French school, have a right to a separate school board to 
administer that school system. 
 
Many Saskatchewan people are aware that Saskatchewan has one 
of the smallest French populations in Canada. The figures I have 
are that 6 per cent of the Saskatchewan public claim France as 
their country of ethnic origin, and just 3 per cent still speak the 
language. 
 
It is not obvious to people in Saskatchewan, when we have such a 
small French population, why documents should appear in both 
languages. The reasons, Mr. Speaker, are historical, and I want to 
spend a moment or two discussing those reasons. 
 
After the loss of the American colonies in the 18th century, it 
became the policy of the British Empire to allow all conquered 
peoples to retain their language, their customs, and their laws. Mr. 
Speaker, I had the privilege of visiting Mexico — I might add at 
my own expense, it was a holiday — during the recess, and I can 
tell you that that policy of allowing people to retain their customs, 
laws, and language was by no means universal among European 
colonial powers; indeed, it was the exception. 
 
That policy was, of course, extended to Canada in 1763 by the 
Quebec Act and subsequent Acts. The success of the policy soon 
became evident. Scarcely 50 years after the Quebec Act, the 
Americans invaded. Soon the French, particularly the French, but 
the English as well, would rise up and assist them, and the victory 
in Canada would be a relatively easy affair. 
 
The war of 1812 was the only war that the United States of 
America has lost in its history. It was defeated soundly, in part by 
British troops, but mainly because the French and the English 
joined together to defend their young country; and so Canada 
survived. 
 
Our generation, Mr. Speaker, is not one that has the luxury of 
believing that we can take the French fact for granted. We know, 
because of the recent referendum, that the French remain in 
Canada as a voluntary matter. We’ve inherited the bargain made 
by the British. We’re morally and legally obligated to obey it. 
Some do not think it is a wise bargain. I’d simply remind such 
people that the policy of allowing people to retain their own 
language and their own culture underpin the success of the British 

Empire, far more so than the guns of the Royal Navy — a 
tolerance showed to people encouraged them to think that they 
would have a place within the British Empire and, in fact, very 
few people ever wanted to — very few countries ever wanted to 
leave. 
 
Since the Supreme Court decision came out, we in the opposition 
have been urging the government to sit down with the French 
community and negotiate an agreement, one more trifling issue 
that I guess was shoved aside by angry dogs and the need to 
highlight that in the throne speech. We believe that people in the 
French community are reasonable people who share with us a 
desire to avoid the sort of acrimonious debate that took place in 
Manitoba and elsewhere. 
 
(1515) 
 
We say to the government opposite that if you have the good will, 
the sense and the courage to set down and negotiate the matter 
with them, you can negotiate an agreement which will meet the 
needs of all concerned. 
 
Given this government’s reluctance to face the public in the by-
elections, it’s becoming increasingly obvious to many 
Saskatchewan people that after the next election, this government 
will be consigned to the annals of history. I believe, Mr. Speaker, 
that history is going to judge this government very harshly. It will 
be said that you inherited one of Canada’s best health care systems 
and you wrecked it out of ignorance. It will be said you took a 
government with soundly-managed finances and turned that into a 
shambles which will take years and years to undo. I think it will be 
said, Mr. Speaker, that you were befriended by farmers — you 
played games with them before the election and have ignored 
them ever since. It will be said of your policies that you created 
hunger in an area which calls itself the bread-basket of the world. 
It will be said, Mr. Speaker, that this government has ignored one 
of the most ancient duties of a ruler: to feed thy people. 
 
But the harshest criticism, I believe, Mr. Speaker, will be reserved 
for the way this government has, with calculated cruelty, singled 
out one minority after another and whipped up public sentiment 
against them. You have treated anyone who isn’t male, Caucasian, 
and well-off as if it were their problem that they weren’t part of 
that privileged minority. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and the members opposite, that the 
public are not so cruel or uncaring, and if you disagree, I invite 
you to call the by-election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — We say to you, if you have the courage, do 
so. One riding, Mr. Speaker, is an inner-city riding, relatively low 
income. The other riding is a relatively affluent riding. You’re 
going to face the same prospect in them both, and that’s loss. 
 
I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the desperate situation they find 
themselves in with respect to the by-elections proves that you 
can’t divide Saskatchewan people. If you single out any of them, 
you single out them all. All we ask is that 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

 

140 
 

you give the public in those two by-elections an opportunity to 
express themselves on your policies. 
 
It goes without say, Mr. Speaker, that I’ll be voting against the 
motion and for the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 
pleasure and an honour for me to participate in this debate in reply 
to the Speech from the Throne. And as government caucus 
chairman, Mr. Speaker, allow me to welcome you back to your 
chair, and also to welcome all members back to the Assembly for 
another session of what I’m sure will be a productive and 
interesting work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a moment to thank my 
constituents of Yorkton for their positive attitude and indeed their 
hard work to cause our city to grow and provide a decent and 
interesting place in which to live. 
 
In my mind, Mr. Speaker, the people of Yorkton are among the 
best in the world. They are builders and doers, Mr. Speaker, even 
during these last few difficult economic years. We have seen 
growth and progress in our city, whole new regions of the city that 
have been . . .  the housing starts are being far beyond our 
expectation. Apartment buildings are being put up, commercial 
buildings are being built, and I was very, very pleased on the 
weekend to read in our local newspapers that the Yorkton Co-op is 
building a $3.2 million retail outlet on the east side of this city. 
They have the attitude that things are going to be good, and are 
good, in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I invite every member of this Assembly to take time out this 
year to come and visit our city and enjoy its fine restaurants, 
recreational facilities, dedicated businesses in our community, and 
its excellent hospitality. And I’m sure the member from Saskatoon 
South enjoyed the perogies and the cabbage rolls and those 
specialty items that are on the menus in the cafes in Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech said a number of important 
principles and objectives of the government, and a number of 
those are of historic importance to our province. 
 
Trade, and particularly the free trade agreement with the United 
States, represents the opportunity to address a demand of western 
Canada, and of the people of Saskatchewan, since confederation, 
and even before confederation. Free trade has been a rallying cry 
in this province for over a hundred years, Mr. Speaker, and 
because the freedom to trade with the world without interference is 
the first requirement for long-term growth and prosperity, I find it 
beyond my comprehension, Mr. Speaker, as to why there is 
absolutely no economic argument against free trade in Canada, the 
United States, or in the entire world, as far as that’s concerned. 
 
And what are we talking about in free trade? Eighty-three percent 
of our trade is already tariff free, so we’re talking about 17 per 
cent yet to do. And it really amuses me when I hear the members 
of the opposition and their leader, 

national leader, and Bob White and the union leaders saying that 
we will lose our sovereignty if we go into the free trade deal. What 
utter nonsense, Mr. Speaker, absolute balderdash! 
 
We look at the European Economic Community which have been 
trading freely over 25 years. And as far as I’m concerned the 
English are still English, the French are still French, the Germans 
are still German, and it’s amazing to see that the Greeks are 
signing the economic deal in the European community. 
 
I just want to comment, Mr. Speaker, on the pleasure and the 
honour that I have had over the last 31 years, prior to getting into 
politics, or working for a company and a man, Morris Rod-
Weeder Company, and the sole owner of that company, Mr. 
George Morris. And I can go back to 1930 when he designed a 
piece of farm machinery, 1929-1930, in difficult times. But he 
designed a piece of equipment that was going to assist the farmers 
of our country in controlling moisture or conserving moisture and 
controlling weeds, to cut the cost of farming. 
 
He started out in a little shop, building eight-foot machines that 
were horse-drawn. But even with those small pieces of equipment 
it became very positive that the farmers of Saskatchewan were 
wanting to buy that equipment and do their farming. He could 
have said, let’s just do a few machines a year and work in 
Saskatchewan. But no, what happened was that the farmers in 
Alberta, and in Manitoba all of a sudden heard of this piece of 
equipment, and the need to manufacture more happened. And then 
in 1960, Mr. Speaker, he built a plant in Yorkton, Saskatchewan to 
accommodate the production requirements to serve that market. 
 
We had 23 people working for us in the first year, and it would 
have been very easy and nice to just have an operation in 
Saskatchewan and build machines and sell them and not go 
beyond our borders. But the demand for equipment didn’t stop 
there, Mr. Speaker. The next thing we knew that the United States 
was wanting to buy our equipment, so dealer and organization was 
set up in the United States. And that is trade; that’s what we call 
trade. 
 
And it didn’t end in the United States. We stated getting orders 
from Australia. And I’m pleased to say that we were able to 
manufacture equipment in Yorkton, Saskatchewan, ship it by truck 
to Vancouver, put it in containers and onto boats, three weeks to 
Australia, then onto trucks to get delivered to the dealers in 
Australia. And we were able to compete. We could sell our 
equipment cheaper than what they were manufacturing in their 
own country, and there was tariffs as well. 
 
So after a few years there we were able to make an agreement with 
Australian companies to bring their equipment Canada, which we 
got the manufacturing rights for. So here was trade both ways. 
We’re still Canadian; they’re still Australian. 
 
It didn’t end there, Mr. Speaker. We had distributors in France. 
We sold equipment to Algeria. We sold equipment to Costa Rica. 
And I can remember being in Algiers in northern Africa with the 
Canadian pavilion showing our equipment over there. 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

 

141 
 

So this is what trading is all about. It doesn’t matter if you’re large 
corporations or small corporations. It’s there for your use. 
Statistics prove conclusively that without trade we cannot grow, 
we cannot prosper, we cannot even maintain what we have. 
 
The evidence also clearly demonstrates that the free trade 
agreement will mean better opportunities for our province, both 
for consumers and producers. Mr. Speaker, let me cite some of the 
evidence produced by independent sources. 
 
Tim Hazeldine, a professor of economics at the University of 
British Columbia, has said his detailed study of the subject 
concludes that free trade will lead to, and I quote, “a drop in the 
cost of living of about 2 per cent, or perhaps as much as 4 per 
cent.” And that equivalent is the same, Mr. Speaker, as a wage 
increase of 2 to 4 per cent, a wage increase without the stress of 
labour disputes, without concessions, without argument. The 
Economic Council of Canada has gone even farther and predicted 
a drop in the cost of living of 6 per cent and the creation of 
350,000 jobs. 
 
Richard Garlick of the Consumers’ Association of Canada said, 
and I quote, “There’s no question that the free trade agreement 
will favour consumers.” And I think it’s hard to get more basic 
than that, Mr. Speaker. For a man whose career it is to protect and 
promote the interests of consumers, we hear that there is no 
question that the deal is good for consumers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why would our hog producers be against the free 
trade agreement? They know that we already have a good piece of 
the market of the U.S. bacon and pork market areas, and they 
know that we are going to get an even bigger share of that market. 
 
I had the pleasure to be in California at Christmas time, Mr. 
Speaker, and I felt real proud when I went into a restaurant in 
Anaheim, California, to order eggs and bacon, and when I looked 
at the menu, in brackets opposite was “Canadian bacon.” 
 
Our bacon producers are shipping up to 40 per cent of their 
production already to a market in Los Angeles. Why shouldn’t 
they have free trade back and forth? Here’s a 7 million population 
city that we can ship our bacon to, and even if we carved out just a 
little niche in that market, that means tremendous increases of 
production requirements and jobs for our people here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a number of farm equipment manufacturers 
in this province as well, and it is true that farm equipment is tariff 
free. It has been travelling back and forth for a number of years 
without any duties; however, it goes further than that. There are 
irritants that come up from time to time, and we in the farm 
machinery business, if we shipped a complete machine across the 
line to the United States, it was all duty free. However, if a farmer 
in Kansas City, for example, had a breakdown and there was a 
hydraulic cylinder problem, we built hydraulic cylinders in 
Yorkton to suit our machinery which was unique, but when you 
go across the border, the tariff manuals say “hydraulic cylinders.” 
It doesn’t 

matter what they do or what they’re supposed to do, so it ended up 
that that farmer would have to pay duty on that hydraulic cylinder 
to get operational again. 
 
(1530) 
 
The free trade agreement will get rid of all those kinds of irritants. 
The agreement will eliminate duties and tariffs, and this will 
enhance the farm machinery sector of this province. 
 
Needless to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am very pleased that the 
government, along with our leader, the member from Estevan, will 
continue to pursue the opportunities presented by the free trade 
agreement, and that the energy and skills of our people will be 
allowed to participate in that market of 250 million people to the 
south of us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech was also clear in its commitment 
to health care in this province. And it is a little unsettling to hear 
the opposition — and we just heard it 10 minutes ago — day after 
day, telling the people that we have this terrible health care system 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
When I look back to 1981 and see the amount that was budgeted 
for by the members opposite compared to what we are budgeting 
now in 1987, there’s a $500 million increase in money. So how 
can they have the gall to keep saying that the medicare system is 
being underfunded and decimated, and these are the words that we 
keep hearing every day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have the highest quality health care system in North America, 
bar none. We have the broadest coverage, the largest and most 
generous programs of any jurisdiction on the continent — a 
budget, Mr. Speaker, of $1.3 billion. 
 
And let me express the gratitude of the people of Yorkton, Mr. 
Speaker, for the extensive additions and renovations to the health 
care facilities of our city. We have had a major $10 million 
expansion onto the Yorkton Union Hospital, a completely new 
emergency ward, and the beginning of an infrastructure to allow 
that hospital to expand in the future. This was a phase 1 
expansion; brand-new laundry for $5 million to do laundry, not 
only for our own hospital and nursing homes in Yorkton, but for 
the outlying communities; brand-new boiler set up for a heating 
system of $1.2 million dollars. 
 
We now, Mr. Speaker, have the Whitespruce alcohol and drug 
treatment facility with a projected expenditure of $5 million 
dollars over the next five years. And I am pleased today, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to let members of the Assembly know that the 
first clients have been registered and are now beginning their 
treatment in that facility in Yorkton. 
 
And that gives me an opportunity to put something in perspective, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. The savings to the government from the 
modifications to the dental program amounted to about 45 million, 
and we had to make some choices as a government, but we were 
told by many, many people around this province that teeth were 
not the problem, that the drugs and the alcohol abuse —  



 
March 28, 1988 

 

142 
 

especially in our teenagers — was a priority, and so the decision 
was made to convert and transfer moneys over into that priority 
and, as I said, the facility is now up and running. 
 
The expenditures for the world class facility for treatment of 
alcohol and drug problems among our youth are, as I stated, $5 
million dollars. 
 
And that points out the kind of decision making that has to be 
made, Mr. Speaker. We have to balance, as a society, for various 
needs and demands of the system, and I believe the people of 
Yorkton and the people of Saskatchewan will agree that a fair and 
effective balance is being achieved. Whitespruce represents a 
powerful example of the philosophy of this government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In Yorkton as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are pleased to have 
seen two new senior citizens’ complexes built containing 
approximately 60 suites — Victoria Place and Fisher Court have 
been built during the last few years and, in fact, Fisher Court will 
be opened in the next few weeks. And we are truly appreciative of 
the concern that this government shows for our seniors. 
 
Last fall we also officially opened a new 40-bed addition to the 
Yorkton and District Nursing Home. And I would like at this point 
to thank my colleagues, the hon. member from Indian Head-
Wolseley and the hon. member from Meadow Lake, for working 
with our people in Yorkton to make these projects a reality. 
 
I also want to commend the government for demonstrated support 
for the ancillary services in our community. And I think of one, 
particularly of Yorkton’s Shelwin House, a home for battered 
women, and how successful that centre has been in serving the 
women of our city in a compassionate, fair, and efficient manner. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, health care is a very important issue, and so 
important that the minister is establishing a very professional task 
force. I met in the last three weeks to a month, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, with nurses in our community, with some of our doctors, 
and the main message that I got out of those meetings was that 
these associations and these groups are wanting to have the 
opportunity to make recommendations and suggestions on how to 
improve our health care system . . .  very emphatic in their words 
to me that this is what they really wanted to do, and I was pleased 
to be able to tell them that there is a task force being set up that 
they will have the opportunity to present their ideas and their brief 
to. The result of the task force process will provide us with the 
blueprint that the Minister of Health has spoken of, a blueprint that 
will continue to provide the best health care system in North 
America. 
 
One other item I’d like to just touch briefly on, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is diversification. What is diversification? It means the 
support of businesses to diversify, government to diversify, which 
will all create jobs. I’ve listed a few of them here. The upgrader 
here in Regina, the $600 million project where at last 
Saskatchewan will be able to make use of its heavy oil resource 
and manufacture gasoline here through the 

refinery. I can remember the NDP talking about it years ago, but it 
never happened. 
 
I look at the paper mill in Prince Albert. 
 
An Hon. Member: That’s one they said wouldn’t be built. 
 
Mr. McLaren: — That’s right. There was — years — last two 
years all we’ve heard is the smoke and mirrors, it will never 
happen, it will never get built. Well it’s built, and we don’t hear 
boo out of those people across there. 
 
I had the opportunity a week ago to go through that facility, and 
we in Saskatchewan need to be proud that there is a paper mill to 
that magnitude and with that high technology that they have that 
we’ll be able to produce paper here in Saskatchewan. And here 
again the free trade will come into play where we will be able to 
take that paper and sell it all over North America. 
 
The bacon plant in North Battleford, and the addition to the 
Intercon in Saskatoon — and I have already mentioned the 
participation that they’ve got in shipping bacon to the United 
States. 
 
The recreational vehicle and trailer complex in North Battleford 
— I haven’t seen it, but I understand it’s a very, very efficient 
operation and one that we can be proud of having here in our 
province. 
 
And I think of the natural gas program to our small towns and our 
rural communities, tremendous savings in the costs of heating and 
running their shops. I heard the NDP talk about it years before we 
got elected — oh, it was going to cost too much money — but it’s 
being done. 
 
I can think of the Buy Saskatchewan program that I had the 
pleasure of introducing when I was minister in charge of 
SaskPower. SaskPower is buying hundreds of millions of product 
here in Saskatchewan now, compared to less than 100 million 
before. All this is giving our small industries an opportunity to 
participate in the growth of our province instead of ordering 
equipment and supplies from other provinces and the United 
States. 
 
The turbine manufacturing plant in Saskatoon, where we will be 
building turbines, has covered the North American market. And 
the list goes on and on and on, Mr. Speaker, many of the smaller 
businesses that I’m sure have expanded their facilities dues to 
these programs. 
 
So needless to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be proud to support 
the motion of my colleague, the member for Rosthern. Thank you 
for the opportunity and the time to present my remarks this 
morning, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I rise today to take part in this throne speech 
debate, a throne speech that I might add that was barren of any 
foresight or any future for this province as we listen for the 16 
minutes that it took to present the throne speech. 
 
Usually when a throne speech is brought down by a 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

 

143 
 

government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it has a blueprint for the coming 
year and for the future, and most certainly as you go through this 
document, you find neither one. 
 
I want to compare the throne speech that was presented last week 
to some of the throne speeches that were presented underneath the 
government of Allan Blakeney. And when you take a look at the 
difference in the documents and the content, it’s pretty clear as to 
why we’re in such great problems, economic problems, in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
When we were . . .  when Allan Blakeney was presenting budgets, 
I might add, 11 balanced budgets in this legislature, and some of 
the remarks that were made in the throne speech were like this: 
throughout the year, 14,000 additional jobs were created, and I 
might add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those were 14,000 good jobs, 
long-term jobs with security. 
 
And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you take a look at the throne 
speech that was brought forward by this Conservative 
government, you see no mention of jobs, just a small, small part, 
and I will get to that a little later on. No blueprint for next year and 
most certainly no blueprint for the future. 
 
Highways and roads: there was absolutely nothing mentioned 
about the highways and road system in this province that are being 
deteriorated at this time — and, I might add, little or no 
construction taking place. Major highways that should be built — 
take Highway 55 from Big River to Green Lake. In the last six 
years, 14 kilometres started by your government, and not one of 
those kilometres has been completed yet. And that is a major 
artery between Green Lake and Big River which links up Prince 
Albert and your constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of Shellbrook 
and north-west Saskatchewan — not a mention. Highways and 
roads such as into Canoe Narrows and Cole Bay, important roads, 
roads that need to be rebuilt and roads that are dangerous to the 
public that are travelling on them — no mention at all. 
 
This does not seem to be a priority, but I say to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the priority seems to be now with Weyerhaeuser. And I 
want to now turn to a document that I have, and it relates, Mr. 
Speaker, to the highways and road system which I think are totally 
being destroyed in this province and are going to be destroyed far 
more severely when Weyerhaeuser implements its new policy 
with the trucking industries in this province. 
 
(1545) 
 
I have a document here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that indicates that in 
Big River alone, 12 . . .  from 27 truckers that are operating right 
now, hauling timber into the plant in Prince Albert, that will be cut 
down to 12 trucks. Now that is a severe blow for the community 
of Big River and in that north-west part of Saskatchewan — a real 
severe blow, because many of those truckers both haul timber to 
Big River and to Meadow Lake and into the Prince Albert mill. 
And they’re cutting that down; from 27 trucks, they’re cutting it 
down to 12. 
 
And that’s not the worst part of it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

What they are saying to the truckers that remain, are going to 
remain there to haul timber, is that they have to get heavier 
equipment to haul. What they are going to do now, they are going 
to make them buy new equipment, which equipment I might add, 
that have air-lift steering, and I will explaining that in just a minute 
— air-lift steering that is outlawed in other provinces in Canada. 
 
But what is going to take place now, and they’re telling the 
truckers in Big River, and this is Weyerhaeuser, the corporation 
that was brought in by the Conservative government, that they 
were given $250 million worth of Saskatchewan assets and were 
going to provide secure, long-term jobs and the survival of our 
small communities. That’s the corporation that we’re talking about 
right now. 
 
Now what they’re going to do, they’re going to say that you’re 
going to have to increase the width of your trailers to 10 feet, 
you’re going to have to increase the weight from 56,000 tonnes 
. . .  kilograms to 74,000 tonnes. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker 
. . .  And you know what that’s going to mean to your constituency 
and the area in Shellbrook where these trucks are going to be 
hauling the timber. That is going to mean disaster. 
 
And when you take air-lift steering, that means that they’re going 
into seven-axle trucks from five-axle trucks, but when they’re out 
there free-wheeling on the highways and our roads, they will lift 
up a set of the wheels or the dollies and they’ll revert back to the 
five-axle truck. And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what that is 
going to mean to our highways and road system. It is going to 
mean a disaster. 
 
And I said before that opening up that link between Big River and 
Green Lake and into the Meadow Lake area was nor a priority any 
more. In the last six years, 14 kilometres not completed. But you 
go back to Big River and six miles south, and you see a brand-new 
highway being constructed up on the opposite side of Cowan Lake 
where it should never, never be — no reason to put a road up 
there. The only reason is for Weyerhaeuser. And that is a highway 
that is being built by the taxpayers of this province. 
 
And that’s what’s taking place there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
what is really happening in this situation is that there are 34 
families involved in this cut-back that are going to lose their 
livelihood in the communities of Big River and in Meadow Lake 
and Green Lake and Shellbrook area. They’re going to lose their 
livelihood. 
 
And if the operators don’t convert to the 10-foot trucks, then they 
will lose their seniority list and they will lose their jobs, also. So 
they are going to be forced to use this heavy equipment. And 
that’s the corporation. 
 
And the member from Turtleford, he says he cannot tell a private 
corporation what to do, when his constituents asked him to 
intervene. So they can’t tell this corporation what to do because 
it’s a private corporation and they will do what they like. They’ll 
destroy our highway system. They think nothing of laying off the 
truckers and destroying the families. Some of those individuals 
who have up to a million dollars invested in equipment are now 
scratching for work, and they just can’t get work. 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

 

144 
 

This is the type of operation that we have there. 
 
When they talk about jobs — and I indicated in our throne speech 
— and that was just one of them; I have many of them here that I 
took the time to go back and look over. And I see that in the throne 
speech we see the Conservative government makes this one 
statement: 
 
We must continue the thrust to diversify our economy so we can 
continue to create jobs and provide a higher standard of living for 
the people in this province. 
 
Then the member from Yorkton just got up and he indicates that 
the Conservative government has increased Social Services budget 
by a half a billion dollars. And he stood up in this House just five 
minutes ago, and he was very proud of the fact that your 
government, sir, has increased the Social Services budget by a half 
a billion dollars . . .  (inaudible interjection) . . .  
 
Well the Minister of Education was not listening very closely 
because I tell you, you can look at Hansard and you’ll find out 
that the member from Yorkton just made the statement that his 
Conservative government, and you are a part of it, sir, has 
increased the social welfare budget by a half a billion dollars. And 
that was his words. He thought that was pretty . . .  that’s progress, 
progress, and that is creating jobs. 
 
I say that is not creating jobs. One just has to go out into 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and take a look at the jobs 
that are being created. They are welfare jobs all right. And that’s 
where you get your figures of a half a billion dollars increase in 
the Conservative budget for welfare because you’re paying 
individuals in this province who are on welfare to work for two 
weeks, and then they take two weeks off and then they work again 
for another two weeks. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in all honesty, that I’m sure 
that you wouldn’t want to have a job like that where you work for 
two weeks and then you had no job for another two weeks and 
then you could go back. And these are welfare jobs and these are 
the jobs that the member from Yorkton was speaking about; this is 
part of the half a billion dollar budget or increase in Social 
Services budget that he was talking about. And I say to you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that this kind of a policy is a dangerous policy, 
and what it is creating is a fear in Saskatchewan — a fear and a 
human disaster and one that we should not tolerate. 
 
I want to now turn, Mr. Speaker, to a region that was not 
mentioned in this throne speech. And I go back to the throne 
speeches of Allan Blakeney — and you can take a look at all his 
throne speeches and he always mentioned northern Saskatchewan, 
a region that is one of the most depressed, economically depressed 
regions in our province — not one mention. And I say to you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that that is a shame when we live in a province 
where our Premier goes down to Ottawa, and he makes statements 
that this Canada is a Canada that is built of regions, and we do 
have regional disparities and we have to address them. And I say, 
yes, you have to address them, but you don’t have to address them 
by 

throwing a half a billion dollars increase in your Social Services 
budget. That is not solving the regional disparities that we have in 
this province. 
 
And that’s the kind of jobs that are being created all over this 
province, from one end to the other, it’s jobs on welfare. 
Corporations who are in here working and they tap those jobs; and 
smaller businesses, they take part in this. They hire people who are 
on welfare for two weeks, then they lay them off for two weeks, 
then they hire two more individuals for another two weeks. And I 
say to the member from Wilkie, I’m sure that you wouldn’t want 
to work just for two weeks and then be laid off for two weeks. I 
know that, and I think it’s time for the member from Wilkie to 
stand up and be counted. I’m sure that that’s not the way that you 
would want to work. I’m sure you appreciate going to work every 
week and getting a pay cheque, and we would all like that. 
 
But as I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the citizens out there in 
Saskatchewan are frustrated with these policies of the 
Conservative government, policies that have to come to an end. 
 
I now want to turn to the deficit that we have in this province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I never heard anything in that throne speech that 
would indicate how you are going to solve the problem. 
 
An Hon. Member: Well then you didn’t listen. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Yes, I was listening very closely, and I never 
heard anything in the throne speech that would indicate how you 
are going to solve the problem of the $3.5 billion deficit that we 
have in this province today. 
 
I just want to explain to you and through you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and to the rest of the House, how we got into this terrible 
mess. It didn’t happen by chance. In 1982 the Conservative 
government of this province took over the provincial treasury with 
$129 million to the good, after 11 straight, consecutive, balanced 
budgets by the Allan Blakeney government. They quickly turned 
that around to deficit budgeting, and now we’re faced with a $3.5 
billion deficit in this province — $3.5 billion deficit. 
 
And I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a serious situation, and 
it’s a situation that has to be solved. And it’s a situation that can’t 
be solved on the back of the poor by creating the type of an 
atmosphere that you’re creating — by creating jobs that pay 4.50 
an hour and you only work for two weeks. That’s not how you 
solve this massive deficit. 
 
And really, when you take a look at what happened in 1982, you 
had $129 million in the bank; you had an unemployment rate in 
this province of less than 4 per cent. Now we have $3.5 billion 
deficit, and we have an unemployment rate, I would suggest if you 
took off all the welfare jobs that you take credit for, well over 12 
per cent in this province. And that is disastrous. 
 
And it’s very simple. It’s very simple, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how 
this has taken place. It has taken place because your government is 
imposing a Conservative ideology, and that is what’s really taken 
place. You’re imposing a 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

 

145 
 

Conservative ideology, and that has been laying dormant since 
1934. All of a sudden you get back into power after 50 years of 
dormancy, and now you want to take it out on the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. And I will get into this a little more as to just what 
you’re doing. 
 
But you know, when you compare the 11 balanced budgets of 
Allan Blakeney, and now you take a look at the short six years that 
you have been in power, and you have got this massive deficits. 
And I suspect that you’re going to see, when the budget is brought 
down on Thursday, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we’re going to 
probably have another 3, $400 million added on to that deficit. 
 
An Hon. Member: Well what do you want us to do, solve it 
overnight? 
 
Mr. Thompson: — That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, shows you the 
mentality of the Minister of Education who says from his seat, 
“What do you want us to do, solve it overnight?” Well I tell you, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they created this situation almost overnight, 
as soon as you took power. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — As soon as you took power you went on the 
rampage, and one of your first things that you did, you fired 220 
Highways workers and literally destroyed all the families that 
went with those jobs. You started off on the right foot, and now he 
sits there and he says, well do you want us to solve it overnight? 
Well I say that just shows why you are in the mess that you’re in. 
And you can . . .  he can bang his hand on the desk as much as he 
wants, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m just telling him the truth. 
 
But you know, 11 years ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there were 
good jobs in this province, and we were creating jobs every year 
— 14,000 in 1977 — houses were being built, everybody was 
working, and they were good jobs, good long-term jobs, but 
they’re no longer; no longer there any more. Now we have the 
welfare jobs. 
 
And I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by implementing this type of 
Conservative ideology they have literally destroyed the family 
structure in this province. They’ve destroyed families, and they’re 
continuing on that rampage right now, all in the name of 
Conservative ideology. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how can this be stopped? 
Well it can only be stopped if the Conservative back-benchers 
who occupy the back-benches of that government, their 
Conservative government, will stand up and be counted. And I say 
be counted. And then if you don’t stand up and be counted, then 
we have to wait for the next general election, and at that time I say 
to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, your government will be turfed out 
and turfed out exactly like it was in 1934. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — And I say, and I say to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and through you to the Minister of Education, who 
continually is chirping from his seat and banging his desk, that the 
members who occupy the back-benches of that party over there 
have to stand up. They have to stand up and be counted because 
we cannot allow this to take 

place in this province, and I give you the examples that have just 
happened today of Chaplin and Carrot River. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, all of sudden you’re going to privatize, and what is 
happening? You’re going to destroy another couple of small 
communities like Chaplin and Carrot River. 
 
(1600) 
 
And I say it’s time for the private members who occupy the back-
benches on that side of the House to stand up and be counted, and 
stand up and fight for what you think is right, not sit behind the 
ideology that’s being imposed by a few senior cabinet ministers 
who have been in that cabinet ever since day one. There’s really 
been no change — the odd addition, small portfolios, very small 
— but you still have the major players who are in there. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I say to the member 
from Wilkie, that those same ministers, the majority of them, will 
never be running again. Their political careers are over. They have 
done a job. They went out and they have literally destroyed this 
province, and I think that you have to stand up and be counted and 
put a stop to what’s taking place, because the majority of those 
cabinet ministers will never run again. Their political careers are 
over. Their political careers are over, and I think if the private 
members on that side believe in Saskatchewan, believe in the 
political process, and if they believe that they have a future, a 
political future in this province, then I say stand up and put a stop 
to this government’s privatization plans that are going on right 
now. It has to come to an end. 
 
The minister of privatization, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he said about 
three weeks ago, when he took over that portfolio, that he wasn’t 
going to privatize until he consulted with the citizens of 
Saskatchewan . . .  (inaudible interjection) . . .  That’s right, and I 
say to the member from Wilkie, it’s time that you stood up; it’s 
time that you stood up and be counted because I’m sure that this is 
not the way you think. I am sure you don’t believe in the welfare 
jobs, and I’m sure you don’t believe in destroying small-town 
Saskatchewan. I’m sure you don’t believe in that. And I say to 
you, stand up. Stand up and be counted. 
 
But the member of privatization indicated that he was going to go 
out and talk to the citizens of Saskatchewan before he went on his 
rampage. And I want to say that this was not in their election 
campaign, Mr. Deputy Speaker. None of the Conservative 
members went around this province campaigning on the fact that 
they were going to continue to privatize our industries. None of 
them went around this province saying they were going to destroy 
the drug program. None of you went around this province 
campaigning on the fact that you were going to fire 423 dental 
nurses and dental therapists and destroy their lives. You didn’t 
campaign on that. So I say to you as back-benchers, I don’t believe 
that you believe in what is happening here today. And I ask you to 
stand up. I ask you to stand up and be counted and put a stop to 
this. 
 
And I think — and I also want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
before the back-benchers allow this Conservative government to 
continue on this path, they should wait for the results of the two 
by-elections that are going to be 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

 

146 
 

called in the future. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, go out and campaign on 
privatization. Use that in your platform on those two by-elections. 
Go out and campaign on the drug program. Go out and campaign 
on the fact that you fired 423 dental nurses and therapists. And I 
say, you go out and campaign on that program. Go out and 
campaign on the rebate on your gasoline tax, one of the most 
confusing programs that has ever been implemented in this 
province, and it will get more confusing. You campaign on that. 
 
And I say call those two by-elections and we’ll find out what the 
results are. And I’m sure that the private members, especially the 
member from Wilkie who is campaigning in both of those 
constituencies, and I ask him to go door to door and tell the folks 
what you have done and what you plan to do, and let’s just see 
what the results are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Conservative ideology is 
tearing down this province. It’s tearing down the fabric that holds 
us together, and that is the family. It is literally destroying them. 
 
And I ask you in closing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, through you and to 
the back-benchers, to stand up. Don’t allow this to happen. And 
fight back. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with that I want to indicate to you that I will not 
be supporting the main motion. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Yes, I would take leave of the House to introduce 
some guests at the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
Leave granted. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is indeed my pleasure to 
introduce students, grade 12 students, 23 grade 12 students from 
the North Battleford area with their teacher, Ken Trainberg; 
counsellors from the area, Merlin Kam, Reg Buglar, Rosalena 
Atchynum, Carmen Blackstar, and Jeannie Blackstar. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words with due respect to 
the languages of this province, especially the Indian languages of 
this province, and say it in my own language, of course, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in Cree. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Mr. Goulet: — So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to 
also say that at 4:30 I will be meeting with the students in the 
members’ dining room. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Neudorf and the amendment 
thereto moved by Ms. Simard. 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is an honour to enter 
this debate on the motion very ably moved by the member from 
Rosthern and seconded by the member from Moosomin, thanking 
His Honour the Lieutenant Governor the for throne speech 
presented to us. 
 
As you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have the privilege of serving 
as the Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Education. Because 
of that work, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was especially pleased with 
the continued commitment that the government has demonstrated 
to education in this province and the high priority awarded to 
education in the Speech from the Throne. One concrete example 
of this government’s commitment to education is the creation of a 
world-class technical education system embodied in 
Saskatchewan Institute of applied Science and Technology. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the opposition has said on a number of 
occasions that there has been a cut-back in the number of seats in 
the province’s technical institutes. I would like to take the time, 
therefore, to provide the members opposite with the facts: a quick 
education, if you will, about the status of technical education in 
this province, particularly as it concerns accessibility. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the facts are that this year there are 5,000 
more students attending a technical institute than there was in 
1982 — 5,000 more students, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — Now I don’t know how they do math in the 
NDP ranks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but in Canora an increase of 
5,000 just does not translate into a cut-back. 
 
The government constructed a new world-class facility in Prince 
Albert, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a technical institute that is the pride 
of the North. The government has built a significant expansion for 
the Wascana institute, and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government 
has provided financial assistance to six times as many students as 
the previous administration. That is a 600 per cent increase, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — 600 per cent. 
 
So I hope the members across the way will take these very 
impressive numbers into account when they debate Education in 
this House. 
 
While we are on accessibility, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it is 
important to note that there are also 5,000 more students attending 
university in this province than was the case under the previous 
administration. For the members opposite, I might add, it’s 5,000 
plus 5,000 equals 10,000. That is 10,000 more students in the post-
secondary education system than the opposition was able to 
provide for. And I congratulate the Minister of Education, I 
congratulate him and the government for this very significant 
accomplishment. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government’s performance in 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

 

147 
 

the field of education is envied by other governments. We have 
spent more per capita than any of the western provinces, even in a 
time when our economy has been the most severely affected. 
 
The government has proceeded with the core curriculum and has 
had simply marvellous co-operation from all people involved in 
education in designing that curriculum. I want to say how 
impressive the commitment to consultation and public 
involvement that process was. Every group, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
every group — teachers, parents, trustees, superintendents, 
academics, and the public at large were consulted in a very direct 
and comprehensive way. And when the broad outlines for the 
curriculum were set, classroom teachers, not high-priced 
bureaucrats but teachers from the classroom were given the lead 
role in developing the details of the curriculum. 
 
It is a major achievement for which credit is due both to the 
Minister of Energy who is the former minister of Education, and 
the present Minister of Education. It is, in my view, a major 
accomplishment of the people of this province because it 
genuinely involved the whole province. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
this kind of consultation is very much the mark of the government. 
 
We heard in the Speech from the Throne how the government will 
pursue that kind of commitment in health care. A task force is to 
be appointed that will have a mandate even broader, I suspect, 
than the one that dealt with the core. 
 
And I want to again thank the government for the initiatives it has 
taken, that it has undertaken in the constituency of Canora — 
initiatives like the addition to Gateway Lodge, our nursing home 
in Invermay, an addition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the member 
from Riversdale says should not have happened; initiatives like the 
integrated health care facility at Theodore valued at two and one-
half million dollars, a facility that the Leader of the Opposition has 
said should not exist; the initiatives, Mr. Deputy Speaker, like the 
seniors’ apartment in Lintlaw, the development at Good Spirit 
with the grants, the funding, the agricultural supports, the 
protections such as the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, and the many 
other very significant happenings in Canora and around the 
province. 
 
I would like to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as well as the 
members of the Assembly, of three events that have happened in 
my constituency. And the member from Athabasca suggested that 
this government was not looking after rural Saskatchewan. Well 
let me give you three examples. I attended a school opening at 
Lintlaw, total costs — this was on March 10, 1988 — total cost: 
$798,612. I’m going to have the honour and pleasure of attending 
the opening of the Sturgis Composite High School addition on 
April 19, 1988 — the cost of $1,368,886; Endeavour School to 
follow that — $710,940. Mr. Deputy Speaker, not one of these 
communities has a population of over 700. To me that is a sign of 
commitment by this government, both to education and rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

(1615) 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — And I do express my gratitude for these 
things, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to briefly address the 
determination of this government that farm families shall be 
ensured the protection and support that they are entitled to. You 
know, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and every person connected with 
agriculture knows — that when this province began in 1905, farm 
issues were the number one priority of the government. And then 
what happened was, as urban areas developed more and more and 
powerful interest groups started to take more of the attention of 
government, it got to the point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when in 1982 
we had a government in Regina that didn’t know a farm from a 
sanitary landfill; and one in Ottawa that asked, why should we sell 
your wheat? It had degenerated to the point that not only was there 
a lack of policy for farm families, but there was a lack of respect. 
 
And then things changed. We elected a government in Regina and, 
in 1984, one in Ottawa that had in their ranks many farmers — 
governments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that had an understanding of 
farm families because they came from farm families; a Premier, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, who is a farmer. 
 
And what has been the result? Billions of dollars in direct financial 
support: The special Canadian grains program, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker; the deficiency payment — the credit for which even the 
NDP gives to the Premier and his determination to do the best for 
Saskatchewan; the western grains stabilization payments, the 
largest pay-outs in history — and a government that absorbs the 
debt of that fund so farm families retain a measure of security; an 
expanded crop insurance program, Mr. Deputy Speaker, expanded 
so that 63 million more dollars of coverage payments have been 
made. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is in place in this province, and 
federally, due in very large measure to our Premier, a set of 
policies that provides the strongest support and the greatest 
commitment to farm families since 1905 when Saskatchewan 
became a province. And it is true, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that not all 
the challenges have been met. We still must cope with that serious 
debt program facing our farmers. 
 
But let’s take a look, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the solutions 
rehashed by the member form Saskatoon South on Thursday, last 
week. He quoted extensively from an article by Dale Eisler, and he 
pumped and he preened about the land bank, and that is his answer 
to the debt problem. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we may not have 
all the answers yet, and we may not have the perfect solutions, but 
we do know one thing: the farm families in Canora do not want 
the NDP’s land bank, and that is not the solution. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — We will address these challenges, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we will address them seriously. We will address them in 
consultation with, and on the advice of 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

 

148 
 

farm families. We will pursue the same commitment we have 
demonstrated over the past six years, a commitment of 
unquestioned support for rural Saskatchewan, and our 
commitment to listen. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have every intention of supporting the 
continued progress and the new initiative so needed in our 
changing world, and I thank the Lieutenant Governor, and I thank 
my friend from Rosthern for his fine motion. I will be proud to 
support that motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is 
my pleasure to rise in this Assembly to address some concerns that 
I have heard form people in Moose Jaw North, people across the 
province of Saskatchewan, to respond to this Speech from the 
Throne that is destined to go down in history as the mad dog 
speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is destined to be known as the mad 
dog speech because we find this Speech from the Throne 
presented to us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at a time in which 
Saskatchewan is in crisis. 
 
Saskatchewan people are in crisis in a whole number of ways, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. It’s been admitted by the government opposite 
that we have a health care crisis in the province of Saskatchewan 
and is there a single individual in this entire province who doesn’t 
know that. 
 
We know all across this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we 
have a crisis facing family farms and family farmers who are 
looking only to be able to survive and that’s the issue of the day, a 
crisis in the family farms. 
 
We have a crisis of inflation here in the province and here in 
Saskatchewan. We are not blessed, not blessed, but cursed, with 
the highest rate of inflation in the entire country of Canada. 
 
We have a crisis in taxation, Mr. Speaker. The crisis in taxation 
here in Saskatchewan. People know from their experience that we 
pay, as a matter of fact, the second highest rate of taxes in all of 
the country of Canada. 
 
And we know as well, Mr. Speaker, that there is a crisis in the area 
of employment and employment security and people in 
Saskatchewan are feeling anything but secure in their opportunity 
to find meaningful, decent employment that pays decent wages, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this Speech from the Throne that 
we heard last week is empty of specifics. It’s been referred to 
before. We heard that there are all kinds of crises, but we heard 
very little, very little by way of solutions. 
 
I’ve referred to the speech. It was one of mush, and certainly it is 
that, certainly it is that, just pure mush, empty of plans and any 
kind of optimism or confidence in the future of this province, in 
the future of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And truly, this speech that we heard, truly this speech that we 
heard, Mr. Speaker, if anything that can be said about 

it at all, it must be said that it is a sure sign that the Government of 
Saskatchewan has gone to the dogs. It has gone to the dogs. 
 
And I suggest that through this empty rhetorical Speech from the 
Throne, this government has admitted that it’s in the doghouse 
with the people of Saskatchewan, a government in the doghouse 
with the people of Saskatchewan. And I suggest as well, Mr. 
Speaker, that with the blind ideological faith that was enunciated 
in this Speech from the Throne, the blind ideological faith that the 
cure for all that ails us lies in the Mulroney-Reagan deal and 
privatization — piratization — with a blind ideological faith that 
was outlined by the government in those two manoeuvres — the 
Mulroney-Reagan free trade deal and piratization — that this 
government has admitted to the people of Saskatchewan, that it is 
barking up the wrong tree. And the people of Saskatchewan will 
clearly be of the opinion that this government is barking up the 
wrong tree. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I will deal with piratization in a moment. But 
first I’d like to make some remarks related to this government and 
its plans, or lack of plans, related to employment and labour in the 
province of Saskatchewan today. 
 
When we take a look at the employment scene in Saskatchewan, 
what do we see? We see a sad state of affairs, Mr. Speaker. When 
I refer to the February Saskatchewan labour market report 
published by the Department of Human Resources, Labour and 
Employment, what does it tell us? Well it tells us, Mr. Speaker, 
simply this: that in February of this year, the last month for which 
there are statistics, in Saskatoon, in the entire city of Saskatoon, 
one out of every eight people is looking for work — one out of 
eight. 
 
And that same report, Mr. Speaker, tells us that in February of this 
year, in the province of Saskatchewan, 15- to 24-year-olds, the 
young people of this province, Mr. Speaker, 15.2 per cent are 
unemployed, or nearly one out of every six young persons 
between the age of 15 and 24 in the province of Saskatchewan is 
looking for work. What a sad statement, Mr. Speaker, about the 
record of employment creation of the government of the day. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we will all remember, all of us in this 
House — and it was to the embarrassment of the members 
opposite — will remember the release of a report earlier this year, 
in January, a report that was produced by this government and 
which told us, Mr. Speaker, the sad state of affairs that faces this 
province if this government’s current plans and actions are 
allowed to continue. The report by this government, Mr. Speaker, 
forecasts that over the next seven years literally 87,000 people will 
be leaving the province of Saskatchewan — will be leaving the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now if the past has been any indication . . .  Mr. Speaker, we 
know that in 1987, of those people who left this province, literally 
two-thirds, two out of every three who left this province, were 29 
years old or younger. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, what is there for the future of the people of 
Saskatchewan, for the optimism of this 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

 

149 
 

province, when we’re losing our young people, our people with 
the greatest amount of energy and talent and drive and 
determination? And this government opposite is forcing them to 
leave the province to look for work, and I say that is a condemning 
statement of their record in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So what’s the plan? What’s the plan? What is the plan . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: This is the biggest bunch of hogwash I’ve 
ever heard in my life. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — The Minister of Education, he sits in his seat and 
he says this is hogwash. He sits and says this is hogwash. Have we 
heard the Minister of Education stand in this Assembly and give 
any indication or insist that in the Speech from the Throne there 
shall be a plan to provide for employment for the students in this 
province this summer? No, we haven’t. 
 
Have we heard the Minister of Education, or any of his colleagues, 
imply or give innuendoes or suggest or even comprehend that 
there is a need in this province for a summer employment program 
of any sort? And the answer, Mr. Speaker, I’m sad to say, is that in 
this mushy Speech from the Throne that we heard last week, not a 
single indication, not one iota of hope, is offered to the young 
people and to the students who are attending universities and 
technical schools and high schools and community colleges in the 
province of Saskatchewan — not one indication of hope that their 
government is listening to their concerns and cares enough to 
undertake initiatives to provide employment opportunities in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And what a sad, what a sad statement 
about their record in employment and their concern for those who 
are unemployed and underemployed in the province of 
Saskatchewan today. 
 
So what are we told? What are we told? What reference does this 
government make in the Speech from the Throne to the plans for 
creation of employment and employment opportunity for the 
people of Saskatchewan? 
 
We’re told and I quote, Mr. Speaker, “that we will continue to 
diversify.” Continue to diversify. The Minister of Education says, 
hear, hear. What is he saying, Mr. Speaker? He is saying that the 
plan for this government to create employment opportunities is the 
same old, sad, sorry plan that we have seen over the past five 
years, a plan that has been nothing but failure, and all they’re 
offering for the young people of the province of Saskatchewan is 
more of the same, more of the same. 
 
And what are we told? What are we told? What’s the implications 
in the Speech from the Throne? The implications in the Speech 
from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, are that the plan involves a blind 
faith in the Mulroney-Reagan free trade deal, and an attachment to 
this whole blind ideological concept of piratization, and that the 
people of Saskatchewan should pin their hopes to those plans. And 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that that is not good enough, and when given 
the opportunity, the people of Saskatoon Eastview and the people 
of Regina Elphinstone will tell this government that its record is 
not good enough, and it’s a message that they won’t be able to 

avoid. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan, young 
working families in the province of Saskatchewan are looking for 
two things: they’re looking for hope and opportunity. They’re 
concerned about security, employment security in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And those who belong to a union, who are organized employees in 
the province of Saskatchewan, are not asking this government for 
the insecurity that comes with government reorganization — and 
we’ve been told that there will be more of that — that comes with 
government reorganization that literally wipes out their legal right 
to protection to keep their union representation, legal protection 
that is guaranteed by law for the people of Saskatchewan and yet 
denied in the reorganization that involves the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation, and the combination of technical institutes and 
community colleges to form the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology. People, employees with union 
representation denied the right to the continued representation that 
is guaranteed by law in Saskatchewan simply because, with the 
stroke of a pen, this government has chosen to deny him that right. 
 
(1630) 
 
Full-time employees as well, Mr. Speaker, in this province of 
Saskatchewan, they’re not asking for insecurity either. They’re not 
asking for the insecurity that comes with the increasing tendency 
that we’re seeing in Saskatchewan today to move away from full-
time employment and into part-time employment. And I’ll be 
watching, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be watching very carefully the 
proposed changes to the labour standards affecting part-time 
workers, and I will view with an open mind and a fair mind, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It may be that I will be able to find myself supporting the 
proposals made by the government if, as a matter of fact, the 
proposals do result in improved standards, labour standards, for 
part-time employees in the province of Saskatchewan, but I must 
admit to a little caution. I must admit to a little caution, Mr. 
Speaker, because I know that the shift to part-time employment in 
the province of Saskatchewan is an agenda that is “Taylor-made”; 
it is Taylor-made for those whose agenda involves the interests in 
the Mulroney-Reagan free trade deal and piratization. And I think 
we have to be very, very careful, Mr. Speaker, in this province of 
Saskatchewan of ours, whether we’re promoting a society in 
which we have more and more young families struggling to make 
ends meet because there just isn’t full-time work available. 
 
Well I’m concerned as well, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about 
labour standards, about the job that the labour standards branch of 
the Human Resources, Labour and Employment Department is 
taking in the job that it’s doing, and how seriously it’s taking its 
job. And I make simple reference, Mr. Speaker, to some statistics 
of the last two years. Now I note with a quick review, Mr. 
Speaker, that in 1986 formal complaints for violation of 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

 

150 
 

labour standards in the province of Saskatchewan involved 2,680 
cases. Forty-two of those led to prosecutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1987, last year, that number had increased by 17 
per cent, where there were 3,135 complaints brought to the labour 
standards branch — an increase of 17 per cent. But what happened 
to prosecutions? Were they the same? Did they go up by 17 per 
cent? Mr. Speaker, I’m sad to report that prosecutions dropped by 
52 per cent, from 42 to 20. And so in 1987, as compared to 1986, 
17 per cent more complaints brought to the labour standards 
branch, but 52 per cent fewer prosecutions. 
 
And one has to ask, Mr. Speaker, just how effectively the labour 
standards branch is doing its job to protect the right of workers in 
this province, the vast majority of whom obviously will be people 
who are not unionized, who are not organized, who are not 
protected by a collective agreement. That doesn’t speak well for 
the security that Saskatchewan people are looking for when 
they’re concerned about employment. 
 
I’m concerned as well, Mr. Speaker, that we have a government 
that likes to point today’s loss through work stoppage as a problem 
which needs to be dealt with, often time, I believe, a reason for 
hammering the rights of working people who are organized with 
union representation. 
 
And let me point out, Mr. Speaker, that the real issue, if a 
government is concerned about days lost, the real issue is not work 
stoppages. And let me again, Mr. Speaker, take a quick review of 
the last five years, although I don’t have part of the statistics for 
1987 — I wasn’t able to get them by today. But let’s just take a 
look very quickly, Mr. Speaker, taking a comparison, because all 
employees and employers will be concerned about days lost from 
the job — that’s neither in the best interest of employees or 
employers. 
 
And we take a quick look at the record, Mr. Speaker, what do we 
see? In 1983 there were 598,536 jobs . . .  sorry, 598,536 days lost 
due to workers’ compensation injuries. These are jobs that are 
covered by workers’ comp . . .  these are days lost covered by 
workers’ compensation, Mr. Speaker. Work stoppage in the same 
year, 1983: 28,800 days lost, Mr. Speaker, in 1983 there were 21 
times as many days lost due to injury as there were days lost due 
to work stoppage. 
 
In 1984, 622,034 days lost due to compensatable injury: 12,231 to 
work stoppage. In 1984, literally 50 times as many days lost due to 
work injury as lost by work stoppage. 
 
In 1985, Mr. Speaker, 573,403 days lost due to injury on the jobs; 
56,659 lost to work stoppage — 10 times as many days lost to 
injury as to work stoppage. and in 1986, the last year, Mr. 
Speaker, for which I’ve been able to get both numbers: 470,254 
days lost due to injury on the job, compensatable injury, 131,249 
to work stoppage, and four times as many days lost through injury 
as work stoppage. 

Now clearly, Mr. Speaker, the numbers are different each year and 
the comparisons is different each year. But clearly, Mr. Speaker, 
there is a consistent pattern here that tells us that if this 
government is truly interested in dealing with days lost on the job, 
if it’s serious, it will focus its efforts on the occupational health 
and safety of workers in Saskatchewan, because that’s where the 
mileage will be made for both employees and employers in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But what do we see, Mr. Speaker, when I review the record of this 
government and its commitment to occupational health and safety 
where their greatest amount of potential to recover lost work days 
in the province of Saskatchewan for employers and employees? 
What do we see? In 1981-82, occupational health and safety in the 
last year of the Blakeney government, the budget was $1.7 
million, with 47 staff members. Last year, Mr. Speaker, in the year 
that we’re just about to conclude — $2.1 million in funds, and 
staff are down to 39. And when we compare those, Mr. Speaker, 
what we see is that in occupational health and safety, this 
government has cut eight staff positions, and there has been a real 
budget cut when you take inflation into consideration — a real 
budget cut of about $200,000. And I say, Mr. Speaker, we have to 
question the credibility and the commitment of this government to 
deal with the real issues facing employees and employers and 
protecting both of those — both of those — groups from lost days 
on the work site. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I said before that I would like to make some 
comments today about “piratization,” and let me turn to that topic 
now, Mr. Speaker. You will know, Mr. Speaker, as will the people 
of Saskatchewan, that in January of this year the Premier of this 
province advised the people of Saskatchewan that we were going 
to have yet another first — yet another first, and don’t we seem to 
have a large number of those these days? — yet another first. 
 
We are going to be the first jurisdiction in the country of Canada 
to be — I was going to say blessed, I would suggest cursed, with a 
Department of Public Participation. You almost have to choke 
when you say the word, public participation, because not even all 
the members opposite can say the phrase with a straight face. Not 
all the members opposite can even say it with a straight face. 
 
And we were informed, we were given notice — we were given 
notice that the people of Saskatchewan are about to become . . .  to 
continue to become the victims of a pure right-wing ideology, a 
process inspired by Maggie Thatcher’s right-hand man, Madsen 
Pirie. And what does he have to say about the management of 
public affairs, Mr. Speaker. He says that governments should get 
rid of all Crown corporations at any cost. And we have the 
minister of piratization today informing this Legislative Assembly 
that we’re busy doing that. 
 
Madsen Pirie also says, Mr. Speaker, that without exception, 
without exception, there is nothing the public sector can do as well 
as the private sector. Without exception. There’s no sense at all, 
Mr. Speaker, of co-operation between the public and the private 
sector 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

 

151 
 

working together. No sense at all of that. It’s pure right-wing, 
blind ideology, motivated by the guru who was chosen by Maggie 
Thatcher to be her consultant in Great Britain. And it’s a process 
in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that has been 
inspired by Madsen Pirie, but been directed and consulted and 
recommended by the Fraser Institute in Vancouver. 
 
The Fraser Institute in Vancouver, Mr. Speaker, which lists as one 
of its members of the board of directors, P.H. Pocklington. Now I 
wonder who that can be. Could that be old Peter Porklington, as 
he’s better known in the province of Saskatchewan? That great 
bastion of free enterprise who is not adverse to wander into the 
province of Saskatchewan with his hand held out firmly and 
taking $22 million of the taxpayers’ money in the province of 
Saskatchewan, part of the team of advisers who are telling this 
government, Mr. Speaker, how to engage in piratization. 
 
And Saskatchewan people have been served notice, Mr. Speaker, 
been served notice that this blind, ideological process will be 
continuing, a process that is Taylor-made — Taylor-made in 
Saskatchewan; a blind, ideological process Taylor-made for 
contracting out and patronage; a process in the province of 
Saskatchewan, a blind, ideological process that will be Taylor-
made, Mr. Speaker, for free trade, deregulation, and user fees; a 
blind, ideological process that is Taylor-made for big business and 
out-of-province interests; a blind, ideological process, Mr. 
Speaker, Taylor-made, Taylor-made for lower wages and job 
insecurity and union bashing; a blind, ideological process Taylor-
made for cut-backs in service, and particularly cut-backs in rural 
Saskatchewan; a blind, ideological process, Taylor-made for the 
selling off and the giving away of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that if we are going to call this process 
what it really is, we will not call it privatization, and we will surely 
not call it public participation. If we call this process what it really 
is, Mr. Speaker, we will call it piratization, because piratization is 
what is going on in the province of Saskatchewan today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I suggest that the pirates of the PC 
Party are plundering the very future of Saskatchewan, and that’s 
piratization, pure and simple, without a doubt. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, every government has to ask itself what it’s 
doing, and this one will do that on occasion too. And when a 
government asks itself why it’s going to do whatever its plans are, 
be they policy or programs or whatever, it has to ask one question, 
Mr. Speaker, and the people of this province should judge the 
government in response of that question. 
 
And the question is this: with these changes that are being made, 
whatever they are, which people in the province of Saskatchewan 
will have more power as a result of that to control their fates and 
their futures and their own destinies, and which people, Mr. 
Speaker, will have less? We could summarize that by saying, who 
are the winners and who are the losers? Another way of asking the 
same 

question. 
 
And when the Government of Saskatchewan is dealing with 
program and policy changes, Mr. Speaker, it has to ask another 
question: will these changes improve or reduce the ability of 
Saskatchewan people to solve Saskatchewan problems in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Well let’s take a look, Mr. Speaker. Let’s take a look at the record 
of piratization that this government has engaged in already. And I 
ask the people of Saskatchewan to judge for themselves: who are 
the winners and who are the losers, and have they resulted in the 
ability of Saskatchewan people to better solve or less able to solve 
the problems that they’re facing within the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Let’s go back, Mr. Speaker, to the Department of Highways back 
in 1983 and ’84. That’s when piratization began in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We’ll remember literally hundreds of highway 
workers in the province of Saskatchewan being fired; in the words 
of the minister of Highways of the day, being transferred to the 
private sector. Remember that, Mr. Speaker? We remember that. 
And then as a result of that, as a result of this announcement made 
by the minister of Highways, the minister who spent the entire 
huge PC cabinet . . .  the largest number of dollars every year on 
airplane flights because he knew what kind of shape the highways 
are in in Saskatchewan — what happened as a result of his 
decision to piratize the highways? 
 
First of all, we auctioned off $40 million worth of highway 
equipment for $6 million — fire sale prices. And then what little 
highway construction work was being done was contracted out 
and usually to out-of-province firms, and often to out-of-province 
employees, both of whom went back home and paid their income 
tax. 
 
And what has highway maintenance come down to in the province 
of Saskatchewan? Mr. Speaker, I suggest that highway 
maintenance in the province of Saskatchewan has come down to 
this: it’s come down to getting in the back of a pick-up truck with 
some red flags and trotting around the roads of this province 
sticking those flags beside the pot-holes and the soft spots and the 
humps and the hollows. And people in Saskatchewan are saying to 
me, if this government believed in honesty in advertising, it would 
take down the signs that say, “Lights on for Life” and put up new 
signs that read, “Hang on for life” when you’re riding on the roads 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
(1645) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Piratization. Piratization of our highways, Mr. 
Speaker, and I ask who are the winners and who are the losers? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen piratization in the Prince Albert 
Pulp Company, PAPCO, with the so-called sale to Weyerhaeuser 
— an asset valued by most people, commonly considered to be 
worth more than $300 million, “sold” for $248 million. Most 
would suggest, given away, Mr. Speaker, because the 
arrangements for 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

 

152 
 

that deal, for that sale, are that over a 30-year period, with a low 
interest arrangement, that Weyerhaeuser need only pay, need only 
pay to the Government of Saskatchewan for that asset in those 
years in which it has a profit over the industry standard. And I say, 
Mr. Speaker, you show me an accountant who cannot prove that 
his company is making less profit than industry standard, and I 
will show you an accountant who’s looking for a job. Piratization 
of PAPCO — piratization of PAPCO — and I ask again, Mr. 
Speaker, who are the winners and who are the losers? 
 
We’ve seen piratization of Saskoil, the Crown-owned corporation 
that returned funds to the Consolidated Fund of the Government of 
Saskatchewan every year. Three years ago, Mr. Speaker, shares 
were sold to Saskoil, put on the public market, and what’s 
happened since? In the years later, of that first sale of shares to 
Saskoil, over three out of every four shares are now owned outside 
the province of Saskatchewan, and the Government of 
Saskatchewan no longer even has a majority control of Saskoil. 
And I ask again, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the piratization 
of Saskoil, who are the winners and who are the losers; and are 
Saskatchewan people better off or worse off at being able to solve 
our financial problems within the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Let’s take a look at another couple of examples of piratization, Mr. 
Speaker. Let’s take a look at the children’s dental care program 
and the prescription drug plan. On July 1, 1987 in the province of 
Saskatchewan we celebrated the 25th anniversary of the 
introduction of one of Saskatchewan’s most beautiful gifts to the 
people of Canada. We celebrated the 25th anniversary of 
medicare. And how did we celebrate? How did we celebrate 
medicare in the eyes of the government opposite? We celebrated 
medicare in two ways: by piratizing the children’s dental care 
program and by piratizing the prescription drug program in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The school-based program that existed in this province was one of 
the best darn examples of preventive health care in the history of 
the world, Mr. Speaker. It was consistent with the dreams of 
Tommy Douglas and others who fought to bring medicare to the 
province of Saskatchewan, a dream that hospital care and 
medicare would eventually result in preventive health care system, 
and the dental care program was the best example in the existence 
of health care today of preventive health care working. 
 
It was getting cheaper every year, Mr. Speaker, in spite of the fact 
that we had inflation, because kids in Saskatchewan were growing 
up with good teeth, growing up with good teeth being cared for by 
professionals who knew how to deal with kids, because they were 
trained to do that. 
 
My kids were enrolled in that program, Mr. Speaker, and they 
came home from a visit with the dental therapist with happy faces 
and committed to brushing teeth and taking good care of their 
teeth. And kids were happy to see the dental therapist. 
 
I don’t know about you, Mr. Speaker, but when I grew up, 

a trip to the dentist was not the highlight of my life, nor is it the 
highlight of the life of a lot of other people. But we had highly 
qualified, professionally trained people to deal with kids, 
providing an excellent program of preventive dental care — 
piratized, taken out of 338 communities in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Now you only get it in 75. 
 
Somehow, Mr. Speaker, this piratization, this piratization of the 
children’s dental care program is an improvement, we’re told. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if you’re having a little difficulty following the 
logic of the government in this one, we’re in this together. We’re 
in this together. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, in the piratization of the children’s dental 
care program, who were the winners and who were the losers? 
And I wonder when the Minister of Health, who told us that we 
have a 40 per cent participation rate in the new dental care 
program for kids, I wonder when he’s going to find that dentist 
who’s been wandering some long, lonely, lost highway looking 
for the community of Gravelbourg? 
 
Let’s take a look as well, Mr. Speaker, at the piratization of the 
prescription drug plan. The prescription drug plan — piratization 
of the prescription drug plan. We had one of the best, if not the 
best, in the entire country before — an example of what Allan 
Blakeney, Mr. Speaker, would call in his special way, socialized 
medicine. I always loved the way Allan Blakeney would describe 
it as socialized medicine. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, our Premier came along in 
Saskatchewan; he said, we’ve got to change this program because 
it’s being abused. And I ask, who’s abusing it? Did the Premier of 
Saskatchewan go to the doctors of Saskatchewan and say, oh 
you’re abusing this program, you’re going to have to change your 
ways? No, we never heard that. So we have to ask, who’s abusing 
this program? 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, is the Premier of Saskatchewan 
suggesting that all across the province of Saskatchewan there are 
bands of renegade senior citizens sweeping across the province, 
breaking into doctors’ offices, stealing prescription pads, and 
going down and getting hooked on drugs? Is that what he’s 
saying? Is that what he’s saying? 
 
Well we had until July 1 this strange example of socialized 
medicine, and people in Saskatchewan went through a ritual, Mr. 
Speaker. People in Saskatchewan’s prescription drug plan would 
go through a ritual of socialized medicine. They’d get sick, they’d 
go to the doctor, the doctor would give them a prescription, they’d 
take $3.95 or less, they’d go to their pharmacist, they’d take their 
medicine home, and they’d get better. What a strange notion of 
socialized medicine! You get sick, you go to your doctor, you get 
a prescription, you take $3.95 or less, you go to the pharmacist, 
you get your medicine, you go home and take it, and you get 
better. 
 
But the Premier of Saskatchewan told us, no, there’s nothing like 
socialized medicine that can’t be improved by piratizing it. And 
now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a new ritual. We’ve got the ritual or 
piratized prescription drug plan in Saskatchewan. People get sick, 
they to go the 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

 

153 
 

doctor, they get their prescription, and then they go to the bank — 
or they wait till the end of the month. 
 
Or worst of all, Mr. Speaker, worst of all, maybe they don’t even 
go to the pharmacist to get the medicine to take home and get 
better. Is there any one of us here who has not had reports and 
personally seen young mothers and senior citizens in the province 
of Saskatchewan walk into a pharmacy with a prescription, hand it 
to the pharmacist, and when told how much it would cost, turn and 
walk out because they didn’t have the money to afford it? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suggest that the piratization of the prescription drug 
plan is a thin edge of the wedge, a move towards private health 
care insurance, a move towards user pay. And I have to ask, when 
it comes to the piratization of the prescription drug plan, who are 
the winners and who are the losers? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen the piratization of SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance), and the greatest criticism 
I have about the piratization of SGI is not what it’s done, but what 
it hasn’t done. We have a need in this province for affordable 
liability insurance. It’s a need that is felt by municipalities and 
hospitals and school boards and businesses and organizations 
across the province. 
 
And what has this government directed SGI, Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance, to do? Nothing — nothing! Why are 
people in Saskatchewan faced with high liability, unaffordable 
liability costs? Because of the Saskatchewan experience in the 
court? No — not even the Canadian experience, because of the 
costs of settlements in the United States and across the world. 
 
I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this government opposite intentionally 
directed SGI not to get into the business of providing affordable 
liability insurance for Saskatchewan people based on the 
Saskatchewan experience because they know when you’re 
committed to a blind ideological process and you do something 
that people consider to be right and fair and just, that they won’t 
let you sell off the solution. What a shame! And I ask again, Mr. 
Speaker: when it comes to the piratization of SGI, who are the 
winners and who are the losers? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we see referred in the house today for the 
Minister of piratization, the piratization of Sask Minerals, a nifty 
little Crown corporation that’s been around for 40 years and paid 
some $61 million in wages and about $50 million to the people of 
Saskatchewan; a leader in research and in the industry over those 
years; a good employer that paid decent wages and decent benefits 
and provided stable employment; that would stockpile in down 
times to ensure that employees and their communities were 
protected against the rises and falls in the industry — a good, 
steady employer and a good Crown corporation corporate citizen 
being sold off today, without opportunity for the employees to 
participate. And I ask again, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the 
piratization of Sask Minerals, who are the winners and who are the 
losers? 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I’m trying to . . .  have to reflect back to 
Thursday. It seems to me that there was a meeting 

out in Chaplin, Saskatchewan at which the minister of piratization 
went out and he said, I’m coming out to consult, coming out to 
consult, and the way I consult is to tell you it’s going to be sold 
within a few days. 
 
And when asked by the employees whether he would give the 
same deal to the employees of Sask Mineral that he gave to 
Weyerhaeuser, he refused to answer. He refused to answer, Mr. 
Speaker, this same Minister of Public Participation who refuses to 
go on talk shows in Saskatchewan. And I would suggest, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Minister of Public Participation is refusing to 
participate publicly in the province of Saskatchewan, and that’s 
piratization as well. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the examples go on for ever and ever, and it 
seems that there is no end to the list. 
 
Let me deal finally, Mr. Speaker, with one more example, the 
piratization of office space. Now the minister responsible for 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation will have some special feelings 
about this one. We had a chance to discuss in question period 
today just how much sense it makes to take the Saskatchewan 
Power building in the city of Moose Jaw and pay more to rent half 
of the building that it costs to operate the whole building that they 
owned. Now, strange little notion, Mr. Speaker, that somehow this 
is in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan and power 
users. 
 
We also have an example across the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. We have in Saskatchewan today the sad state of 
affairs that means that in the province of Saskatchewan the 
government has committed itself and pays every day $34,000 — 
every day — of taxpayers’ money for government office space 
that’s not being used — $34,000 a day of taxpayers’ money for 
empty office space as a commitment to the private sector that 
somehow will offer these deals that we’re told provide a more 
efficient use of public space and public dollars. And I ask you, Mr. 
Speaker — if this is not clear to you, again, we’re in this together 
— how spending $34,000 a day of taxpayers’ money for empty 
office space is in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
So when we take about the piratization of office space, again I ask: 
who are the winners and who are the losers in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when I look at the Speech from the Throne it 
looks as though it comes from a government that’s dog-tired and 
dog-eared and gone to the dogs, barking up the wrong tree, and 
having a little trouble keeping itself on a short leash at times, Mr. 
Speaker. A speech full of mush and devoid of promises and 
commitments and plans to improve the lot of the life of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
And so when I stand, Mr. Speaker, in this House to respond to that 
Speech from the Throne, I am sad to say that I cannot support, I 
cannot support this mushy lack of plans that was put forth last 
Monday and proposed by the government opposite. I cannot do 
that and I will look with keen interest, Mr. Speaker, at those 
opposite to see how they stand when it comes to supporting this 
mushy 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

 

154 
 

objective that was put forth last Monday. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will be voting against the motion 
and I will be voting for the amendment which expresses regrets 
that the provincial government has betrayed Saskatchewan’s 
families by its attacks on medicare, its failure to support 
Saskatchewan farmers in financial crisis, its unfair tax policies, 
and its failure provide jobs and opportunities for Saskatchewan 
young people. Mr. Speaker, those are the things I believe in; those 
are the things that are important to Saskatchewan people today. I 
will be voting for the amendment and against the motion. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for the opportunity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


