


















































April 6, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 6, 1988 
 

341 
 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
present a petition signed by hundreds of Saskatchewan students 
some of whom are sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and 
residents. They are expressing their opposition to the 
government’s underfunding of post-secondary education which 
is eroding the quality of education and denying opportunities to 
Saskatchewan young people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
present a petition, signed by hundreds of Saskatchewan 
students, to this legislature. These students, Mr. Speaker, are 
expressing their opposition to the government’s cuts in the 
funding for post-secondary education. They are expressing their 
opposition to the elimination of the Saskatchewan student 
bursary program and they’re expressing their dismay at the lack 
of an adequate summer student employment program in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to present 
these petitions on behalf of the students of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise to present, according to 
rule 11, hundreds of signatures by way of petition, signatures 
from Saskatchewan students and residents around the province. 
These people, Mr. Speaker, are expressing their opposition to 
the government’s underfunding of post-secondary education 
and the fact that it is eroding both the quality of education and 
denying opportunities to Saskatchewan’s young people. On 
behalf of these hundreds of people, Mr. Speaker, I present this 
petition to the legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice: 
 

That I shall, on Friday, April 8, 1988, move first reading 
of a Bill, An Act to Provide for the Resumption of 
Instruction, Teaching and Examination of students at the 
University of Saskatchewan. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I 
have two groups of guests to introduce. I’d like to introduce to 
you, in your gallery, 13 adults, ages 18 to 28, who are taking 
part in the YWCA (Young Women’s Christian Association) 
nanny training program and they are here with Valerie Davies. 
This is a government sponsored program to enhance their skills 
in this 

particular area, and I would like all the members to welcome 
them to the Assembly, and I wish them encouragement in their 
studies and futures. So would you all welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, secondly, while I have 
your attention and your indulgence, I would like to introduce in 
the west gallery the mayor of the town of Balcarres, 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Gordon Townsend and his wife Myrna. I 
welcome them here to the legislature. I know that everyone still 
has to learn something — the mayor has a great deal of 
knowledge and doesn’t need to learn as much as some of the 
students that come here — but I’m hopeful that the mayor of 
Balcarres will have an interesting visit here this afternoon. I ask 
the members to welcome him here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on behalf of my seat 
mate, the member for Regina Centre, who is unavoidably 
detained this afternoon and won’t be here until a little bit later, 
to join with the Minister of Labour in welcoming the 15 adults 
from the YWCA nanny training program. They are here in the 
Speaker’s gallery this afternoon, and I will be meeting with 
them later on on behalf of the member for Regina Centre in 
whose constituency the YWCA is. In welcoming them to the 
Chamber, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the member for Regina 
Centre, I’m sure all members will join with me in extending a 
warm welcome. and a question is in my mind, Mr. Speaker, 
whether the people attending here on behalf of the YWCA 
nanny training program has any significance that they’re also 
here at the question period today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure today to 
introduce to you, and to introduce to the members of this 
House, representatives of student bodies in our post-secondary 
institutions here in Regina and in Moose Jaw. We have with us 
today the president of the Saskatchewan branch of the Canadian 
Federation of Students, Lyndon Surjik. We have with us Sean 
Caragata who is the president of the students’ union of the 
University of Saskatchewan. I think we have with us also the 
newly elected president, and we have with us Elaine Brogden, 
who is from the Wascana Institute. 
 
I would ask that these students please rise, and I would ask that 
all members greet them in the traditional manner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you, and through you to the other members of the 
Assembly today, two scholars from the People’s Republic of 
China who are visiting here. They are Zhu Yu Chao and Zhao 
Zhi Jun, and they’re seated in the east gallery, and accompanied 
by their friend and translator, Mr. Orin Durey. I would ask all 
members to welcome them to the Assembly today. 
  



 
April 6, 1988 

342 
 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Funding of Post-secondary Education 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Education. Mr. Minister, students from 
post-secondary institutions in Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, 
Regina, and Saskatoon have taken the time to organize and 
deliver a petition to this legislature, and they’ve done so to 
show their strong feeling that the underlying problem 
underlying post-secondary education are your cut-backs. Last 
year you cut education by $27 million in real dollars. This year 
your 1.9 per cent increase is less than one-third the cost of 
inflation. 
 
Will you listen, Mr. Speaker . . . In fact, Mr. Speaker, since 
your government has come to power, the university funding per 
student in real dollars — including the massive inflation caused 
by your government’s policies — in real dollars has dropped by 
23 per cent. 
 
Will you listen to what the students are saying; will you restore 
funding; will you guarantee quality and accessibility to our 
university? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve made a number of 
changes over the past year to post-secondary education, aimed 
directly at providing increased accessibility to students from all 
across this province to post-secondary education, whether they 
be institutes or universities. Our initiatives relative to distance 
education were aimed as well at the whole question of 
accessibility. 
 
And on the other hand, the other part of the triangle, Mr. 
Speaker, the whole question of quality, because no student 
wants to graduate from any institution unless that institution has 
a very high reputation across the world, because that’s what 
ultimately translates into jobs. And along with these changes 
we’ve put in place four centres of excellence across this 
province, used the regional colleges to deliver that 
programming across rural Saskatchewan, which also speaks 
directly to the whole question of accessibility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
and the final point of that triangle — accessibility, quality, and 
funding — our commitment was there again this year in this 
budget with not a “hold the line” budget in education, Mr. 
Speaker, but in fact an increase for institutes and for universities 
and indeed for education across the piece. Four of every five 
dollars, new program dollars, in this last budget, Mr. Speaker, 
went directly to two areas that people consider critically 
important — health and education. 
 
Our commitment to education, Mr. Speaker, is unshakeable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, the underfunding by your 
government has caused quotas on students at the 

University of Saskatchewan. It has reduced the spaces, the 
number of spaces in the technical institute, by 1,100 spaces. 
And yet your government feels it’s quite all right to spend 
$34,000 a day renting empty office space in the luxurious 
Ramada Inn. 
 
I’m asking you to change your priorities, Mr. Minister. Will you 
assure these students, and will you assure the people of 
Saskatchewan, that you will no longer cause restrictions to 
enrolments at the University of Saskatchewan or at our 
technical institutes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, the member for Prince 
Albert talks about restricted space, or somehow that this 
government isn’t committed to institutes and institute 
programming. I would ask you, and other members of the 
legislature, where was he and his party for some several years? 
Did they build a new institute in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker? 
No, they did not. 
 
And let’s look at the last four or five or six years and what has 
been the enrolment, Mr. Speaker; what has been the total 
enrolment? Well we’ve gone, Mr. Speaker, from ’81-’82, 
19,862 people in our institutes, Mr. Speaker, to in ’86-’87, 
26,077. Now that’s a real increase, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to tell you and every member of this legislature and 
the public of Saskatchewan, despite what they say, despite what 
they say, the fact of the matter is more young people are having 
the opportunity to continue a post-secondary education 
opportunity in this province than ever before, Mr. Speaker, than 
ever before. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Supplementary. Mr. Minister, the amount 
that you have increased operating grants to public schools, 
universities and technical schools this year equals about half of 
what your government gave to Peter Pocklington. 
 
Now it’s a double standard, Mr. Speaker. Your underfunding 
has brought out unprecedented labour strife at the university. 
The institutions and the instructors are under stress, and the 
quality of education is threatened. So I ask you again, Mr. 
Speaker: will you make a commitment; will you make a 
commitment today to increasing funding so that post-secondary 
education will be up to a fair and reasonable level? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, here is a classic example 
of a point that the opportunity missed. In their blind ideology, in 
their blind pursuit of socialist dogma, they again raise this 
spectre of Peter Pocklington, this rotten multinationalist, that 
this is somehow bad for this province and bad for our young 
people. Well I want to tell you what the consequence of Peter 
Pocklington moving into Saskatchewan means, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Peter Pocklington buys hogs from farmers, and he processes 
them in a packing plant. And the reason he has 
  



 
April 6, 1988 

343 
 
 

moved here is because hog production has gone up substantially 
in this province. And what has that meant for some of these 
young people, Mr. Speaker? One of the new programs that’s 
been put in place at the institutes this past year is a program to 
give opportunities, training opportunities, in the area of swine 
herdsmen, swine management, and swine technicians. 
 
And I saw a clip on television the other night where they did a 
feature on this for about a half an hour, and there are young 
people getting jobs in the hog industry because of the Peter 
Pocklingtons of the world, Mr. Speaker, not the other way 
around, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, a new question to the Minister of Education. Mr. 
Minister, if you were really serious about helping the University 
of Saskatchewan with its urgent needs, you would have come 
down this year with a budget increase of at least 6 per cent for 
the universities of this province. Mr. Speaker, instead we’ve 
seen a government that has frozen the budget last year, and in 
real terms over the last two years you’ve cut the budget at the U 
of S by 8 per cent, Mr. Minister. 
 
Classes at the U of S are filled to the brim. The College of Arts 
and Science at that university has had a 48 per cent increase in 
enrolment since ’82 and hasn’t been able to hire a single new 
faculty member because of your policies. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: if you are serious 
about helping the universities of this province, will you increase 
the budget of the two universities in Saskatchewan by at least 
$9 million, Mr. Minister, over what they received in 1987? Will 
you in effect, Mr. Minister, release your stranglehold on the 
universities of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As it relates to the funding of 
universities, Mr. Speaker, last year when I met with both boards 
of governors and raised with them, in a brief, the fact that over 
this next four years . . . I gave them some expectation of what 
they could look for. I suggested then it might well be two years 
where we had to hold the line. 
 
The reality is, because of this government’s commitment to 
education we did find additional money this year in the budget 
for education. I’m very proud of that, Mr. Speaker, because it 
does mean more opportunities for those at universities, whether 
it be addressing the issue of more staff or more programs or less 
tuition for the young people. 
 
Just on that point of funding, Mr. Speaker, I reiterate again, if 
you look at our record, our Premier’s record on funding over 
the last five or six years, we’ve increased by a greater 
percentage than any other . . . the funds we’ve advanced to 
universities, both operating and capital, have increased by a 
greater percentage to our universities than any other university 
in western Canada, Mr. Speaker, and that’s a fact. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Employment Prospects for Young People 
 

Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, a new question, and this time a 
question to the Minister of Human Resources, Labour and 
Employment. Mr. Minister, the employment picture for young 
people in Saskatchewan is very bleak. The unemployment rate 
right now for people age 15 to 24 in this province is fifteen and 
a half per cent. There are 3,000 fewer jobs available for young 
people now than there was a year ago at this time. And next 
week, Mr. Minister, university students will be coming out of 
classes and looking for work. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you have cut the summer student 
employment budget from $10.5 million in 1986 to $4 million in 
1988. Five thousand fewer young people will get employment 
this summer as a result of that policy. And my question to you, 
Mr. Minister, is with fifteen and a half per cent youth 
unemployment in this province, why don’t you take $8 million 
out of your $20 million government advertising budget, put it 
into summer student employment for young people, and give 
young people in this province some hope that they can get a job 
this summer under your government’s policies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has a 
very short memory. He can’t recall last year when we had 
record student employment in Saskatchewan under a similar 
program, and the amount that we spend is more than double 
what the NDP spent. And so, therefore, I don’t see how the 
member opposite can justify triple the spending when he also 
denounces the deficit and he doesn’t want to have any tax 
increases. 
 
What I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, is that we had record student 
employment last year in Saskatchewan and that we are spending 
the same amount of money as last year. And I expect that the 
economy has improved somewhat, that we are out of the 
downturn. And I expect that it will be a good year for student 
employment this year because of two reasons: the attitude of 
this government towards business is healthy and that causes 
jobs; and secondly, we have government programs designed 
specifically for students. They denounce the gas rebate, but it 
will hire students. So they can’t have it both ways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — A final supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the 
same minister. Mr. Minister, in 1986 you created 8,000 summer 
student jobs for young people. Last summer you created only 
4,000, and it’ll be no better than last summer this summer, Mr. 
Minister. The unemployment rate for young people was about 
13 per cent last summer. This year unemployment is running at 
fifteen and a half per cent province-wide, and approximately at 
20 per cent in Saskatoon. 
 
Now my question to the minister is: last summer, Mr. Minister, 
you decided that you would make non-profit organizations in 
this province and municipalities 
  



 
April 6, 1988 

344 
 
 

ineligible for hiring young people for summer student jobs; and 
those two groups, Mr. Minister, have the best track record in 
this province in terms of hiring young people in seasonal work 
and giving them good experience. And my question to you is: 
will you now, Mr. Minister, announce that you’ll change your 
policy and that municipalities and non-profit organizations will 
be eligible for funding under your student summer employment 
program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, there’s the difference 
between our government and their policies and the way they 
operated this province. They do not realize that business creates 
the jobs, and that last year business created the jobs — that 
business, agriculture, those kind of businesses, mining, all of 
the things that people do for profit — that’s what creates 
wealth, that’s what creates jobs. 
 
What does not create jobs is government spending — that is 
spending what other people have produced. We are allowing 
other people to produce, and when they produce, they create 
jobs, and I thank business for having a record amount of student 
employment last year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Faculty Strike at the University of Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Education and it has to do with the current 
contract dispute at the University of Saskatchewan between the 
faculty and the administration there. 
 
The minister will know that a serious impasse has developed — 
the conciliation talks broke off last night. And the minister will 
know that both sides in this dispute — both sides — have 
blamed him and his government for dooming the conciliation 
process from the very outset. 
 
And I would like to know from the minister: were the ill-timed 
and ill-advised interventions in this matter by the minister and 
his deputy and the Premier just clumsy and foolish mistakes, or 
did this government have a deliberate strategy from the outset 
to provoke an insoluble confrontation and contrive a situation 
where legislation in this House could be the only recourse? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as all members of 
the legislature know, I put before this House a notice of motion 
to deal with this very critical issue on behalf of university 
students in Saskatoon. But having said that, through all of this, 
Mr. Speaker, very much the preferred by all of us would be to 
have had the normal process work. 
 
We made what I thought was a very constructive suggestion last 
week, and that was that the professors go back to work and put 
the strike aside until students finish their exams. Over and 
above that, the university has brought in a contingency plan. 
Over and above that, a conciliator was brought in, and it’s 
unfortunate that last night talks broke down and we find 
ourselves facing the 

situation we do this very day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, whatever this minister’s strategy 
has been in this matter, it has obviously failed. And I wonder if 
the minister would now abandon that failed strategy and instead 
make himself and, if necessary, the Premier available personally 
to both sides in this dispute at the University of Saskatchewan, 
to work creatively and constructively toward a negotiated 
settlement in this matter before the proposed legislation for 
which the minister gave notice earlier today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Our strategy throughout all of this, 
Mr. Speaker, has been to keep the interests of the students 
uppermost in our minds, and we’ll continue to do that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Delay in Admission of Patients for Surgery 
 

Mr. Koenker: — In the absence of the Minister of Health, to 
the Deputy Premier: your Premier has said that your 
government should be judged on its record. 
 
I have a constituent, a woman in Saskatoon who has cancer and 
is a cancer patient. To begin with, she had a five-month wait 
from the time of diagnostic procedure being booked until it was 
done in day surgery. Informed of a malignancy in mid-March, 
and that her gynecologist had rated this malignancy as urgent 
for surgery, it was only today that she learned she was booked 
for April 18. First a five-month delay; now a five-week delay. 
 
That’s your record. And what are you going to do to help a 
woman like this and thousands like her? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I will talk to the member 
privately and I will get this individual’s name and I will look 
into his allegation. But I have a very, very difficult time taking 
what he says as being credible when he sits down, as he sits 
down, Mr. Speaker, he says, and thousands more just like her. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, they simply are incapable of dealing 
with fact. Mr. Speaker, I will be more than happy, more than 
happy to meet with that member privately and get the details of 
his allegation and check it out and do whatever I can, Mr. 
Speaker, to help this lady, if in fact what he says is true. But the 
people over there simply are not credible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — New question to the Deputy Premier. Deputy 
Premier, I’ve another example of your government’s record 
when it comes to health care. 
 
There is a Regina man who has blood clots in his legs, and the 
doctors want to treat him but he can’t get a hospital bed. In 
view of the fact that these blood clots could develop into a 
serious problem for this gentleman and currently are impeding 
his ability to walk, and in view of the fact that these blood clots 
could lead to gangrene and 
  



 
April 6, 1988 

345 
 
 

other complications, and in fact could become life-threatening, 
and in view of the fact that your government spends $34,000 a 
day on empty office space in this province when you could be 
supplying 84 new hospital beds per day, how do you justify the 
choices you make and the priorities that you have when it 
comes to health care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, if I could just comment 
for a second on priorities. The priority of the Premier and the 
Minister of Health today was to open a new wing of the General 
Hospital here in Regina rather than . . .  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — . . . rather than come to question period 
to deal with questions that come from a group of people who 
have a high degree of credibility problems, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I will take notice as well, and I will be happy, Mr. Speaker, as 
well, to talk with that member privately if she wants to give me 
the name and the details as it relates to the allegation that she’s 
making. I’ll be quite happy to look into it. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — This government continues to shoot the 
messenger, and the time has come to listen to the messenger, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — I have a case here of a 73-year-old Saskatoon 
woman who has cataracts in both eyes. In November she was 
told it would take one year for surgery. In March she was told it 
would take another year. Her doctor is hoping that there’ll be a 
cancelled bed and she’ll be able to get into hospital. 
 
Mr. Minister, the people of Elphinstone and Saskatoon 
Eastview are being asked to judge you on your record. What 
excuses will you offer them, Mr. Minister? Tell us the excuses 
that you will offer them in view of the priorities of your 
government when it comes to government mismanagement and 
government spending. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I think we now 
understand what the real motive of members opposite is. They 
have no more concern for these people, Mr. Speaker, than 
flying . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker — Order, order, order. I’m having difficulty 
hearing the minister’s answers. I’m sure other members are. 
Give him the opportunity to answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — They have no more concern about the 
welfare and health of these people than they have in flying to 
the moon, Mr. Speaker. They are here with their cheap theatrics 
for cheap political purposes to try and score a point or two in 
the by-elections that were called yesterday, Mr. Speaker, and 
nothing more. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister, these are real 
people. They are people that live in this province and they are 
part . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. We’re also 
having difficulty hearing the question, and therefore I would 
ask the co-operation of members to allow the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana to ask the question. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Premier, these are real people. They are people who are part of 
the more than 15,000 people who are on hospital waiting lists in 
Regina and Saskatoon. And if you got one of these people into 
hospital every day of the year for the next umpteen years, it 
would take more than 41 years to wade through that list, and 
that’s if you’re prepared to do something about it. 
 
Mr. Minister, that’s your record, and the people of this province 
are being asked to pass judgement on that record. How can you, 
in face of the staggering numbers, continue to defend your 
wasteful government advertising, your wasteful spending when 
it comes to empty office space all over this province, when we 
have 15,000 people waiting to get into hospital? And they are 
real people; they are not the figment of anybody’s imagination. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, that question — at a time 
when this government is spending more on health than has ever 
been spent in the history of this province — that question, Mr. 
Speaker, coming from that party, from that party when, Mr. 
Speaker, I remember when they were sitting over here and that 
member, the member for Regina North East was minister of 
Health, had a complement of nine medical professionals in the 
whole cancer treatment program of Saskatchewan. They were 
leaving because that minister would not fund cancer treatment 
in this province. This minister, my colleague that was minister 
just prior to the current minister, has funded cancer treatment, 
has built cancer clinics, has built hospitals. The Regina General, 
the new wing is being opened today; rural hospitals, urban 
hospitals, nursing homes — we will stack our record up any day 
against that party’s. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Contract Agreement with Saskatchewan Teachers 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the 
Minister of Education. My question is in regard to the 
government’s long overdue settlement with the teachers and 
their contract. 
 
Mr. Minister, the tentative agreement, if ratified, will increase 
the teachers’ pay by 3 per cent this year, and it’s going to cost 
the school boards of Saskatchewan an additional $15 million. 
You have not provided for that increase in your budget. Your 
department’s school operating budget increased, Mr. Minister, 
by only $7 
  



 
April 6, 1988 

346 
 
 

million. 
 
In view of the fact, Mr. Minister, that you are forcing school 
boards to consider cutting programs and teachers, or drastically 
increasing property taxes, are you prepared to make a 
commitment in this House today that you’re going to make up 
for this shortfall that you have provided in this budget so that 
they don’t have to do either of those things? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, as it relates 
to the negotiated settlement that has yet to be — at least 
tentatively — approved negotiated settlement that has yet to be 
ratified, I’m not about to comment on details of the settlement. 
 
The hon. member is asking, is the commitment in education 
sufficient to meet teacher salary increases, more teaching 
positions, more program commitments, more computers in the 
classrooms; the answer is yes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as it relates specifically to the question of teachers’ 
salaries, it traditionally has been a 50-50 arrangement between 
ourselves and school boards, and my reading of school board 
officials after the budget was delivered last week was that they 
were very happy with the demonstrated commitment again to 
education in this province by the Devine government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 3 — An Act to provide for the Resumption of 
Instruction, Teaching and Examination of Students at the 

University of Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I, with leave, would move first 
reading of a Bill, An Act to provide for the Resumption of 
Instruction, Teaching and Examination of Students at the 
University of Saskatchewan. and as is customary in these 
situations, Mr. Speaker, I provided the opposition Advanced 
Education critic with an advance copy of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
so with leave, I would so move. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — With leave now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Is leave granted? Leave is not granted. Next 
sitting. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Tusa: — Before orders of the day, I would like leave 
of the Assembly to introduce some guests. 
 
It’s my pleasure, fellow members, to introduce to you the 

First Southey Girl Guide Company, who is seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery. They are accompanied by Margo Huber, 
Sandra Schultz, Sylvia Schneider, and Dennis Koch. They have 
just viewed the question period; they will be having a tour of 
the building. At 3 o’clock I will meet with them for pictures and 
for a brief discussion, which I would very much look forward 
to. 
 
Please welcome these Girl Guides from Southey. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it now being 2:39, I would like to 
resume my remarks in the budget debate, Mr. Speaker, but 
before I do that, before I resume my remarks in this budget 
debate, I would like to make a few observations about what 
happened in this House late yesterday afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will know that by playing on some 
inexperience on my part, the Deputy Premier and a few of his 
front-bench colleagues over there shut this legislature down. 
Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier and a few of his colleagues 
shut this legislature down. 
 
Now in the short time that I’ve been around this place I’ve 
learned a little bit about political gamesmanship, and I 
understand that that has a role to play in this House, but I 
simply can’t believe that the Deputy Premier and his close 
colleagues on the front bench, for the sake of political 
gamesmanship, would shut this legislature down — would shut 
this House down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask why? Why would they do such a thing? Well 
I don’t think you need a degree in political science to figure this 
one out. Why, why do they want to shut down debate in this 
legislature? I’ll tell you why, Mr. Speaker. It’s because they 
don’t want debate on their actions; they don’t want debate on 
their budget; they don’t want debate on their tax increases; they 
don’t want debate on their mismanagement. Mr. Speaker, they 
don’t want the people of Saskatchewan to hear about their 
record and their budget, so what do they do? They shut this 
legislature down. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious. Monday night of 
this week, not one of those members, not a one, would stand in 
this House and defend this budget — not a one of them, Mr. 
Speaker, last night every one of them stood in this House to 
shut the House down. Every one of them stood to vote 
adjournment, Mr. Speaker. It’s obvious, Mr. 
  



 
April 6, 1988 

347 
 
 

Speaker, that this government doesn’t want debate of its actions 
or its budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if I may continue in my remarks directed to 
the budget speech and this government’s record. as I indicated 
yesterday, when this government was given the mandate to 
govern, when this PC Party was given the mandate to govern 
this province by the people of this province, in many ways the 
people of Saskatchewan laid their dreams, their hopes and their 
dreams, at the feet of this government. In the course of the past 
six years, of seven budgets, they’ve seen those dreams trampled 
on. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . and I was saying yesterday, nowhere, nowhere 
and among no other group of people is this more true than 
among the young people and the young families of this 
province. They laid their dreams and hopes at the feet of this 
government, and they have seen them trampled. 
 
This is true very much, Mr. Speaker, for the young families of 
Saskatchewan. Not so long ago, I had a gentleman come into 
our office to tell me about his 24-year-old daughter who is fully 
trained at a college level, who wants to live and work in this 
province, but who, for the past year and a half, has been living 
at home with her parents. And for the past year and a half she’s 
been sending out resumes — without answer, without an 
opportunity. Mr. Speaker, there’s something tragically wrong in 
this province when a young person with talents and skills and 
education can spend a year and a half and not find an 
opportunity to share those talents and skills and opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not so long ago I had a couple come into our 
office who have three grown children, two of them married. Mr. 
Speaker, they tell me that each of their three children have left 
this province — left this province to find work and to build 
their homes in some other province because they couldn’t find 
opportunity here. Those grandparents had dreamed of seeing 
their grandchildren grow up — had dreamed of watching their 
grandchildren grow up. They’ve been denied that dream, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I talk to Saskatchewan families regularly who 
have seen their wages held at zero for the past number of years. 
I talk to others who have, in fact, have seen their wages cut 
back in recent years. I talk to many families who see their hours 
of work being cut, being forced into part-time jobs. Mr. 
Speaker, I see these people trying to pay their mortgages, trying 
to clothe their children, send them off to school, trying to 
scrimp and save a little bit for a summer vacation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the farm families who I associate with 
have these days been forced into finding off-farm income, into 
taking any kind of a job they can to support their dream of 
holding on to the family farm. Mr. Speaker, I talk to families on 
a regular basis who have concern about their ageing parents, 
who wonder if their will be care and health care facilities for 
their parents. 
 
I talk to mothers who question whether they’re going to be able 
to afford prescription drugs for their children. I talk to families 
who today are receiving social assistance 

who never dreamed — never dreamed — that they would need 
this kind of help. 

(1445) 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just tell you about one other family, one 
other family of my experience. Prior to coming to this House, I 
served as a referral agent for the Moose Jaw and district food 
bank. And in that capacity I met literally dozens and dozens of 
families, many of them in crisis, but one that stands out in my 
mind is the mother of two teen-age children who came to me. 
 
Having been deserted by her husband, she was left to raise 
those two children on her own. This woman had found her 
hours of work cut to part time. It was the season of her 
daughter’s graduation, and if her daughter was to have a new 
dress for graduation, it meant that that money had to come out 
of the food budget. Her two children pleaded with her, because 
they were proud, not to come to me, not to join the line-up at 
the food bank. But she bent her pride, Mr. Speaker, and she 
came to me. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, it is simply a disgrace when in this 
province a mother must beg to feed her children or to get her 
daughter a dress for graduation. And I ask you, Mr. Speaker, 
what is in this budget, what is in this budget for that woman and 
that family? — nothing, Mr. Speaker. What is in this budget, 
what is in this budget for the young families of Saskatchewan? 
Has this government, with this budget, extended a helping hand 
to the families of Saskatchewan? No; I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
where their hand is; their hand is even deeper, even deeper into 
the pocket-books and the bank accounts and the savings of 
Saskatchewan families. That’s where the hand of this 
government is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the figures that I have indicate that since 1981 car 
insurance rates have risen 38 per cent in this province; 
telephone rates have risen 23 per cent; home heating rates have 
raised 55 per cent; electricity has been raised 51 per cent. In 
addition to those increases, Mr. Speaker, the figures I have 
indicate that on average, for a family of four with a net income 
of $25,000, that family has seen a retail sales tax increase of 
$100. They’ve seen an average property tax increase of $400. 
They’ve lost their property improvement grant of $230. 
They’ve seen an average prescription drug cost of $144, and 
add to that another $31 of miscellaneous license and fee 
increases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to those increases, we have the unfair 
flat tax, increased in 1985, increased in 1987, and what happens 
with this budget? — increased again. Is there tax relief in this 
budget for Saskatchewan families, Mr. Speaker? No, not a bit of 
it; in fact, just the opposite. Is the hand of this government 
extended to help Saskatchewan families and young families? 
Not a bit of it. The hand of this government is deep into the 
pocket-books of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, maybe these members opposite have forgotten, or 
perhaps they never knew, perhaps they never knew what it’s 
like to farm with old machinery, and just to go from repair to 
repair to repair. Perhaps they’ve forgotten, perhaps they’ve 
never known what it’s like to 
  



 
April 6, 1988 

348 
 
 

have to find work off farm, any kind of work, just to hold the 
farm together. Perhaps they’ve forgotten, perhaps they never 
knew what it’s like to work for a minimum wage and to see 
your wages cut back, to see your hours cut back, and in the 
meantime try to keep up the house payment and the car 
payment and get the kids off to school and save just a bit for 
summer vacation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of the Environment stood 
in this house and talked about the $300 suits that he buys. Well 
perhaps he’s forgotten, or perhaps he never knew what it’s like 
for some people to try and clothe their family for a year with 
that $300. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I read a headline in the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix, in which the Minister of Finance of this province 
described this budget as “fair,” as “fair,” I said to myself, how 
far out of touch with Saskatchewan families can this 
government get — how far out of touch can they get with the 
reality of life in Saskatchewan for most families. No, they’re 
not out of touch with their family of corporate friends, Mr. 
Speaker, not out of touch at all. And you will note, in this 
budget, who gets the tax breaks. How out of touch they are with 
Saskatchewan families, and that old truth is just becoming more 
and more true: the rich are getting richer, the poor are getting 
poorer, and Saskatchewan families are paying the bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, given this government’s record of 
mismanagement, given its record of waste, given its record of 
incompetence, given its record of patronage, this PC 
government has lost any right to further tax the families of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, they do not deserve the right to 
govern any longer, and I’ll tell you, when the results from 
Regina Elphinstone and Saskatoon Eastview come in, they are 
going to get that message loud and clear, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I say to you that young people 
and young families of this province, like many of us, laid hopes 
and dreams at the feet of this government. They trusted this 
group of men and women when they said, there’s so much more 
you can be. Mr. Speaker, they’ve seen those hopes and dreams 
trampled on, and they’ve found out just how much less we can 
become. 
 
And if only for the sake of the young people and the young 
families of this province, if for only that reason alone, I vote 
against this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to rise and speak on this budget. Members opposite think that 
the members on this side are afraid to speak. That is not the 
case. As a matter of fact, we have sat here and listened to the 
members opposite for two or three days now, in their pious 
form, bring on tirade after tirade upon the members of this side 
of the government. I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s time that there was 
a reply to some of the nonsense we have been hearing from the 
other side, and I use that as a polite form. 
 
Now first of all, Mr. Speaker, this budget is a prime 

example of the difference between the Progressive 
Conservatives of Saskatchewan and the democratic socialists of 
Saskatchewan. And I will proceed to show you, Mr. Speaker, 
and the members opposite, and everyone in Saskatchewan, how 
great that difference is. 
 
First of all it is quite clear, Mr. Speaker, that the people of this 
province have in the past two elections, and will in the future 
vote for leaders who stand for something. They do not wish to 
have leaders such as the people now in opposition who stand for 
everything, anything to get elected. They will change their 
stance — and I will show that in this speech today — they will 
their stance from week to week and from month to month. 
 
So first of all this budget, Mr. Speaker, is reasonable. Secondly, 
it is a balanced approach. Thirdly, it continues services to the 
people of Saskatchewan and reduces the deficit so that this 
government is in a position, on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan, to balance the budget when the world economy 
improves, and we are showing a track, a graph, that is declining 
so that it is now possible to balance this budget. 
 
But what do the members opposite have to offer? Do they have 
anything to offer as to how this province should be governed or 
what kind of a budget we should have? 
 
Well first of all they offer, there should be no tax increases. 
Everybody agrees with that. Then they say there should be no 
deficit. Well everyone agrees with that. Then they say there 
should be no reduction in spending, and everyone agrees with 
that. They stand for everything. But which of those three do 
they stand for? What kind of a balance between those three 
possibilities do they stand for? Maybe if they could pick and 
choose from those three, maybe they could govern, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But there is a fourth — it is called economic growth. It is a 
solution that the members opposite don’t even think about. This 
government, Mr. Speaker, believes that we can build 
Saskatchewan, that we can build an economy based on people 
working for themselves, building profits to share with others. 
 
Now the members opposite think that wealth falls from heaven. 
Oh, I retract that, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe they think wealth 
falls from heaven because I have doubts if they believe there is 
a heaven. They believe that profits come from someone else. 
Well profits and the money that they buy and the services that 
we share have to be built in this province, and our goods have 
to be exported. And so, therefore, we have to have free trade, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But no, the members opposite think we could build a wall 
around Saskatchewan. They think we could build a wall around 
Canada, and we could share — very happily share — a 
diminishing life-style. As Winston Churchill once said, 
socialism is equal poverty for all. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
think anyone in Saskatchewan would want to have socialism if 
they understood it as well as Churchill understood it. 
 
But before I go into the details of this budget, Mr. Speaker, I 
want to talk about a second element of leadership, and that is 
moral leadership. You might say, how is that 
  



 
April 6, 1988 

349 
 
 

related to this budget? Well I tell you, everything, Mr. Speaker, 
is related to the government of this province and how this 
province should be governed. And the members opposite have 
raised the very touchy point amongst themselves that this is an 
immoral budget. all of a sudden, Mr. Speaker, they set 
themselves out as being experts on morality, and maybe even 
believing in some. But, Mr. Speaker, when did the members 
opposite discover morality? And if they accuse this budget of 
being an immoral budget, Mr. Speaker, I want to show you and 
the people of Saskatchewan the difference between the 
Progressive Conservative Party and the members of the NDP 
opposite. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, let us look at some examples. Let us 
look at some differences and choices. This government stands 
for rights, and so do the members opposite, but this government 
stands for rights and responsibilities. But to the members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, “responsibilities” is a dirty capitalist 
word which they cannot use, or would ever want to implement. 
So they stand for rights, rights, rights, but they never, ever stand 
for rights and responsibilities. That’s what is causing moral 
decay, and they are leading the moral decay in this province 
with their attitude, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we care for the people of 
Saskatchewan, and they say they care for the people of 
Saskatchewan; and maybe they do, but there is a difference. 
There is a difference in caring, Mr. Speaker. The government 
cares for and helps the people of Saskatchewan; they members 
opposite are caring and scaring. They say they care, but they go 
around scaring people rather than caring for people. They fill 
them with untruth. They use every political trick in the book to 
tell people they are caring while they are out there scaring the 
people. And they are doing it today in two constituencies in 
Saskatchewan — out scaring people when they say they are 
actually caring for people. 
 
There’s a difference, Mr. Speaker. We care and we help 
because we are the government and we have that responsibility, 
and we show that in this budget. and they care and they scare, 
and they care not for the people, but they care for themselves, 
Mr. Speaker. That is the problem. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we do not rant on and on about how we 
help the needy; we go out and do it, Mr. Speaker. Actions are 
stronger than words. But the NDP go out promoting 
government dependency. They are trying to create, and did 
prior to 1982, Mr. Speaker, a caring industry — caring for their 
friends, paid by the taxpayers. You pay the NDP’s friends to 
care for the people that they have made dependent. And they 
have a cycle, a cycle of dependent people that they create, and 
caring NDP employees who care for the dependent people they 
have created. And the cycle goes on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
However at a certain stage, Mr. Speaker, two things could 
happen. 
 
And I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I am pleased that you are 
now paying attention and that Mr. Speaker is going to his 
dutiful rest, and I address myself to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I say that the members opposite speak only about caring — 
caring for their friends. And they create a system of dependency 
and government help — dependency and government help. And 
this system is financed by the labours of the independent 
individuals of Saskatchewan who believe in profits, in owning 
their own land, in owning their own businesses, in owning their 
own mines, and in harvesting the forest for themselves and the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan, not for the NDP and their caring, 
tax-receiving industry. That is the difference in philosophy. 
This government believes in helping. The members opposite 
believe in rhetoric. 
 
(1500) 
 
Next, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government is based on 
religious values. And I would say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 
are primarily Christian, but they are not limited to Christian 
religious values. They are moral values that are more or less 
universal between Christians and Muslims and the native Indian 
religions of Canada, and all other religions of the world have 
very, very common moral standards. 
 
However, what is the position of the NDP? The position of the 
NDP is basically, do as you please. You have your rights to do 
as you please. You don’t have any responsibility, and you can 
do as you please so long as you fit into and live under the 
socialist doctrine. And if you want examples, throughout the 
world, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you can have examples of socialist 
countries that are neither free, that do not have rights, that do 
not have moral values as part of their government, but they all 
have the freedom to live under the socialist doctrine. 
 
So there is a considerable difference in values between this 
government and the members opposite. And they have the 
audacity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to tell us this is an immoral 
budget. Then in addition, Mr. Speaker, there are other examples 
of morality and moral values. We have the members opposite 
taking several positions on some moral issues. And in 
particular, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote for you briefly from 
today’s Leader-Post, one paragraph: 
 

On the homosexuality issue, (the Leader of the 
Opposition, the Leader of the NDP) said . . . supports 
expanding the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code so 
discrimination in employment and housing on the basis of 
sexual preference is prohibited. 

 
Now we have the true colours of the NDP and the Leader of the 
Opposition. At one time there was some doubt of the moral 
values of the members opposite, the members who would 
lecture us on what’s moral and what’s a moral budget and what 
isn’t a moral budget. Well I will tell them, and I will tell you, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this government has moral values, 
and that this government is consistent, and our position if quite 
clear. 
 
First of all, we had the member from Moose Jaw North taking a 
position on behalf of the NDP that homosexuals should have 
greater rights than other citizens. They now have all the rights 
that you and I have, Mr. Deputy 
  



 
April 6, 1988 

350 
 
 

Speaker, but they should have greater rights. They should have 
the rights to do as they please. 
 
And the member from Moose Jaw North said, yes, the human 
rights code should be amended. Then the member from Moose 
Jaw North went into exile and could not be found. And then he 
pronounced that maybe it shouldn’t be amended. 
 
And then the media went to look for the Leader of the 
Opposition, and he had no position. And then last week, or the 
week before, on a radio open-line show, when the Premier of 
Saskatchewan said that this government would be opposed to 
homosexuals adopting children, the Leader of the Opposition 
said he had the same position as the Premier. But lo and behold, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, now he has come out of the closet and he 
has told us exactly what his position is. His position is: 
 

. . . the NDP supports expanding the Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Code so discrimination in employment and housing 
on the basis of sexual preference is prohibited. 

 
Now they tell us that this budget is immoral, Mr. Speaker. I can 
tell you that the NDP in Manitoba have introduced such 
immoral legislation, and I can tell you that the legislation 
proposed by the Leader of the Opposition is clearly immoral, 
and I can prove it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — It is not only immoral by Christian 
standards, it is immoral by the standards of any recognized 
religion in the world. They have the audacity to say this is an 
immoral budget. What do they know about what is immoral? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to show you further than 
homosexual activity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is not moral 
behaviour by the standards of this government nor by the 
standards of our society nor by the standards of world religion. 
And recently, when this government, the cabinet of this 
government, met with the religious leaders of Saskatchewan, I 
can tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that with the exception of one 
Christian church in this province, the Christian churches were 
unanimous that homosexual activity was not proper, was not a 
proper example for our children to see. The Christian churches 
were unanimous with the exception of one. 
 
At that meeting also, the Islamic religion took the same 
position. And I can tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I 
discussed this question with Chief Roland Crowe, Chief of the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Indian Nations, and he told me that 
in their traditional Indian culture and religion, homosexuality 
was not tolerated and is not tolerated. 
 
So if the members opposite think that this government is on a 
Christian binge, something that they do not tolerate, that it is 
not fair for a government to be Christian; if they think that this 
morality is limited to Christians, I tell you it is not. It is 
common to every religion of the world except the anti-religion 
of socialism. It is common to every real religion. 

Now the members opposite, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are starting to 
hoot and holler, and they are starting to be edgy in their seats, 
and I see only one of the men of the cloth on their side that is 
present, and the other does not see fit to listen to this. But I 
continue my lecture, Mr. Deputy Speaker — I continue my 
lecture on what is . . .  
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. All members of the 
legislature will get their opportunity to enter into the budget 
debate, or have had their opportunity, so I would ask them to 
give the Minister of Labour his opportunity to address the 
budget speech. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not the Minister of Labour. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Human Resources. I 
would ask you members to give him the courtesy of allowing 
him to address the budget speech in his way. 
 
Order. The member from Regina North West, I would ask you 
to be quiet while the Minister of Human Resources is on his 
feet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So the 
members opposite, after accusing this government of being 
immoral, after having the member from Saskatoon . . . there’s 
so many seats there . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — University. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — No, not University; it’s Paul 
Schoenhals’ seat . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Sutherland. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Sutherland — thank you. The member 
from Saskatoon Sutherland having the audacity to say that the 
Premier was fundamentally immoral, and we on this side, 
because their speeches are so boring, we’re not quick enough to 
jump up and take them to task on judging what is moral and 
what is not moral. 
 
And I say to you, this government has a policy to serve the 
people, and in comparison the NDP have a policy of the people 
serving the government. And the policy of this government, in 
serving the people, includes serving the churches; it includes 
serving God — serving Allah, serving the Great Spirit — 
serving God by whatever name you choose God, to call God. 
 
But the NDP has not got that same kind of view, and I was 
saddened to see what they have done, in particular, to one of 
our Christian churches, the United Church of Canada. And they 
have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, made a conscious effort to take over 
part of that church and gain political control of that church. 
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the NDP candidate 
that ran against me in 1982, when she was defeated, when she 
was defeated in worldly politics went directly into theological 
politics, and has become a leader of the United Church of 
Canada in this province and is preaching socialism and their 
form of morality to 
  



 
April 6, 1988 

351 
 
 

my constituents. And I can tell you that my constituents are 
tired of NDP politics in their church, and I can tell you also that 
there are clear examples of the NDP philosophy and the NDP 
philosophy having taken over the leadership of that church. 
 
My wife was listening to an open line show the other day, and 
the leaders of that church were on there, and she could not 
believe what she heard. She heard them say, the Bible is 
outdated. When the discussion came to homosexuality, they 
took the NDP line that the Bible is outdated. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, shows where the NDP stand, and how they 
try to spread their socialism into everybody else’s life and 
business. Now the NDP stand over there and they lecture us on 
morality. But I believe, Mr. Speaker, that their view is that 
morality is outdated. That is the NDP position: is morality 
outdated? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said I would prove, I said . . . Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I said I would prove what is moral and what is not 
moral, and I do not believe that the Bible is outdated, even 
though the NDP might believe it is outdated. I do not believe 
that morality is outdated, even though the NDP may believe it is 
outdated. 
 
And now I hear, from his seat, a member of my Lutheran 
Church, opposite, shouting at me. I say to him: I listen to him, I 
listen to his sermon, and this time, just this once, he’s going to 
listen to my sermon, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — And I ask, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
member for Saskatoon Sutherland to pay close attention to 
Leviticus 18, chapter 22: 
 

You shall not lie with a man as with a woman; that is an 
abomination. (And) you shall (not have sexual intercourse) 
with any beast ( to make yourself unclean) with it, nor a 
woman submit herself to intercourse with a beast. 

 
That is a violation of nature. Now maybe, maybe the member 
for Saskatoon Sutherland thinks that the Old Testament is 
outdated. Maybe the NDP think that the Bible is outdated. So 
let us go to the New Testament, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and let us 
refer to Romans, Romans 1, 26, 27 and it says: 
 

In consequence, I say God has given them up to shameful 
passions. Their women have exchanged natural intercourse 
for unnatural, and their men in turn giving up natural 
relations with women, burn with lust for one another, 
males behave indecently with males and are paid in their 
own persons the fitting wage for such perversion. 

 
Now I see that the member from Saskatoon Sutherland, a fellow 
Lutheran, is paying attention. And I ask him, I ask him: where 
does it say in Luther’s small catechism that homosexuals shall 
have the same rights as ordinary Christians, as ordinary 
citizens? Where does it say that that life-style is moral? 
Nowhere. I believe it does not say that anywhere. 

And I say to the member from Moose Jaw South, he should 
show me that this kind of behaviour is moral. He should go 
back to John Calvert and think of what he had to say, and ask 
himself: does he really believe that the Bible is outdated? That 
is the question, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And they have the 
audacity to lecture us on morality and say that this is an 
immoral budget. This is a budget dealing with money and 
services to the people of Saskatchewan. This budget may have 
something to do with morality, but it is not an immoral budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one more reference, just to satisfy this matter and 
give you conclusive proof of what is moral and what isn’t. I 
refer to 1 Corinthians, chapter 6, verse 9: 
 

Make no mistake, no fornicator nor idolaters, none who 
are guilty either of adultery or homosexual perversion, no 
thieves, no grabbers or drunkards or slanderers or 
swindlers will possess the kingdom of God. 

 
(1515) 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do not profess to be a religious 
scholar. I do not profess to be a man of the cloth. I am not, and 
have not preached on the pulpit, as the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland and as the member for Moose Jaw South. But on 
behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan and all of the people 
in this province who know what is right and who know what is 
wrong, I implore the members opposite to do what is right, to 
have some moral standards and stop talking about an immoral 
budget until they understand what morality really is, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Now, in addition — in addition, the 
Leader of the Opposition has now come out of the closet and 
told us exactly what their position is. And I want it made quite 
clear for you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and for the media who are 
taking clear notes, because I am sure they will find some 
offence with a member of the government talking about moral 
issues in address to the allegation that a budget is immoral. I 
want you to know that this government, nor does this member, 
wish to persecute people who follow homosexual practices. We 
wish to discourage them, but we do not wish to persecute 
anyone. 
 
And I have no doubt, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there are 
homosexuals who are members of the Progressive Conservative 
Party of Saskatchewan. I have no doubt that there are some. 
And I do not wish to have those people ejected from our party, 
nor do I wish to have them ejected from their church and, for 
the most part, from the point of view of a government — maybe 
not of a religion, but from the point of view of a government — 
I wish to simply leave them alone. However . . . however, I also 
wish to discourage them and help them overcome these 
practices which I believe are not normal and are not moral. And 
in no way do I ever wish to have people who follow 
homosexual practices or, to quote the Bible, people who are 
drunkards, or people who are slanderers or swindlers showing a 
public example for my children. Nor do I ever 
  



 
April 6, 1988 

352 
 
 

wish them to have the right to adopt children. Nor do I ever 
wish them to have any rights that I don’t already have. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you have to draw the line somewhere, and 
this is where we are drawing the line, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
Bible also refers to bestiality. Now how far do the members 
opposite want to let people go in their sexual orientation. There 
has to be a limit. Where are we going to draw the line? We have 
said, we will draw it right here, and we will try to help people. 
But we will certainly not give them rights above and beyond 
what the ordinary citizen of Saskatchewan has got, except for 
the members opposite, the members of the NDP in Manitoba 
and the Leader of the Opposition, who now proposes to bring in 
immoral legislation giving people the right to follow their own 
wishes regardless of what the majority believes is correct. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, now that we have established what is moral 
and what is not moral, now that we have established the 
position of the NDP and their expertise in morality, let us now 
look at the real true measures of this budget and consider them 
from the point of view of what is fair rather than what is 
immoral. 
 
First of all the member for Moose Jaw South, a man of the 
cloth, a man who knows the Ten Commandments, has told us 
that there are further . . . we are digging deeper into the pockets 
of the citizens, there’s further tax increases. Let us look at tax 
reform and the income tax situation. 
 
First of all, in this budget the flat tax has been raised one-half of 
1 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to a percentage of 2 per cent. 
Now I recall — and the member for Moose Jaw South and the 
member for Saskatoon Sutherland were not here — but I recall 
when the members opposite, all nine of them, stood up and said 
that this was a disgusting tax, it was immoral, at the time when 
we brought it in. I can say that we were not pleased to have to 
raise taxes at that time, but it was necessary. But I remember all 
of those comments. And then I remember the NDP in Manitoba 
implementing the same tax. Oh, did their view of this tax 
change? Most definitely. In Manitoba it was reasonable, it was 
necessary, but in Saskatchewan it was totally opposite. 
 
Let us look at what has happened with this flat tax. Alberta 
adopted it; Manitoba adopted it; it is now in Saskatchewan. 
Nobody on this side of the House likes taxation, and the people 
on the other side of the House would say that they are opposed 
to raising taxes, but look at their example, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
When they were first elected in Saskatchewan — not first — we 
won’t go back to 1944, nor will we go back to 1932, the time 
warp in which they function; we will go back to 1971. From 
that period of time until the period of time that they were 
thrown out of office in 1982, they changed the Saskatchewan 
tax rate from 26 per cent to 52 per cent; doubled it — doubled 
the Saskatchewan income tax. They had no qualms about 
raising taxes. 
 
They said we will tax, tax, tax, and we will hire more people, 
and we will provide more services, and more of our friends will 
be hired, and everybody will be happy, at 

least in the NDP Party. And they were, until they were turfed 
out in 1982. Doubled, the income tax doubled during their last 
term of office, and they come along and say that this tax is 
immoral. 
 
Now the next thing we have to look at is federal tax reform. The 
Progressive Conservative government in Ottawa is bringing in 
tax reform, and if the province of Saskatchewan did nothing, 
our tax revenue as a result of that reform would drop $30 
million on the spot. Now the members opposite say, well that 
would be good; yes it would, but the deficit would go up $30 
million on the spot. 
 
Now in order to avoid that we could reduce some government 
spending. Now where would the members opposite want to 
start? It is not easy to reduce government spending, as this 
government has proven in the last year, nor is it very popular. 
So all sides of the House are agreed that there is a limit to how 
much you can reduce government spending. 
 
So what our government has done is that we have said, because 
the federal government will take less, because the federal 
government has more and because Saskatchewan’s economy is 
in the state it’s in, this government will have to pick up some of 
that slack. So here’s exactly what was done, and I’ll give you 
examples, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
If you have a family income of $5,000, did you pay taxes? No, 
as a matter of fact, if you filed in 1987 you would receive a tax 
credit of $1,106. As a result of tax reform, and even with an 
increase in the flat tax, that family will receive an additional 
$322. 
 
Is that a tax increase for that family? I would say no. I would 
say that anybody who could add and subtract would say no. But 
I suppose maybe the members opposite, even after they added 
and subtract, would say yes. Who knows? But it’s clearly there 
— $322 for that lowest income family. 
 
In addition, a family that had an income of $10,000 in 1987 
does not pay income tax but really receives a negative income 
tax payment. That means a supplement from the tax system of 
$1,099, an additional $329 even after tax reform and the flat tax 
change. 
 
A family with an income of $15,000, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has a 
payment from the tax system of $411 in tax credits and will 
receive, after tax reform, an additional $550, flat tax calculated 
into the calculation. 
 
After that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at an income of $20,000, a 
family will receive an additional $524. and it goes on and on 
that way. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is one family that as a result of 
tax reform will receive a tax increase, and that is a family that 
earns $50,000 will pay $14 more in taxes. Only in that category 
will anyone’s actual tax go up. At $50,000 your tax will be an 
extra $14 — half the cost of a bottle of whisky, and about half 
the cost of a carton of cigarettes. So I do not believe that this is 
hardship. 
  



 
April 6, 1988 

353 
 
 

But consider what we get with that additional flat tax. We get 
added health care. We get added education — things that the 
members opposite have been asking for, and out scaring people 
on. We are solving that. We are following a policy that they 
started — raise taxes, improve health care, improve education. 
We’re doing just what they always did in practice, except we 
are doing it more thoroughly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that is 
why we are government and they are not. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let us look at the situation with 
respect to other elements of the budget. Let us look in particular 
at social services and some of our welfare system. 
 
In 1982 we had a welfare system that offered little hope to 
people and encouraged dependency and abuse. Now, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I am pleased to tell you that we have a 
reformed welfare system — I admit it is not perfect — and we 
are making changes every day, and we will continue to make 
changes until we get it as close to perfect as possible. But, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I cannot stand here before this Assembly and 
declare that the system is perfect without having the 2,000 
workers I have in my department implementing the system. I 
cannot do it by wish, as the NDP do; they wish everything were 
good. I must do it by action, and that’s what we have started to 
do. 
 
Now in 1984, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we started welfare reform. 
We believe, as a government, there should be alternatives to 
simply existing on welfare, that there should be hope for 
people. And so we have a three-pronged approach to welfare 
reform. 
 
There are those people, first of all, who cannot be self-sufficient 
and we believe they should be helped. And I will show later on 
in this address, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we have helped them 
more than any government in the history of Saskatchewan and, 
in some cases, more than any government in Canada. 
 
But with this three-pronged approach, we believe that people 
who could be self-sufficient should be sent in three directions. 
First of all, completion of education. And since we started 
welfare reform, 11,000 people have been able to complete or 
further their education so that they can become self-sufficient. 
The second element, Mr. Deputy Speaker, job training — 
training on the job in businesses in Saskatchewan; and the third 
element, community work. 
 
We believe that people who have time on their hands and are 
able-bodied should be able to do something to help others in 
society. We will assist them with their needs, but they also have 
to assist others. This sounds a lot like the NDP philosophy, and 
I can’t see why they are against welfare reform. They believe 
that everybody should help each other, that we should all share, 
and our government is implementing this policy of: those 
people who can help, will help. 
 
What we have then is 11,000 people completed their education 
since 1984. We have 8,500 people who have been able to take 
on-the-job training or community work. 

In particular, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have the New Careers 
Corporation through which 800 people have been able to take 
job training, on the job, building things, building roads in parks, 
learning to operate heavy equipment, improving beaches, 
building marinas, building a gold course — all in provincial 
parks. They are now building a golf course at La Ronge — all 
part of welfare reform. Things that will not only help the people 
of Saskatchewan directly, but will also improve our future 
benefits in tourism, to bring more money in to create more jobs 
so that fewer people will be on welfare. 
 
In addition, the success rate of the New Careers Corporation has 
been tremendous, running in the 70 to 80 per cent rage of 
people going through that program now full time employed, 
self-sufficient. 
 
But that hope was not there before 1982. Before 1982 the 
philosophy of the NDP was: keep them dependent on us and 
they will have to vote for us. Our philosophy is: make them 
self-sufficient and they will thank you and they will vote for the 
Conservative government that made them self-sufficient. And it 
worked in 1986, I might say. 
 
Now in addition we have other projects. The Par Industries 
project has assisted about 269 people in Prince Albert. They’re 
now into actual logging. They started as clean-up work. They’re 
now into actual logging. They have a contract with 
Weyerhaeuser — the dirty word. 
 
(1530) 
 
Now the members opposite have become so quiet that the word 
“Weyerhaeuser” does not even rouse them any more. I think 
maybe they are learning and they are now paying attention, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. But they have a contract at Par Industries to 
deliver pulpwood to Weyerhaeuser. They have a lease from the 
province of Saskatchewan. and this non-profit organization is 
behaving like a small corporation: creating jobs, creating 
profits, paying off their mortgage, and training people to the 
extent that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, nearly everyone in Prince 
Albert that is single and employable now has a job or is 
continuing their education. 
 
And the members opposite accused me . . . And here’s another 
one of their wild accusations. They accuse us of being immoral. 
They accused me personally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of being a 
slaver. Well I can tell you that the people working on these 
projects, to dispel these scares of the NDP, are paid more than 
they would receive on welfare in every case. 
 
And in those cases where their job does not give them an 
income sufficient to get them off welfare, we top up their 
income. And we have about 1,500 people in this province who 
are working and are on welfare, because we pay welfare to 
people who are trying their best. If they’re trying their best and 
they still don’t have sufficient income to support themselves or 
their families, we top up their incomes. 
 
In addition, the success rate of this Par project has been 
phenomenal. Two of the people that graduated from there, that I 
know of, are working at Weyerhaeuser on construction jobs at 
hourly wages in excess of $13 per 
  



 
April 6, 1988 

354 
 
 

hour. In addition, there are people who came to this project and 
got motivated. And they tell me the story of the woman who 
showed up and said, I won’t cut trees, I’ll get a real job, I’ll go 
to McDonald’s, and she did. And we were very pleased. But 
you have to sometimes motivate people. 
 
And this project has been a motivation to the extent, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that the P.A. Raiders hockey club decided that 
they had 10 hockey players last fall who were not working and 
were not going to school, and so therefore the coach decided 
that on a . . . at 8 a.m. on a Wednesday morning those 10 
hockey players should go out and volunteer to work alongside 
the other people on the project for their exercise — these 
hockey players were not being paid — but for their exercise in 
assisting in the logging operations. 
 
Now a lot of this logging is by hand. They use chain-saws, but 
then they load the logs by hand, and they haul them away — 
sometimes they pull them out by horse, by horsepower — and 
what they do is they haul these logs out, and then they sort them 
and they cut them, and it’s a lot of hand labour. 
 
So 10 of the P.A. Raiders hockey team went on a Wednesday 
morning last fall to assist out there. And the coach said that the 
motivation of that project was phenomenal because that evening 
six hockey players said: hey, coach, do we have to go out there 
tomorrow because we think we would like to go to school 
tomorrow? So in one day alone, six P.A. hockey players were 
motivated to go to school, and I can tell you that there is a 
motivation factor in projects like the P.A. Par Industries project. 
 
And not only is there motivation, but there is opportunity there. 
And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the forewoman of this 
project is a very versatile woman, and I was truly impressed 
that she was a forewoman there, working out there with these 
men and women in the logging operations. She’s a 
non-traditional forewoman, you might say. And I was also 
impressed to meet her later with her boots off and with her coat 
off and her hard hat off, and she’s a very charming woman. 
 
I was totally impressed with this operation and the rehabilitation 
they are doing and the training they are doing in Prince Albert. 
And I might say that the people of Prince Albert and area are 
also impressed with that project. 
 
And what caused it was two things: the people of Prince Albert 
and this particular project had the motivation to go out and do 
something; and this government had the flexibility to allow 
people to do something, rather than sit around. So people are 
learning; people are working; society is benefitting. 
 
In addition, I might say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there’s 
another good example of community work in my home city of 
Melville, Saskatchewan. And I didn’t want to show any 
favouritism so I didn’t push a project in my home city, but as 
we had 140 people out working in skating rinks and hockey 
rinks throughout the province this winter; the word spread to 
my city, the city of Melville, that we could 

have welfare recipients doing community work and learning on 
the job. and they asked, would it be possible for the city of 
Melville to have welfare recipients work to complete the new 
Merve Moore Sportsplex. 
 
Now the Merve Moore Sportsplex in the city of Melville is 
named in honour of a First World War veteran who died just 
this spring — I believe he was 88 years of age — and a true 
sportsman in the city of Melville, a true leader of youth, a true 
sportsman. And this complex, this new arena, is named after 
Merve Moore. But it wasn’t being completed because we didn’t 
quite have the money to complete it. 
 
So, through this welfare reform project, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 11 
persons in Melville were hired to do something — complete the 
arena, rather than to do nothing. They were being paid, are still 
being paid to do something, rather than being paid to do 
nothing. And all of a sudden this arena project took off and 
things got done. 
 
And I walked into that arena and my son played hockey there, 
so I suppose I have a conflict of interest, as the members 
opposite might say, that my son plays hockey in this arena, and 
I do not hide it. And my little eight-year-old plays hockey in 
this arena, and when I went there these people on the project 
were happy. I saw a man that had been in my office earlier, and 
he was driving the cleaning machine, cleaning the ice, and it 
just so happened that he was skilled at tractor operations. And 
that man had a big smile on his face, and I went up and I talked 
to him, and he said, thank you for helping me get this job, he 
said, I like it here. And he’s driving a tractor, the ice machine, 
and does a very good job. And before that they couldn’t get 
anybody who wouldn’t crash into the boards. And now this man 
is very proudly doing this job and I would hope and I would 
expect that he will probably be hired back next winter and the 
winter after that, and probably this man will have a job for 
many years in the future because he was given an opportunity to 
help himself and show what he could do. 
 
Others, Mr. Deputy Speaker, others at this project in Melville 
— I had city . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Did you give him a membership card? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Did I give him a membership? No, he 
will buy his own membership card. We do not buy 
memberships for people in this party. The members on my side 
are testing me, and they know that there’s morality on this side. 
We do not buy memberships for people on this side. This man 
has got a job; he can now buy his own membership. 
 
In any event, there are other people working there, and 
aldermen in the city of Melville would come up and say, these 
are a good crew. Two or three of them are excellent carpenters. 
We don’t know why they didn’t have jobs. Well they didn’t 
have jobs because nobody ever gave them a break. Now they 
will have a reference from the city of Melville. 
 
These are more examples of welfare reform, giving 
  



 
April 6, 1988 

355 
 
 

people a chance to help themselves, rather than, in comparison, 
the NDP philosophy of keep them dependent, keep them poor, 
buy them memberships, buy them memberships and they will 
be with the NDP for ever. We will let people achieve their full 
potential, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We will not hold them down or 
hold them back as the NDP have tried to do for years and years. 
 
In addition, there are other elements of welfare reform, some so 
new that the public is not yet aware of them; some so new that 
the media has not yet discovered them. And I will give you a 
brief listing of some of the new things that we are doing. 
 
In addition, we have a new job search training program, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, which we started in Saskatoon a few weeks 
ago and have expanded to Regina. And what we did with this 
program is we decided that employable people probably 
couldn’t get a job because they didn’t know how to look for a 
job and they didn’t have the skills, the knowledge, or the habits 
which would allow them to land a job. 
 
So we decided that we would have a three-week training 
program and we would phone up welfare recipients and ask 
them if they will come and take this training program. And the 
program runs from 8 in the morning until 5 p.m., Monday to 
Friday, for three weeks — a normal working day — and you 
learn how to apply for a job, you learn where to look, you learn 
how you should try to dress. You learn all of the skills that 
maybe not everyone was able to learn in their home family, or 
the unfortunate that didn’t have parents that taught them these 
skills. 
 
So we decided that we would ask people to come to Saskatoon 
for this training. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we decided we 
wanted 20 people to start, and so we made 50 phone calls. After 
making 50 phone calls we found 34 people — 16 people could 
not be located. So since we couldn’t locate these people, we 
invited them to come in and pick up their welfare cheques so 
we could talk to them about why they couldn’t be found, and 16 
just could not be found. 
 
Of the 34, 20 agreed to come to the training program. And of 
the 20 that agreed, 13 showed up on Monday morning. So we 
located another seven and we started with this training program. 
And I might say that the program has been going very well, so 
we moved it to Regina in addition. 
 
As part of this program, you receive the same welfare benefits 
you would have, you always did, but in addition you get your 
lunch because we felt that these people could not afford to eat 
out, so we decided to provide lunch. And so for the first part of 
the program, we provided lunch. But as you work on this, you 
get brighter, and we said: now just a minute, why should we 
bring caterers in? We will provide materials and the people 
could make their own lunch. So we have now got these people 
becoming more self-sufficient, making their own lunch during 
the training program, and the government supplies the food. 
 
This program is going very well. One example, one man after 
three days phoned in and said he wasn’t coming for  

the fourth day; and we asked why, and he said, because he had 
landed a job as a welder. As a result of this program, he decided 
that if to find a job he had to do these certain things, he went 
out and he found one. So after three days he got a job as a 
welder. And we congratulated him and wished him well. We 
like to have our people in this program graduate early if 
possible. And so this program is going very, very well. 
 
In addition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we initiated earlier this week a 
pilot project in the city of Regina and in the city of Prince 
Albert and the city of Moose Jaw to have people who are 
able-bodied and under the age of 50 come and pick up their 
welfare cheques every month rather than us mail them out. Now 
we found that when there was a postal strike last June, 480 
people did not show up to pick up their cheques. And in order 
to have more money for the needy, we have to cut the abuses 
out of the system, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so we’ve decided that 
we would try to cut the abuses out of the system, and then we 
would have more money for the people who are truly in need. 
 
So we have implemented, starting this week, for this month in 
those three named cities, welfare cheque pick-up for people 
who are first of all, able-bodied, under 50 and have no 
dependents, no children to support. and we have found so far 
that 14 per cent of those people did not come to pick up their 
cheque. Now we will inquire as to why they were not able to 
make it, and we will probably find that some had good reason. 
 
And I will report later, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as to the final 
result of this pilot project, and I will tell you also that we will 
expand this program into the city of Saskatoon next month. 
 
I will tell you that this is a program designed not only to have 
single employables, the most transient element of our case-load, 
be responsible enough to pick up their cheque, but also to do 
some controls. And we spend five minutes asking how they’re 
doing in their job search, give them advice, ask them if they 
need any help in any other way, because our department 
provides services beyond the simple provision of cheques. 
 
So, so far this pilot project is working relatively well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And in addition, we’ve started a pilot project 
for the joint payment of rent cheques on welfare recipients who 
are single employable and under the age of 50, and we will 
consider extending this if it works. 
 
Now there may be some flaws in this. This is our first month, 
and we’re trying to get it down to working properly and as 
fairly as possible. But so far it seems to be quite popular, and 
what happens here is simply this. I hear a constant barrage from 
the members opposite about the plight of the homeless, and it is 
the policy of this government and the Government of Canada 
that everyone shall have shelter and that everyone shall receive 
an allowance for rent. And if that allowance is spent on rent, 
then everyone should have a home. 
 
So what we have done in this pilot project is we’ve made the 
cheques payable jointly to the landlord and the tenant, so that 
the tenant can only spend the rent on rent. But to prevent 
landlords from abusing tenants, the tenant 
  



 
April 6, 1988 

356 
 
 

must also co-sign the cheque, because if we simply send it to 
the landlord, the landlord could abuse the tenant. So in order to 
have a degree of fairness and responsibility, the welfare 
recipient must take the joint cheque, endorse it over the 
landlord, and deliver it. 
 
(1545) 
 
So far we haven’t had any complaints. We haven’t had any 
questions from the members opposite in question period on 
these proposals. We haven’t had the media report them. So I 
will assume, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this is working very, 
very well, because the opposition has not opposed it, the media 
has not yet found fault in it, and the opposition is not even 
rushing out right now to find fault. 
 
So I presume that this program will work very well and that we 
will continue to correct abuses because, Mr. Deputy Speaker 
. . . The members opposite are suggesting time is up, it is not 
up; they must listen to what is right, it’s their turn to listen. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, because we have been able to correct abuses in 
the welfare system, we have had more money to spend on the 
true, needy citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I can tell you today — here is the status in my department, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have 5 per cent fewer people on 
welfare today than we did a year ago. So we have fewer people 
on welfare, but we are paying more money to the people who 
are still on welfare, more than we did a year ago, or ever. So 
what we are doing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is accomplishing the 
goals of welfare reform — fewer people on welfare, correction 
of abuses, and helping those needy people who have to be on 
welfare. Certainly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do not say that 
everyone on welfare is an abuser. That is not the case at all. 
 
And we have to start categorizing people by their needs. People 
who are disabled cannot be self-sufficient and we want to help 
them in every way possible. People who are partially disabled 
can be partially self-sufficient, and these people have done a 
very, very good job of trying to be sufficient to their very best. 
And that’s why, as I indicated earlier, we do supplement work 
income, we supplement that with welfare payments so that 
people who are partially employable can fulfil themselves and 
do as much as possible. 
 
And we do have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, single mothers, and 
these are people who either never did have a husband to support 
their children, or had a husband who ran away. And I might say 
that there are such men in Saskatchewan — too many of them I 
might say — and I would say that their behaviour is immoral. 
And I think for once the members of the opposition . . . I think 
one of them nodded their head and said such behaviour is 
immoral. Yes, there is one nodding her head. 
 
So because these people are in these circumstances through no 
fault of their own, we have no objection with assisting them. 
We try our best to assist them, and here is the example of what 
we have been able to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Here is the 
situation of Saskatchewan’s welfare rates, and what we are 
today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is as  

follows. 
 
For a single employable person, Saskatchewan pays $405 per 
month, which puts us sixth in Canada. I would like to be higher, 
but due to the economic situation we can not lead in all 
categories, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We are sixth in that category. 
 
A disabled person would receive $635 per month, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We are third in Canada, and I will make every effort to 
increase that. 
 
For families, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are first in Canada. One 
adult with one child, which would usually, nine out of ten 
times, be a single mother, we pay $828 per month, which is the 
highest in Canada at $828 per month. For a family of two adults 
and two children, we pay $1,176 per month, which is also the 
highest in Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So we’ve been able, by having welfare reform abuses corrected, 
raise our rates so that we are the highest in Canada for families 
and the third highest for disabled people. 
 
If you think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the NDP could do better 
than that, if you at all believe that with their great morality they 
would show greater leadership, I ask you to consider Manitoba, 
where the disabled are ninth in Canada at $461 a month 
compared to $635 in Saskatchewan. 
 
I would ask . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — How is day care in Manitoba? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The members opposite ask, how is day 
care in Manitoba? I will tell you later. 
 
Now we are talking about the payments to the disabled — ninth 
in Manitoba for families. One adult, one child, Manitoba is 
ninth. For two adults and two children, Manitoba is fourth. 
Saskatchewan is number one in those categories. and the NDP, 
the last socialist government in North America, is ninth and 
fourth in the family category, where Saskatchewan is number 
one. 
 
Now who are the mean and nasty people? Are they the 
Conservatives? I would say not. I would say to the caring, 
rhetorical members of the NDP on the other side, and to those 
that are now in Manitoba campaigning, why have they not 
raised those rates in Manitoba where they do have power for 
another 30 days or so? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Twenty-eight. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Twenty-eight days, I’m reminded. 28. 
In 28 days, Mr. Deputy Speaker, socialist government, the 
blight of socialist government will be wiped off of the map of 
North America. And for the first time, we will have freedom 
right across the continent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — For the first time in my lifetime, I might 
say, and it will feel like a burden off of the people of 
  



 
April 6, 1988 

357 
 
 

western Canada. So I have pointed out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that we have raised the rates, reformed the system, made 
general changes, and in addition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I 
saved this for last because the members opposite would say, oh, 
you are harsh, you are harsh. 
 
In addition, the Department of Social Services, contrary to what 
the critic opposite has said — he said that the Department of 
Social Services budget is down $1.9 million. That is only a 
paper transaction. The budget is actually down; it is down $13 
million over the prior year. Last year we spent $13 million over 
the prior year. Last year we spent $13 million less than the year 
before and raised the rates and had the highest rates for families 
and the third highest rates for the disabled. And while doing all 
that, we did it because we reformed the system and there are 5 
per cent fewer people on welfare. We are paying fewer people 
more money. 
 
And how could we accomplish that? Well it wasn’t easy, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I would say that we balanced the budget last 
year at Social Services for the first time in approximately 12 
years. We’re researching — it may be 18 years since the 
Department of Social Services ever came in on budget, and we 
did it through good management. And, Mr. Speaker, I thank the 
employees of the new management team in that department for 
coming in on budget in that manner and reducing the 
overexpenditure by $11 million last year. 
 
And how did we do that? First of all we had to change the 
management, because I cannot stand here and say the 
department will run well when the NDP’s fifth column is 
managing my department, running it as badly as possible. And 
so I can tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP are correct on 
one thing: they wanted . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Where are they now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — They’re in Manitoba. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where are they going to go next month? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I don’t know where they’re going to go 
next, in answer to your question, but I would say we had better 
be careful after April 26 as to where they’re going to go. 
 
But here is the situation: last year the NDP in estimates were 
concerned as to how much money it cost my department to 
make management changes. I can tell them exactly how much it 
cost today. I’ve done the exact calculation. It cost $202,000 to 
pay their friends to go away. 
 
And I would have outright fired them except their friends had 
written up their own reports on how wonderful they were. And 
they were so wonderful that they were $11 million over budget, 
but they still had all these reports in their files — excellent 
worker, fine work. 
 
And when I checked it all out, when I checked it all out, some 
of them didn’t even have the degrees that were in their resumes. 
And I went so far as to phone the University of Manitoba. My 
chief of staff did, and he found out that 

the members the NDP had hired had listed degrees from the 
University of Manitoba that they did not own or exist. 
 
But I will not ever mention names because those people are not 
with us any more, and they are on with their lives and their 
careers, some of them in the province of Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say my department spent $202,000 to pay NDP 
fifth column managers to go away, because that is the state of 
the law, and that is how they had rigged the evidence. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let them tell the whole truth when they run 
out and shout $202,000. They saved, they saved . . . the new 
management saved $13 million. That is the best investment the 
people of Saskatchewan have ever made, is a better return than 
we ever got on a potash mine, or on a paper mill, or on a salt 
mine, or anything that the socialists ever invested in in this 
province. I can’t even calculate how many thousand per cent 
return on investment that is. 
 
So I do not, at all, ever apologize for paying $202,000 to have 
their friends go to Manitoba, but I am sorry that they will 
probably be paid to go away again. That bothers me. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have made management 
changes, and the new management is doing excellent work. And 
I might say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that some of the new 
management is old management which has been re-educated 
and rehabilitated, and they are doing excellent work. And I can 
tell you that there is a great improvement in that department. 
 
And it is not a philosophical problem for the workers in the 
field as long as they get some direction. But it was not possible 
to reform welfare, it was not possible to change the welfare 
system with management that was philosophically opposed to 
changing the welfare system. 
 
And in addition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was not possible . . . 
The members opposite ask about credentials, the credentials of 
my deputy minister. Well I will tell you: my deputy minister — 
without going too much into his personal life — was born into a 
CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) family, worked 
for the co-operative movement, was a union organizer at one 
time; he rose to management, was management in the 
co-operatives. He then was also in various other elements of 
management. He did a brief stint with the church — a church — 
the church of his choice in British Columbia, and he came back 
and he now manages the Department of Social Services. Now I 
don’t know if he’s still CCF; I don’t really care, but he does an 
excellent job, I tell you, Mr. Speaker, and that’s all that I’m 
interested in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Now they want to know about my new 
associate deputy minister. Well, I have two, both of them were 
hired by the NDP government, and both of them are doing an 
excellent job. And I am afraid that after April 26 some of this 
good management will be lured to 
  



 
April 6, 1988 

358 
 
 

Manitoba to clean up the mess. And I’m going to have to work 
hard to keep these good people here because there’s quite a 
challenge in Manitoba, where my past deputy is now in charge 
of Social Services, and I understand they are not on budget, and 
other people that are no longer with me are in Manitoba. so 
beware of exiles passing through Saskatchewan heading 
somewhere in the next while. 
 
Now members opposite . . . I think they’re satisfied I’ve 
answered their questions. Do you have any other questions? 
They don’t ask any questions in question period, Mr. Speaker. 
If they want to ask during my speech, I’ll oblige them. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve covered large areas of my 
department, but there is one other area that I wanted to cover 
that is also the responsibility of my department, and that is 
senior citizens. And I want to give you, Mr. Speaker, and the 
members here and the public, a brief run-down of what this 
government has done for senior citizens in the past six years. 
 
First of all, the first thing this government did was this 
government started building nursing homes, and since 1982 we 
took off the moratorium set by the NDP, and we have built 
1,741 additional nursing home beds. The construction costs 
alone were over $119 million. 
 
In home care we have brought it from $12.8 million to $23 
million — nearly doubling it in the last five years. We have 
implemented a chiropody program for foot care; the home 
improvement program, which applies to senior citizens as to 
everyone else — $1,500 for home improvements; enriched 
housing projects throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
(1600) 
 
The members opposite believe that senior citizens in rural 
Saskatchewan should live in duplexes and should run, at 40 
below with their coats and boots on, to visit their neighbours to 
play cards or just to get help if they needed help. 
 
So this government said, enough of that. We’re not going to 
build any more of those duplexes. It is not our policy to force 
senior citizens to go out in the cold in winter, and so we have 
built enriched housing projects where senior citizens can either 
go out for fresh air if they wish, or walk down the hallway and 
visit their relatives if they wish. 
 
And I submit, Mr. Speaker, what we have given the people and 
senior citizens is choice. Now the NDP, in their socialist 
theories, do not believe in choice, because if you are given 
choice, you may not choose socialism. We give people choice, 
and senior citizens are very happy for that choice. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, we have implemented the seniors’ 
heritage program which pays out $39.19 million to 75,000 
senior citizens’ families — a total of 107,000 senior citizens 
who receive either $500 for a single person, $700 per family, or 
half that if their income is between 25 and 30,000, and none of 
that if they are over 30,000. One hundred and seven thousand 
senior citizens 

benefit from this program out of a total of 136,000 senior 
citizens — the great majority. 
 
I can tell you, those that are over 30,000 think it’s not fair that 
they don’t benefit. But I can say to those people that it is an 
awful lot more than they ever did get, or would have gotten 
from the NDP, because senior citizens have benefitted in many, 
many ways. 
 
In addition, we have announced in this budget . . . I ask you, 
Mr. Speaker, is it immoral, as the opposition says, to raise 
senior citizens’ income plan benefits by another $15 per month? 
Is that immoral? That will be done in November. I can tell you 
what might be immoral: to have senior citizens’ benefits of $25 
per month, as the NDP did, and then to accuse a government 
that raises them to $80 a month of being immoral. That 
accusation might be immoral, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So now when we’ve raised the rates, more people qualify, so it 
is anticipated that as a result of raising the rates 27,000 senior 
citizens out of the 136,000 that there are will qualify for some 
of these benefits which are a maximum, when the 
implementation goes into effect, of $80 for single and $135 for 
a couple, as compared to the $25 that the NDP paid. And they 
are so pious over there to say they care. Oh yes, they care, Mr. 
Speaker. They care for the poor. They care and . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Nice, big words. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Yes, agreed. My colleagues say: in nice, 
big words they care. We care in cash, Mr. Speaker. That’s how 
we care for senior citizens. 
 
Saskatchewan . . . the question is seniors’ telephones. Well 
here’s what’s happening with seniors’ telephones. We offer 
specialized products to assist individuals with physical 
disabilities, to help with hearing and speech impairment. And 
that was what happened with senior citizens’ telephones. 
 
And the members opposite say: you lied to them; you didn’t 
give them free telephones. Well listen, I tell you, member from 
Humboldt, that an extra $50 per month will more than cover the 
cost of their telephone. That is more than a free telephone. What 
would you do? What would the member from Humboldt do? 
Would he give them the free telephone and take back another 
$50 a month? I don’t know. 
 
We are flexible. We changed our mind. We did what was better. 
Instead of giving them $8 a month for their telephone, we gave 
them $50 a month. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And they appreciated it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — They certainly did appreciate it. My 
colleagues point out they appreciated it. Yes, they did. In my 
constituency they appreciated it, and in many, many 
constituencies they appreciated it. 
 
Now do the members opposite have any other questions? 
Would they want to ask about insurance? Let them ask about 
government insurance. Saskatchewan Government Insurance 
provides a pension pack — 15 per 
  



 
April 6, 1988 

359 
 
 

cent discount for senior citizens. Not free, but 15 per cent 
discount. 
 
Do they know anything about foreclosures? No, we don’t 
foreclose senior citizens . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, 
foreclosures. Yes. Well they do know about foreclosures; yes. 
That’s the Leader of the Opposition’s foray — foreclosing 
farmers and then going out and promising to save them. See, 
that’s how you do it. First of all you beat them down under the 
NDP policy, then you come along as a Messiah and you save 
them. 
 
Our philosophy is, you let people help themselves, and if they 
can’t help themselves, you help them, but you never, ever let 
them get down. That’s the difference in the philosophies. 
 
With respect to transportation, senior citizens get a discount on 
bus fares, and they do not pay anything for angling licences. 
Senior citizens in Saskatchewan are better off than they ever 
have been. And I say to the 136,000 senior citizens in 
Saskatchewan, that if they honestly think back as to how things 
were financially and how they are now, that almost every one of 
them is better off now than they were under the NDP — 
financially, health-wise, and in many, many ways. And yet the 
NDP will go around scaring them, saying: they’ll take your 
pension away; oh, they’ll take away your medicare. That is the 
tactics of the NDP — the “mediscare” party. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, they’ll take away the drug plan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Now the members opposite refer to the 
drug plan, and they say we took it away. It’s still there. Senior 
citizens are still getting their drugs. Senior citizens are still 
paying for their drugs. 
 
Let us compare the incomes of senior citizens to what they 
might have received under the NDP. If you are a single senior 
citizen in this province, you are entitled to the following 
benefits, disregarding anything that you may have saved: old 
age security pension, $308.19; guaranteed income supplement, 
$366.28; Saskatchewan income plan, $65 rising to $80. This is 
an annual income of $9,603.64 — not a large amount of money, 
I agree, but more than senior citizens who are single ever 
received in the history of Canada and more than the NDP ever 
paid them. 
 
For a senior citizens couple, they are guaranteed an income 
under this government and the federal Progressive Conservative 
government, a guaranteed income of $15,542 for a senior 
couple. This is regardless of any money they may have saved or 
any other pensions they may have earned. That is a guaranteed 
minimum. 
 
And I say that senior citizens, while they cannot live high, 
senior citizens can get by, and they are. In my constituency, 
they are grateful and they have smiles on their faces, and they 
are living longer than they ever did and they are living happier 
than they ever did, and they would continue to be happy if the 
NDP didn’t go around scaring them every month. 
 
So could the NDP please stop bothering senior citizens. Leave 
them alone. Let them enjoy life, and keep out of 

their lives. They are not interested in socialism. They are not 
interested in your scare tactics. Stay away from senior citizens. 
They are happy; leave them alone. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve gone on maybe a little longer 
than I had anticipated. Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a reason I 
have gone on that long, because the members opposite have 
stood up there for days and days on the budget and the throne 
speech and said, the members of the government are afraid to 
speak. The members of the government won’t defend what 
they’re doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am not here defending anything. I am here 
praising what we are doing. It needs no defence. It is right; it is 
moral. It is proper and it is best for the people of Saskatchewan. 
And we’re going to keep doing what we are doing, and we 
don’t care how long the NDP snivel on the other side. We don’t 
care how long they hoot and holler, and we don’t care how 
hypocritical they ever get. 
 
This government turns a blind eye to the socialism on the other 
side, and we will govern for the people, and that is that. We will 
do what is right. and that’s how it will go in this province 
because there will be leadership from this government — fiscal 
leadership, managerial leadership and moral leadership. 
 
And that’s how it’s going to be, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’m 
going to support this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to have 
the opportunity to take part in this debate, and I want to 
apologize in advance for the quality of the recording. I want 
members to know they should not adjust their sets. I want the 
television audience to know it’s not their television set that’s 
not working, it’s my voice box. That is to say, if we still have 
an audience after what we’ve been listening to for the last hour. 
 
I don’t know why I allow myself to be surprised by anything 
that that man says, Mr. Speaker. I mean, we’ve been hearing 
him going around this province for the last few years saying 
some of the most outrageous things that any of us have ever 
heard and today, I think, he topped all of his previous records. 
 
Who would have expected us to come here today and hear some 
of the things that we heard? I guess we could have expected the 
vicious right-wing attack on the homosexual community. I 
mean we’ve heard words like that from him before and from 
some of his colleagues, and so I guess we could have 
anticipated that. 
 
I am not qualified to answer his scriptures with other scriptures. 
That’s not within the area of my competence, although I could 
observe in passing that one wonders how our Saviour would 
have reacted to the degree of intolerance and hatred that 
underlay the words that the member used. My understanding of 
the life of Christ is one of love — a life of love, and a life of 
tolerance and a life of acceptance, and not a life of intolerance 
and hatred as we heard spewing forth from the mouth of the 
member today. But I shouldn’t have been surprised about that, 
although I was surprised about the severity of the attack. 
  



 
April 6, 1988 

360 
 
 

What I did not expect, Mr. Speaker, was that we would also 
hear attacked here today the United Church of Canada. The 
United Church of Canada is, I believe, the largest Protestant 
denomination in the province. I’m not going to answer the 
member’s charge, I’m not going to answer the minister’s charge 
about whether or not they’re being run by some political party. 
I’ll leave that to members of the church itself, Mr. Speaker. But 
I don’t recall having heard any minister of the Crown ever make 
more shocking allegations with respect to a major church in 
Canada than I heard from the minister today. 
 
I think it was an inappropriate and pathetic attack, and I think 
quite below the level of dignity, the level of decorum that we 
expect from ministers of the Crown and, indeed, from all 
members of this House. 
 
The minister said that he could make the assumption, he could 
make the assumption that we were accepting of his programs 
because we haven’t been asking him questions in question 
period. I want to assure the minister that we’re not staying away 
from him at all. There will be times, many times in this House 
when we’ll be able to come after him with respect to those 
ridiculous, absurd, right-wing programs that he is instituting in 
his department. 
 
My constituency has the misfortune of having a very large 
number of welfare recipients. There are many, many welfare 
recipients in my constituency. My office deals with those 
problems all of the time. We have a keen understanding, a keen 
understanding of the kind of programs that he has instituted in 
this province. and if he believes that those so-called welfare 
reforms are being accepted by the unfortunate people who are 
on welfare, he should come with me sometime around my 
constituency and talk to the people, the people who have been 
affected by these so-called reforms. 
 
To call what he has done “reforms,” is a perversion of the 
English language that almost defies description. These are not 
reforms. This is the imposition of some foolish, red-neck, 
right-wing agenda that has caused untold hardship — untold 
hardship, Mr. Speaker. My constituents must laugh when they 
hear that minister lecture this House about morality. For what 
can be a greater immorality than to squeeze and crush the poor 
in the way that his programs have squeezed and crushed the 
poor in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — When he was talking about senior citizens, 
Mr. Speaker, he talked about the fact that we should leave them 
alone, let them make their own choices, Mr. Speaker, we can’t 
leave them alone. We can’t leave them alone for the simple 
reason that wherever we go, and wherever we meet senior 
citizens, they want to talk to us. They want to complain to us 
about program after program of this government, about cut after 
cut, about abolition of programs that they’ve enjoyed, and these 
are the experienced people in our society, Mr. Speaker. These 
are people who have seen governments come and have seen 
governments go, and what they want to tell us, Mr. Speaker, is 
that this is the worst government 

Saskatchewan has ever had. That’s what they want to tell us. 
 
(1615) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — And so we can’t follow the advice of the 
minister. We can’t leave the seniors alone simply because they 
won’t leave us alone. They await the day when a general 
election will happen in this province and we’ll see a return to 
sanity in government. 
 
But speaking of choices, Mr. Speaker, these seniors, and a lot of 
other seniors in this province living in the two constituencies of 
Eastview and Elphinstone, are going to have a choice, and we 
will see then how they judge the program of this government 
and this government’s record. We’ll see then how they judge 
that program. 
 
Now I had no intention of addressing myself to those remarks; 
it just happened to be my misfortune to follow that particular 
minister in the speaking order. I earnestly wish that I could have 
followed anyone else on that side of the House. 
 
I want to talk about the budget, Mr. Speaker. I want to talk 
about that part of the budget that referred to the free trade 
agreement. The budget makes a number of references to the free 
trade agreement which, I submit, are naive and which are 
misleading expressions of hope about the effect of the free trade 
agreement. 
 
The budget refers to the agreement, saying that “(it) will 
provide us with flexibility to deal with changes in the 
international market-place.” Mr. Speaker, the free trade 
agreement will do no such thing. Secondly, the minister says 
that it will “ensure the building of a more diversified 
Saskatchewan economy.” That, Mr. Speaker, is a bunch of 
bunk; that will not happen. The members opposite know it will 
not happen, and it ought not to have been included in this 
budget statement. 
 
The budget says that the free trade agreement “will strengthen 
(our) position . . . by offering us new economic opportunities.” 
That, Mr. Speaker, is not true. Taken overall, the free trade 
agreement is going to destroy jobs in this province . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was saying that it 
is not true, by saying that this agreement offers us new 
economic opportunities. The fact of the matter is that overall 
this agreement is going to cost us economic opportunities, that 
this agreement will cost us jobs in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The budget also says, Mr. Speaker, that it . . . the agreement 
reduces the threat of protectionist measures from the United 
States. That is not true, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We went into these negotiations precisely because we wanted to 
reduce the threat of protectionist measures from the United 
States, and everyone knows we did not accomplish that. The 
American trade laws remain exactly 
  



 
April 6, 1988 

361 
 
 

the same as they were before these negotiations started. Not 
only that, the agreement recognizes that the United States is free 
to amend its trade laws in any way it wants to, and it 
acknowledges that they have the right to do that. Now how is it, 
how could it possibly be considered that this reduces the threat 
of protectionist measures? 
 
The fact of the matter is that the omnibus trade Bill, about 
which we’ve heard so much in the last three years, is now 
practically out of Congress. The discussions between the 
members of Congress have . . . to produce a compromise Bill 
are near an end, and the fact of the matter is that the Bill will 
apply to Canada. Canada is not going to be exempted from this 
Bill, and the fact is that it is going to impact on Canada. And we 
did not receive any reduction in the threat of protectionist 
measures — those measures continue. 
 
And I think it ironic that, considering that it was the threat of 
the countervailing duties that more than anything else brought 
us into these negotiations, that we stand now in April of 1988 in 
exactly the same position as before with respect to 
countervailing duties. We are not one whit better off than we 
were before this started. 
 
The answer that I may get from the minister, if he chooses to 
respond to any of this, is that there is now a binational panel 
which is somehow supposed to make this process more fair. 
 
The answer to that, Mr. Speaker, is that the binational panel will 
do no such thing. The binational panel plays about the most 
insignificant role in the application of the American trade law 
that you could possibly conceive. You had a trade agreement, or 
trade laws in the United States, which set up a system in which 
the courts have no role. The courts have no role. 
 
Under the American trade law, as in the Canadian trade law, the 
only way you get into the courts is if some tribunal makes an 
order which it has no power to make, or where it somehow 
otherwise abuses its jurisdiction. The incidents of that 
happening, either in the United States or Canada, are practically 
nil. It is almost unknown that that would happen, and all we’ve 
done in this agreement is take out the courts from the system 
and replace it with the binational panel. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it is a wild exaggeration to think that more 
than 1 per cent of our trade cases could ever get before this 
panel. This panel is going to be the most non-news item of the 
l980s and the 1990s. It simply isn’t going to have any work, and 
anybody that goes around this province or this country 
suggesting that the binational panel protects us, with respect to 
the application of the American Trade law, is just dreaming. It 
is not going to happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now some of the magpies opposite have asked me why I’m 
opposed to free trade, and the answer simply is that I am not; I 
am not opposed to free trade. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why are you opposed to the Americans? 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — The minister from his seat asked why I’m 

opposed to the Americans, and I am not opposed to the 
Americans, Mr. Speaker. I am not opposed to the Americans, 
and I am not opposed to free trade. What I am opposed to is this 
agreement — this agreement, which for the most part has 
nothing to do with trade, and which does not provide us with 
free trade with the United States. It provides us with something 
else altogether. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has for many, many years 
hated the tariff. The tariff has cost this country a great deal of 
money. It has cost this province a great deal of money. And 
generally speaking, there is a reservoir of sympathy in this 
province for the reduction and for the elimination of tariffs, and 
I share that view — and I share that view. 
 
The problem, the problem, Mr. Speaker, is not the reduction of 
tariffs. If that’s all this agreement were about, we wouldn’t be 
having a debate about it. But that’s not what this agreement is 
about. That’s only a small part of this agreement. This 
agreement goes on, in chapter after chapter, to do things which 
horrify Canadians — which horrify Canadians. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — And the federal government knew this, and 
the members opposite would know it if they’d take the time to 
read the agreement. The federal government knew it, and we 
know they knew it, Mr. Speaker, because one of the documents 
that were leaked to The Toronto Star in 1985 was the federal 
government communication strategy. And that communication 
strategy, Mr. Speaker, made it clear that the federal government 
understood that the more Canadians find out about this 
agreement, the less likely they are to support it. 
 
And the fact of the matter is that the more Canadians are 
finding out about this agreement, the more opposed to it they 
are. And the polls taken by the party of the members opposite 
and by private polling agencies show that. Canadians generally 
favour the notion of free trade, but a growing percentage of 
Canadians are opposed to this agreement, and it comes back to 
the point that this agreement has, for the most part, nothing to 
do with free trade. 
 
Let me tell you some of the provisions of this agreement which 
are causing so much concern across this country, and which 
ought to concern the members of this House. Let me say, first 
of all . . . first of all point out the provisions respecting 
investment. 
 
The provisions respecting investment, Mr. Speaker, have to do 
with who owns the Canadian economy. The question of who 
owns the Canadian economy has been a public issue in this 
province for at least 25 years. For 25 years we have been 
worried about the fact that such a large percentage of 
non-Canadians own the mines and the factories and the 
businesses in this country — indeed own our resources. We 
have, according to recent numbers, Mr. Speaker, something like 
36 per cent of the Canadian economy is owned by 
non-Canadians. 
 
Now to give that number some perspective, let me tell the 
members opposite that if you compare it to the countries 
  



 
April 6, 1988 

362 
 
 

of Europe, for example, the difference is shocking. The extent 
of foreign ownership in European countries varies between 1 
and 2 per cent, Mr. Speaker — 1 and 2 per cent — compared to 
our situation where 36 per cent of our economy is owned by 
non-Canadians. It happens that the majority of those are 
American. 
 
You would be thinking, in light of those circumstances, that 
Canada, in order to ensure that in the future we will be in 
charge of our own country, that we would be introducing 
measures to ensure that we watch that situation very carefully. 
I’m not saying, Mr. Speaker, I’m not saying that foreign 
investment is not welcome here. Very often we are in situations 
where . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I am obviously striking a nerve, Mr. Speaker. 
I brought them up to the front desks. I’ve got the largest 
audience that we’ve seen here for some time, and the din over 
there just is non-stop. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Let me go back to what’s at stake here. 
What’s at stake here is the ability, is the capacity of Canadians 
to control their own economic future. We have here a situation 
where 36 per cent of our country is owned by foreign capital. 
We have a situation where our government ought to be taking 
steps to ensure that that situation does not deteriorate. Neither I 
nor the member from Lloydminster wants to see our economy 
owned by non-Canadians. He does not want that to happen. 
 
But instead of strengthening the laws to ensure that we are 
reviewing foreign take-overs, that we are reviewing purchases 
by entrepreneurs from outside Canada, we find an agreement 
that is going in exactly the opposite direction. The fact of the 
matter is, Mr. Speaker, that by 1992 the only transactions, the 
only purchases by Americans that will be reviewed in Canada 
are purchases where the selling price exceeds $150 million. 
Now was the member aware of that? — $150 million dollars. 
 
Apart from that, any American can come up here and buy any 
business at all and pay his money and take over the business. 
Now why would we be doing that? Mr. Speaker, why is that a 
good idea? At the very moment when we should be alert to the 
dangers of the situation, we face our face exactly in the opposite 
direction, and we say we’re not even going to review these 
transactions. 
 
And this, Mr. Speaker, this is not a statute that we are debating. 
This is not some new regime where we are going to, by 
legislation, change the way in which we view foreign 
take-overs. This is being incorporated into an international 
treaty, into a binding treaty which we cannot amend if we want 
to, which we can only amend if we have the consent of the 
United States to its amendment. It is being cast in stone, Mr. 
Speaker. Our option, with respect to investment, is to do what 
we should do, and that is to ensure that our children and our 
grandchildren don’t live in an economy which is entirely owned 
by non-Canadians. That’s our alternative. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Mitchell: — And, Mr. Speaker, the part about this that is 
so outrageous is that the federal Conservative government is 
taking this very important public issue, which has been debated 
across this country for 25 years, and is putting it into a trade 
agreement — into a trade agreement — in such a way that it is 
irretrievable. We can’t get it back. The only way we can get it 
back is to abrogate the whole agreement. Now that is stupid. 
That is not fair, and that is certainly not in the best interests of 
Canada. 
 
(1630) 
 
And that’s only one example, Mr. Speaker. That’s only one 
example. I would like to hear someone from the other side 
explain to this province, and to this country, why they would 
treat energy in the way in which it is treated in this agreement 
— why they would treat energy in this way. What they have 
done by this agreement, Mr. Speaker, is to take away from 
Canada, to take away from Canada crucial, crucial powers with 
respect to the management of this important resource. 
 
Instead of our energy resource decisions being made in cities 
like Ottawa and Edmonton and Regina, those decisions are 
going to be made in cities like Washington and Denver and 
Houston. That’s what this agreement does, and I ask myself: 
why would any government want to do this? Why, for example, 
would any government want to strip itself of the authority to say 
to the Americans, we are no longer going to supply oil to you at 
the rate in which we have been supplying it. 
 
Now I ask that question, Mr. Speaker, because in the last few 
months, indeed the last few years, we have been supplying 
crude oil to the United States at an unprecedentedly high level. 
Now there’s nothing wrong with that, Mr. Speaker, except that 
we in western Canada have a limited amount of oil in the 
ground. The most optimistic predictions with respect to the 
reserves of crude oil in Canada are somewhere between 15 and 
20 years, but at the present rate of production we have to lower 
that figure appreciably. We’re getting down into the territory, 
Mr. Speaker, where our oil may be all run out, our conventional 
crude oil reserves may be all run out within a dozen years, and 
yet in this agreement we guarantee that we will not restrict the 
supply of oil to the Americans over the average of the last 36 
months, and that that will continue for ever. And the only way 
in which we can cut back the amount that the Americans have 
been receiving is to find that we are running out of oil, in which 
event we can cut them back, but at the same time, Mr. Speaker, 
we have to cut ourselves back by exactly the same proportion. 
 
Now why would any government enter into such a stupid 
provision like that? And I would like to hear one of these noisy 
people stand up in their place and explain why this country 
would enter into an agreement such as that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Furthermore, for reasons which really escape 
understanding, we have for ever tied ourself to the world price. 
Now we may want to follow the world price;  
  



 
April 6, 1988 

363 
 
 

that should be our decision. You and I and the others in this 
Assembly and in the Commons in Ottawa ought to be able to 
decide how much we’re going to charge ourself for our own 
resource. 
 
Members nod and they agree that that’s a good idea, but I say to 
them that under this agreement they can’t do that. They can’t do 
that. They have . . . this agreement ties us to the world price for 
ever. Now when the price of oil is $16.50 U.S. a barrel, nobody 
may be very concerned . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. The hon. member, as all 
members realize, has been having some difficulty addressing 
the Assembly because of almost continuous interruption, and I 
would like to ask the hon. members to refrain from that and to 
allow the member from Fairview to continue. Why is the 
member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Speaker, our remarks to the member has 
been invited by the member. He had asked that he would be 
more than pleased to entertain some questions from us, so we 
are asking those questions. But if you would allow, Mr. Speaker 
. . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. There is 
provision, according to our rules, for members to ask questions 
of another member who is speaking. However, they must ask 
the member to give way if he is willing to entertain such. You 
may do that if that . . .  
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Speaker, then I do ask the hon. member if 
he would entertain a question from me in regards to agriculture 
and why his law firm is acting on behalf of a bank . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The question that a 
member . . . Order, please! Order, please. Order. The question 
that a member raises must be directly on the topic on which the 
member is speaking at the time. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — I accept your ruling, so I would just ask the 
member if he would entertain a question. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Would the member entertain the question? 
Leave is granted. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Judging by the foolishness that we’ve heard, 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think I should. And my answer is going to 
be that I’ll accept questions when his leader starts accepting 
questions in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — His leader was asked that same question at 
the end of his remarks and he declined, and I feel that I’m 
perfectly entitled to do that, particularly in view of the 
nonsense. If that member wants to ask me any questions, I’ll be 
glad to answer them outside this Chamber. Glad to. 
 
Now I was saying, Mr. Speaker, that while . . . I was talking 
about the price of oil before we were so rudely interrupted. I 
must say I do hope the members will bear with me and heckle 
me the next time I speak when my voice is stronger. This is 
really a work-out for my failing vocal cords. But I’m not asking 
for sympathy, I want to made this point. 

While the price of crude oil is $16.50 U.S. a barrel, this 
question about being able to price our own crude, our own 
petroleum, may not seem of much importance. But what’s 
going to happen when the OPEC countries regain control of the 
supply situation, as they almost certainly will, certainly in the 
next while, certainly in our lifetime, certainly while many of us 
continue in this Chamber? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, how are we going to feel when the world 
price starts to go $25 and $35 and $50 and $75 a barrel — and 
these are not alarmist numbers. These are not alarmist numbers 
because consultants to this government over the last 15, 18 
years have been advising this government with respect to where 
the price of crude oil was going to go. 
 
And in the 1970s, these consultants, who are the best 
international consultants in the business, were predicting energy 
prices would rise into the 70, 80, $90 a barrel range, even up to 
$100 a barrel. 
 
Now do we want to charge $100 a barrel at the pump at Outlook 
for our gas and oil? Do we want an agreement which ties us to 
that kind of a price and robs us of our sovereign right to charge 
ourself as much as we want to for our own resource? I think 
not. 
 
I think these provisions are short-sighted and wrong. What they 
are is a complete capitulation to the oil industry in Canada, and 
I don’t think anybody would seriously quarrel with that. It is the 
oil industry in Canada which dictated, which practically drafted 
these particular provisions. 
 
And while I’m on that point, and to show you the truth of what 
I’m saying, let me prove it. Let me prove it, Mr. Member. The 
provisions respecting energy also deal with the question of 
subsidy. Now this whole agreement is based upon the notion 
that subsidies from the government are bad things, and that 
subsidies from the government should stop. But I want to read 
you Article 906 of the agreement, which is in the energy 
chapter, and it’s headed as follows, Mr. Speaker: “Government 
Incentives for Energy Resource Development.” and it says the 
following, and I quote: 
 

Both parties have agreed to allow existing or future 
incentives for oil and gas exploration, development and 
related activities in order to maintain the reserve base for 
these energy resources. 

 
So there is . . . The one subsidy in this whole agreement that is 
acknowledged as being desirable, and which can remain in 
effect, is the subsidy to the oil industry for exploration and for 
development and for related activities. 
 
So by this agreement we practically strip ourself of the right as 
a government to intervene, by way of subsidy programs, to 
assist our industry, to assist our entrepreneurs, to assist our 
small businesses, and at the same time we agree explicitly and 
in print that we may maintain our . . . we will allow our existing 
and our future incentive programs for oil and gas explorations 
and 
  



 
April 6, 1988 

364 
 
 

development and related activities. 
 
Now that is really something, and I think it goes to show quite 
clearly that it is the oil industry which drafted, which was the 
guiding force behind chapter 9 of the free trade agreement 
dealing with energy. 
 
I want now to turn to one other aspect of the agreement which I 
have never heard referred to by members opposite, either inside 
this House or outside this House, and that is the provisions 
respecting government procurement. Now for the information 
of members, government procurement is simply government 
contracting. It covers what government buys; it covers the 
services that government buys. 
 
Governments in this province and in this country have used its 
demand for goods and services in a very judicial way over the 
years — sometimes not so judicial, but always it has used this 
aspect of its operations to support local business. And we’ve all 
agreed that that was a good thing. We’ve known all kinds of 
situations where through contracts with the government, a 
business has started, or a business has expanded, or a failing 
business has been revived. Jobs have been created. Jobs have 
been saved. 
 
The total purchasing power of the governments in Canada with 
respect to its own goods and services is huge. It is the 
overwhelmingly large source of demand in our economy. And 
yet under this agreement this practice that we followed of 
favouring local contractors goes out the window. any contract 
in excess of $25,000 will, when all the dust has settled, be gone. 
We will lose our power as a Government of Saskatchewan or a 
Government of Canada to favour local business. American 
entrepreneurs have the same rights with respect to tendering and 
winning these contracts as the most favoured Canadian. 
 
Now why would we do that, Mr. Speaker? What is there in this 
agreement that would justify us agreeing to such a silly and 
outrageous thing? Why would we do that? I’ve searched this 
agreement with a fine-tooth comb to see what it is that the 
United States is giving to Canada that would make it sensible 
and worthwhile for us to give up our government contracting 
powers. Just as I’ve searched for the pay-off — for the pay-off 
for us doing these outrageous things with respect to foreign 
investment and energy, so I’ve looked for it in contracting, and 
I can’t find it. I don’t know what we got in this agreement that 
would justify doing these things. 
 
Now I don’t think I — let me say it this way: I have never 
talked to a business person in this province who was aware of 
that government contracting provision. These are business 
people in Regina and Saskatoon, many of whom have had 
government contracts in the past. Without exception — without 
exception, Mr. Speaker, they’re shocked by this provision, and I 
think that all of us ought to be. 
 
Now let me draw to a conclusion, Mr. Speaker, by — let me not 
draw to a conclusion. Let me deal with something that I think 
has to be dealt with in detail. The agreement contains a chapter 
with respect to the service sector of our economy. It provides 
for the almost unlimited free trade 

in services. 
 
Now what is a service, Mr. Speaker? Well in the beginning, let 
me say that the service sector is by any measure the giant — the 
giant sector in our economy. The service sector employs 
approximately 70 per cent of the people who are employed in 
Canada — 70 per cent. So it is an enormously important sector 
of our economy. 

(1645) 

Examples of what is covered by the notion of the service sector 
are included in this so-called trade agreement. Let me just refer 
to some of them, Mr. Speaker. The services include practically 
all mining. Services include all construction — practically all 
construction. It includes distributive trade services. It includes 
practically all aspects of insurance and practically all aspects of 
real estate. It includes many, many examples of — under the 
heading “commercial services,” all the way from cleaning, 
credit bureau, collection agency services, advertising and 
promotional, public relations, janitor service in buildings, 
hotels, hotel reservations, security and investigation services, 
auto renting — many, many professions, Mr. Speaker — 
engineering, architectural, accounting, not law — not law, Mr. 
Speaker. 

I mean, there were a lot of lawyers involved in the drafting of 
this agreement, and they very wisely exempted themselves from 
the provisions of chapter 14 with respect to services. Whatever 
you may say about lawyers, at least, Mr. Speaker, they’re not 
dumb. They had the sense to write themselves out of this 
provision. And it goes on to include computer services and 
many aspects of agricultural services. 

Now what have we done here? Well what we have done here, 
Mr. Speaker, in entering into a free trade agreement for 
services, is become the first country in the world to do so. No 
country has previously entered into an agreement for free trade 
and services. 

The MacDonald commission, which was a strong proponent of 
comprehensive free trade negotiations with the United States, 
when it came to the question of services, recommended against 
entering into an agreement for the free trade in services, for two 
reasons. First reason was that there was no precedent for it; 
never been done before. The United States has been taking this 
idea around to many countries in the world, and everybody has 
told them to get lost, until they come to Canada — come to 
Canada, they don’t get lost; we get lost, Mr. Speaker. 

The second reason why the MacDonald commission 
recommended against it is that no one has done any research 
with respect to the impact of this free trade in services 
agreement. No one has done any research and, as a result, no 
one has any clear understanding of what the implications are. 
And in spite of that, we went ahead and did it. We went ahead 
and did it. 

Now we enjoy a trade surplus with the United States with 
respect to most aspects of trade. But when you come to trade in 
services, Mr. Speaker, this is the area in which we are in a 
deficit position, a substantial deficit position. The 
  



 
April 6, 1988 

365 
 
 

United States is providing far more business service services in 
Canada than we are to the United States, and what we’ve done 
here is opened up the whole of our service sector to penetration 
by American entrepreneurs. 
 
Now there may be some areas in which we want them to come 
up here and do something, I don’t know; I can’t think of one, 
but there may be a service which we can’t provide that we want 
them to provide. And there may be other services where we 
don’t want them here at all. 
 
One of the things they’re entitled to do under this agreement, 
one of the things that they’re entitled to do is to provide health 
care facilities management services. Now that includes the 
running of hospitals, the running of nursing homes, the running 
of medical clinics. So the Americans are going to be able to 
come up here and get involved in that kind of a business. 
 
Now what are the implications of that in the long run, Mr. 
Speaker? Let’s assume that in 20 years when we’re all gone 
from this House and our children are here, they decide that the 
Americans who are up here running our nursing homes are not 
meeting our needs. Something has to be done about it. And in 
the wisdom of this legislature, we feel that what ought to be 
done about it is that Saskatchewan people own their own 
nursing homes, or that the families of the occupants own their 
own nursing homes, or whatever. I can’t imagine. I can’t see 
clearly 20 years down the road to know what we might want to 
do. 
 
But the point I want to make is that under this agreement we 
wouldn’t be able to do anything. Under this agreement we’d be 
a helpless bystander. Under this agreement we could not affect 
that situation one whit. And I think that’s silly. Why would we 
want to tie our hands in that way? What did we get in return 
that made it worthwhile for us to strip ourself, strip ourself of 
our ability to handle situations such as that? 
 
We have stripped ourself of our sovereignty, just as we have 
done in energy, just as we have done in investment, just as we 
have done in government contracting, so we also do in services 
— strip ourself of the ability to act as a responsible government 
should. 
 
Now let me also refer to our cultural institutions. I do this 
because I know that the minister responsible has had some 
pretty tough moments, had some pretty tough moments talking 
about the cultural part of the agreement to those involved in 
culture in this province. We are told by our Prime Minister and 
by others that culture is exempt from this agreement. And we 
all assumed that our Prime Minister was telling us the truth. 
When we got the agreement, Mr. Speaker, and opened it up and 
looked at article 2005, we found the following. In subsection 1 
it says: 
 

Cultural industries are exempt from the provisions of this 
agreement. 

 
And we thought great, great, the Prime Minister has actually 
told us the truth. But then we turned the page, from page 296 to 
297, and we looked at subsection 2, and we see the following. 
Listen to this very closely, Mr. Speaker: 

Notwithstanding any other provision in this agreement, a 
party (which is one of the countries) may take measures of 
equivalent commercial effect in response to actions that 
would have been inconsistent with this agreement, but for 
subsection 1. 

 
Imagine! Some exemption, eh? Subsection 1 says culture is 
exempt. Subsection 2 comes along and says, in spite of that 
exemption, if one of the countries does something which is 
inconsistent with this agreement, then the other country can 
take actions, take measures, of equivalent commercial effect. 
 
What are we saying there? Well you can just imagine how the 
Americans must be laughing at us. They’re saying, in effect, 
sure, sure, I know culture is exempt, but just you try one thing 
to interfere with the flow of American books or magazines or 
videos or records or movies into Canada — just you try 
anything like that, and I’ll tell you that that’s inconsistent with 
this agreement — and it would be — and we would be able, 
that is the United States, would be able to take measures of 
equivalent commercial effect. That’s what the Americans are 
saying to us. 
 
I’m not just making this up. I saw with my own eyes a Senate 
hearing, A Senate hearing on the subject on one of the 
American channels, and I heard a senator say those precise 
things. And he was assured by Clayton Yeutter, the big 
heavy-duty guy on trade issues in the United States, and he told 
them: senator, that’s correct — senator, that’s correct. 
 
So no wonder our minister responsible here runs into some flak 
when he meets with the cultural industry in this province, 
because they’ve looked at those provisions and they realize that 
our Canadian culture has been exposed in this so-called trade 
agreement to a real danger. We, in effect, have stripped ourself 
of the ability to protect our own culture. 
 
Now I happen to think that the Canadian culture is strong and 
vibrant and that we’ve been managing it very well over the past 
few years. It is not easy to live next to such a large, such a 
dominating country. We all love to watch American movies, we 
all like to read American books, we watch American television, 
but we’re not American; we’re striving to be Canadian, and we 
have to maintain the tools with which we can continue to be 
Canadian. 
 
This agreement, Mr. Speaker, strips us of important powers that 
we are going to require in order to ensure that our country 
remains that, that our country remains a country and that our 
children and grandchildren will remain Canadian in every sense 
of the term. 
 
Now I ask myself, Mr. Speaker, why — there are many other 
parts of this agreement that are disturbing and that are grounds 
in themselves for opposing this agreement. They include the 
provisions with respect to agriculture in this agreement, and 
we’re going to have that debate some day in this House, and I’ll 
be glad to have it. 
 
We have fallen miles short of achieving our bottom line in the 
negotiations which would secure access to the 
  



 
April 6, 1988 

366 
 
 

American market. There is no way in which that is assured by 
this agreement. The ability of Canada to deal as a sovereign 
nation with third countries is seriously compromised by this 
agreement. There are provisions in this agreement which allow 
the new American investors, who will be able to come in here 
and buy up without any kind of review, to bring along with 
them their management and professional staff, bring along with 
them into Canada, so instead of Canadians getting those jobs — 
which they have for generations — they are now going to be 
filled by non-Canadians. 
 
Now I do want to come to a conclusion here because the time is 
late. Mr. Speaker, I’ve asked in this debate, and I ask again: 
why would Canada agree to some of the things that are in this 
agreement? I mean, I can understand concluding a trade 
agreement; I can understand trying to negotiate tariffs down and 
out, and I would agree with that. And I can also agree with 
trying to reduce the number of border hassles that take place 
with products such as pork and that sort of thing. I mean, I 
understand about that. And if that’s all that was in this 
agreement, we’d support it. But it’s the other multitude — the 
other multitude of things that are in here without any quid pro 
quo, without any concessions from the United States to balance 
them off, and which propose such a danger to Canada. 
 
These are the things that disturb me and I ask myself: why 
would any government agree with these things? Why would we 
open our country in this way to American investment? Why 
would we strip ourselves of these important powers with respect 
to the energy industry and why would we expose our culture in 
this way? 
 
Now one answer is that the agreement was poorly negotiated. 
And I think most serious-minded Canadians are coming to the 
understanding that the agreement was poorly negotiated. 
 
Another answer was that the Prime Minister had so much 
political capital tied up in this agreement that he felt he had to 
get an agreement no matter what it looked like, so he even 
settled for this one in order to try and save his political hide. 
 
But that’s not a sufficient answer either, Mr. Speaker, 
considering the enormity of what we’ve done. When you 
consider the enormity of what we’ve given away, there had to 
be a more fundamental reason and it is this: these people agree 
with the things that I’ve said. They agree that it is appropriate to 
open up the ownership of Canada to American intrusion in this 
way. They agree that the only deals that should be reviewed are 
those where the selling price exceeds $150 million. They agree 
that our energy industry should in effect be run out of 
Washington and Houston and Denver. They agree that 
government’s decisions with respect to contracting should be 
stripped away so that Americans have the same access as the 
most favoured Canadians. 
 
And they have somehow arrived at the startling conclusion that 
our culture no longer needs protection. Provisions that countries 
like France and Germany established for 8 or 900 years 
wouldn’t think of agreeing to, these people have agreed to. 

This agreement appears to be entirely consistent with the Tory 
agenda for Canada. A far-right-wing radical agenda in which 
they are seeking to transform our society from what it has been 
over these many years to a purely market-driven economy, 
where government sits in the corner, helpless, unable to do 
anything to protect its own citizens. 
 
Well I don’t agree with that, Mr. Speaker. My party doesn’t 
agree with it either, and a growing number of Canadians take 
the strongest kind of objection to many, many provisions in this 
agreement. And it will be reflected, it will be reflected come the 
next federal election when this, hopefully, will be the main 
issue. And we will fight this agreement in every corner . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. It being 5 o’clock, this House now 
stands adjourned until tomorrow at 2 o’clock p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 


