


















































May 19, 1988 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 May 19, 1988 
 

1481 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Education 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, I’d like to ask you where the 
money for the northern library services is coming out of in the 
education estimates. Is it coming out of the Saskatchewan 
library money, is it coming out of the grants for libraries, or is it 
coming out of some other fund, and if so, which fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The money for the new northern 
headquarters is in the grants to libraries subvote 30, I think that 
is. 
 
Ms. Smart: — The total amount of money for the northern 
library services, then, is coming out of the grants for libraries? 
Well, Mr. Minister, if it’s coming out of the grants for libraries, 
that’s an additional amount of money that’s coming out of that 
grant money which, as I pointed out to you already, has only 
gone up by $87,000 over the last six years, and you said 
$260,000 was going for northern library services. 
 
Now I’m very pleased to see northern library services 
developed. It’s long overdue, and they should have a lot more 
money for library services in the North. But if it’s coming out 
of the grants for libraries which is already only at a one and a 
half per cent increase since 1983, and you’ve had an 8 per cent 
decrease in that amount of money over the last two years, then 
that means less money even for the regional libraries and the 
municipal libraries; is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In constructing this year’s library 
budget, there was a 2 per cent increase for regional libraries and 
the cities, but similar to our thinking last year, it was the 
northern libraries that, I think, we needed to focus on because 
there is some catching up to do there, and part of that is the 
northern headquarters; and as well there was a substantial 
increase to the northern libraries from 88,500 to 111,000 there. 
 
What I’m saying is there’s a 6.8 per cent increase in grants to 
libraries, and on a percentage basis, northern libraries gets a 
very big increase, but all the regionals and the city libraries get 
the 2 per cent. So I think you can see what we’re intending to 
do here — some extra focus on the northern libraries; other than 
that everybody else got the same increase as other parties in 
education did. 
 
Ms. Smart: — But other parties in education didn’t take a 10 
per cent decrease last year, Mr. Minister. And I just want to 
make the point that all your hype about the information age is 
— all that — it’s hot air; there’s no substance. You’ve 
decreased the budget and you’ve added other library services to 
it. 
 
I have two questions — you can answer them probably at  

the same time — one about the distance education council and 
where the money is in the budget for that, and how much; and 
where the money is in the budget for the literacy council, and 
how much? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Relative tot he distance education 
council, Mr. Chairman, and hon. member, and as well the 
literacy council, both are budgeted for under subvote 27, the 
education outreach fund, and you’ll be happy to know that 
we’re budgeting 330 thousands of dollars to the distance 
education council, and a whopping $816,000 for the literacy 
council. And we’re proud of both of those initiatives, those new 
initiatives in last year’s budget, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, I just want to point out that in the 
estimates last year when we asked about the distance education, 
you mentioned $3 million in new money last year for the 
distance education. The education outreach fund is 3.2 million 
last year, the same this year. as I understand it, the distance 
education is coming out of that; the literacy council is coming 
out of that. And that was money that was also set aside — am I 
not correct? — for the resource centres in the school libraries as 
well, for extra programs in that, or am I not correct on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, there’s nothing to do with 
resource centres or libraries for the kindergarten to grade 12 
system when it comes to the education outreach fund. The other 
items, the other highlights — not all of them, necessarily, but 
the other highlights in this fund would be over and above the 
distance education council. 
 
With the literacy council would be the women’s conference that 
we’re going to have; the native services division is $345,000 — 
that’s on our contract with Gabriel Dumont Institute; some 
initiatives relative to the disabled — it would be $300,000 spent 
there. 
 
Our rural and northern training would be about $640,000; 
university extension — a fairly handsome sum there, over half a 
million; and a Trade Language Centre, the Summer centre for 
International Languages out of the University of Regina, in 
conjunction with Luther College — $100,000; and the 
Agricultural Commodities Institute, in conjunction with the 
University of Saskatchewan — 100,000 for a total of 
approximately 3.2 millions of dollars. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Well, Mr. Minister, that doesn’t begin to give 
enough money for the distance education program, which you 
said last time would have $3 million in new money. You said 
that last year. I suppose this is just another one of your 
government’s examples of money, where you say there’s going 
to be millions of dollars for funds for a new project, and then 
you dribble it out in small amounts of money for years to come. 
And yet you get away with a big PR (public relations) 
announcement that you’ve got a lot of money to spend. 
 
I want to end, then, on saying that I’m really disappointed in the 
fact that the budget — amounts of money that you’ve put for 
libraries — the kinds of ways you’ve treated the distance 
education council and literacy show the lack of policy of your 
government towards developing  
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1482 
 

anything remotely resembling an organized and planned and 
thought-out information system for this province — one that’s 
available to the public and funded properly by the government 
and available to people regardless of where they live and their 
ability to pay. 
 
Mr. Minister, it was interesting this afternoon that when we 
were talking about what was happening with the Wheatland 
Regional Library system and the fact that the PC Party 
convention committee was running their PC Party convention 
out of the Wheatland Regional Library system. And the 
questioning in the House was getting so intense on that issue 
that your Minister of Finance saw that as the opportunity to 
introduce the Public Accounts into this Assembly, the Public 
Accounts, which we’ve asking for a long time. And I’m rather 
pleased that the intensity of the questions regarding libraries 
moved you to deliver yourself of the Public Accounts. 
 
At least you’ve finally seen the need to give us some 
information here in the House, and we can look forward to lots 
of questions about the Public Accounts in the weeks ahead, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
But when I read, for example, The Public Libraries Act, and I 
see that the regional library board has the authority to deal with 
library business — it has the authority to rent library spaces, to 
buy library resources, to spend money and to raise money 
regarding library services — then I realize that that was the 
answer to your challenge to me earlier when you said, what 
should I do? Libraries have autonomy, and if they want to run 
the PC Party convention out of the Wheatland Regional 
Library, then you don’t condone it, but there’s nothing you can 
do. 
 
According to the public library Act, you, Mr. Minister, can hold 
that regional library board accountable if they use the money for 
doing something other than library services. And let me tell 
you, that running the PC Party convention committee out of the 
Wheatland Regional Library system has nothing to do with 
public library services — absolutely nothing. You should be 
held accountable for the fact that they did that, that the 
taxpayers’ money was spent on that, that money and staff time 
was used for that — and quite a lot of staff time, because you 
don’t run a PC Party convention on very little time. 
 
There was a lot of time and a lot of money involved running 
that PC Party convention out of the Wheatland Regional 
Library system, and you are responsible for that. The public 
library Act has been contravened. It’s your responsibility as a 
Minister of Education to see to that, and I’m really holding you 
accountable for that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — Yes, you’re being negligent; you’re not 
developing proper library policies; you’re letting the libraries 
go downhill in terms of the funding; and you’re letting things 
go on in the public library system, like running the PC party 
convention, which is totally unheard of in a public institution. 
 
It’s a shameful thing that you have not taken a stand against 
that. And it’s shameful that you haven’t funded the  

university so that the University of Regina library is not looking 
at selling off its resources to a company owned in Toronto in 
order to lease back the resources that are already owned by the 
people of this province. 
 
(1915) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — That’s your information age, Mr. Minister; I tell 
you, I don’t want to have anything to do with it. And we are not 
going to go into the 21st century limping along like that with 
these ridiculous policies in place. I can tell you when we form 
the government after the next election, there’ll be a lot more 
support for the universities and for the libraries and for 
information, and a lot better government than you’ve been able 
to deliver. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
asked yesterday for you to provide me with some information, 
and I was wondering whether you have that information now. I 
asked for a couple of things; one, I asked you about the number 
of people that you had, the people that you had hired in the 
Department of Education; and also, the increases in your 
personal staff, the rate, the salary increases in your personal 
staff. You said that you would provide that for me. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just want to ask you a few questions. Could you 
tell me is K. Gallagher still with you? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Kelly Gallagher? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Well I don’t know who the person is. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well then, why do you ask? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Well if the minor minister, if the minor minister 
who was so well characterized by Roy Norris the other day on 
open line as the height of arrogance would just stay quiet, we 
might be able to get some business of the people done here. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Which minister? Let’s clarify it. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — The Minister of Urban Affairs. The minor 
minister, the minor minister who likes to make comments from 
his seat but very seldom says anything intelligent only when he 
gets up. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you mind telling me if K. Gallagher is still 
working for you and . . . well, first of all, what’s the 
responsibility of the individual, if he or she is still working for 
you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, the material you asked 
for, my officials are just getting it together here. In the 
meantime, Kelly Gallagher — I presume is K. Gallagher — 
works in my office as a ministerial assistant to me relative to 
the Public Service Commission. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Then, Mr. Minister, the list of people that you 
gave me the other day was just the list that you had of 
ministerial assistants as pertains to Education. Is that correct? 
 
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1483 
 

Why, Mr. Minister, if that . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Yes, 
well okay, but I just want to ask if that is correct, why then 
would you list minister’s support staff, out-of-province travel? 
In Estimates for Education, you have noted here K. Gallagher 
went to one, two, three — three different places, and I just 
assumed, since we were in Education estimates, you have noted 
him here. Why did you note him here and now say that he 
doesn’t work for you in this capacity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Now if he is included — and I, to be 
honest with you, didn’t even scan the material that was 
prepared, but it was for them to . . . My officials were just 
trying to be as complete as possible in terms of the 
out-of-province travel. 
 
The only other correction or clarification I would make is that 
we listed all the secretarial staff, which under our 
administration, are of the ministerial assistant category, unlike 
when you were the minister. And they’re all listed in that list I 
gave you relative to Education, although it’s fair to say that 
probably, I suppose, a half to one might end up on any given 
day full time on Public Service Commission. But for 
simplicity’s sake they were all listed in Education. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, I don’t want to follow up as to 
why K. Gallagher, if he is with the Public Service Commission, 
why he attended with the minister a tour of the Canadian Grains 
Institute and 100th anniversary of commodity exchange; why 
he went to Kansas City to attend with minister National 
Fertilizer Solutions Conference. What that has to do with the 
Public Service Commission I don’t know. But anyway, I 
thought it pertained to Education, and I thought, fertilizer? Yes, 
the minister has so, and he’s got lots of it. I thought that’s 
maybe why he attended that conference with you. 
 
Mr. Minister, very quickly if I may, and this pertains to B. 
Martin. Would you tell me why B. Martin, what the purpose of 
the trip was to Sydney and Halifax for legislative secretaries 
duties at Ketico Lodge and Halifax? What were the purpose of 
going to that, and then . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — That specific trip, as I recall, and I’m 
virtually certain I’m correct here, was to attend with, as 
Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Education, to attend 
with the Minister of Human Resources, Labour and 
Employment the minister’s meeting, ministers of labour and 
manpower and women’s secretariat minister’s meeting in 
Halifax, or wherever it was. A minister’s meeting is what it was 
and he was there . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ministers of education meeting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, ministers’ meeting of labour, 
manpower and women’s issues, and since I have the manpower 
side in advanced education and manpower, he attended there for 
myself in conjunction with the other minister. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — All right, fair enough. He says he made a fair 
contribution, and that’s fair enough, too. 
 
January 13 to 14, ’88, two days — two days — B. Martin went 
to Flin Flon for Legislative Secretary duties at the  

cost of . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Chairman, the member from Saskatoon 
South has been using the name of the member from Wascana 
Centre on at least three occasions. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order. I’d ask the member for 
Quill Lakes . . . Order, order. I’d ask the member for Quill 
Lakes to allow the member from Morse to make his point of 
order. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The member from 
Saskatoon South has, on at least three occasions, used the name 
of the member from Regina Wascana, and I don’t believe that 
that is in order, and I’d like you to check on that for me please. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, just on a point of order, I have 
no idea who B. Martin is. It’s given here, B. Martin. I’m simply 
asking why he . . .(inaudible interjection). . . That’s right; I 
didn’t know who K. Gallagher was either — no idea who they 
are. And so I want to know who B. Martin is and why he went 
on these trips. I’ve not idea who B. Martin is. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. Order. The member knows 
now who the legislative . . . Order. The minister answered the 
question as the member being a Legislative Secretary, and from 
now on I’d ask the member for Saskatoon South to refer to him 
as the Legislative Secretary. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — On a point of order, Mr. Chairman — on a point 
of order, Mr. Chairman, it simply says here, Flin Flon, for 
Legislative Secretary duties. That could be anybody attending a 
legislative secretaries conference to find out what the duties are 
of legislative secretaries. I have no idea — I have no idea, Mr. 
Chairman, who this person is. Now maybe you do; I don’t. and 
I’m quite prepared to go on and say, Mr. Minister, would you 
mind telling me if this . . . But how am I going to do it? I mean, 
I want to inquire about this person. If I don’t read it to him, how 
does he know who am I talking about? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The member for Wascana. Does the . . . 
Order. The member for Wascana is the legislative . . . was the 
Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Education. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, in order to proceed with the 
matter, look . . . yes, but you don’t know that. If you do then 
you’re . . . Oh, here comes the intelligent person, the man from 
prehistoric age who never went beyond. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you mind telling me if the Legislative 
Secretary, the member from Wascana — I guess I can get away 
from that — Mr. Minister, would you tell me if the Legislative 
Secretary, the member from Wascana, attended a conference in 
Flin Flon and for what reason? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The Legislative Secretary to the 
Minister of Education was in Flin Flon to meet with the 
Creighton school board relative to northern education matters. 
 
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1484 
 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, a further question. I know you 
can’t do this tonight, buy would you mind itemizing the cost for 
the Legislative secretary? I notice he spent three days or four 
days in Sydney and Halifax at a cost of $1,630. I assume that 
Flin Flon is Flin Flon, Manitoba, at a cost — two days only — 
at a cost of $1,853. Would you mind itemizing those for me? I 
know you probably don’t have them now, but could I get them 
some time next week? Is that agreed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would like to, Mr. 
Minister, now very quickly get to some other items. We have 
some other things we want to do this evening, and I would 
appreciate, Mr. Minister, very quickly. There has been some 
concern, Mr. Minister, in the field of education, both by school 
boards, trustees, and teachers — I think very legitimate 
concerns that they really can’t plan far enough ahead because of 
the uncertainty of the school year, not knowing, for example, 
when the school year begins, how many days there will be in 
any particular school year. and they don’t know that until into 
the school year. 
 
And some people have suggested that maybe what we ought to 
do is work three years in advance and let school boards know 
and teachers know that for the next three years the school year 
will begin on such and such a day, and there will be so many 
years in each one of these school years. Would you mind telling 
us: have you done any research on it? Would this be possible to 
do this? I know that would be appreciated by the people in the 
field and also by school boards. This has been drawn to my 
attention both by teachers and by school boards. Would you 
mind commenting on that for me, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I know the hon. 
member might find this an incredulous statement coming from 
myself, but I think we’ve seen a historic event here tonight. The 
hon. member has actually come forward with what could be a 
constructive suggestion, and I thank him for it. He is suggesting 
that perhaps the school year ought to be set one or two or three 
years in advance so everybody can do some better forward 
planning. 
 
Historically how we have determined whether there will be 196 
or 198 or 200 days, which is basically what is set out by The 
Education Act, is at the annual convention of the school trustees 
in the fall. The teachers’ federation officials, the SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) officials, and my 
department officials get together and come to some mutual 
agreement on 196 or 198, or whatever it should be, and that 
gives a lead time of 10 or 11 months which is not bad, buy your 
point is well taken about two or three years. So I will raise it 
with these other bodies that have a vested interest in this. 
 
The other point that is raised by parents on occasion is the 
whole question of the length of the school year, and it is set out 
to be 200 days in the Act. It has varied somewhat, for the most 
part, downward, not upward, and there may be some merit as 
well in looking at getting back to a good, solid 200 days year. 
but I’ll take your suggestion forward to the other parties, and if 
it meets with  

everyone’s approval, then it’s something I would give serious 
consideration to, and I thank the hon. member for his 
suggestion. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I don’t 
want to prolong it, but I would like you to clarify, because I 
don’t want to leave any — I know you didn’t mean to leave any 
misconceptions — the business of making the school year into 
— what was the term you used? — solid 200 days. I think you 
ought to clarify that, what you meant by it, because we don’t 
want the wrong impression left out there. When you say solid 
200 days, I hope you’re not suggesting that it should be over 
200 days and without serious consultations, to begin with, with 
the trustees and with the teachers. I don’t want to prolong, then, 
because I have a number of other items I do want to discuss. 
 
Mr. Minister, have you given any consideration at all to the 
driver education program? There have been some suggestions 
made — and I think wrongly — that the driver education 
program is not meeting its objectives, and the concerns have 
been that many of the young people who go through the driver 
education program really aren’t reliable drivers once they 
receive their driver’s licence. I don’t buy that. I don’t buy that, 
and I don’t think that there is any evidence to show that young 
people at the age of 16 or 17 cause any more accidents than 
people of other ages, except maybe those in their middle 20’s. I 
think they probably are fairly reliable drivers. 
 
I wanted to ask you, Mr. Minister; have you done any studies at 
all on the driver education program, or are you quite content to 
leave it where it is? And are you fairly content with the job that 
is being done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, our view is unchanged relative 
to the fact that driver education is a useful exercise for teachers, 
for schools to be involved in. 
 
There was a change in the focus, scope and rationale for the 
driver education program over this last year. there was a pilot 
on a new and enriched course of studies designed to address 
specifically, or to put some additional emphasis, if you like, on 
the kinds of accidents in which young people or young drivers 
tend to be over-represented relative to the normal population, if 
you like, or the rest of the population. And if that pilot, and 
research and analysis conducted as a result of the pilot, proves 
that this enriched kind of program is useful, then it may well 
replace the traditional program. But I would see an enrichment 
as a strengthening, not a weakening, okay? And I think that 
should allay your fears, so to speak. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I appreciate those 
remarks, and I do hope that if that pilot project does show that 
there may be some evidence for a thorough review, that you do 
involve all the people concerned before making your own 
decision as to what you might think, or your department might 
think, what the new program ought to be. Let’s make certain 
that we involve those people who are carrying out he program 
right now. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to turn very quickly now to another  
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1485 
 

topic or two. Mr. Minister, this refers to standardized testing. 
You have made a number of statements on standardized testing, 
and you have indicated that you have the impression, I believe, 
that there are parents out there who are simply not happy with, 
or satisfied with, the evaluation that is being carried out in the 
school system, and that you would like to see some form of 
standardized testing take place. 
 
Mr. Minister, before we get into that, I want to read to you — 
oh, I got the wrong file here; here we are: standardized testing 
— I want to read to you just very quickly on the comments that 
have been made by people in the field: Mr. Wiens, the head of 
the trustees association. It says here: 
 

Wiens drew strong applause from the 250 delegates when 
he said standardized, province-wide examinations would 
be a step backwards. (He said) Tests that focus on 
marginally relevant information learned by memory do not 
take into account efforts by teachers to develop students’ 
thinking and problem-solving skills. 

 
Mr. Minister, here’s another heading which says, “Simplistic 
student tests misleading, teachers are told.” “Standardized 
exams get failing marks,” by the incoming president of the STF 
(Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation). Another comment, 
“Teachers oppose standardized exams.” Another one, Mr. 
Minister, “Teachers’ global leader condemns standardized 
testing.” And, Mr. Minister, I have a number of others — both 
practitioners, the teachers, and the trustees — who see this as a 
backward step. 
 
Mr. Minister, let me — before you comment on this, let me 
make it absolutely clear to you and the members here that the 
teachers and trustees and parents of this province are not 
reluctant to examine evaluation practices that are taking place 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . No, we’re not, but when you say 
. . . when you comment and go a step further — and therefore 
maybe we need some external marking or method of evaluating 
— meaning standardized tests — then we part company. 
 
Those of us who started teaching in the ’60s and the late ’50s 
and were . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Yes, the late ’50s, and 
worked with standardized tests, we know that they did not meet 
the objectives. In early April and May, teachers just simply 
pulled out the old exams, departmental exams. Many of the 
older members in this House, I’m sure were coached in that 
fashion. And you simply took the tests of the last five, six, 
seven or eight years, and you knew it you knew those tests, you 
were bound to hit questions that would be on the upcoming test. 
 
It simply does not test, Mr. Minister, the kind of thing you have 
been talking about in this house. You have said that we have to 
get our students to do critical analysis; they must know how to 
think critically. Well, standardized tests don’t measure that kind 
of thing, and I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, first of all, two 
things: what evidence do you have, can you bring forward in 
this House, that shows that a considerable number of parents are  

dissatisfied with the evaluation procedures that are presently 
taking place? Because you are the one that made the statement, 
so I assume you have some evidence. And secondly, do you not 
agree that standardized tests simply will not accomplish the 
objectives that we wanted to accomplish, namely, to measure 
critical analysis, critical thinking, problem solving, and so on? 
Would you please comment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman and hon. 
member, as it relates to the question of standardized exams, 
that’s one part of a much larger question that we are currently 
engaged in looking at. That’s the whole question of assessment 
and evaluation of students and schools and that whole area. 
 
I have consistently taken the position, and will continue to take 
the position, that it’s an area that we must examine. I have said 
before it’s not an area that I have preconceived notions on, 
particularly, but I am very much of the view that there are some 
substantial numbers of parents who expect — indeed, I would 
even go so far as to say are to the point of demanding — 
assurances that the system is fair to their children, that it is 
equitable, that it is indeed a system that provides their children 
with the opportunity to do work from a level playing field. And 
by that I am talking about the fact that parents in Meadow Lake 
want to know that if their child gets a 68 on an exam, that may 
be a factor in so far as whether they go on to university, or a 
technical college, or an institute, or a regional college, that a 68 
in Meadow Lake is the same as a 68 in Nipawin, is the same as 
a 68 in Swift Current, is the same as a 68 in Weyburn, is the 
same as a 68 in Regina, is the same as a 68 in Unity and so on, 
and so on, and so on. 
 
And I certainly . . . I’m certain I get that from parents. Now I 
know on the other side, I know on the other side of the coin, 
there are those certainly amongst the profession itself who will 
raise a number of points in opposition to standardized testing. 
It’s a bureaucratic invasion of the class-room, I think some have 
described them as. Others have said, it will not; somehow it’s 
machine testing. Others have suggested all teachers would do is 
teach to the exams. Some would suggest it’s merely a survival 
of the fittest mentality, that kind of thing. 
 
So I know there are objectives out there; I know it’s a 
contentious issue; I know the whole question of assessment and 
evaluation is much broader than merely the standardized exam 
question. But if you’re asking me if that’s going to stop me and 
the department, along with SSTA, and STF, and LEADS 
(League of Educational Administrator, Directors and 
Superintendents), who are involved in a committee structure 
examining this whole question of assessment evaluation — no, 
it’s not going to stop me. 
 
And for all those reasons I’ve just given you, because parents 
do want fairness and do have that expectation, for that reason 
alone it would be good enough for me to be engaged in this 
exercise. 
 
But over and above that, the Directions final report, action 
recommendation no. 7, that the minister initiate a review of 
evaluation procedures in the province, and it goes on to outline 
them: types of evaluations that aid  
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1486 
 

teachers, and teach accreditation policy, and program 
evaluation, and so on, and so forth. The clear expectation of 
Directions in that recommendation was that we should do this. 
And, finally, the Issues and Options paper at the University of 
Saskatchewan raised the questions of entrance exams and exit 
exams or standardized exams as well, and what role they may 
or may not have in the future. So for all those reasons we will 
be examining that question, and I hope to have some 
recommendations forward from that committee within the next 
month, I think it’s safe to say something in that order. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, I appreciate those remarks, but I 
do think it shows some naivety on your part, and I don’t say 
that in any derogatory sense. I think for someone who has not 
been in the field, who is not a practitioner in the field, yes, you 
would expect an answer like that. But if you’re a practitioner in 
the field and you understand, for example, that teachers are 
accredited. Teachers are accredited and therefore they have to 
follow certain . . . they have to meet certain standards. They are 
professional people, and they have objectives that they want to 
accomplish in the schools, and we set those educational 
objectives for them. one of them, yes is information. One of 
them is that students learn certain information, and everybody 
expects them to reach a certain standard. But you can’t measure 
by an external exam. 
 
(1945) 
 
And by the way, Mr. Minister, as an aside, there is nowhere, 
nowhere in Directions do they allude to external exams at all. 
They simply say that the minister initiate a review of evaluation 
procedures in the province. Mr. Minister, if you deduce from 
that that they were referring to standardized exams, you have 
misinterpreted the whole report. I have talked to the author, the 
chairman of that report, that is not what he meant at all and 
that’s not what his committee meant. 
 
I indicated from the outset that we have to have continuous 
evaluation over teaching methods in our school system — 
continuously. And there is nothing wrong with that. Constantly 
we should evaluate the methods we use in assessing our 
students. No one argues with that — no one. But if you assume 
from that, Mr. Minister, as you have done in your public 
statements, in your public statements that we ought to look at 
standardized testing, then I think you have misinterpreted. And 
the reaction from the trustees’ association and the teachers’ 
association clearly indicate to you that you’ve made a mistake. 
 
And I think if you would be man enough, you would say, all 
right, sorry, I misinterpreted what you people meant. Evaluation 
— yes, and we will look at how we should evaluate students, 
how we should assess them. But, Mr. Minister, if you are saying 
today, as you have done, that a 68 in Meadow Lake will mean 
the same as a 68 in Regina, then you are taking our system back 
50 years. No one wants that — no one. 
 
If you mean to tell me that a student who gets a division 1 mark 
— or whatever they call it now — an A at the university, from 
the University of Saskatchewan, and  

someone gets an A at the University of Regina, and another one 
gets an A at the University of Alberta, and you say they’re all 
the same, then you’re showing your naivety. It’s a general 
range. This is a range of the top student but that doesn’t mean 
that someone . . . that those students all are 97s or 96s or 95s, 
neither should they be. 
 
You’re trying to put education into a strait-jacket. You’re 
saying, if anybody doesn’t fit into this strait-jacket then you’re 
outside the bounds of what I think we should have in education, 
and I can’t allow that. So, Mr. Minister, I think you didn’t mean 
that. 
 
I don’t think you meant that, and I appreciate very much that a 
committee has been set up, and I really hope that that 
committee looks at the evaluation and the assessments that are 
being done in our school systems and see whether or not we can 
make certain that we have true evaluation methods. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, please don’t go back where the accreditation 
of teachers no longer means anything. We went through that. 
The teachers who are accredited are professional people; they 
know their knowledge; they know their methodology. It’s 
incumbent upon you not to say that you know best. 
 
These people know, they’re experts in their field, but that 
doesn’t mean that we shouldn’t search for outside assistance. 
That doesn’t mean we shouldn’t ask parents and trustees and 
others to help us in the evaluation and the assessment. But for 
Heaven’s sake, Mr. Minister, don’t set yourself up as the expert, 
because if you do, you do a real disservice to the field of 
education in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, I do want to leave that particular 
area because I think I’ve said what I wanted to say and you’ve 
said what you wanted to say and we’ll, I think . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — One more thing to say here. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Okay . . .(inaudible interjection). . . No. Oh, no. 
Mr. Minister, I do want to ask you a very specific question — 
have you got a question on standardizing . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — On this testing. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Okay, go ahead, because I want to change 
topics. My colleague has a question on standardized testing. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, when I look at the budget and 
the particular item which would deal with this testing, it appears 
to me that you would have budgeted a fair amount for it and my 
estimate would be, judging from item 8, that it’s approximately 
$600,000. 
 
Now, if it isn’t, I would like to ask you two questions. First of 
all, how much money did you budget for standardized testing? 
And secondly, would you consider taking that amount of money 
and putting it in along with the $1 million that you’ve budgeted 
for teacher in-service for working towards a core curriculum? 
Because if you did  
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1487 
 

that, that move would be viewed very very positively by the 
educators of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, just two or three points here. 
First of all, the hon. member talks about standardized testing in 
the past tense. And what I said earlier, and I will repeat for you, 
is that no decisions have been made. I know there are pros and 
cons on both sides, I know it’s contentious. I know it’s just one 
part of a much larger issue related to assessment and evaluation. 
Because there are many faces to that whole area of assessment 
and evaluation, that’s why I put the committee together. And 
when they bring some recommendations forward, then we can 
discuss what the recommendations are. I also know that all the 
focus . . . the attention has been focused on this one thing. But 
as the Directions report itself said, there are many types, and yet 
the debate has got subsumed by that one thing. 
 
The second point is the budget that you refer to is the $300,000 
roughly, is do to with assessment, but not student assessment. 
It’s to do with the core curriculum, okay? 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I just want to clarify, is there not any 
specific item in your budget that you will put aside for testing 
— for a standardized testing scheme, or the possibility of a 
standardized testing scheme? Is there an item in the budget, in 
the detail of the budget, that deals with that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Okay. Mr. Minister, yes, I wanted to ask you, 
have you reconsidered, Mr. Minister . . . I asked you yesterday, 
several times, whether you would make that survey available to 
me — the one that was done by Tanka somewhere in December 
or January. You’ve had now 24 hours t think about it. Mr. 
Minister, I was wondering, have you rethought about it, and 
would you make it available to me, and on a confidential basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — My view is unchanged from the last 
time we were in estimates. I made a commitment to you then 
and I’ll . . . My commitment is the same. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Are you saying, Mr. Minister, you will not 
make that . . . although it was a survey done on teachers, and 
asking questions about teachers, and really insulting the 
teaching profession, you now say you’re going to keep it secret 
and you won’t make it available to us. I find that appalling, but 
that’s your decision and you’re going to have to live with it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I object to the hon. 
member characterizing that survey in the way that he has, 
knowing full well that all the information I gave him, I said that 
clearly such was not the case. And he continues to persist with 
that line of rationale when it’s clearly not so. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 32 — An Act to provide for the Continuation of  

Regina Police Services 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I beg to inform the 
Assembly that His Honour the Lieutenant Governor having 
been informed of the subject matter of the Bill, recommends 
that it be considered to the consideration to the Assembly, and I 
move, by leave of this Assembly, that a Bill, an Act to Provide 
for the Continuation of Regina Police Service, be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill 
ordered to be read a second time later this day. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 32 — An Act to provide for the Continuation of 
Regina Police Services 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
make a few brief comments with regards to second reading of 
this Bill — the Bill entitled The Regina Police Service 
Continuation of Service Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I, and I would assume most people in this 
Assembly, would have hoped that this type of legislation would 
not have to be brought forward, but in my judgement it must, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
If I could set out he situation in the city of Regina with regards 
to this dispute, would be as follows: The City Police 
Association and the Regina Police Commission have been 
involved in negotiations for some period of time. Those 
negotiations, while they involve a number of issues on both 
sides, clearly centre around two fundamental questions: the 
question of wages and the question of the so-called 12-hour 
shift. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m satisfied that obviously both sides feel very 
strong about these two issues, and I believe that there is very 
little likelihood of a negotiated settlement, particularly as it 
relates to the issue of the 12-hour shift. 
 
As I said, these negotiations have been going on for some 
period of time. Various methods have been attempted to find an 
agreement, including the employ of Sieg Walter to try to 
conciliate this deal. 
 
I think it would also be fair to say that both sides have 
expressed, both publicly and certainly to myself, their desire not 
to strike if that could be averted. And I think in fairness to both 
sides, I think they recognize the ramifications of what a strike 
of this nature would have. And it, in that sense, I think perhaps 
sets it beyond, obviously, a normal labour dispute. 
 
(2000) 
 
Both sides to this agreement have, in the last week, asked for or 
suggested some form of binding arbitration, initially put 
forward by the Regina Police Commission and rejected at that 
time. About a day or two ago the Regina Police Association 
indicated publicly and to the board that they would be prepared 
as well to go to binding arbitration. They placed a caveat, 
obviously, on that request and that caveat came in the form of 
who would be the arbitrator or the chairman of the board of 
arbitration. 



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1488 
 

I think it fair to say then, Mr. Speaker, that this dispute has 
come down primarily to a question, quite frankly, of who 
should be appointed the arbitrator in the event of, or in the 
situation where they would both go to binding arbitration. Mr. 
Speaker, today the notice of strike was served on the 
appropriate bodies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have no intention, nor do I believe I should 
comment on the merits of the issue between, the two parties. I 
don’t think it’s proper for me or for, quite frankly, anyone in 
this level of government to become involved in that part of this 
dispute. 
 
We then are left with what options? Obviously the first option is 
that strike notice is served at 3 o’clock today. That would allow 
for a strike to be commenced at 3 o’clock this Saturday 
afternoon. Now obviously, we all know that that falls in the 
middle of a long weekend. 
 
That could find ourselves in the following two possible 
positions: one, if the house is adjourned until Tuesday, the 
strike would then continue on at a minimum until Tuesday; or 
the members of the Assembly, I think, could stay on call, 
prepared to come in should that emergency require that. And I 
think in fairness to all members, I think all members of this 
House would probably be prepared to in fact do that. So you 
have that option. 
 
You have the option of calling in the RCMP or some other 
force, but most likely the RCMP. I indicated to both parties 
early on in this dispute that I did not favour that, and I did not 
favour that for a couple of reasons, Mr. Speaker. one is, the 
RCMP do not have a great deal of extra members that they 
could use, and to bring those members to Regina would mean 
that you would leave policing falling short in other parts of 
Saskatchewan. and I think as important, you would find 
yourself in a situation where you would be calling upon the 
RCMP to, in effect, be asked to become involved in strike 
breaking and, therefore, to find themselves at odds with the city 
policy — I think a process that no one in this House would 
really want to see. The two forces must work together on many, 
many cases, and I think it’s only appropriate that they not be put 
in that type of a compromising position. 
 
Therefore, the next option would be that we could legislate. If 
you look at that option, I think we have to look at it from two 
points of view. Firstly, what is at stake for the people of this 
community and this city, and what is at stake for the two parties 
involved? 
 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, what is at stake for the community is, I 
suppose, a difficult situation should we find ourselves in a strike 
situation. And that’s not been experienced very often in our 
province, and I think that’s to the credit of the people that work 
in the police force and to the police commissions of this 
province. 
 
The last time there was a strike, it was a short strike that ended 
up being resolved by the parties and forced into binding 
arbitration. But during the time of that strike, there was a great 
deal of lawlessness that went on in this city — lawlessness, Mr. 
Speaker, that I think we as elected members have a 
responsibility to at least address. How we might address that, I 
suppose, is open to debate, but  

clearly we must address it. And when I say we must address it 
is that if people are allowed to drive in a reckless manner 
through the streets of Regina without protection, that is a 
problem; if stores are being broken into, clearly that can pose a 
problem. So clearly that’s an issue of law and order. 
 
On the other side of the coin, you have the right of the police, 
which they do have in this province, to go on strike. And I 
suppose a debate has raged for some time with regards to 
whether or not there should be essential services legislation 
passed in a blanket form that would cover these type of 
situations; that you just simply turn the switch and are not 
called upon to come into this Assembly and deal with. I happen 
not to agree or support that type of legislation. 
 
It still begs the question though, I suppose, Mr. Speaker, as 
what is meant then by the right to strike by the city of Regina 
police, or any police force, for that matter, in our province. 
Obviously the right to strike for the police, if we are to look at it 
practically, means if they have the right to strike, obviously that 
right would tend to be used only in a very narrow time frame. 
Clearly I don’t think anybody could contemplate a stroke that 
would rune on for days, or certainly run on for weeks. 
Something would have to respond. 
 
The question, then, that I find, and the difficulty I find in 
balancing those two is: how in fact do you balance them? and I 
think you find that balance, Mr. Speaker, by looking at how this 
particular event unfolded and what is now the case at the 
moment. 
 
As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, both sides agree to binding 
arbitration, and that’s what this Bill will propose. Clearly there 
is a dispute as to who should be the arbitrator; there’s no doubt 
about that. Mr. Speaker, if we were to say to ourselves, well 
let’s let the strike unfold, and then if we have to step in, we 
could step in and appoint the arbitrator. 
 
I don’t believe, and from my talking to both sides I do not 
believe there is common ground to find an arbitrator that both 
sides would agree to; therefore, what I propose in this Bill is to 
appoint the arbitrator. And to appoint the arbitrator, put the two 
parties to binding arbitration, simply stated, that’s the Bill. 
 
The large question then, I suppose, for the Bill is: who should 
that arbitrator be? I think, as you want to address that question, 
it had to be influenced by the events of the last day or two. Let 
me put it in this way: the police association proposed Dan Ish, 
which many of us in this House know, a class-mate of mine 
from law school, former deal of the College of Law — I don’t 
think anyone would disagree that Dan Ish could do an 
appropriate job in this particular case. 
 
But the way events have unfolded, I’m not sure it would be fair 
for the process, and I’m not sure it would be fair for Dan Ish 
that he be appointed. He was placed in, I believe, a very 
difficult position, and that difficulty position would be this: if 
he was to be appointed, he would be said to be in the pocket by 
some — not by all, but by some — in the pocket of the 
association because they said Dan Ish, and  
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1489 
 

only Dan Ish. 
 
That would then force him, I believe, into a very difficult 
situation. If he was to rule in favour of the police association, 
they would say it was a set-up, or some would say it was a 
set-up, and I think that would not be fair to that particular 
individual; or, by therefore being in that position, would it then 
give him a force, or try to force him over into a more moderate 
position, even though that moderate position was not the right 
one to take in this case. And for that reasons, Mr. Speaker, I 
have decided that that would not be appropriate. And I do not in 
any way wish to reflect upon the character and the personality 
of Dan Ish in so doing. And I think perhaps the two parties have 
done, in my view, a disservice to that man through the way this 
matter has unfolded. 
 
That still puts me to the position, Mr. Speaker, of appointing an 
arbitrator. And it would be my proposal, and proposed in this 
legislation, that Mr. Bob Laing of Saskatoon by appointed as 
the arbitrator. Let me say why. I think Bob Laing can bring 
something to this than can be balanced, and can be and will be 
seen as fair. 
 
Bob Laing, for those that do not know him, is a former member 
of the RCMP. Bob Laing is an established and well-regarded 
lawyer in this province and in the city of Saskatoon, past 
member of the Law Society of Saskatchewan. He comes from 
outside of Regina, which I believe is important so that he is not 
caught either by any suggestion that he might be involved by 
the push and pull of whatever of the city of Regina. And he has 
recently been involved, and I say successfully involved, in the 
dispute arising between SSTA, the government on the one side, 
and STF on the other side, and brought that matter to a resolve 
that I think most sides were happy with. 
 
So it would be my proposal in this legislation that this 
individual would be appointed. I have talked to both sides of 
this issue this afternoon. I advanced the name of Bob Laing, and 
while I do not want to speak for them, because at least some of 
them do an adequate job of speaking for themselves on 
television — some would say otherwise — so I do not wish to 
speak for them, but I did not get a negative response from either 
side to the name, Bob Laing. I believe Bob Laing is a very 
credible . . . I believe he will be seen as fair, and I can assure 
you, in my judgement he will be fair in this particular situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the legislation, as I said, basically does that. It 
appoints the arbitrator; it provides for an eight-day cooling off 
period. The arbitrator will hear the issues, not established by 
this legislature but issues as submitted to the arbitrator by both 
sides. And he will come down with his judgement, and both 
sides will abide by it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This legislation is a copy of built on the basis of legislation 
introduced in this House earlier, back in 1974-75. 
 
Let me close by saying this, Mr. Speaker, as again I do not want 
to comment on either side in the handling or the issues involved 
in either side. I had the feeling, Mr. Speaker, that at least one 
party to this dispute, quite frankly, relied upon this institution to 
come forward to solve its problem. I say I had that feeling, and I 
think that is  

unfortunate if that is in fact true, that they were not able to solve 
that dispute themselves. 
 
I think it is also unfortunate that much of the negotiation, at 
least over the last month or last week or week and a half, has in 
fact been done in public, and I think it is justification the 
negotiations done in public seldom, in fact, serve their purpose. 
 
(2015) 
 
I will refrain further, Mr. Speaker, from making comments with 
regards to the process pursued by either party. Suffice it to say 
two things. Today the mayor indicated that I had advised him 
that it was my intention to bring this legislation forward. I can 
say, Mr. Speaker, categorically that I did not speak to the 
mayor, nor did I tell him that. 
 
I would further say, Mr. Speaker, with regards to the 
spokesperson for the police commission, it is my view as well 
that some of the statements rendered that I saw on television did 
not do justice to that office, and did not do justice to this 
particular negotiation. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, for the 
last 20 minutes, 25 minutes, we have listened to a speech from 
the Minister of Justice which has been in part a lengthy and, I 
think, a trite rendition of the events leading up to today. One 
would have had to have travelled a long distance and travelled 
very fast to have been unaware of the background to this, given 
the play it’s made in the daily media. 
 
The rest of his speech involved something that members of this 
government can’t resist, and that’s an attempt to take a poke at 
Regina city council, some of their apparently arch-enemies. I 
think, Mr. Minister, the public of Saskatchewan would be better 
served if you took the sliver . . . if you took the beam out of 
your own eye rather than the sliver out of theirs. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, the public would feel a great deal better if 
your speech had dealt not with the events leading up to, and 
who you think your enemies are, but I think the public would 
have been better served if your speech had dealt with some of 
the fundamental underlying causes of this most regrettable 
event. 
 
Mr. Minister, and Mr. Speaker, there was no question but that 
the root of the problem is inadequate funding to municipal 
governments in this province. There is no question about that. 
Mr. Minister, and Mr. Speaker, one has to note further in the 
documents published by this government, their estimates in 
1983. In 1983, in round terms, this government provided $60 
million in urban revenue sharing. Their estimates published this 
year, in round terms, provide $67 million in revenue sharing. 
That’s almost exactly 11 per cent increase during the period of 
time in which inflation has gone up by in excess of 30 per cent. 
That, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, is the root of the problem. 
 
The Minister of Finance, as is his habit, made a comment and 
then quickly left before anybody could respond to it.  
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1490 
 

The Minister of Finance wants to know why other municipal 
forces don’t have the same problem; in fact, they do. There’s 
only one municipal force in this province that has a contract. 
The rest are waiting to see what happens in the city. The 
problem is all over. 
 
One has to look no further than the estimates which you 
yourself published. Therein lays the root of this problem. The 
strains being shown by local authorities, by the inadequate 
funding to local authorities, are everywhere. 
 
The Minister of Urban Affairs, who makes such a brilliant and 
incessant contribution from his seat, who spoke a moment ago, 
might remember the other evening when we were talking about 
the estimates of the Wascana Authority and the criticisms which 
I had of your funding for the Wascana Authority. I complained 
about something not quite so serious: weeds, grass that’s not 
properly looked after and a place . . . a spot of great beauty that 
is generally deteriorating. 
 
A few weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, this 
Assembly had to deal with a stroke by the professors at the 
University of Saskatchewan brought on, again, by inadequate 
funding to local authorities. As I drove here this evening, I 
couldn’t help but be reminded of some of the more obvious 
results of inadequate funding to the municipalities, the streets 
— destructive, Mr. Speaker, of any vehicle more delicate than a 
4 by 4 jeep. The member from Moose Jaw has suggested that 
the Lights On For Life motto be scrapped, and instead we 
substitute hand on for dear life. It’s very true. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, I want to state something that 
everybody states, and that is that we have a high quality police 
force in Regina, one that this city takes justifiable pride in. And 
in any city of 150,000, Mr. Speaker, being a policeman is a 
dangerous as it is essential. The members of the force will 
respond that; anybody will tell you, it’s a dangerous but 
essential job. But senior governments currently in office won’t 
give the municipalities the resources they need to adequately 
fund this force. 
 
I don’t want to get in, in any great detail, to the issues involved. 
The police commission no doubt have their difficulties. I think 
I’ve outlined the source of most of them; it’s this government 
which has given away, to the like of Weyerhaeuser and 
Pocklington, the resources which should have gone to the likes 
of the police force. 
 
The policemen, for their part, want a 12-hour shift. I may say in 
passing, they have some impressive evidence that suggest that 
the current shifts produce an unacceptable strain on them and 
their lives and their families. They’ve asked for a pay increase 
which, by any stretch of the imagination, doesn’t seem to be too 
immoderate. Once again this government has frittered away, 
wasted and given away the resources of this province so that 
they’re no longer able to adequately fund this service. 
 
In passing, I think all we can do is wish Mr. Laing good luck in 
trying to, in bringing this thing to a successful conclusion. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Let’s vote against it. 
 

Mr. Shillington: — The member from Cannington, if you’ll 
show some patience, I’ll come to that in due course. 
 
I want to make a comment about the right to strike. We of the 
NDP strongly support the right of free men and women to 
organize themselves in democratic institutions and to organize 
themselves in a democratic union and to bargain collectively. 
And if the right to bargain collectively is to have any meaning 
at all, it must include the right to withdraw services. this 
government has — in a fashion which I think there are very few 
parallels — this government has trampled all over those basic 
democratic rights of free association and we, Mr. Speaker, stand 
opposed to that. This government seems to have no guiding 
principles except patronage and privilege for them and their 
friends. 
 
This legislation is somewhat unusual in that it precedes any 
strike. Under normal circumstances we would vociferously 
oppose such a Bill. There is, however, a difference this time and 
the Minister of Justice alluded to it. That is that both sides have 
agreed to arbitration. All that remains is a small step of 
choosing an arbitrator. There is no side that believes that a 
strike should take place. And that makes this a little bit 
different. 
 
It also raises the issue, Mr. Speaker, of what the Minister of 
Labour, the Minister of Human Resources has been doing. In 
other provinces and in this province in former times, one of the 
most important functions of the Minister of Labour was to use 
the prestige of his office — and there are some who remember 
when the occupant of that office carried some prestige — they 
used the prestige of his office to bring people together, to bridge 
these gaps which may seem insurmountable to the parties 
involved in the heat of the moment, but which can often be 
bridged by some diplomacy and some jaw-boning. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we don’t have a Minister of Labour; we have 
a parody of one. We have someone currently occupying the 
office who has discovered the power of a live mike. He’s 
discovered, Mr. Speaker, that if you make an outrageous 
comment in a live mike you get a lot of publicity. So he has 
sought to wrap, and he has spent his time wrapping himself in a 
good deal of publicity, and I think finding — it’s fair to say — a 
few friends among that small group of our population who seem 
to find some gratification in discriminating against minorities. 
 
It’s apparent this minister is unable to do his job; he’s just too 
busy searching our new minorities to charge. And one can 
understand he may be having some problems, having in a 
cavalier fashion disposed of such ruffians as the United Church 
of Canada. He may be having some difficulty finding worthy 
victims. Obviously, Mr. Speaker, he has no time to attend to the 
responsibilities of his office. And it’s probably unparliamentary 
for me to make any comments with the fact that he left, and I 
won’t do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. I’d just like to remind the hon. 
member that in fact it is, as he well knows, that a direct or 
indirect implication of members’ absence or presence is not 
acceptable. 
 
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1491 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, in the six years that this 
government has been in office the back-to-work legislation 
which, as brought in, has been so harsh and so destructive of the 
basic democratic rights to which I’ve referred earlier, that we 
have come to expect — when I say “we” I mean the opposition 
and most of the Saskatchewan public — have come to expect 
the very worst. 
 
And when our worst fears aren’t realized we tend to breathe a 
sign of relief, as I did when I saw this Bill. But I think the 
members opposite may take it as eloquent testimony to the 
reputation they’ve developed in dealing with labour problems, 
that when a Bill comes through which isn’t too bad, everybody 
breathes a sign of relief. I don’t think I could state your 
reputation much more eloquently that that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill was unnecessary in the sense that this 
government created the problem through irresponsible, 
short-sighted policies. It was unnecessary in that the Minister of 
Labour should have used his office to bridge what is really a 
very small gap. However the legislation is necessary in the 
sense that no city of 150,000 can be without a police force for 
very long without risking serious problems. 
 
In any city of this size there are large numbers of people who 
contribute mightily to life in the city and there’s a small group 
who play a somewhat different role, It’s that other group that 
during such a period can do some real damage. 
 
It’s therefore, Mr. Speaker, with considerable regret and no 
small degree of anger that we find ourselves with no viable 
option but to vote in favour of this legislation. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill 
referred to a Committee of the Whole later this day. 
 
(2030) 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 32 — An Act to provide for the Continuation of 
Regina Police Services 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Yes. With me is Darryl Bogdasavich 
from Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
refrained from making remarks in the course of the second 
reading debate because I think the concerns that I want to raise 
can be raised most adequately in the questions that I have to put 
to the minister. And I’d like to start with two or three basic 
questions, Mr. Minister, having to do with the process by which 
we arrived at the point in time where this legislation was 
introduced. 
 
I would be anxious to know if you would be in a position to 
describe to the House the steps in this process that involved the 
Government of Saskatchewan. Could you  

indicate to members of the House what efforts were made by 
the Government of Saskatchewan, formally or informally, as 
this long dispute went on, to facilitate a solution to it at the 
bargaining table without the ultimate recourse to the legislation 
that we are talking about this evening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Chairman, perhaps let me try to 
respond to the hon. member in the following way. People 
within the Department of Justice have obviously — or I should 
not say obviously — have been monitoring this and have been 
involved with both sides of this in a watching brief for some 
period of time. 
 
Approximately two weeks ago I called both sides to my office 
to determine whether or not there was some way by which 
Department of Justice might be able to facilitate or assist in a 
negotiated settlement. I think we were indicated, both sides 
indicated some of their concerns with regards to the issue. I 
think we clarified for certain sides as to what could or could not 
be done. 
 
The negotiations have then gone on for some period of time, 
often in the media. Again I have been in touch with both sides, 
perhaps in touch with Mr. Hudson perhaps more often than the 
police commission — my deputy had been involved with them 
a fair degree. With regard to what the nature of that 
conversation was, I think it probably better to leave that unsaid. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, you’ve described in the last few 
moments what sounds, on the surface at least, to be a pretty 
passive exercise from the point of view of yourself, as Minister 
of Justice, or your colleague, the Minister of Labour. 
 
And I wonder if you might not have though it more appropriate, 
at some stage in this process, to be a little more creative in 
trying to bring about a negotiated settlement so that legislation 
would not ultimately be necessary. Could you not have, at some 
stage much earlier, been more useful in the bringing to bear on 
this situation of the good offices of members of the cabinet of 
the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well clearly, you know, the option 
would have been there. First of all, it is an issue that is in 
another level of government and I think it somewhat dangerous 
to interfere to a great deal. I was not public in anything I did 
and this became a very public debate very often. And so if you 
mean by your question whether or not I should have been more 
publicly involved, I don’t think that would have served any 
purpose. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, I want to take 
you back to your comments about the chairman of the Regina 
Police Commission. Mr. Minister, you seem to indicate you 
though that’s where the fault lay or at least a goodly part of it. 
The only criticism which you enunciated was that you felt that 
they had relied upon the legislature to solve this problem. 
 
Quite frankly, Mr. Minister, that’s my precise criticism of you. 
Instead of you or the Minister of Labour going and using your 
offices, the prestige of your offices to settle that, you did 
nothing except to criticize the police  
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1492 
 

commission in public and very little else. You referred to a 
meeting in an answer to the member from Assiniboia, but you 
did very, very little to push those parties. Asking them if there’s 
anything you can do is something quite different than 
jaw-boning the parties into getting together. 
 
Mr. Minister, I am beginning to resent the continued attacks on 
the council of this city and any offices of it. And the public of 
Regina resent your blaming them for every conceivable ill. Mr. 
Minister, you say that the chairman of the police commission 
might not . . . You perhaps suggest you might have made some 
decisions different. Well, Mr. Minister, you weren’t there; you 
were sitting in the cool, calm, collected confines of your office. 
The chairman was on the job, in the heat of battle, making the 
decisions. You might have made the decisions differently; I 
might have made the decisions differently; but he had to make 
them and he made them sincerely. 
 
The problem, Mr. Minister, is not the chairman of the police 
commission or the city council, try as you might to blame every 
conceivable problem on them. the problem is you and your 
colleagues who have done such an inadequate job or running 
this government and who have so woefully, inadequately 
funded municipalities. We gave you the statistics earlier. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, you ought to withdraw that comment you 
made about the chairman of the Regina Police Commission. It’s 
unfair and it’s really uncalled for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Chairman, let me say this, that 
obviously we are in a political speaking forum. But I don’t 
think the member opposite can genuinely say in this particular 
case that the only cause of this problem is the provincial 
government. 
 
Now I think for him to say that is not being very credible to 
what has transpired over the last period of time. And I know 
there’s a political forum; I know oppositions attack 
government; I know governments attack opposition. But surely 
in this situation — to the hon. member — that is going a long 
step, I would suggest. 
 
Now, would I withdraw the statements I made? I think it would 
be fair to say that I indicated . . .(inaudible interjection). . . No. 
But the hon. member asks that I attack the . . . I take by his tone 
that I attacked only the chairman of the police commission. I 
thought I also made some statements about the mayor, which I 
didn’t think were in order. And so I think I was playing that 
fairly balanced, quite frankly. 
 
I thought quite frankly, if you get down to it, that the final offer 
by the city police to go to binding arbitration was ruled out, 
what I believe, in a rather . . . I don’t think it was given, 
perhaps, the due consideration it should have been. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Just very simply, Mr. Minister, what did 
you make such a comment at all for? It’s not at all constructive, 
and simply destructive of the job that Mr. Laing is going to 
have to do to bring these parties together. What did you make 
such a destructive, ill-conceived, unnecessary comment for? 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I guess I was honestly 
reflecting my view of this particular issue. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, as my 
colleague from Regina Centre pointed out in his remarks, it has 
been a practice in years gone by in disputes of this nature for 
the Minister of Labour to become personally involved with both 
sides to attempt to facilitate an agreement without it coming to 
the state that we find ourselves in today — both in terms of the 
strike having been called and the legislation before the 
Assembly this evening. 
 
I would ask, Mr. Minister, what role the Minister of Labour of 
your government played in this dispute in terms of attempting 
to facilitate an agreement between the two parties? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I would refer the hon. member to The 
Police Act and I think it sets out a different situation — and 
maybe a lot of other Acts as it relates to this — and that is that 
while he, the Minister of Labour, would be served with the 
notice, that is the long and the short of it. 
 
The rest of it, when it refers to cabinet, refers to Lieutenant 
Governor in Council and that has traditionally been, in these 
particular cases, the Attorney General. and it is the Attorney 
General, in this particular case, that took that position. 
Therefore our interpretation, the interpretation by the 
Department of Justice, is that quite frankly it was an issue for 
the Attorney General, and that’s who pursued it. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I would ask you on what basis you 
say that that has been the tradition, because it is not my 
understanding, as a matter of fact, that that has been the 
tradition. On what basis was a decision made to conscientiously 
prohibit or to conscientiously decide not to be involve din 
facilitating a conclusion by the Minister of Labour of your 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well all I can tell you is the advice that 
we were given is that under The Police Act that responsibility 
falls on the Attorney General, and I took that responsibility. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, let me simply express the opposite point 
of view, Mr. Minister. 
 
It would be my view that the last time that there was a similar 
set of circumstances in the city of Regina, that the Minister of 
Labour did become involved in attempting to facilitate some 
happy conclusion to that set of circumstances. I think it does not 
speak well at all for your government that you have a Minister 
of Labour who has been anything but helpful in the process of 
facilitating an acceptable agreement to both parties in this. 
 
I think the argument that you put forward here is a weak one 
and perhaps more than anything else, what it states is that there 
is not a level of confidence in your Minister of Labour to be the 
facilitator of equitable agreements when parties find themselves 
at odds in a disagreement about the conditions that they are 
negotiating. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I mean, I’ll simply answer the 
question again. I think the hon. member must understand  
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1493 
 

too, in this particular dispute, that the key issue expressed to me 
by both sides — and as I say, I talked to both sides very often 
over the last two weeks — the main issue at hand here was the 
12-hour shift and it became more than really a money issue, it 
became the principle of the way the system was going to work, 
and clearly there was strong loggerheads on both sides on that 
particular issue. 
 
(2045) 
 
So I can only say to the hon. member that we in fact tried to 
resolve that in a variety of ways. I think in fairness, both sides 
tried to come to a compromised position whether it’s the 10 
hours or what. But it tended to focus on that issue far more than, 
let’s say, a normal labour dispute which would tend to focus on 
the dollar question much more than perhaps this particular 
dispute did. And so that clearly was the key point of it. And 
then I suppose the second one is sort of the . . . I won’t get into 
the other question. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I accept at face value your 
statement that your involvement prior to this evening in 
communicating with both sides of the dispute was done to the 
best of your ability. I accept that at face value. 
 
I simply make the point again, Mr. Minister, that it is not my 
view that is a matter of fact, the absenting of the Minister of 
Labour from a process of trying to bring about solution without 
that solution involving legislative action, is a matter of fact a 
unique circumstance. And I think it is . . . if we stand in this 
Assembly and do not recognize that, that we are not serving all 
parties that find themselves at odds in arriving at conclusions to 
collective agreements in which there are disputes, because it 
would appear to me, Mr. Minister, and I think it would appear 
to the people of Saskatchewan, that we have in this province 
today a Minister of Labour who is either unwilling or unable to 
facilitate the arriving at equitable solutions for parties who are 
at dispute related to their collective agreements. And perhaps, 
Mr. Minister, it is fair to say that that is not a criticism levelled 
towards yourself, but perhaps levelled more towards the 
Minister of Labour, although I quite understand that collectively 
the government must assume responsibility for that. 
 
And I simply say, Mr. Minister, I personally believe that it is a 
shame that in the province of today, the minister responsible for 
matters related to labour and to collective agreement sin this 
province is either unwilling or unable to be involved in . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Both. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Or perhaps both, as one of my colleagues 
suggests — either unwilling or unable to be involved in a matter 
which I think, as we have said here in this Assembly tonight, 
has had the potential of arriving at a solution a number of times. 
And it certainly must be a condemning statement for your 
Minister of Labour that he neither became involved or wanted 
to become involved. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure that we 
will do a great deal to this debate to continue on with that 
particular question. Let me say this, that The Police Act, which 
we are operating under here, involves the  

question of law and order. And that matter, when it came to 
cabinet, it was the decision of cabinet that it would be the 
Attorney General who handled this issue. We saw it as a 
law-and-order issue. 
 
I attempted, to the best of my ability, to do what I could with 
both sides in bringing them together. So I think it’s not a 
question of whether or not the Minister of Labour did not, or 
would not become involved. That was the decision of cabinet, 
that it would be focused on the Attorney General and that’s how 
we proceeded. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, the courts have at long last begun to curb your 
rapacious appetite for union-bashing and ordering people back 
to work. 
 
In the dairy workers’ strike, that strike was declared contrary to 
the charter of rights because there was no apprehended danger 
to the public. Mr. Minister, this . . . an interpretation which 
might be placed on this is, the legislation was passed before the 
strike has actually taken place or in fact been called. What steps 
did you take, Mr. Minister, to determine that you wouldn’t 
suffer a similar fate on a charter argument — which may well 
ensue — that you suffered with respect to the dairy workers’ 
strike? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I would only say to the hon. 
member that he should a) read the Supreme Court decision on 
the dairy workers’ strike; that they in fact reversed that. Number 
one and number two, I have been advised, and must rely upon 
the advice of the people of the Department of Justice that in fact 
this complies with the constitution of this country. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just one or two 
other questions to the minister. 
 
In his second reading speech, the minister indicated that both 
parties, at certain times in the bargaining process in the last 
week or so, have suggested themselves that arbitration is the 
most likely route to a settlement, and that the dispute then 
reduced itself to a question of who the arbitrator ought to be. 
And the minister indicated in his speech that this legislation 
effectively names that person in one R.D. Laing, Q.C., of the 
city of Saskatoon. 
 
The minister mentioned that he had raised this particular name 
with both parties in conversations that I understand took place 
earlier today. I wonder if the minister made any effort in raising 
this particular name in his conversations with the two parties to 
this dispute, any effort to invite them to accept this appointment 
without the necessity of some recourse to legislation. Would it 
have been possible in your view, Mr. Minister, to have Mr. 
Laing appointed and go to work without actually resorting to 
legislation in this House to legislate that conclusion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Clearly, that was my preferred option. 
Clearly, that was what I attempted to do, I think probably in 
fairness that both sides, again because of their media position 
and public position that we saw unfold with this issue, found 
themselves in a difficult position to give ground on that. I 
would not want to assess blame on either side with regard to 
that, but it did not and would not  
  



 
May 19, 1988 

 

1494 
 

come together. And that’s what we would have hoped to do, is 
that they both would have agreed and then we would not have 
to be here today. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 10 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I might take the 
minister back to section 10. This is not a strongly felt criticism, 
it’s just a question of the minister. There’s one unusual 
provision in it, and that is subsection (3), which states: 
 

The arbitrator may, in his discretion, accept evidence of, 
or give consideration to, submissions respecting any 
proposal made by the employer or the association to the 
other in bargaining collectively prior to the coming into 
force of this Act. 

 
Under normal circumstances those sort of communications are 
privileged, and while it might be useful for the arbitrator to 
have, I would think that you would want the consent of the 
parties before the arbitrator made use of those proposals which, 
as I say, are often treated as having a privilege and made 
without prejudice. 
 
I’m not going to be very satisfied if you tell me that this 
appeared in some previous legislation which another 
administration may have passed. I’d like to know why, Mr. 
Minister, you decided to include it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’m advised that the rationale of that is 
that it is in there so the arbitrator has the flexibility to look at 
what the negotiations have been leading up to it in the history of 
that bargaining, to come to a fair and reasoned decision. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well without, as I say, without making a 
federal case out of this thing, suffice it to say that it’s not my 
understanding of how most arbitrations proceed. Proposals 
which are made to attempt to settle it are not given to the 
arbitration . . . to the arbitrator rather, without the consent of the 
parties involved. 
 
It’s a perfectly sensible proposal if the parties agree, somewhat 
offensive if they don’t agree. And it’s just a little unusual, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’m advised the following rationale: 
number one, is discretionary in the hands of the arbitrator. 
Counsel is there, counsel can object if there’s something that is 
inappropriate that they do not wish to have in the . . . The 
arbitrator can then use his discretion to determine that. So if the 
hon. member’s question is, is there some devious method in 
this, there is not. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I, quite frankly, Mr. Minister, I suspect you 
copied it out of a previous Bill without giving the matter a 
whole lot of thought. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’ll leave the matter by saying I think it’s 
fortunate that we have the arbitrator we do. I have every  

confidence in Mr. Laing; he’s a class-mate of mine; other 
distinguishing characteristics, Mr. Chairman, as well. He led 
our class; in fact, I think, received more than one academic 
award in his graduating year. he’s past president of the bar 
association, a person whose discretion and judgement I think 
we can trust. In this case, I think it may do less damage than it 
might if the arbitrator had been left to the tender mercies of 
someone like the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I welcome the statement with regard to 
Bob Laing by the hon. member, and I would hope that the two 
sides in this dispute would see him as a fair and reasoned 
person as well. 
 
Clause 10 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 11 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(2100) 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 32 — An Act to provide for the Continuation of 
Regina Police Services 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move that the 
Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 
 
At 9:03 p.m. His Honour the Administrator entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bill: 
 
Bill No. 32 — An Act to provide for the Continuation of Regina 
Police Services 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 9:05 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:06 p.m. 
 
 


