


















































June 21, 1988 Hansard Morning


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 21, 1988 
 

2279 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order, I hereby lay on the Table the 
following petition which I have examined under rule 11(7). The 
petition is as follows: 
 

Of certain citizens of the province of Saskatchewan praying 
that the Legislative Assembly may be pleased to urge the 
Government of Saskatchewan to reverse the decision to stop 
production at the PCS Cory mine and lay off 200 employees. 

 
Mr. Speaker: — Question period will be at 2 p.m. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to raise a 
point of order, and I do it at this time because I have just had 
access only today to the printed Hansard. My point of order refers 
to unparliamentary use of expressions and language in the 
legislature, and you will find . . . I refer you to Beauchesne, page 
105, in which it states that ‘deliberately deceived is 
unparliamentary, is an unparliamentary expression. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you have been quick to act when you have heard 
certain members allegedly use, or sometimes really use, 
unparliamentary language. Yesterday there was not this action 
quite so quickly, and I refer you to page 2237 of Hansard in which 
the Minister of Finance said, in answer to a question asked by the 
member for Riversdale: 
 

. . . it’s wrong, and it’s deliberately deceptive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I raise that point of order with you, and I ask you to 
check the record and then make a ruling in order to determine 
whether in fact that was unparliamentary language and take 
whatever appropriate action you deem necessary. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’ll certainly check the allegation that the hon. 
member has brought up and take the necessary action. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Even though what he said was really true? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Oh, yes. Oh, yes. 
 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Also before orders of the day, I would like to 
refer to a point of order raised by the member for Saskatoon 
Westmount yesterday before orders of the day in which he 
indicated that the Deputy Premier had referred to the absence of a 
member in the House and was 

not corrected. 
 
The point of order raised by the member from Saskatoon 
Westmount is correct and well taken; however, I should also point 
out to the House that the previous speaker had also referred to the 
absence of the Premier and not in the context, not in the context 
that he had been directing a question to the Premier in his absence. 
 
Therefore, the point of order is well taken. It is well taken and 
certainly points out that members on both sides of the House 
should not refer to the absence of members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might have 
leave of the Assembly to go directly to government orders and 
deal with third readings, followed by second readings. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 86 — An Act respecting Registered Nurses 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 86, An 
Act respecting Registered Nurses be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 85 — An Act respecting The Saskatchewan 
Association of Certified Nursing Assistants 

 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 85, an 
Act respecting certified nursing assistants be now read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 75 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Bill introduces 
policy measures announced in the budget. It also contains a 
number of technical amendments that have been requested by the 
federal government as part of our responsibilities under the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Tax Collection Agreement. 
 
Over the past year, Saskatchewan taxpayers have witnessed a 
major reform of the national income tax system. Tax rates have 
been lowered, certain deductions have been eliminated, and tax 
credits have replaced most personal deductions and exemptions. 
The federal proposals will result in a significant redistribution of 
income tax liability among Saskatchewan residents. They will also 
result in a major loss in personal income tax revenues for the 
province in 1988. 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2280 
 

Because of the magnitude of the federal proposals being 
introduced in 1988, action had to be taken to minimize the 
provincial revenue loss in 1988 in order to ensure that adequate 
funds are available to finance vital government services such as 
health and education. As a result, the Saskatchewan flat tax will be 
increased to 2 per cent for 1988. This increase will enable our 
government to offset the revenue loss resulting from the 
implementation of the federal tax reform proposals, while 
maintaining a relatively low marginal tax rate and ensuring that 
higher income taxpayers pay their fair share. 
 
In addition, the Saskatchewan tax reduction will continue to 
provide assistance to approximately 335,000 lower and middle 
income families and individuals. 
 
In order to minimize the impact of the increase in the 
Saskatchewan flat tax, the province will not require the payment 
of tax withholding for the first six months of 1988. The tax will be 
held at the rate of 1.5 per cent from January 1 to June 30, 1988, 
and the rate of 2 per cent from July 1 to December 31, ’88. The 
remaining flat tax liability will be payable when individuals file 
their 1988 income tax returns in April ’89. 
 
By implementing this change in conjunction with federal reform 
measures, over 95 per cent of Saskatchewan individuals and 
families will see an increase in their take-home pay, commencing 
this July. 
 
Federal tax reform presents us with both a challenge and an 
opportunity. In 1989 we intend to introduce reform measures that 
will enable the province to respond to the economic and social 
challenges facing our residents over the next few years and 
beyond. 
 
In presenting the budget, I tabled a discussion paper entitled “A 
Dialogue on Saskatchewan Income Tax Reform.” The paper 
presents four alternatives for personal income tax reform in 
Saskatchewan and asks for public input in developing proposals 
for reforming our tax system. Public response to the paper has 
been positive, and we expect to have a specific proposal prepared 
for public discussion later this fiscal year. 
 
In reforming our tax system, there are a number of principles 
which must be addressed. Changes must be made to improve the 
fairness of the tax system. Individuals should bear a tax burden 
which reflects their ability to pay. The delivery of social policy 
through the tax system must be considered. Support for the family 
is one of the corner-stones of the Saskatchewan tax system, and 
any reform proposal must examine ways of directing greater 
support to families. 
 
The tax system has been used extensively to accomplish economic 
objectives. Programs such as the Saskatchewan stock savings tax 
credit and the labour-sponsored venture capital tax credit 
encourage a strengthening of Saskatchewan industry through 
equity participation by Saskatchewan residents. We believe that 
the tax system should continue to be used to foster economic 
growth in the province. 
 
The system must also be simplified. Complexity 

undermines public confidence in the fairness of the income tax 
system and encourages tax evasion. Consideration must be given 
to maintaining the harmony between our tax system and the 
federal system. In Saskatchewan, individuals and families have to 
deal with only one income tax administration, unlike in the United 
States where tax filers are often required to file separate federal, 
state, and indeed municipal tax returns, and deal with three 
separate tax administrations. 
 
The final principle which must be addressed in reforming our tax 
system is revenue sufficiency. Any reform proposal must ensure 
that government revenue will be sufficient to fund the central 
government services. By carefully considering and balancing these 
principles, a reform proposal can be introduced in 1989 which will 
make our personal income tax system more equitable and more 
efficient. 
 
In respect to corporate income tax, our government is introducing 
measures to assist one of the province’s largest employers, small 
business. This Bill provides for the extension of the two-year 
corporate tax holiday for new small business. Small business 
incorporating in Saskatchewan prior to April 1, 1990, will be 
eligible for a provincial tax holiday during their first and second 
years. 
 
In addition, small businesses will receive assistance in reducing 
the burden of local business taxes. In the budget I announced that 
our government would commit $10 million to the reduction of 
local business taxes in 1989. Changes have also been introduced to 
the corporate capital tax to ensure that resource companies and 
federal commercial Crown corporations operating in 
Saskatchewan made adequate contributions to provincial 
revenues. These corporate tax changes will result in additional 
revenues in excess of $37 million in this fiscal year. 
 
And finally this Bill introduces a number of technical amendments 
at the request of the federal government under the terms of the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Tax Collection Agreement. These 
amendments will allow our Act to remain consistent with the 
federal laws so that the taxpayer compliance is made as simple as 
possible. I would be pleased to answer members’ questions 
concerning these amendments when discussing this Bill at the 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
(1015) 
 
It therefore gives me pleasure to move that, An Act to amend The 
Income Tax Act, be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to make a few 
comments in respect to a very substantial increase in the personal 
income tax on ordinary Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Many will remember that the PC Party, in their election platform, 
indicated that they would in fact bring about a 10 per cent across 
the board decrease in personal income tax. And what we seen? We 
have them introduce, under the disguise of tax reform, a flat tax. 
And this year they have increased it by 33 per cent — increased an 
ordinary Saskatchewan resident’s . . . the flat tax by 33 per 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2281 
 

cent. 
 
The minister indicates that this is done in respect to the tax reform 
of the federal government. Let’s take a look at the tax reform in 
the federal government, basically, and see what it has meant to 
ordinary people in Canada. 
 
First of all, I want to indicate that the amount of income tax that is 
being paid by residents across Canada since 1984 under the 
federal government has increased on average from 1,000 to 
$1,500. They increased the tax massively and then brought n the 
so-called tax reform, with the net result that people across Canada 
today, under the federal Tory party, are paying on average 1,000 to 
$1,200 more in personal income tax. And he congratulates them 
on tax reform. 
 
I want to say that there’s a second part of the massive tax reform 
of the federal government, and that is implementing a sales tax or 
a value added tax which will be introduced following the next 
election. And this will again massively increase the taxes on 
ordinary Canadians. 
 
I want to say that here we have a government come in with a 
massive increase again of a tax on ordinary Saskatchewan people. 
First of all, as I said, it’s a breach of the promise that they have 
given to the people of Saskatchewan that they would reduce 
taxation. But what do we find? We find now a 2 per cent surtax, 
flat tax, imposed on residents across this province. For a family 
earning some $25,000 at 2 per cent, if their net income is 25,000, 
they pay $500 a year just in flat tax. 
 
It’s interesting to know that the minister on the one hand has 
increased the flat tax on ordinary taxpayers but at the same time he 
introduced in his budget a cut in corporate income tax from 17 per 
cent down to 15 per cent. That’s the fairness in respect to the 
government opposite. 
 
He indicates that he is supporting families. And I wonder how a 
flat tax of 2 per cent or $500 on $2,500 income is supporting the 
strengthening of families and the caring of their children. 
 
We take a look at . . . since 1983-84, under the PC government, it 
has increased the corporation income tax by only $1.7 million. 
The corporate income tax paid in 1983-84, the estimated income 
tax, corporate income tax this year is only $1.7 million increase. 
But in the same period, it has increased the personal income taxes 
by 47 per cent or $266 million. 
 
And when you check the figures in minister’s March budget, we 
see clearly the impact of his policy. For every dollar that an 
individual pays in personal income tax, corporations are paying 
only 16 cents in income tax. And this, the minister says, is 
strengthening and protecting families. 
 
If we take a look at the amount of revenue that is being raised in 
respect to personal income tax via the flat tax, we find that while 
personal income taxes in 1982 accounted for 15 per cent of 
provincial revenues, that personal income tax now has increased to 
where it represents 23 per cent of the government’s revenue. 

But if you look at the same period of time in respect to 
corporations, the corporate income taxes seven years ago at 4 per 
cent of the revenues of the government today, it represents 4 per 
cent. And the minister stands here and indicates that he’s 
strengthening and protecting families. 
 
I want to indicate, Mr. Speaker, that this government has broken 
yet another promise. It has increased massively the taxes on 
ordinary people, and he goes on to indicate — and we’ll be 
dealing with it later — in respect to the corporate capital tax, and 
he indicates that that has been increased. And the Bill purports to 
increase the corporate capital tax. 
 
But if you look at the same time that the minister is protecting 
their friends, while he purports to increase the corporate capital 
tax, at the same time he indicates that to the resource companies 
what he proposes to do is to give a further reduction in resource 
royalty tax. On the one hand he’s going to charge them more 
under the corporate capital tax; on the other hand he proposes to 
give them a reduction in the resource royalty tax. 
 
All of us have seen the unfairness of the basic taxation policy of 
this government. We have seen it in respect to their application of 
royalty and taxes on the oil companies as opposed to individual 
members in society. We have seen from 1982 to 1985 that the 
production of oil, the value of oil produced doubled from $1.2 
billion in value in 1982 to $2.4 billion. 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the revenue to the people of 
Saskatchewan did not increase a single dollar during that period of 
time. And the oil companies filled their pockets, and now what is 
happening the people of this province are taking the beating with 
increased taxes and the massive increase in the flat tax. 
 
I want to say that the minister is talking about tax reforms. Well 
we have had some of his tax reform because his predecessor in 
1985, the member from Kindersley, introduced his tax reform and 
part of that tax reform was this vicious flat tax, was increased and 
introduced at that time. 
 
I think that any time that you hear a Tory talk about tax reform, 
one has to look only at their idol across the Atlantic where 
Margaret Thatcher, the Prime Minister of Great Britain, 
introduced a massive tax reform policy — a $9 billion cut in 
taxation. And do you know who got it? Five per cent of the richest 
people in United Kingdom received 50 per cent of the tax benefits. 
And at the very bottom of the scale, the very poorest, they had a 
small increase in the amount of taxation. 
 
So when the minister starts talking in introducing this Bill about 
further tax reform, I say to the people of this province, I think 
we’ve had enough. This government has gouged and picked the 
pockets of people in Saskatchewan, the like of which we have 
never seen. If we take a look in the four budgets — of ’85-86 and 
the budget of ’87-88 and ’88-89 — you will find that the overall 
increase in taxes that have been imposed on the backs of 
Saskatchewan people exceeds $500 million on ordinary 
Saskatchewan people. 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2282 
 

They have breached every promise they have made. They broke 
the promise in increasing the tax rather than decreasing. They also 
indicated that the E&H tax would be removed in the first term of 
office, and what did we see there? The E&H tax went up from 5 
per cent to 7 per cent — another Tory tax reform for the people of 
this province. But the unmerciful part of the fiscal taxation policies 
of the government opposite, it seems to me, is that not only while 
they are paying excessively more taxation, the services provided to 
families have been greatly curtailed and cut. 
 
The minister didn’t say, when he’s talking about families, how he 
is protecting them when he destroyed the basic underlying feature 
of the drug program. He didn’t speak of how his government 
achieved helping families by cutting and slashing and imposing a 
premium on the drug program. He didn’t talk about undermining 
dental program of the school-based program. And so what I’m 
saying here, Mr. Speaker, is that this Bill here clearly indicates the 
direction of this government, a government that is conveniently 
taxing away the people of the province, slashing the services to the 
people of this province, and at the same time giving hand-outs to 
their corporate friends. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker . . . The people of this province, as we travel it, 
are indicating that they have had enough. Business people are 
saying, this government is taxing us far too much. Ordinary 
Saskatchewan people are saying, we can’t tolerate any more taxes 
and at the same time have massive cuts in our services. 
 
So I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill here, The Income Tax 
Act, it represents, I may say, a breach of a promise by this 
government. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The people were misled. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — The people again, as my colleague indicates, were 
misled, but the people of this province are sick and tired of any tax 
reform, Tory style. 
 
It’s rather interesting that while introducing the tax increase here, 
the flat tax, by 33 per cent, that the minister didn’t go further and 
introduce also, as I understand are incorporated in The Income 
Tax Act, two other factors which he indicated in his budget that 
the was going to carry out. They’re obviously missing from the 
Bill, and they are the reduction, as I indicated, of the corporate 
income tax from 17 to 15 per cent. He didn’t have the nerve to put 
in the Bill an increase of 33 per cent for ordinary Saskatchewan 
people and at the same time put in the Bill that he was cutting the 
corporate income tax by 2 per cent. 
 
The other obvious omission is the repeal of the manufacturing and 
processing tax reduction. Here he has indicated in his budget that 
he was prepared, that he was going to repeal the manufacturing 
and processing tax reduction, which will affect many of our small 
manufacturing and processing businesses here in Saskatchewan. 
That, obviously, is a part of his tax reform as indicated in his 
budget. 

But what he indicated here is that he’s going to increase the tax on 
ordinary Saskatchewan citizens by 33 per cent, half a per cent on 
the flat tax this year, but he didn’t include that he’s reducing the 
corporate income tax rate from 17 to 15 per cent. He didn’t 
indicate that he is repealing the manufacturing and processing tax 
reduction which will affect the local small manufacturing 
businesses throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
I think it’s clear, Mr. Speaker, in closing my remarks, that the 
people of this province are on to this government. They have no 
longer any faith in believing what they say. This government 
promised tax reduction and what did we get is tax increases, 
massive tax increases, and in fact, in Saskatchewan we pay two 
income taxes now. We pay the ordinary income tax, and then on 
top of it we have this special Tory tax reform tax, the flat tax, at 2 
per cent of net income. 
 
(1030) 
 
And I’ll tell you, it’s very, very difficult for working people. 
Working people across this province have no basic deductions. 
Basically their net . . . their gross income is equivalent almost to 
their net income because of a lack of deductions. And as a 
consequence, the 2 per cent flat tax is a heavy burden on those that 
take home cheques to feed their families and to provide the 
necessities of life. 
 
I have talked to people across this province, school teachers and 
others, who are on monthly wage. And they are indicating that in 
spite of some adjustments in respect to salaries, that when they 
look at their take-home pay now, as a result of the vicious flat tax 
that has been imposed, that their take-home pay is less today than 
it was two years ago. That’s what the people of this province are 
finding. They’re finding that they’re being taxed and taxed and 
taxed by this government, while at the same time the corporate 
sector, in the corporate income tax, are getting a break. They see 
this government that gave up huge amounts of revenue to the oil 
companies from 1982 to 1985 that have jeopardized the fiscal 
strength of this province. And to now, this government has turned 
on the very people that supported them and have catered to the 
outside multinational corporations with gifts and tax breaks. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we will be opposing this massive 
increase here in the income tax. I think it’s a total breach of 
promise. I think it’s a deception that this government is trying to 
play on the people of Saskatchewan with the phoney attempt of 
bringing in tax reform. 
 
I can only say, Mr. Speaker, that when corporations pay 16 cents 
for every dollar that ordinary Saskatchewan people pay in respect 
to personal income tax, there’s got to be something wrong. That’s 
PC fairness that’s basically unfair to the people of this province. 
 
I can say that in this province the personal income tax was the 
envy of other provinces until this government took office. And 
today the personal income tax paid by Saskatchewan people is the 
. . . if not in the highest, is the second highest personal income tax 
for a person earning 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2283 
 

$35,000, and the minister can’t deny it. 
 
The best he could do is to exclude those figures from his estimates 
and from his budget address so that it couldn’t be compared. But 
in 1987, when we looked and compared the personal income tax 
being paid by Saskatchewan people, it was the second highest in 
Canada, second only to Quebec. And those were his figures, his 
figures set out in the ’87-88 budget, and we were using the 
comparison of someone earning $35,000. This is a fantastic record 
that this minister has brought forward. He should be very proud 
that he has given the oil companies the break, and he has taxed the 
ordinary citizens of this province, the like of which we have never 
seen. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that certainly, given the opportunity to 
discuss this with the people of Saskatchewan, that the high 
taxation that is being charged to the ordinary people of 
Saskatchewan is an issue which we are raising with the people of 
Saskatchewan. And I can only say that more and more of them are 
in agreement with us and indicate that the fiscal management of 
this government is so bad that they need to be tossed from office. 
And more and more people are joining, joining with us in a tax 
revolt against this government, because what they are doing is 
taxing ordinary people and giving holidays and grants to their 
corporate friends. 
 
Can you just feature? — Canada Packers as an example. Here 
we’re charging ordinary people that have helped to build this 
province, yet 33 per cent increase in the flat tax. And only a year 
and a half ago, what did this government do? It walked into 
Canada Packers after it had set up Peter Pocklington in North 
Battleford, and the minister, then of Finance, the minister of small 
business or industry and trade sent a letter to Canada Packers: — 
enclosed herein find our cheque for $1 million as a grant if you 
will stay in the province — $1 million cheque from the people of 
Saskatchewan. And then this minister has the utter audacity to turn 
around and to tax further the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
As I say, Mr. Speaker, I will want to discuss this vicious tax 
increase in some detail in both the estimates and in Committee of 
the Whole. Our members on this side are opposed to this massive 
increase in the flat tax, and accordingly will be voting against it, 
Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a second time. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — With leave, later this day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

Bill No. 79 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 
Pension Plan Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Almost two 

years ago this government introduced the Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan to provide an unprecedented level of protection and security 
to the people of this province. 
 
For people without access to private pension plans, it offers the 
opportunity to take control of their future and plan for a 
comfortable retirement. It also enables people to supplement what 
they might received from other pensions such as the Canada 
Pension Plan. 
 
Two features make the Saskatchewan Pension Plan especially 
attractive for low income earners — matching government 
contributions based on an individual’s income, and a guaranteed 
minimum pension. 
 
Since introducing this landmark plan two years ago, we’ve had the 
opportunity to review how well it functioned, and to the credit of 
everyone who has been involved, it has functioned extremely well. 
 
More than 40,000 Saskatchewan people have responded by 
joining the plan, and already more than 1,600 people are enjoying 
retirement benefits offered by the plan. 
 
Many of these people were previously unable to have a pension. 
More than 50 per cent of our members described themselves as 
housewives. Another 30 per cent are farmers and part-time 
workers. I don’t need to remind anyone of how these groups have 
been bypassed and overlooked in the pension mainstream. 
 
Many of our members have suggested ways we can improve the 
plan, the first and only plan of its kind to North America. People 
have asked us to keep things simple, and understandably they 
want to maximize the amount they can put into the plan. 
 
We have taken their suggestions and made some other changes. 
We want to lower administration costs, we want to make the plan 
as fair and as understandable as possible, and we want people to 
plan for and enjoy a secure retirement without additional burden to 
the taxpayer. The Saskatchewan Pension Plan amendments being 
given second reading today will accomplish the aforementioned. 
 
The specific amendments are as follows: — firstly, the amended 
plan will allow anyone to contribute up to $600 a year, regardless 
of income level. Previously, high income earners could make 
personal contributions of up to $600, but lower income earners 
had to make sure that their personal contribution plus the matching 
amount they would receive from the government would not 
exceed $600. This proposed change will make it easier for 
members to calculate their personal contribution and will enable 
lower income earners to set aside more for their retirement should 
they choose to do so, without any additional cost to the taxpayer. It 
will also eliminate the administrative problems caused by 
accidental over-contributions. 
 
Secondly, retiring members receiving the guaranteed minimum 
pension will obtain additional retirement benefits with their 
unmatched personal contributions. Previously, these were 
refunded at the time of retirement, as they provided no additional 
value. With the 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2284 
 

implementation of this change, lower income members will be 
able to realize larger pension benefit than they could previously, at 
no additional cost. 
 
The third change will have government matching contributions 
calculated on the member’s income for the previous, rather than 
the current, year. This will simplify contribution amount decisions 
for members such as farmers or self-employed workers who don’t 
know their income for the current year. It will also enable the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan to issue annual statements earlier and 
finalize accounts for retired or deceased members more 
expeditiously. 
 
The fourth and fifth proposed changes have to deal with the 
simplification of contribution eligibility. With legislative approval 
of these changes, we will allow members in receipt of Canada 
Pension Plan benefits and Saskatchewan Pension Plan death 
benefits to continue making Saskatchewan Pension Plan 
contributions until they are 65 years old. By taking advantage of 
the recently enacted early retirement provisions of the Canada 
pension Plan Act, many people were rendered ineligible to make 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan contributions. SPP (Saskatchewan 
Pension Plan) members who may receive a death benefit from 
another member would have been ineligible to make their own 
personal contributions. These changes will make the plan more 
equitable, since people have always been able to contribute to the 
SPP if they are receiving retirement benefits from a private plan or 
even disability or survivor benefits from the Canada Pension Plan. 
 
The sixth and seventh changes will province s six-month cooling-
off period for new contributors and new retirees in the plan. New 
contributors will be able to opt out of the plan and receive a refund 
of their contribution. The new retirees will be able to revoke their 
retirement, pay back benefits received, and resume making their 
contributions, or simply defer their retirement date. 
 
While locking investing of contributions provides protection for 
members, sometimes personal situations change drastically. This 
amendment will allow people to exercise the right of change, to 
change their minds, within reason. We also expect it will reduce 
our administrative costs in dealing with appeals to the board of 
trustees. 
 
Other minor housekeeping amendments provide 18-year-olds with 
eligibility for maximum government matching contribution rather 
than a prorated amount, treating them the same as retiring 
members; that an application for membership can follow a 
contribution, and the ability to advance larger, less frequent 
pension payments to members whose pensions are small. 
 
The contributors to the Saskatchewan Pension Plan are the 
ordinary people of this province. They want to prepare for their 
retirement, and they want to enjoy retirement on their own terms. 
They are people like our parents or brothers and sisters or children 
who have lived in towns, villages, and cities of this province. We 
believe these changes will make the plan more equitable and fair 
for those who decide to contribute to the Saskatchewan Pension 
Plan. These changes will not increase the tax burden but for the 
most part will reduce administrative 

costs to the plan. 
 
The long-term success of the plan will of course mean lower costs 
to government and to the people in the future. I move second 
reading of this Bill. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to say 
a few words. We’re not surprised that at this stage that there would 
be a number of amendments by the government to the plan, 
bearing in mind that this plan was introduced with great haste by 
the government. Although we support the plan, we think that the 
plan needs to go further, and hopefully we’ll have an opportunity 
in future years to improve dramatically the plan that’s before us. I 
want to say, however, that in listening to the minister, that I agree 
that the amendments are primarily intended to make the existing 
plan more equitable and fair, agree that they are mostly 
amendments of a technical nature which are required, therefore 
can support the Bill and are prepared to see it go forward to 
committee. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1045) 
 
Bill No. 88 — An Act to make Certain Changes in the Statute 

Law with respect to the Investment of Moneys 
Held pursuant to Certain Acts 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of a Bill, No. 88, The Investment Provisions Amendment 
Act. This is an omnibus Bill, Mr. Speaker. It amends 15 separate 
statutes to accomplish the following four objectives. 
 
In the first place, this Bill provides various pension and other 
general funds with the ability to contract for the services of outside 
investment managers. These services are currently provided to the 
Department of Finance. With these changes, fund manager or 
pension boards will have the opportunity to obtain investment 
management services from the private sector and to pay for these 
services out of the fund. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the Bill exempts a number of funds from 
the authority of the Investment Board. Current legislation permits 
the Investment Board of cabinet to determine investment policy to 
be followed by these funds. It is important that this linkage to 
government authority be eliminated, and that investment authority 
be clearly vested with a plan sponsor, or its board. 
 
This Bill also standardizes the reference to authority under which 
investments can be made. Our current legislation is unduly 
redundant and confusing. Investments can currently be made 
under The Pension Benefits Act, the Pension Benefits Standards 
Act, The Department of Finance Act, the Canadian and British 
Insurance Companies Act, etc. These changes will result in 
uniform and consistent regulations applying to the investment of 
superannuation funds, The Pension Benefits Act. The changes are 
being implemented, Mr. 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2285 
 

Speaker, with the support of the funds affected, and they will 
neither enhance nor diminish the scope of eligible investments. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, the legislation will standardize investment 
decision making authority for various types of pension plans. Most 
significantly the legislation empowers the Municipal Employees’ 
Superannuation Commission to make its own funds investment 
decisions without reference to the Minister of Finance. Again this 
is being done, Mr. speaker, with full support of the superannuation 
commission and recognizes that no potential Consolidated Fund 
liability exists within this plan. 
 
These legislative changes serve to remedy past inconsistencies and 
anomalies. They are being made with the knowledge and support 
of the affected parties and, most importantly, Mr. Speaker, these 
changes serve to position the various funds to better manage their 
investment activities at a time when financial markets are 
increasingly complex and volatile and the size of the funds are 
growing at a dramatic rate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just like to assure all hon. members and the 
opposition critic, as I’ve indicated, that all changes being 
implemented have the full support of the particular funds affected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 88, The 
Investment Provisions Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 
minister for his remarks, and I thank him for his assurances about 
the support of the participating pension plans in so far as his plans 
are concerned. I might say, though, that in no way lessens some 
concerns that we have on our side with the proposed legislation 
and other consequential Acts, because in a sense the minister is 
asking us to buy a pig in a poke, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He’s asking the Legislative Assembly to improve the contracting 
out of investment management services of billions, of billions of 
dollars, of public dollars, without it being clear who will be 
contracted to provide these services. There has been a great deal of 
speculation in the media based in part on comments by the 
minister, based in part on reports that have been leaked to the 
media, about an independent investment corporation being 
developed to handle these investments. 
 
Now supposedly this investment corporation is to be client-owned. 
That is to say, it’s owned by the respective pension funds and by 
the various investment funds that are proposed to come together to 
form this particular body. And therefore I’m not surprised, as 
neither should the minister be, that the various employee groups 
and the various pension funds are pleased with that particular 
direction. 
 
The concern that we have is that this particular investment 
corporation — and again I’m going on the speculation that’s been 
there in the media — is to be a private business corporation; that is 
to say, it’s to be chartered or set up under the existing corporation 
Act. And should this be the case, I would submit that we, as 

members of the Legislative Assembly, should be concerned, 
indeed alarmed, about the fact that billions of dollars of public 
money are to be administered by a corporation that will not be 
subject to, not be subject to the public scrutiny of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
And therefore in that particular way, Mr. Speaker, we fear that the 
people of Saskatchewan, through their Legislative Assembly, will 
have again less of a say in how the public funds, the public 
moneys of this province, are to be, in this case invested, or in other 
ways discharged. 
 
That is a concern that we have expressed now for some years in 
this Legislative Assembly. This is a concern that rises out of Bills 
by the government to enable the cabinet to take extraordinary 
powers to organize departments without reference to the 
Legislative Assembly. So therefore, Mr. Speaker, we are greatly 
concerned about the direction that the government proposes. 
 
We feel that there are other options available to the government. It 
is reportedly, reportedly in the consultant’s report that was 
prepared for the government, other options were made available, 
such as Crown corporations, an independent Crown corporation, a 
Crown corporation that would be subject to the public scrutiny of 
the Legislative Assembly, as opposed to the speculation that is 
afoot about a private business corporation which would limit the 
kind of scrutiny that members of the Legislative Assembly can 
give to investment of public moneys, and recognize in this case 
that we’re talking about billions and billions of dollars — not just 
employees’ contributions, but also contributions by the employer, 
that is to say, the Government of Saskatchewan, and other public 
funds, whether it’s the workers’ compensation fund or other funds 
where the government proposes to contract out services to this 
investment corporation, but that corporation not being answerable 
in any way to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
So therefore we have some great concerns. When the minister first 
spoke, he said that . . . I’m not quite clear whether he said that it’s 
an omnibus Bill or an ominous Bill. At this point, Mr. Speaker, I 
would say that it’s an ominous Bill because it reduces the kind of 
scrutiny that I feel that the Legislative Assembly should give when 
public dollars are involved. This particular Bill seeks to limit that, 
therefore we have those concerns. 
 
I will want to take some further time to review the minister’s 
comments, and at this time beg leave to adjourn the debate, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 45 — An Act to amend The Department of 
Revenue and Financial Services Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a legislation 
consequential to the investment services statutory provisions 
amendment Act and deals with another aspect of the pensions. I 
might advise that the proposed investment corporation referred to 
by the hon. member as being a public corporation is at the choice 
of the pension fund managers. Certainly all of the options referred 
to were at their request, were certainly 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2286 
 

considered. But I can give the assurance to the hon. member that 
the form is that requested by the pension funds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Public Employees Benefits Agency within the 
Department of Finance administers several public sector pension 
and benefit programs. Currently the cost of administering these 
programs are a charge upon the Consolidated Fund. We are 
proposing, through this Bill, to create a revolving fund which 
allow the cost of administration to be borne by the pension benefit 
funds. 
 
The measures presented in this Bill represent a common sense 
approach to managing the ever increasing demands for 
government services. The measures accomplish several goals. We 
are better able to serve the needs of individuals and families, 
interest groups in communities throughout Saskatchewan, by 
reallocating funds used for the administration of employee pension 
benefits to higher priorities such as health and education. 
 
We are better able to serve the needs of employees and 
superannuates who participate in the pension and benefit programs 
in terms of the level and quality of services offered. 
 
Through this Bill we are going a long way towards removing the 
constraint on the administration services offered to employees and 
superannuates, as a result of the Public Employees Benefits 
Agency being part of the process of competing for limited 
government resources. 
 
I’m pleased to report that we are able to achieve these goals 
without having a significant negative impact on the pension 
benefits enjoyed by our employees. As well, it is worth noting that 
neither the role of the various boards and commissions established 
to administer the plans, nor the autonomy of the funds themselves 
will be diminished or infringed upon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the principle that users of government services 
should be expected to shoulder more of the burden is, I think, 
reasonable and sensible, and again I indicate to the hon. member, 
that is part of the overall changes. This has also been approved by 
the various plans and their boards and commissions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Department of 
Revenue and Financial Services (Consequential) Amendment Act 
1988. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t want to 
say much about this particular Bill. I agree with the minister that 
it’s in great part consequential to the previous Bill. I might again 
emphasize, however, that there are alternatives available to the 
government. And let’s make it clear that it’s the government that 
has pursued this matter. It’s not a matter that has been pursued by 
the pension funds as such. This is a matter that’s being pursued by 
the government. This is a government that has outlined the 
alternatives available to the various pension funds, and I’m not 
surprised that the pension funds would find the investment 
corporation that has been much bandied about as being the most 
preferable option of those that are being proposed by the 
government. 

That in no way lessens the concerns that we have, that we have as 
stewards of the public purse, and as those who are concerned 
about how public moneys are spent and invested in Saskatchewan, 
no way lessens our concerns that this Legislative Assembly on 
behalf of he people of Saskatchewan should have the opportunity 
for public scrutiny of significant investment decisions where 
public dollars are involved. 
 
The Bills that we have and at least goes . . . again I would say 
some step towards allowing a limitation of that scrutiny and 
something that we are concerned about. But as with the last Bill, 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave to adjourn the debate from this 
matter. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 46 — An Act respecting Certain Amendments to 
Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of The Department 

of Revenue and Financial Services Act, 
1988 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The Revenue and Financial Services 
Consequential Amendment Act amends the various pension Acts 
which are administered by the Public Employees Benefits Agency. 
The amendments provide the authority to pay for administrative 
costs directly from the various pension funds rather than the 
Consolidated Fund. While the authority to charge for the 
administration costs lies in The Department of Revenue and 
Financial Services (Consequential) Amendment Act, 1988, 
reciprocal authority to pay for those costs must be included in each 
pension Act. 
 
The following pension Acts are specifically affected by the Bill: 
Liquor Board superannuation fund; members of the Legislative 
Assembly superannuation fund; the municipal employees’ 
superannuation fund; the judges of provincial courts 
superannuation fund; the Anti-tuberculosis League’s 
superannuation fund; Saskatchewan Transportation Company 
superannuation fund; public employees’ superannuation fund; 
public employees’ annuity fund; Workers’ Compensation Board 
superannuation fund. 
 
The expenses of administering the public service superannuation 
plan, the old formula plan, will continue to be charged to the 
Consolidated Fund as no separate fund exists for this plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move that The Department of Revenue and 
Financial Services Consequential Amendment Act will be read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I agree with the minister that 
this particular Bill is consequential to the last Bill we dealt with 
and is certainly related to the penultimate, or the next-to-last Bill 
we dealt with. And as are those two Bills, I would beg leave to 
adjourn debate in this matter. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1100) 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2287 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 70 — An Act to 
amend The Corporation Capital Tax Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to make a few 
comments in respect to The Corporations Capital Tax Amendment 
Act. This legislation, as indicated by the minister in his comments, 
is intended to ensure that large resource corporations with 
significant activities in Saskatchewan will pay a reasonable share 
to the provincial treasury. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that on surface, this looks encouraging 
and we say, it’s about time. However, when we look closer at 
what the government is doing, we discover that it’s really only a 
very gentle touch in respect to the corporate capital tax increase. 
 
I don’t disagree with the principle that is being adopted. The 
minister indicates that the capital surcharge will generate 
something like $34.8 million to the provincial treasury. But he 
counters this with, I believe, two measures. The government turns 
around and proposes to reduce the resource royalties and freehold 
production taxes by an amount equal to 1 per cent of the value of 
the Saskatchewan resource sales. The estimated savings in respect 
to the resource royalty cut-back or decrease is somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of $20 million. 
 
So on the one hand the minister is indicating that he is going to go 
after these big corporations and receive for the provincial treasury 
$34.8 million, and then he turns around with his left hand and he 
hands them back $20 million in resource royalty decreases. 
 
I want to say that another aspect that is beneficial to the 
corporations is the corporate income tax reduction. Here the 
minister also indicates in his budget that there will be a 2 per cent 
cut in the corporate income tax. So while increasing the surcharge 
on the resource companies, he turns around, as I said, and 
decreases the royalty tax by 20 million and he cuts the corporate 
income tax by 2 per cent. 
 
So it’s a clear indication that this government is really catering to 
the whims of big business and it has, as was indicated here earlier 
by the introduction of The Income Tax Act, sticking it to the 
ordinary Saskatchewan resident whereby he increased the flat tax, 
went up some 33 per cent. 
 
In his remarks, Mr. Speaker, the minister says, and I want to just 
quote to make a point. He indicates: 
 

As a result (he says) fewer than 1,000 companies pay tax and 
most of them have their head offices located outside the 
province. 

 
The very point that we have been indicating. I think it indicates 
two or three things. It indicates that the economic policies of this 
government is not attracting outside companies to locate here in 
Saskatchewan. By his 

own admission and his statement, is that most of their head offices 
are located outside this province. 
 
And under the previous administration, one of the key industrial 
strategies that we had is that in the development of our resource 
sector that the companies that would be developing them would 
indeed have their head offices here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And indeed this was achieved to a large extent with the Crown 
corporations — the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, head 
office, Saskatoon; SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining and 
Development Corporation), head office in Saskatoon; Saskoil, 
which was a Crown corporation, head office here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So the admission of the minister is that many of the major 
companies, resource companies, while indeed developing our 
resources, are not in fact locating here in Saskatchewan. And I say 
that’s regrettable because our strategy was to indeed have head 
offices here in Saskatchewan, to have people hired here in 
Saskatchewan, to have the money that was earned stay in 
Saskatchewan with companies with head offices in Saskatchewan. 
 
As a consequence of the economic policy of the government 
opposite, we have fewer jobs being provided to Saskatchewan 
people as a result of not locating head offices here. 
 
So I can only say that on the face of the minister’s statement, the 
economic policies that they have been following are indeed a 
dismal failure in contrast to what we had developed here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And found wanting. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Pardon? 
 
An Hon. Member: — And they’re found wanting. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Did you want to say something, the member from 
Souris-Cannington? 
 
I want to also indicate, Mr. Speaker, in respect to The Corporation 
Capital Tax Act, I’m just wondering whether the minister will be 
prepared to indicate to us whether or not he had some considerable 
consultation in introducing this particular tax. What was the 
degree of the amount of consultation? With whom did he discuss 
the implementation of the amendments to the corporation capital 
tax? I would have welcomed whether he has any information as to 
whether or not there are similar enactments in other provinces, say 
Manitoba, Alberta, and British Columbia. 
 
I’d be asking the minister those particular questions, because I 
would suspect that he had considerable consultation with his 
friends, the major corporations. Certainly there was little or no 
consultation when he came to sticking it to the ordinary taxpayers 
in respect to the flat tax. 
 
He indicates also in his remarks in respect to the Bill that it 
provides for another taxation, and that is in respect to the 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2288 
 

federal Crown corporations. And he indicates that in the current 
fiscal year that should amount to $2.3 million. I want to get 
specifically from the minister whether or not that includes all of 
the Crown corporations, federal Crown corporations; or is there, I 
suppose, a select few that are in the resource industry and excludes 
others that are not? But I want that clarification. 
 
There are some concerns in respect to the particular sections in the 
Act which we can deal with in Committee of the Whole. But those 
are the concerns that I have in respect to it, Mr. Speaker, that while 
on the one hand he indicates that there’s going to be additional 
revenue to the provincial treasury, and we think that those that 
develop our resources, they belong to the people of Saskatchewan 
and therefore we should be entitled to greater revenues from the 
development of the resources. 
 
But he does counter, as I said, with two measures of decreasing 1 
per cent the resource royalty of about $20 million. I suspect that 
that affects the same companies that he’s putting the surtax on in 
respect to capital tax. And so when you look at the increase, it’s 
not 34.8 million. Although it does look like an increase in the 
estimates, there will be revenue loss in respect to the decrease in 
the royalty rates paid by resource companies, and there will be 
indeed some reduction when implemented, loss of revenue, in 
respect to the decrease in the corporate income tax. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we feel that the resource companies should 
be paying more. We have indicated that throughout. We have seen 
the oil companies making billions of dollars here in the 
Saskatchewan oil industry and the people of Saskatchewan 
receiving little or no revenue. 
 
And so we will be, in essence, supporting this, subject to some of 
the questions which I’ve raised and a few details in respect to the 
Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 101 — An Act to amend The Revenue and 
Financial Services Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill is consequential to the 
enactment of Bill 82, An Act to amend The Litter Control Act, 
which imposed the environmental handling charge of refundable 
deposit on beverages sold in cans. 
 
This Bill will allow the environmental handling charge and the 
deposit to be collected and administered in a manner similar to the 
province’s consumption taxes. By adopting the provision of The 
Revenue and Financial Services Act, an existing and efficient 
system will be used to ensure that the environmental handling 
charge and the refundable deposit are properly collected and 
accounted for by distributors and retailers of canned beverages. 
 
I move second reading of Bill 101, An Act to amend The Revenue 
and Financial Services Act. 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not likely to have 
controversy with this, but I would want to check with the critic 
involved. I move adjournment. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 78 — An Act to amend The Teachers’ Life 
Insurance (Government Contributory) Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, group life insurance is one 
of the mandatory items for negotiation in teacher collective 
bargaining. The amendments being proposed here are intended to 
simply provide the necessary legal basis for changes in the 
teachers’ group life insurance plan that are included in the new 
contract. 
 
There are three specific points to note, Mr. Speaker. First, teachers 
who were previously covered under the plan as community 
college employees and who now are employees of SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology), will 
continue to be covered under the plan. 
 
Second, teachers who retire prior to age 65, who elect to continue 
coverage until age 65, will now also have the option to maintain 
coverage beyond that time until their 75th birthday. 
 
And third, teachers who retire after age 65 will also have the 
option to maintain coverage until their 75th birthday. 
 
I should add, Mr. Speaker, that all premiums for coverage beyond 
age 65 will be the responsibility of the teacher, and that the 
amount of coverage provided will be reduced because of the age 
factor. 
 
As I have indicated, Mr. Speaker, these amendments are strictly 
consequential to the new group life provisions in the teachers’ 
contract. 
 
I therefore move, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 78, An Act to amend The 
Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government Contributory) Act, now be 
read a second time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 76 — An Act to amend The Teachers’ 
Superannuation Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, this is one of the three Bills 
being introduced this session as a result of the recently signed 
teachers’ contract; the other two dealing with the teachers’ dental 
plan and the group life insurance plan. 
 
The amendments of the superannuation Act are all needed in order 
to provide a proper legal basis for provisions in the new contract 
relating to teachers’ pensions. The highlights are as follows. 
 
Teachers who were previously employees of the community 
college who became employees of SIAST on January 1 this year 
will continue to be covered by the teachers’ superannuation plan. 
The deadline for teachers 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2289 
 

to transfer from the old formula pension plan to the new annuity 
plan is being extended by three years to June 30, 1991. 
 
(1115) 
 
Teachers who have reached age 55 and who have at least 20 years 
of service will be eligible to receive a superannuation allowance or 
annuity. The allowances will be subject to actuarial reduction with 
one exception. There will be no reduction in the case of teachers 
who qualify and apply during the period July 1, 1988 to July 1, 
1989 inclusive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is intended that this one-time opportunity for the 
allowance without reduction be directed to practising teachers. For 
this reason it will be available only to teachers who have been in 
contract at some time since July 1, 1986, and it will not be 
available to teachers who transfer into the plan under a reciprocal 
agreement during this one-year period. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, the method of calculating required 
superannuation contributions is being redefined in order that the 
teachers’ pension plans will remain properly integrated with the 
Canada Pension Plan. 
 
As I have indicated, Mr. Speaker, these amendments are not being 
brought forward as a government initiative. They are all required 
as a consequence of the new contract with our province’s teachers. 
 
I therefore move that Bill No. 76, an Act to amend The Teachers’ 
Superannuation Act be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Department of Finance 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 18 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — With me at present, Mr. Chairman, are Mr. 
Art Wakabayashi, deputy minister; and Mr. Bob Blackwell, 
director, operations branch, treasury board division. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I want to 
clear off a few introductory questions which you may have the 
information, or can provide to me, however I would like the 
information prior to the conclusion to the estimates. 
 
And first of all, what I would appreciate if you could send over is a 
list of your personal staff, their classification, their rate of pay, 
whether their salaries have been increased and whether or not the 
increase was from classification or a straight increase in respect to 
the 

individual. And also whether this completes the . . . this is a 
complete list of staff and whether there’s a budget for any 
additional staff, you might answer that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — You said there were some other specific 
questions, you were just making a list. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Oh, all right. I want that information in respect to 
the staff. Also, in respect to air travel outside the province. I would 
appreciate if the minister could provide information in respect to 
the minister’s air travel, destination, who accompanied you, cost 
and dates of the particular flights. And also, if you would, Mr. 
Minister, provide us with the cost of travel for the department 
during the past year, ’78-79. 
 
And also if you could . . . well, I can get into the specific, but the 
amount budgeted for this year. And also, I would appreciate if you 
could provide me with the cost of the recent trip that you yourself 
had to Japan recently and provide the details as respect to the cost, 
the number of people that accompanied you and such detail in 
respect to that. 
 
Thirdly, Mr. Minister, in respect to advertising. I would like if you 
could provide us with the total cost of all advertising by the 
department in ’87-88 with a break down indicating to whom it was 
. . . the money was paid. And also the total budget for ’88-89, and 
indicate a break down as to what programs or for what the budget, 
advertising budget is allocated for the current year. 
 
Fourth, I wonder if the minister could provide us with information 
whether or not you have any employees under a personal service 
contracts within the department during the year ’87-89, and if so, 
to provide us with the details, that is the name of the person, the 
position held, and salary and term of contract? 
 
And fifth, I would like you to indicate whether you had any major 
contracts with consulting firms during the course of the year ’87-
88, that is to do any major study for the Department of Finance? 
 
Sixth, I would appreciate if the minister could provide, Mr. 
Chairman, information whether the Department of Finance has 
been involved directly in the government’s planned privatization, 
that is 87 . . . during the year ’87-88; any direct expenditures by 
the Department of Finance in respect to, you know, the 
employment or the seeking out of advice or any studies in respect 
to privatization; if so, the details and the amount that would have 
been spent in ’87-88? And also, do you budget for any direct 
expenditure for this year relating to privatization? 
 
Seventh, I’d like, if you could provide information, Mr. Minister, 
in respect to the Income Tax Reform Commission, that is the 
expenditures, if any, in the year ’87-88, the personnel; and the 
costs and the payments made to members of the commission, and 
whether you have allocated a budget for this year, and if so, the 
amount of that budget. 
 
Those are some of the preliminary questions that I would 
appreciate, Mr. Minister, if I could get it. There may be, as 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2290 
 

I say, some follow-up questions if I had that information. But I’ve 
tried to set those out, those detailed questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I, too, would just like to clarify a couple of 
things. We’ll try and get what information we have on the Japan 
trip. I’m not sure all of the expenses are in yet. 
 
But on the question of privatization, are you including finance, for 
example, on private sector auditing? Is that . . . or are you looking 
at a broader question of privatization? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I was looking at a broader aspect of privatization 
in taking the lead, for instance, of doing any studies in respect to it, 
the bringing in of any experts that you may have been involved in, 
that type of thing, rather than the specific auditing of the private 
corporations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If it’s all right, we’ll try and get most of that 
for you by 2 o’clock, if that’s all right. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, that would be fine, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I want to introduce other officials that have 
joined the committee. Mr. John Wright, the executive director of 
taxation, economic policy division; Gerry Kraus, Provincial 
Comptroller; and Bill Van Sickle, the executive director, admin. 
division; and Mr. Bill Jones, assistant deputy minister, investment 
and financial services branch. I’m sorry, and Keith Laxdal, who is 
associate deputy minister, revenue, pensions and administration. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to turn your attention, Mr. Minister, to the 
page 10 in the Estimates, and what I want to take a look at is the 
budgetary revenue. And I would think that by now you would 
know for ’87-88, the year ’87-88, not only the estimated but the 
actual revenues in respect to the various items as set out in page 
10. And I was wondering . . . I want a couple specifics here, but I 
was wondering whether it’s possible for you to provide me with 
the 1987-88 actuals in respect to budgetary revenues. 
 
I want specifically to know in respect to oil, it indicates 309.3 
million. So I think I’ll just stop there, and first of all, ask you 
whether you’re in a position to provide us with the actual revenues 
for ’87-88? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I can give you what we have. We don’t have 
the final actuals, if I can give you that. They’re not prepared yet. 
But the ’87-88 blue book, and I can give you the most recent, 
revised forecast. The blue book, as the hon. member knows, was 
3,202,508,000. The revised forecast is 3,295,673,000. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In respect to the specific items then, I want to run 
through them. Corporation capital, estimated in ’87-88 was 51.9 
million. I was wondering whether I could get the specific 
information as to the projected amount that you expect to receive 
from corporation capital tax? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Does the hon. member want me to just go 
right down the list? That may be easier. 

Mr. Koskie: — Yes. 
 
(1130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The corporate . . . the blue book was 
181,900,000. The revised forecast is 178,944,000; that’s a 
difference of 2,956,000 — percentage change of down 1.6 per 
cent. 
 
Individual: — 751 million — in the blue book — 500,000; the 
revised forecast, 768,555,000 — a difference of 17,055,000; that’s 
percentage change of 2.3 per cent. 
 
Sales: — in the tax, 467,300,000; the revised forecast of 
455,302,000 — a reduction of 11,998,000; percentage change 
over blue book of down 2.6 per cent. 
 
Tobacco: — blue book, 91 million; revised forecast, 89,811,000 
— a difference of 1,189,000; percentage change of 1.3 per cent. 
 
Other was 174,945,000; the revised forecast was 194,324; 
percentage change of 11.1. 
 
I’ll go through the non-renewable resource category if the hon. 
member wants that at this time. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Oil and gas: — the blue book estimate was 
330 million; the revised forecast, 369,439,000 — a difference of 
38,639,000; percentage change of 11.7 per cent. 
 
Potash: — 35,400,000 in the blue book; revised forecast, 
48,900,000; difference, 13,500,000 — 38.1 per cent difference. 
 
Uranium: — blue book, 15,990,000; revised forecast, 19.718,000; 
the difference, 3,728,000 — 23.3 per cent change over blue book. 
 
Other: — 19,140,000; revised forecast 20,438,000; difference of 
1,298,000 — a 6.8 per cent change. 
 
Under the category Other Own Source, Liquor Board: — the blue 
book was 122,500,000. As we had indicated, we were not taking 
the money from the blue book at that time, so the difference is 
obviously the 122,500,000. 
 
Agricultural lands: — 16,840,000; the revised forecast 
20,681,000; difference 3,841,000 — 22.8 per cent difference from 
the blue book. 
 
Motor vehicles: — 73,500,000; the revised forecast 67,873,000; 
difference 5,626,000 — a difference from the blue book of 7.7, 
negative 7.7 per cent. 
 
Other: — 133,000,006 in the blue book; revised forecast, 
138,844,000; a difference of 5,878,000 — percentage change-
over, blue book, of 4.4 per cent. 
 
I’ll give you now the category of intergovernmental transfers. 
 
CAP (Canada Assistance Plan): — 151,681,000; revised 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2291 
 

forecast 156,801,000; differential of 5,120,000 — percentage 
change-over, blue book, of 3.4 per cent. 
 
EPF (established program of financing): — the blue book was 
400,600,000; revised forecast of 406,233,000; the difference of 
5,633,000 — Percentage change-over, blue book, 1.4 per cent. 
 
Equalization: — 185,000,000; revised forecast 302,675,000; the 
difference of 111,675,000 — a difference of 63.6 per cent. 
 
Other: — 51,406,000 in the blue book; 57,073,000 in the revised, 
a difference of 5,667,000 — an 11 per cent difference. 
Unidentified revenue is $23,000. The overall difference, blue book 
— I’ll give you the totals — blue book, 3,202,508,000. Revised 
forecast is 3,295,673,000. The difference is 93,165,000; total 
percentage difference of 2.9 per cent. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I would request 
leave to introduce some special guests, please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you very much. It’s my pleasure this 
morning to introduce to members of this Assembly, some very 
special guests from Lavoy, Alberta, and from other parts of the 
world. In the east gallery I have visiting with me this morning — 
they’re on their way from Lavoy, Alberta to Manitoba — my 
uncle and aunt, Fred Solomon and Rosa Solomon. My Uncle Fred 
is 82 years old and he’s a retired farmer; my aunt is a retired 
school teacher. And they’re accompanied by their daughter, Ellen 
Ching, who has been spending the last two years or thereabouts in 
Peking, China, doing some work for CIDA (Canadian 
International Development Agency) with her husband who is 
doing some special contract work on behalf of Hewlett-Packard in 
Calgary. 
 
And I’d like to just also mention as well that my uncle has never 
been here before, but my aunt was here once before in her life, and 
it was when Tommy Douglas was premier, 
 
So I’d like to, with that introduction, have all members joint with 
me in giving them a very special welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Finance 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 18 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I would just advise the opposition critic as 
well, that you will note a slight difference between the blue book 
numbers, and that’s referred to in the footnote on page 10 dealing 
with SIAST. And that is adjusted both on the revenue and 
expenditure side. 

Mr. Koskie: — I want to thank the minister for that information. I 
was wondering, Mr. Minister, would it be possible to make 
available the statement which you had. It’s rather difficult to copy 
all the details down. Would it be possible to provide us with the 
sheet of that information so that we would have it on your new 
projected estimates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I will give you the information. I’ll get it 
photocopied for you. I do have some notes here that I’d prefer to 
raise in debate. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I would like it as soon as possible. Leave the 
writing on it you want. I just want to . . . from what you have 
given and the information that we have, a couple things are 
evident. 
 
One, in respect to oil revenue where it was estimated at 330 
million, I believe it went up to 369 million. I want to ask the 
minister: — in estimating that revenue, could you indicate what 
accounts for the significant increase in revenue in the year ’87-88 
in respect to oil revenue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Very modestly higher prices than estimated, 
but primarily bonus bids. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Could you be a little bit more specific in respect 
to it? In respect to price, what calculation of price did you include 
in your estimate, and what price did you receive? And further, can 
you give the breakdown of the additional revenue of some 38 
million, I guess it is, breakdown in respect to price increases and 
also in the sales? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Let me break it down. I’m sorry about the 
price because our budget estimate was 18.90, that’s West Texas 
Intermediate. The revised estimate’s coming in at $18.72, so it’s 
virtually the same. Our budget for this year, I don’t know if we 
discussed it — estimate is 18.45. You can just keep that for future 
information. 
 
There was a $5.8 million increase in Crown royalties and freehold 
taxes, a $20.4 million increase in bonus bids, and a $1.1 million 
increase in other oil revenues, and a $.6 million due to adjustments 
in service and supply employment program pay-outs. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I note in respect to the projected estimate for ’88-
89, for oil it’s estimated at 311,372. I take it what you’re 
estimating there, as you have indicated, that per barrel be 
estimated at 18.45. Could you indicate whether, in light of what 
happened last year, substantial increase in revenue, whether you 
are expecting to have an increase over the estimated 311, either 
due to price or to other sales? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well so far I’m advised that we’re right on 
our projections. I do suggest that our estimate of 18.90 and the 
actual coming in at 18.72 is fairly close. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, I appreciate that. And I was talking about 
this year’s estimated amount of 311 at 18.45. Is that price holding 
in the market at the present time, up to the present? And secondly, 
have you any indication as to the stability of that during the course 
of the year? 
  



 
June 21, 1988 

2292 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — At this point we’re slightly below our 
estimates, but we do expect it picked up in the fall. 
 
I do have, for the hon. member, that outline of the budgetary 
revenues. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, similarly, in respect 
to potash you had estimated 35.4 million, and indicates here that it 
was slightly over $48 million. Can the minister indicate what 
represents the increase in revenue in respect to potash over what 
was estimated in ’87-88? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Revenue increase is attributable to the 
following: — prices were projected to average $86.45 but instead 
were $100.90. This enabled the industry to pay the profits-related 
graduated payment. Obviously, higher list prices increased Crown 
royalty payments. Production was projected at 6.1 million tonnes 
but came in at 6.4 million tonnes. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, with 
leave from the House, I’d like permission to introduce a group of 
students who are in the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(1145) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Chairman, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you, and to all members 
of the Assembly, five students and two teachers accompanying 
them. Four of the students are from the R.J.D. Williams 
(Provincial) School for the Deaf in Saskatoon. They’re hearing 
impaired students and their names are Margo Sayazie, Gabriel 
Kkaikkai, Ronald Hofer, and Jonathon Reigert. They’re 
accompanied by their teachers Allan Reine and Dianne Newman, 
and Dianne’s daughter Kirsten. 
 
And we’ve very pleased to have them visiting with us in the 
Assembly this morning. We’ve just met for pictures and I’ll be 
meeting the students afterwards for drinks and discussions about 
what’s taking place here in the estimates. I’d ask that you help me 
welcome them in the usual manner with a round of applause. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Finance 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 18 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, dealing 
with potash for the year, revenues from potash for the year ’88-89, 
you’ve estimated that the revenue would be 50.048 million. I ask 
you, in respect to that, number one, what is the projected price per 
tonne, and also the projected production? 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — The question on price: — prices are projected 
to increase from $100.90 to 140 per tonne of K2O; production is 
projected to decline from 6.4 to 6.1 million tonnes. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — One other interesting aspect — in equalization 
payments you had estimated 185 million and, in accordance to 
your figures, it exceeded $300 million. Can you indicate, Mr. 
Minister, the degree of inaccuracy that you achieved in respect to 
that item? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well there were two reasons. I’m advised that 
Ottawa changed the time for the adjustments. These adjustments 
go back to previous years, of course, as the hon. member knows. 
And secondly, the estimates were based on perhaps a modest 
slowing of the economy in central Canada, which is a major factor 
in equalization, and of course that didn’t happen. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And this year I note that in respect to equalization 
you have estimated another 175 million over the estimate last year 
to $360 million. I wonder if the minister could indicate what 
degree of accuracy does that figure represent? Are you able to 
indicate whether that would likely be another 60 per cent out or 
whether you have some assurance that that represents the figure in 
respect to equalization? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well keep in mind, the hon. member, that 
these are estimates. For example, the province over a period of 
five years did have to pay back an overpayment on equalization in 
the 1981-82 budget, which we have just paid back. But we are 
estimating an 18.9 per cent increase from the ’87-88 actual of 
about $57.3 million. The increase is due to the fact that the 1986 
economic data will be fully incorporated in the equalization 
estimate for the first time in ’88-89. Prior to this year, equalization 
payments did not fully reflect the economic problems in 1986 
caused by falling commodity prices. As a result, the entitlement 
will rise to 279.3 million from the 1987-88 entitlement of 179.7. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, in the formula for setting the 
equalization payment, I wonder whether you could enlighten us in 
respect to the outline of the nature of the application of the 
equalization payment in layman’s terms. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I will not attempt to summarize, but it’s 36 
different entitlements all separately weighted which go into the 
calculations with the overall objective. They’re to provide extra 
revenues to provinces with below average tax bases, so that a basic 
level of public services can be provided at reasonable rates of tax. 
 
Equalization payments are determined by a formula that compares 
each provinces’ capacity to raise revenues from 36 different 
sources against the average revenue raising capacity of five 
standard provinces. Those provinces are Ontario, Quebec, 
Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and British Columbia. 
 
The comprehensive list of revenues covered by the formula 
include 17 categories for natural resource revenues and 19 non-
resource revenues. For each 



 
June 21, 1988 

2293 
 

category the formula assigns a province either a positive 
equalization entitlement if the province’s per capita tax base is 
below the average of the five standard provinces, or a negative 
entitlement if the province’s per capita base is about average. 
 
Entitlements for all categories are summed to calculate the 
province’s overall entitlement. If the sum of a province’s 36 
separate entitlements is positive, the federal government makes a 
payment to the province that makes up the difference between the 
province’s capacity to raise revenues and the five-province 
revenue raising standard. If the sum of entitlements turns out to be 
negative, the province is simply not eligible to receive equalization 
payments. 
 
Makes great television. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Definitely — great television, indicating that you 
can read. I just want to ask you in respect to that, Mr. Minister, 
that you indicate that one of the ingredients in determining it is 
below the provinces that have . . . are below the tax base. What I 
want to specifically ask you, in respect to other provinces, can you 
indicate whether Manitoba, Alberta, relative to Saskatchewan, are 
receiving equalization payments relative to what Saskatchewan is? 
 
I note where Premier Getty was indicating that he appears to have 
been underpaid and was looking for some 3 to $400 million 
additional money. I wonder whether a similar situation exists here, 
whether there may be a further entitlement, as Premier Getty has 
indicated, in respect to Alberta? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — There’s a separate program not related to 
equalization that Alberta is dealing with, and it’s the revenue 
stabilization program And there is a national program in place if 
revenues fall dramatically below, that there is a stabilization 
formula not related to the equalization formula. And Alberta, of 
course, having the effect of the major drop in oil revenues for the 
one year, is making a claim under the revenue stabilization, which 
is not an equalization related matter. Okay? 
 
Now so Alberta, on the equalization, does not receive equalization 
payments. Manitoba, the estimate in ’87-88, the estimate now was 
508; the estimate now is 544 million, so it’s up for Manitoba as 
well. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In respect to a couple other items, the established 
program financing, I note that it was, in 1987-88, was relatively 
close to the estimate; and I note that in established program 
financing this year, it’s up to . . . estimate is 427.6 million. Are you 
expecting to receiving close to that under the formula, or is there a 
risk of shortfall in respect to that or additional payments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Revenues are fairly stable under that program. 
Any adjustments tend to come from population, so we expect it to 
be fairly stable. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In respect to the . . . In formulating the budget, 
could the minister indicate what economic rate of growth that you 
are expecting for Saskatchewan during the current fiscal year? 

 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We based it on 2 per cent. We’re now noting 
that most forecasters are in the range of 3 per cent plus. I wouldn’t 
want to move from the 2 per cent yet, with the uncertainty of 
drought out there, but we did estimate it at 2 per cent. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Recognizing the agricultural situation, in what 
area do you project to have the greatest economic rate of growth in 
the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We’re advised that non-agricultural private 
sector investment is up considerably. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, in respect to uranium, also, we 
noted that there had been a substantial increase over the estimated 
1987-88, and I wonder whether you could also indicate, in respect 
to uranium for ’88-89, what you base that projection of revenue 
. . . production and price? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Let me indicate that there . . . as I stated 
before, there was about a $3.7 million increase. The sales were 
estimated, ’87-88 at 8.9 million kilograms; the revised estimate is 
11.1 million kilograms. The ’88-89 budget estimate is 9 million. 
 
The average price for ’87-88, it was estimated at $59.94 — that’s 
Canadian. The revised estimate is $58.02. The budget estimate for 
’88-89 is $62.08. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 


