


















































April 28, 1988 Hansard Evening


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

April 28, 1988 
 
 

919 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave of the House to 
introduce some guests in the Speaker’s gallery, sir. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Martin: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it gives me a great deal of 
pleasure to introduce some members of the Girl Guides 18th 
Company of Regina, and before I talk a little bit about the Guides, 
I’d like to introduce the adults who are here with them. We have 
Mrs. Patti Woodlock, Mrs. Gloria Pickard, Mrs. Trudy Otterbein, 
Maureen Gammell, and Mrs. Russell. 
 
Mr. Chairman, Girl Guides are generally in grades 4, 5, and 6, 
and usually between the ages of nine and 12. We have, with our 
Girl Guides this evening, four Tenderfoots. Tenderfoots are those 
recruits who are between Brownies and Girl Guides, and they 
wouldn’t wear their Brownie uniforms tonight because they’ve 
gone beyond that stage; they’re now moving into the Girl Guide 
category, and I’m sure they’ll be welcomed into the pack when 
their occasion arises. 
 
I’d like to mention that this is an exciting time for Girl Guides in 
Saskatchewan because they’re going to have an international 
conference, an international get-together. I don’t think they’re 
going to call it a jamboree, but more or less an event when they 
will have 3,000 Girl Guides from around the country, from the 
various countries of the world, plus 500 international guests, and 
they’ll be from 50 countries, Mr. Chairman. It’s going to be some 
event. 
 
I’d like for all of us to welcome them. Before I do, I say it’s been 
a pleasure for me to meet with them earlier and talk a little bit the 
process of legislation. I hope they enjoy their stay while they’re 
in the House. And may you all welcome them here now. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 1 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I’d 
like to pick up where we left off at 5 o’clock, and I hope that the 
Minister of Agriculture has calmed himself over the supper hour 
and will attempt to start talking about the issues. 
 
Mr. Minister, as we were saying, the $6 billion farm debt in 
Saskatchewan is at crisis levels, and you don’t have to take my 
word for it, what the numbers of farmers that are losing. And it 
was very unfortunate — or I don’t know

what the word is to describe it — that the minister couldn’t come 
up with some of the details, some of the facts. 
 
But here is a little clipping from a paper, and it says: 

 
Canada probably faces the loss of more than 25 per cent of 
its farmers over the next several years, and the country has 
not decided how to deal with those people, Dr. Harold 
Baker of the University of Saskatchewan told the Canadian 
Bankers’ Association agricultural credit conference on 
Monday. 

 
And he goes on to say: 
 

Many of the farmers who will disappear are among the most 
productive and are simply victims of choosing a bad time to 
enter agriculture, and in most cases, these people want to 
remain farming. 

 
That’s one person’s opinion on it. 
 
Another little clipping I’d like to read to you is, the heading is: 
“Part time farmer ranks to swell.” And it says: 
 

Farmers who earn at least some other income from off farm 
will comprise almost half of all Canadian producers by the 
year 2000, says an Economic Council of Canada report. The 
ranks of these producers will swell by 40 to 50 per cent by 
the turn of the century says economist, Ludwig Auer. 

 
It goes on to say: 
 

Large corporate farms, meanwhile, will increase by half, 
and by the year 2000, about 20 per cent of Canada’s farm 
products will come from these farms. 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, I don’t know what we have to do to impress 
upon you that the ball is in your court on this one. Between you 
and the ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) 
and the federal government, you hold half of that $6 billion debt 
— half of it. So, Mr. Minister, I would ask you now if you could 
tell me how much Farm Credit Corporation and how much ACS 
has written off in the past two years with regards to farm land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I have some figures here, Mr. 
Chairman, for 1988, in terms of land holdings by institution. And 
between the banks and the credit unions — I’ll just lump them 
altogether — there would be about 190,000 acres. The Farm 
Credit Corporation is 125,000 acres, and the agriculture credit 
corporation is 3,280 acres. So the holdings in 1988 for the 
financial institutions, banks, credit unions, farm credit, and ag 
credit would be about 320,000 acres. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you . . . For the 
sake of knowing what the dollar value is, could you tell me in a 
breakdown what the dollar value is of those three different 
categories? And, actually, could you put it in the . . . and could 
you break up the credit union 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

920 
 

and the banks for me and tell me what the dollar value of their 
write-offs have been, as well as Farm Credit Corporation and the 
value of ACS? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, no, I can’t do that. You could get that 
from Credit Union Central, if you want, or you can get it from 
the financial institutions. I can tell you from our part that ag credit 
corporation is 3,000 acres and farm credit, from my knowledge, 
is 125,000. But I think Credit Union Central would be the place 
to go to find out what they’ve done with the acres, and the value, 
and so forth, rather than . . . I don’t have the information here, 
but I think that’s where you could get that information. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, here we go again. I mean, 
you’re the Minister of Agriculture, and you’re supposed to be on 
top of things in this province, and again we see that you don’t 
have the figures. Now how can you be on top of this debt crisis 
if you’re not staying on top of what’s going on? And I’ll just 
leave the banks and credit unions aside for a minute, and I’ll just 
tell you, Farm Credit Corporation last year wrote off about $133 
million. This year they’re going to be writing off close to $250 
million, and it seems to me, Mr. Minister, that when you have a 
federal Crown corporation in a position to help farmers. And you, 
yourself, were complaining about the high interest rates, and 
Farm Credit Corporation just raised their interest rates without 
any quarrel from you. And yet you turn around and say it’s 
somebody else’s fault that the interest rates are too high. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I’ll tell you . . . Just think of it this way. Over 
the last two years close to $400 million of taxpayers’ money in 
write-offs from Farm Credit Corporation alone. At thirteen and 
one-half — let’s use that for an average figure — per cent 
interest, wouldn’t it make more sense . . . And you’re always 
saying give us some ideas, give us some ideas. Well we’ve tried, 
and I’ll try again. 
 
I’ll ask you in the form of question. Have you made 
representation to the Farm Credit Corporation and say, look, 
you’re writing off nearly $400 million of taxpayers’ money in the 
last two years, you’re taking in land by the thousands of acres, 
taking it away from the farmers, the title — and taxpayers, as I 
say, losing the money, farmers are losing their land — wouldn’t 
it make much more sense, Mr. Minister, if you took Farm Credit 
Corporation and gave a reasonable interest rate — the federal 
government can get at 9 per cent; give it somewhat less than that 
— it would be a lot less than $400 million over two years that it 
would cost you and the farmers would be able to keep their land, 
the taxpayers wouldn’t be out their money, and over a period of 
time the corporation would get their returns? I mean it’s not that 
difficult; it’s not that difficult unless you don’t want to do it. And 
I think therein lies the problem. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I would ask you: have you made representation 
to the federal government to reduce the interest rate to a 
reasonable level, slightly subsidized, in order that farmers can 
keep their land and the taxpayers of this country don’t have to be 
footing this bill all the time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we have had much 
success in discussing the agricultural problems with the federal 
government. As the hon. member knows,

if you send $2 billion in cash into the prairie provinces and you 
don’t have to pay it back, that’s even better than a subsidized 
interest rate. And if he hasn’t figured out how much that means 
in terms of lower interest rates, then I suppose that I could go 
back and calculate what $2 billion cash that you don’t have to 
pay back is worth in terms of lower interest rates. Obviously you 
can use it for anything you like and the farmers know that. When 
they get their deficiency payment, they don’t have to pay it back, 
and they can call it low interest or they an call it this or they can 
call it anything they like, but it’s . . . 
 
Now almost 50 per cent of their income comes from government 
— almost 50 per cent. And it’s, in many cases, not paid back 
because you got cash advances for the livestock industry at zero 
per cent interest rates. And I wish you’d acknowledge that. And 
you’ve got deficiency payments in the neighbourhood of now 2 
point something billion dollars that they don’t have to pay back. 
That goes in their pocket and they can apply to all kinds of things. 
On top of that, we’ve got $1.2 billion out at 6 per cent money and 
nine and three-quarters fixed for 10 years. That’s the best, 
longest, lowest interest rate that you’re going to find in Canada. 
 
So we’ve got over a billion dollars of the Saskatchewan taxpayers 
out at long-fixed interest rates; federal government’s got over $2 
billion out that they don’t have to pay back. I mean, you wouldn’t 
have to be very high in grade school to figure out that that is a 
tremendous economic benefit to western Canadian people and 
particularly farmers when you’ve got long-run, low-fixed interest 
rates at $25 an acre at 6 per cent and nine and three-quarters — 
locked in, no penalty to repay it — plus billions of dollars that 
we’ve got out of the federal government because of our meetings. 
And you’re standing up and say, well would you try this idea to 
have long, low-run, fixed interest rates and some cash. That’s 
precisely what we’ve done — precisely. 
 
If I could read for you . . . This is the Leader-Post, March 3, 1988. 
And it says here that the NDP got together to come up with some 
ideas with respect to agriculture. And it says: 
 

While senior federal and provincial NDP officials from 
Alberta and Saskatchewan met on Tuesday as well on 
Wednesday to discuss agricultural issues, they had no new 
initiatives to announce when the meeting ended. (And this) 
. . . is in part of a continuing NDP search for solutions to 
agriculture problem. 

 
Now you stood up having an interprovincial conference here just 
a few weeks ago — nothing new, nothing to suggest — 
announced to the media that there was nothing to suggest, 
announced to the media that there was nothing to suggest. You 
had nothing for Manitoba, nothing for Saskatchewan, nothing for 
Alberta, nothing at all in terms of new policy. You say that it had 
no new initiatives to announce when the meeting ended and it’s 
part of a continuing NDP search for solutions to agriculture 
problems. And I’m here, standing in the legislature, telling you 
that we’ve provided at least $2 billion in cash that you don’t have 
to pay back — that ends up to towns and villages and cities all 
across this 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

921 
 

province — and that we provide $1.2 billion in low interest loans 
to farmers — the best interest rate and the longest that they’ve 
ever had — and you’re standing there and saying, well have you 
had a meeting. 
 
(1915) 
 
I can just say, from our meetings you get billions of dollars in 
cash on long-run, low-fixed interest rates; from your meetings, 
according to the Leader-Post and your press releases, you get 
zero. Nothing. No new policies. You have an ongoing search for 
policy, and I would recommend that you stay with the research 
and you continue to search because obviously if it’s just land 
bank, that’s it. And if it’s just to take advantage of them 
foreclosing, then I would say that you’re in some trouble, not 
only in your own riding, but indeed across western Canada. 
 
So I would remind you, and the member from the Quill Lakes, 
that the cash and the assistance that this administration, plus the 
federal government working in co-operation to provide it, 
amounts to almost half the farm income today — almost half the 
farm income — coming from a Progressive Conservative 
government in Saskatchewan, and a Progressive Conservative in 
Ottawa say that we’re prepared to help farmers, and we are. And 
the releases we get from the NDPs are still looking for and 
searching for new solutions. 
 
So yes, we right down interest rates; yes, I would continue to 
encourage financial institutions to write off some of the debt; yes, 
the federal government wrote off debt in the Farm Credit 
Corporation. It did. Over $100 million, wrote it off because we 
met with them. And yes, they did the same with respect to the 
deficiency payments; and yes, they did the same with respect to 
western grain stabilization, and they’ve done the same with 
program after program to help people here. Because we met with 
them and as a result of our meetings, you see the kind of cash and 
help that are provided to the people of Saskatchewan. As a result 
of your meetings and your press release in the legislature 
covering it, you continue to search for solutions to agricultural 
problems and you have no new initiatives to announce — no new 
initiatives. 
 
So all I can say to you, sir, is that while you have no new 
initiatives, we’ve come up with at least billions of dollars of cash 
— and a large percentage of it that you don’t have to pay back 
— and long-term, low-run interest rates, and cash advances to the 
livestock sector at zero per cent interest rates. And, Mr. 
Chairman, I can only say to the hon. member, when the NDP had 
their chance, they didn’t give them a dime — 18 to 20 per cent 
interest rates and they didn’t give them a dime. 
 
And the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) would 
have been ashamed of that. And the hon. member knows that he 
stands up and talks about the CCF. The CCF have been replaced 
in rural Saskatchewan and rural Canada by the PCs, and he 
knows it. We have replaced them because we care about farm 
families and rural families. That’s why, Mr. Chairman, they 
come up with no solutions. We come up with literally billions of 
dollars of help for people when they need it.

Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’ll come back to my 
question, but first, before I do that, I would just like to say, it 
wasn’t your $2 billion, as you like to . . . Here we go again talking 
in half truths, talking double talk, confusing the issues, but that’s 
okay, Mr. Minister, because you’ll never win that way. 
 
That $2 billion, Mr. Minister, was very much needed out here. 
But I’ll tell you, sir, that there’s people out there who simply 
survived on that money and their debt is still there. That’s why 
we have $6 billion in Saskatchewan of farm debt. 
 
My question to you is this. And I would take it just from your 
answer that you haven’t made representation to the federal 
government to have Farm Credit Corporation act as the prime 
lender, as an institution that is in place to keep farmers on the 
land. And I say, if you haven’t done that, why haven’t you done 
it? I mean, you can talk about all your programs. Look at the 
facts. The facts say that there’s a problem out there — 40 per cent 
of our farmers in crisis. What do we have to do? What do the 
farmers have to do to clear your vision for you? I mean you can 
talk and rant and rave and try to confuse the issue, that’s your 
prerogative, but I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, it’s not keeping the 
family farms on the land. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ll ask you another question; have you asked the 
banks and other financial institutions, on an individual basis, 
what percentage of their ag loans are in arrears and what 
percentage of their loans are considered to be farmers who are 
insolvent? Have you asked them that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I can say to the hon. 
member that when we meet with the federal government and ask 
them to write down some of the debt in the Farm Credit 
Corporation, they have done it. They have written it off to the 
tune of maybe $100 million. When we’ve asked them to provide 
billions of dollars to farmers because they needed it, they 
delivered. when we’ve asked them for interest rate protection, 
they have helped. When we’ve asked for freight rate reductions, 
they have been there. when the farmers in the wheat pool and the 
wheat producers and others have come to us for low interest 
loans, and they said it might cost you a billion dollars, we have 
provided it. When they said extend it over time, we have. 
 
Now if he wants to know what Credit Union Central has in 
arrears, then he can go to Credit Union Central. If he wants to 
know what the Bank of Nova Scotia has in arrears, you can go to 
the Bank of Nova Scotia. We all know who works for them, the 
Leader of the NDP. If you want to find out what other financial 
institutions do, you go and ask them — okay? 
 
I know that we have responded to farmers and for farmers in 
co-operation with the federal government, and I can only say, as 
I said before dinner, that the NDP knows far more about the 
banks and foreclosures than anybody on this side of the House 
because obviously they make a living doing it. And it’s very 
clear. So if you must have the information . . . I mean NDP 
lawyers continue to foreclose on farmers, and the Leader of the 
NDP and his 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

922 
 

law firm and his partner from Saskatoon foreclose on home 
owners and on farmers on behalf of the bank. And we all know 
that. And you ask me about banks. All I can say is that the NDP 
leader with his law firm works for the bank. He’s got a unionized 
law firm, Mr. Chairman — union leader; the NDP leader and the 
bank together foreclosing on farmers and home owners in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And the NDP ask me about banks, Mr. Chairman. All I can say 
is that they deal with them; they know all about them. I’m sure 
that they can get an inside story from the Bank of Nova Scotia if 
they want because they have the contract to foreclose on behalf 
of the bank. Just go ask your friends the bank; they’ll tell you 
how many they have to foreclose on, how much they’ll pay you 
to foreclose. And you can continue to reap the benefits. Probably 
many people would consider it, as the farmer said when he wrote 
in here, it was just a little bit hypocritical when the Leader of the 
NDP stands up and says, I will save you, when he’s out there 
making a living foreclosing on behalf of the banks. 
 
Now I don’t have to get information on behalf of the banks and 
the financial institutions for the NDP because, Mr. Chairman, the 
financial institutions have cut a deal with the Leader of the NDP. 
Everybody in the province knows it. They’re going to know it 
tonight; they’re going to know it tomorrow; they’re going to 
know it day after day. 
 
We have met with the federal government and we have generated 
deficiency payments that come from Ottawa for the first time 
here into this province. It’s a great deal of money. It ends up in 
Saskatoon and Regina in the retail stores, in the communities 
across the province, because we’ve got it. And you know what? 
It doesn’t have to be paid back. It doesn’t have to be paid back. 
So when you bring up the financial institutions and the banks, I’d 
ask you to go check with your leader, the NDP leader who has a 
contract with a bank — his firm does — to go foreclose on 
people. He’s probably got more information on banks than 
anybody in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, maybe we should 
just back right up here. We’re not getting anywhere. So I’ll ask 
you a simple question: is there a problem in Saskatchewan with 
farm debt? Is there a farm debt crisis in Saskatchewan? And do 
you agree that this debt is a problem for farmers, is a problem for 
the whole economy of the province? Let’s just leave it there. Do 
you agree, first of all, that there is a problem with debt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, at the beginning of the 
estimates the hon. member asked me to describe my vision of 
agriculture and where the situation was today. I said that high 
interest rates — 20 per cent interest rates — and $2 wheat have 
caused tremendous problems across rural Saskatchewan and 
indeed across western Canada and a good part of North America. 
And I described that to the individual, and I said that’s why we 
stepped in and protected them against high interest rates, and 
we’re providing cash, in terms of billions of dollars between us 
and the federal government, to make sure that they can survive 
under difficult situations.

So, Mr. Chairman, I have described the fact that farm debt has 
accumulated, that equity has dropped for every farmer across the 
province. The equity position may have dropped by 50 per cent 
on average as a result of $2 wheat and high interest rates. And 
I’ve mentioned that, and I talked about it. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I just respond to the individual. Debt has 
increased across the province. It applied to all farmers as a result 
of the devaluation of land values and the $2 wheat and high 
interest rates. And I just wanted to make the point to the hon. 
member that the reason for that is twofold: one, when they faced 
the 20 per cent interest rates, you wouldn’t do a thing for them, 
and you let them get into trouble; and secondly, you continue to 
encourage the Europeans and the United States to subsidize 
unfairly, as you did this afternoon. 
 
You stood in your place and say, I understand why Europe does 
that; I don’t see any problem with it. Well clearly the farmers of 
this province and western Canada would be awfully interested in 
finding out that the NDP agriculture critic says it’s fine to have 
the Europeans unfairly subsidize farmers. Now it’s going to be 
all over the place that they will know that you have said that — 
and you’re asking me if there’s a problem. I’ve described the 
problem in detail. I’ve described solutions. You don’t have any 
solutions and then you stand up and say, but it’s okay for the 
European farmer to do that. You want this treasury to fight 
another treasury that’s all . . . You don’t understand at all what 
causes the problems. 
 
The surpluses of grain cause the prices to go down. Do you 
understand that? When you have a big surplus, the value of the 
commodity goes down, the price is low. It’s very low. And if you 
continue to recommend to the Europeans to subsidize more, do 
you know what happens? The surpluses grow and the price goes 
down and we have bigger problem. 
 
If you want to help the farmer, if you want to help them, 
encourage those other governments to back away from the 
subsidies and protect them against high interest rates, as we have, 
and do some research to find out how you might be able to do 
that at the national level as well. But, Mr. Chairman, would they 
do that? No. They come up with their suggestions, say there’s no 
new solutions as far as the NDP are concerned, no new solutions. 
They have no new initiatives to announce after the meeting, and 
the NDP continue to search for solutions in agriculture. 
 
Well look, we’ll protect the interest rates; we’ll provide the cash, 
the billions of dollars. Up to 50 per cent of their income now 
comes from government because of our help. And you stand 
there and say, do you know what you should be doing. Well, I 
share with you, Mr. Chairman, I’ve said this many times . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I can, Mr. Chairman. And the next 
time they ask this question, I will take the opportunity to go 
through every single program we have and list them for the hon. 
member so that he can find out all the new initiatives that we have 
provided to cut costs, cut interest rates, provide electricity, 
individual line service, rural gas, a new agriculture college, all 
those things for rural people. I’ll be glad to do it. 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

923 
 

I mean, I don’t know how many times I’ve got to go over it. He 
still stands in his place and says, but do you know that there’s 
still need for more new programs identified by the NDP. Well 
they haven’t identified one — not one, Mr. Chairman. So I hope 
they come forward with some new solutions, some new idea that 
would help rural people because I just haven’t heard any, and 
neither has the media. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well we’ll just say that’s one person’s 
interpretation, I would say to you, Mr. Minister, and I’d be 
worried but the jury is still out on that one, and we’ll see. 
 
Obviously you don’t think there’s a problem. At least you didn’t 
say you thought there was a problem. And maybe that’s the 
problem. We’re talking about debt; we’re talking about 
everything else, but there’s no solutions. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you can get up here and you can rant and rave 
and talk about all the crazy, stupid things that you want, and 
dodge the issue of debt. But I’ll tell you, you’re going to be the 
loser in the long run. But unfortunately there’ll be many farmers 
losing before you. That’s the bad part of it. 
 
Now Mr. Minister, do you think . . . First of all, do you think that 
your present programs are doing the job to alleviate the debt 
problem in Saskatchewan? And if you think that, what do you 
have to back it up? Have you done any studies on the 
restructuring of debt? Have you done any surveys on the 
magnitude of the problem and what areas there . . . more or better 
or worse? So do you think your solutions are working? And what 
statistics, what studies, and what surveys have you done to back 
that up? 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we do know that now 
up to 50 per cent of the farm income comes from government. 
And we do know that without that support, without that support, 
it would be extremely difficult. So if the farmer gets about $2.40 
a bushel for wheat in the market, he’s getting a little over $2 a 
bushel from governments at various levels. And on top of that, 
we have the interest rate protection and other programs that can 
provide in total about 50 per cent of his income. 
 
Now if the public sector and the taxpayer is footing about 50 per 
cent of the farm income, I don’t know whether that will solve all 
the problems for every individual farmer. I do know that it helps 
a large number of people. I do know that the taxpayer has noticed 
it. The taxpayer across the country says, by gosh, at least we’re 
helping farmers, and they know that it’s billions of dollars. The 
taxpayer also knows that subsidies cost a great deal, and they’re 
trying to get other countries to stop so we wouldn’t have to play 
this game. 
 
So if you want to look at the research, yes, we know now that 
about half of the income at the agricultural level is coming from 
the government. People would rather not farm for the 
government; they’d rather farm for the market. My only response 
to you is: we want to get the market price up, and that means 
we’ve got to get these other governments out of the market. And 
that’s the only way that we can do it.

If we continue to add more subsidies and they add more 
subsidies, pretty soon three-quarters of your income will come 
from government, and then 90 per cent of your income, until 
virtually 100 per cent of your income would come from 
government if you were on the farm. I don’t think the taxpayer 
wants that and the farmer doesn’t want it. 
 
So yes, a great deal of their income comes from government. 
They don’t particularly like to farm for the government but they 
appreciate the help when they’re taking on other treasuries that 
have decided to put our guys out of work. And we’re not going 
to sit back and let that happen. 
 
We know that we can make a significant difference. We can write 
down debts and we’ve done that, in co-operation with the federal 
government, provide cash that is non-repayable, and we can have 
low interest loans. We can restructure, we can have counselling, 
we can have various kinds of advisory committees that will be 
there to help people work through their problems in terms of 
restructuring. 
 
And you’re asking, will it solve all the problems? Is it as good as 
making $7 a bushel wheat? Of course it isn’t. What you need is 
6 and $7 wheat, and you need low interest rates. 
 
I don’t buy the wheat, right. In Saskatchewan, we don’t. In 
Canada, you don’t. We sell it internationally. That’s where the 
market is. And internationally, because people are subsidizing, 
the surpluses rise and the prices go down and you’ve got this 
problem. So the suggestions that have come from all corners of 
agricultures, go out into the international market and get them 
away from those subsidies, and the prices can come back up and 
we can make a living from the market. That’s what they want. 
They don’t want to farm 100 per cent for the government. They 
don’t want that. They want to farm for the market. And yet you 
keep suggesting, oh, it’s okay as long as the Europeans 
subsidized and wreck the price. And you’re on record now saying 
that. So you want the taxpayers to pay more; I want to get it from 
the market. 
 
I mean there’s . . . Mr. Chairman, we can agree to disagree. The 
NDP says, go subsidize, let the farmer farm just for the 
government. And we’re saying, I’d rather get the money from the 
market-place, get other governments to quit subsidizing. It’s a 
clear difference of philosophy, Mr. Chairman. I don’t know how 
many times you could ask the same question, but we are 
providing a great deal of help. The key, however, is to get the 
international market prices higher so that in fact our farm 
incomes can go up on their own, on their own from the market. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well I’m not sure that you answered my 
question, again — just like every other question that we have 
asked. Mr. Minister, 70 per cent of farmers’ income in this 
country goes to service debt, pay interest and principal — 70 per 
cent. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ll ask you this: what is the current debt, farm debt 
in Saskatchewan? Do you have the up-to-date current figures of 
farm debt in Saskatchewan? Have you 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

924 
 

looked at the cost of restructuring that debt for those 40 per cent 
of farmers who are in deep financial trouble? Have you looked at 
the cost of restructuring it? I would like you to answer as 
specifically as you could please because these rhetorical blurbs 
of yours are not doing anybody any good. And, Mr. Minister, 
have you done a study in any way, shape or form of how to 
restructure the debt problem in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I have the agriculture 
statistics 1986, and on page 85 — page 3, pardon me — table 5, 
amount and source of outstanding agriculture debt as of 
December 31 in Saskatchewan, and they’ve got the years from 
1971 to 1985, and then we’ve calculated 1986, and it’s gone from 
$1 billion in 1971-72 to $5.7 billion in December 31, 1986. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, the question was: what is the 
current up-to-date figures for farm debt in Saskatchewan? I have 
those figures; everybody else has them. You’re the Minister of 
Agriculture; you’re supposed to be on top of this problem. What 
are the numbers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, this 1986 document does 
not have 1986 figures. So we’ve just calculated them from 1987. 
So you don’t have the 1986 figures, do you? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes, we do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well you don’t. I don’t think you do. This 
is recent calculations. The most recent calculations we have are 
December 31, 1986 and that’s 5.7. So that’s the most recent that 
are out. Now when you’re going through for 1987, you’ll find 
they’ll be out later in 1988 because it takes that long to go through 
all the statistics and all the information. But for 1986, what is 
published here is the end of 1985. We have done our own 
calculations now to give you 1986, and later in the year, you’ll 
be able to get 1987. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, does your department not monitor 
. . . because of the severeness of the crisis and things are shifting 
quicker every day now, does your department not monitor the 
debt situation in this province? I’m amazed of your lack of 
knowledge of this debt crisis. Anything that we ask you here you 
have no answers to as far as the statistical information is 
concerned. No wonder you can’t control the department, no 
wonder there is people going off the land, and no wonder the debt 
is rising every day. Obviously you don’t monitor it. That’s 
incredible, but I guess that’s the way you run your department. 
 
The other question that I asked, Mr. Minister, is, have you done 
a study to determine the cost of restructuring the debt in 
Saskatchewan? Have you had anyone working on how the debt 
could be restructured, whether it be set aside or lengthened or 
whatever? Is there any study to tell the people of this province 
what it might cost to restructure the debt in so farm as principal 
and interest are concerned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I have described the 
1986 debt figures to the hon. member, and it’s every year from 
1971 to ’86, and you have estimates of ’87. And any . . . the 
Credit Union Central or financial

institutions of farm credit can give you estimates of 1987. 
 
Secondly, with respect to restructuring the debt, we’ve done an 
awful lot of research — a lot of research. We’ve done it with the 
Farm Credit Corporation, in asking them how they could 
restructure. And because of our co-operation and theirs, they 
have written off over $100 million. Now that’s a great deal of 
money. 
 
When we went back and talked to the federal government, they 
said, well we can write off some more, we can make sure that we 
provide a great deal of support for initial prices for wheat, and 
we’ll go and back that up. Debt in various pools, in the wheat 
board pooling mechanism, have been backed up as a result of our 
co-operation and understanding with it. Discussing it with the 
credit unions. We have talked at length, for hours and hours, and 
with the financial institutions, about restructure and how they 
restructure and how we do. Obviously the agriculture credit 
corporation has done the same. 
 
We’ve just finished a great deal of discussion with respect to $1.2 
billion that we had out. Can you restructure that? And they said, 
yes, let’s discuss that. They recommended we extend it to 10 
years so we restructured $1.2 billion that’s out to people. And we 
know what it costs. The benefit to Saskatchewan farmers this 
year alone is over $200 million and that they don’t have to make 
those kinds of payments. Now that’s 200 million in cash flow 
alone with one program that we’ve restructured. 
 
And yes, we had many meetings, and we have had research and 
we have had consultations. We have had meetings with 
professionals, with economists, with financial people. We meet 
all the time with them, and that’s why we’ve come up with more 
programs and more packages than in the history of the country 
with respect to agriculture — a long list of programs and 
packages that deal with restructuring the debt, cash in the 
farmers’ hands, and all the other things that we can do that are 
both interest rate protection and cash to people and, yes, 
restructuring. 
 
So when you’re looking at the debt today, the debt is a result of 
declining asset values is everywhere, it’s universal across North 
America. We understand that. We’re doing something about it in 
terms of cash, in terms of advances, in terms of low interest rate 
loans, and in terms of restructuring. So yes, we’ve done a 
considerable amount of research with virtually every financial 
institution — provincial, federal, and private — in the country. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well it seems to me that your idea of 
restructuring debt is adding $1.2. billion of it and pressing 
farmers hard to get it back now. That’s your idea of restructuring 
— your production loan and increasing the interest rate, just like 
farm credit did on their loans. That’s the Tory idea of 
restructuring. It’s ridiculous. And you didn’t answer my question 
of the cost of restructuring that debt. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ll ask you this: do you have any estimates from 
your department as to how many farmers will be lost in this 
province — lost meaning off the land or losing their 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

925 
 

titles — in the next two years? Do you have any estimate of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, various financial 
institutions have their estimates. The agriculture credit 
corporation has forecasts of how many people would be in 
difficulty depending on what prices are. So you put some 
assumptions into your forecast. Here’s what interest rates will be; 
here’s what the price of wheat will be; here are the price of 
various grains and livestock. And you put in various prices and 
you can get forecasts on into the future. It depends on a large 
number of variables. 
 
And if grain prices continue to go up, interest rates would flatten 
out; then you’ve got a combination that obviously will help 
people stay on the land. If you get prices continue to be low 
because of international subsidies or interest rates shoot up, then 
you’re going to have more difficulty. So their forecast depends 
on the information you put in the parameters of your forecasting 
model. 
 
I can only say to the hon. member that across the piece that the 
equity has fallen, it is significant, and we have people who are in 
difficulty as a result of that. That’s why we’re prepared to go to 
10-year money, low interest loans, long run loans, and why we’ll 
continue to bargain with the federal government and lobby hard 
for western farmers to make sure that we can provide deficiency 
payments and that cash that is non-repayable to farmers across 
western Canada, and indeed certainly here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So we will be there on behalf of farmers for billions and billions 
of dollars. As we have in the past, we’ll do that in the future, plus 
restructuring and a combination of things that we can do to help 
them out. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, under current conditions and it 
doesn’t appear as though there’s going to be any great change in 
the next two years — under current conditions, do you think it’s 
inevitable, do you think it’s a given fact that we’re going to lose 
a number of farmers off the land? And could that number be as 
high as 33 per cent? And do you accept that, that these farmers 
have to go? The question is: how, under current conditions, or 
what, under current conditions, are the numbers going to be and 
do you accept that those farmers will have to go? 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I don’t know where you get your 
figures of 33 per cent would be going in the next year or two 
years, so I don’t buy that. I don’t think that will be the case. I 
believe that you will see normal attrition, and you will see the 
kinds of things that go on in agriculture; at the same time you’re 
going to see young people go back into agriculture. 
 
And I’ve pointed out: through more processing, manufacturing, 
diversification, various kinds of support programs, interest rate 
protections, restructuring, the kinds of research that we’re doing 
in the training and education and market development, that you 
will see more people in rural Saskatchewan, because people like 
to live in rural Saskatchewan and in rural Canada. So the 
combination of things that we can do will, Mr. Chairman, allow 
people

to live in rural Saskatchewan and live profitably as a result of the 
kinds of things that we are doing. 
 
So I don’t buy your argument. I’ll say that there could be very 
good times in agriculture with any kind of break in markets and 
breaks, obviously, in the weather, and to maintain support and 
protection against high interest rates. 
 
So the combination of the things that we do nationally and locally 
will protect farmers well into the next decade and well into the 
next century, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, in your own document, your 
big thrust to solve the farm debt crisis, your equity financing 
proposal, that was rejected flatly by the farmers of this province, 
it says, and I quote — and this is where I get the one-third figure 
from; maybe you should read your own documents — “However, 
one-third of the farmers currently holding three-quarters of the 
debt may not have the resources to continue farming.” That’s 
where we get the one-third figure from with the farmers — 30 
per cent, 32 per cent. 
 
And my question to you was: is it inevitable that those farmers 
go? And you’re saying no, we’re going to have more farmers. 
Well, Mr. Minister, your arguments don’t make sense because 
the figures that we have and the facts that we have show that 
under current conditions, and in your own document you say 
one-third of them may not have the resources to continue because 
they hold three-quarters of the debt. 
 
So I mean, you’re talking around in circles and you’re not making 
sense. I’ll ask you a simple question: do you think by in two years 
time that we will be losing a number of our farmers? And is that 
going to be the trend in the next two to five years? And do you 
find that acceptable? Would you please answer that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the number of farmers in 
Saskatchewan going back to 1971 through the NDP 
administration declined year after year after year. The loss in 
farmers during the NDP times was larger, Mr. Chairman, than it 
was now. And he’s asking me: do you think we’re still going to 
see some decline in the number of farms; will it be as high as 33 
per cent; will it take place in the next year, year and one-half. I 
mean, he wants to paint this scenario. I will just point out to him 
that not all farmers will survive. 
 
I believe we’re going to help a lot of farmers, and we’re going to 
continue to do that. We’re going to provide assistance through 
difficult economic times, through drought, through flood, 
through high interest rates and many other things, so that in fact 
farm families can survive. That’s what we’re doing. 
 
And I will only say that if you look at the NDP record through 
high-priced grain, my gosh, it was tremendous times. They lost 
farmers because they didn’t have any confidence at all in the 
administration and the administration was buying their land. 
 
So you go back to 1971, up to 1982, and there are almost 1,000 
farmers a year left — it was over 10,000 farmers left 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

926 
 

the land in Saskatchewan in the decade that you were in power. 
And these were good times. This was a real buoyant time in 
agriculture, 1970s right through to 1982 — 10,000 farmers left. 
And do you know what they said to us? No more of the NDP. 
They don’t want any more of the NDP; they don’t want any more 
of their land bank; they don’t want any more of their talk that 
they’re just going to go out there and help them, but not give them 
a dime against high interest rates; nothing with respect to 
drought. All we saw was succession duties, death tax, high 
interest rates, land bank. And they said, I don’t want any part of 
this. 
 
And that’s why we have the policies we have today. We went to 
the people and they said: protect us against high interest rates; 
get out there and help those farmers; make sure that you go to 
Ottawa and get deficiency payments; back us up; give us cash 
advances; give us natural gas; try to help the livestock industry 
so it has both economic and political balance. We listened to the 
people and they’ve told us that time and time again. 
 
And over western Canada, as we just saw again in Manitoba, 
farmers reject NDP solutions because they don’t have any. So 
you stand up and you say you’ve got all the answers. And you 
can hardly find an NDPer in all of Canada in the rural areas 
because they don’t buy your solutions. They don’t trust you. 
They’ve been there, they’ve seen what you did before when you 
tried to buy their land and wouldn’t protect them, and you had 
death taxes and succession duties, all that stuff. And they said, 
I’m done with it; I don’t want any more of you. And now you 
stand up there and you say, well for Heaven’s sakes, do you think 
it’s going to be such that we might lose a farmer? Are you going 
to lose some more farmers? Well I can say, we want to help 
farmers. We put money up, not just rhetoric. We don’t go buy 
their land; we help them own their land — and we’ve got 
thousands and thousands of young farmers that we have helped 
and we’re happy to do that, Mr. Chairman. So if he wants to talk 
about numbers, in the 1970s when you had high grain prices you 
lost 10,000 farmers because you didn’t give them any help at all. 
We won’t do that, Mr. Speaker. We’ll be there to make sure we 
help people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s amazing how you 
continue to avoid answering the questions, and I can’t do 
anything about that. But I will continue, in my way, of trying to 
ask you some direct questions and . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That the farmers want. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — That’s right, questions that the farmers need 
answers to and you continue to avoid them time after time. That’s 
totally despicable. Mr. Minister, I’ll ask you this question again. 
You continue to say that you have the programs; you have the $2 
billion. I mean, take credit for it if you wish. We all know that 
it’s not the Premier of this province who gave out $2 billion, 
although you’d like to think that. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you believe that the programs that you presently 
have in place are addressing the farm debt crisis? Do you believe 
that those programs are enough for

Saskatchewan farmers to continue and survive on over the next 
five years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, we are working, in 
co-operation with the financial institutions, with the federal 
government institutions, with other provinces, to come up with 
more and better programs all the time. That’s what we do 
constantly. We are reviewing them; we are designing new ones; 
we extend them out; we lower the interest rate; we help 
restructure; we’re asking for more money from the federal 
government; we’re working hard at the international level; we’re 
meeting with people, planning new ideas and new strategies all 
the time. 
 
We met today, for example, and much of the agriculture caucus 
went through the entire program for drought assistance in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Our package is far superior to 
anything else you’ll find in western Canada, and you’ll find it in 
consultation with the elevator companies, the commodity groups, 
the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), 
and others — continual consultation, continual consultation and 
co-operation in designing new programs and mechanisms. 
 
So I’ll say to the hon. member, we work every day on new 
programs, new ideas, and in constant consultation and 
co-operation with agriculture groups, financial institutions, and 
others in this province to make it better for farmers in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, you’re talking about your new 
ideas, new programs and your strategies. Could you just give us 
a couple of examples of the new ideas and the new programs and 
the new strategies that you’re working on right now to address 
the farm debt crisis? And let’s not talk about what you . . . all 
your so-called programs that you have in place that are supposed 
to do the job, because, Mr. Minister, they’re not. I want to know 
. . . Well, you just talked about your new ideas, your new 
strategies. Could you just give us a couple of those that will 
address the farm debt crisis to keep farmers on their land. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve just described that we 
are looking at all kinds of mechanisms and methods to restructure 
debt. We’re looking at more money with respect to the federal 
government. We are going through a series of meetings with 
farmers with respect to assistance, with respect to counselling, 
with respect to refinancing. All those ideas are being discussed 
with farmers right now, and they’re coming back in, we’re 
meeting with other groups, they’re giving us some other ideas for 
local associations, for provincial associations and meetings, for 
national organizations, and the combinations of things that we 
can do with the credit unions, with farm credit, with agriculture 
credit, with farm groups, with elevator companies, with all kinds 
of people. 
 
The SARM has brought us suggestions, the wheat pool brings us 
ideas. We put them together, we do modelling on it. We are 
consulting and reviewing these all the time to help us manage the 
debt, restructure the debt, and deal with the debt problem, as well 
as raise incomes because 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

927 
 

of our protection and interest rates — encouraging the federal 
government to have a low interest rate policy and not artificially 
prop up the dollar, to have them work internationally to get the 
surpluses down so that we can get the price up. All those things 
are going on all of the time, and they are precisely the right 
things. 
 
Now I will say once more, once more, that your suggestion that 
we should encourage the Europeans and the Americans to 
continue to subsidize, to have surpluses so that we have low grain 
prices, is absurd. And I’m not going to do that. And I will stand 
in my place here for a long time to say, you’re going the wrong 
way. 
 
If you want to have low commodity prices, then you just continue 
to let the Europeans and Americans subsidize. You should be 
writing them letters to say, stop subsidizing; go the other way. 
But you stood in this legislature and said, no, for Heaven’s sakes, 
you understand why they should subsidize, and it was okay with 
you. 
 
Now do you think the taxpayers in this country want to put all 
this money in agriculture while the NDP critic stands up and says, 
go ahead, Germans and the French and the Brits, continue to 
subsidize because the taxpayers here just love it? Is that all 
you’ve got in your ideas, that you can just say, well the taxpayer 
here . . . Is that all? I mean, don’t you expect any money out of 
the international markets? We sell all over the world. Wouldn’t 
you like to see the prices up? Wouldn’t you like to see those 
international prices up? Wouldn’t you join with me and help raise 
them, to get people to get their income out of the market? No, not 
you. You just say, well you should have the government involved 
some more and some more. 
 
That’s all you’ve said. Why don’t you want the income to come 
out of the world markets? Why don’t you ever mention world 
markets? You never, ever mention the world price and the world 
markets. You’re afraid to talk about them. I assume you don’t 
understand them. You just encourage the international people to 
subsidize and hurt Canadians and you stand in your place and 
say, well, Mr. Premier, can you find more subsidies? And you, at 
the same time, encourage the Germans to subsidize more. I mean, 
you haven’t mentioned international market prices once, 
international trade. You haven’t mentioned tariffs. you haven’t 
mentioned subsidies and protectionism, the whole reason for the 
problem. You have never addressed it once. You just stand there 
with the NFU (National Farmers Union) handbook, saying, can’t 
we get more money from the government? That’s all you say. 
 
Now let me just ask you. Couldn’t we just shift this discussion a 
little bit, Mr. Chairman, on how to get money into agriculture 
from the world markets for livestock and grain? Wouldn’t that be 
an interesting discussion? I mean, focus on the problem — 
market development, the reduction of subsidies, access to 
markets, all those things. I mean, it would make so much sense 
to the farmer. The farmer wants his money from the market; he 
doesn’t want it from you and me here in government. But that’s 
all you seem to have in your mind, so I just . . . I plead with you, 
think about those international markets and how we could make 
money there rather than just saying, well you

have to go to the government to get more income. 
 
Finally, we are providing more money than in the history of the 
country, half the farm income from government, and you still 
think that the government is the problem. That’s all you say. Now 
if the government is the problem, please talk about and direct 
your attention to the international subsidies that have wrecked all 
our prices. And if you can’t see that, I’ll go through that in some 
detail so that we can talk about the international subsidies and the 
protectionism that has hurt us here, that we’re internationally 
trying to resolve through free trade and international multilateral 
trade discussions, so that we can reduce those subsidies and 
reduce that protectionism and get the price up. That’s what the 
answer is. And I would like, Mr. Chairman, if the hon. member 
would at least have some discussion on the international markets 
where we make — and should make — our living. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, all the while that you’re floating 
around the world you’re ignoring the problem at home in 
Saskatchewan. You’re letting them drift off the land. You’re not 
addressing the problem; you as much as said the debt wasn’t the 
problem. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And the government will do no more. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Upshall: — And the government . . . That’s right, the 
government is going to wash its hands of it. Well, Mr. Minister, 
I’m sure that will give some comfort to the farmers. 
 
And you ask me if I wouldn’t join with you; I won’t join with 
you because I’m joining with the farmers of this province. And 
those people are going to tell you, Mr. Minister, what they think 
exactly of your programs. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you one straightforward 
question: how many foreclosures have been started in the last two 
years, foreclosure actions have been started by ACS and by Farm 
Credit Corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, on page 7 of the Farm 
Finance for the Future, the MLA report, the hon. member will 
find the notices of farm land foreclosures in Saskatchewan from 
1981-82 to 1987. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — And the other one was Farm Credit Corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — This includes all foreclosures. This is 
everything. It’s not broken down by bank or credit union or FCC 
(Farm Credit Corporation) or ACS. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — So that was nearly 1,000 in 1987 — something 
that you could do something about by restructuring debt, by 
being serious about the problem, and you’re not doing it. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has put out what 
they call the rural Saskatchewan stability program. That is the 
proposal by the wheat pool to address some of the problems in 
Saskatchewan. Have you considered, 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

928 
 

have you . . . First of all, have you read this report? And, Mr. 
Minister, could you tell me if you agree or disagree with it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I want to point out to 
the hon. member that we have had the wheat pool give us reports 
and suggestions — all commodity groups, frankly; elevator 
companies; municipal governments, urban governments, various 
financial institutions. They give us research and their suggestions 
on how we do them. And yes, I’ve read them and I’ve looked at 
them all. Some have some good ideas and if you look at a 
combination of them as we did for, say, the production loan 
program when we first did it, then to extend it out, it was a 
combination of what people suggested from the SARM, 
commodity groups, and elevator companies. That’s exactly what 
we do; I make that point. 
 
I just ask you to consider this: what if we have international 
prices, because of the subsidies, go to $1 a bushel? What if they 
go down to $1 a bushel because of the unfairness and the cheating 
internationally? Would it then make some sense to you that we 
go internationally and ask them to stop the subsidy and use some 
real trade pressure on them, because pretty soon wheat could go 
even to 50 cents a bushel? And would you expect all of income 
to come from government? I don’t think that that’s what you 
expect. 
 
I mean, if wheat goes down to a buck a bushel, and you talk about 
restructuring, you would have to restructuring every farm in the 
province. You see what I’m asking you? Your solution is only on 
the government side. You will not look at that international 
problem which is the price of wheat which caused the problem. 
Do you understand that? 
 
We’ve got $2 wheat; farmers need 6 or $7 wheat. The problem is 
that you can’t get it out of the market because other people are 
cheating, and you keep coming back and say, well can the 
government keep piling on more money? If the price of wheat 
continues to go down because of international unfairness, we’ll 
have to restructure every farm in western Canada. And then 
they’d all farm for the government. I suppose philosophically that 
would make you quite happy. You’d say, well gosh we got them 
all now. I mean, we just . . . We restructured it and we own them, 
and whoop-de-do — we’ve got 8 or $10 billion in debt in 
government, and it was a cheaper way to do it than land bank. 
We didn’t even have to buy it from them, we just assume it. 
 
I mean, we don’t want to own the land. We want to get that 
market price up. I just ask you: don’t you think there’s room for 
discussion here — room for discussion to jointly work with other 
countries to get that price of wheat up, rather than just saying, 
can you restructure more and more debt in case the price of wheat 
continues to go down? 
 
What causes the price of wheat to go down? What causes it? It’s 
not Saskatchewan farmers that do it; it’s not Saskatchewan 
farmers. It’s international treasuries like the United States and 
like the Europeans who cause huge surpluses, and with surpluses 
the price falls, and we don’t get the income. That’s the problem. 
And I just again ask

you: wouldn’t you like to see that international price go up? 
Wouldn’t you like to see us get income from the market, as 
opposed to the government? 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, your response to these questions 
is incredible. I mean, you’re stating the obvious, but you’re not 
looking at the reality. I mean, all the while that you’re running 
around saying the international market-place, you’ve got to get 
the price of wheat up — that’s right. But what are you doing in 
the meantime? You’re sitting on your hands. You’re ignoring the 
problem and it won’t go away from you. And your lack of 
solutions is putting suffering and hardships upon the backs of 
farm families. 
 
And one of the ministers chirps, quit scaring people. Well, I tell 
you, Mr. Minister, we don’t have to scare them, because when I 
travel around rural Saskatchewan and I see them and I talk to the 
farmers out there. They can’t be much scareder, because they’re 
saying what was in the budget; what were these new ideas? 
 
There was nothing in the budget except $8 million for 
corporations, corporate entities to get into livestock business. 
That’s your idea, cutting back incentives for farm families and 
smaller operations and giving up to $8 million per operation for 
corporate entities. That’s the direction you’re going. And you’re 
ignoring the debt problem. 
 
And you run around with this farm equity financing proposal, and 
you’ve taken a year to do it — dragged your feet for a year. All 
the while we’re losing farmers, and we see, in 1987, 976 farmers 
with foreclosure actions on them. That’s what you’re doing. 
 
And we have proposals from . . . a good proposal from the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, but because it’s not ideologically 
what you want, you ignore it. 
 
We have a situation where you say that the NDP want the 
government to own all the land. Well, that’s such garbage, and 
you know it, and the farmers of this province know it. We’re 
looking for solutions to keep them on the land. And what’s your 
solution under your equity financing proposal? Your solution is 
to have people other than farmers owning their land. That’s your 
solution. Have the corporate investors own it — tenant farmers, 
serfs on their own land. That’s your solution. 
 
All the while you’re running around and talking about trade and 
international prices. Well, Mr. Minister, I think you’d better open 
your eyes because the problem is here at home right now. We 
talked about subsidies and we talk about reducing subsidies. And 
you know very well, and you misinterpret what I say and what 
everyone else says just to satisfy your own ego. And that won’t 
work, Mr. Minister. 
 
Six billion dollars, the latest figure we have for debt. And you 
continue to ignore it. And I’ll tell you, that is no way. That is 
hypocritical; that is not right for the farm families of this province 
to have to put up with that. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, we also have some other suggestions from 
other people — suggestions like giving the Farm 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

929 
 

Debt Review Board some teeth to enforce settlements. And 
there’s many people suggesting this, when you have these boards 
running around and what they’re doing is simply, in some cases, 
speeding up the actions. That’s not helping the farmers out. I 
mean, they go through this process, but in the end run they’re 
losing. That’s not a solution. 
 
And here we come down to what I think is the crux of it all. And 
the headline in this paper says, and this clipping says, “Politicians 
weigh more heavily than nature for farmers.” And you’ve said 
that tonight. and I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, that is correct. And I 
think that’s the way your government and the Tory government 
in Ottawa want it to be because they have the power then and 
now. They have the power to bring on or delete or change or 
manipulate every program in such a way that they will buy the 
farm vote or attempt to. Well I tell you, Mr. Minister, that’s 
passed you by because the farmers of this province will no longer 
put up with that. 
 
You have not stated to me once today how you’re going to have 
a long-term solution, a long-term program in place. You’re going 
on deficiency payments that are year at a time. We’re running on 
a stabilization that is quickly running out. And you’re talking 
about your $2 billion. Well I tell you, Mr. Minister, how is a 
farmer supposed to know from one year to the next what he’s 
going to get out of those program because you refuse to put in 
place a long-term program. And you refuse to do that so that you 
can manipulate the farmers of this province to your advantage — 
programs for the government to maintain government. And all 
the while you’re saying, oh yes, we’re giving the farmers this 
much money, we’ve opened the treasury. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, throwing money at this problem is not 
solving it. You have to do it in such a manner as to put farmers 
in a stable position, a long-term program of subsidy if that’s 
what’s needed, a long-term restructuring of debt. And that is 
needed, but you fail to address that — you won’t address it. What 
you’re doing is catering to corporations and patronage and 
spending money on your Tory friends. We have the figures to 
back it up, and I don’t have to reiterate them as they were put out 
today. That’s the direction that you’re taking this province in. 
 
And you stand in your place and you say that . . . you know, you 
didn’t really say there was a debt problem when I asked you; you 
didn’t tell me if your programs were sufficient enough to keep 
farmers on the land; you didn’t tell me if we’re going to be losing 
more farmers over the next two or three years; you didn’t answer 
the questions about how we’re going to restructure the debt. You 
say you have new ideas and you’re talking all the time; and you 
didn’t tell the farmers anything. 
 
You have told us, since 2:30 today, absolutely nothing of how 
you are going to address the debt problem in Saskatchewan. All 
you talk about is your short-term, ad hoc programs. You won’t 
address the problem, and I find that very sad. I find it sad because 
of the farmers of this province who are going to be lost — the 
potential new population that we have coming up in 
Saskatchewan who won’t have the opportunity to produce food 
in this country because you won’t be there to stand behind

them. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I’ll tell you when I look at the whole situation 
of farm debt I find that if we don’t restructure that debt, if we 
don’t have long-term subsidy programs that is built into a 
mechanism where they can cut in and cut out as needed. We 
won’t be around here to compete with anybody. I’ll tell you we 
can farm this whole country with 10 farmers of corporate farms 
if we wanted, but that doesn’t build Saskatchewan. And every 
program that you’re putting in place is geared towards reducing 
the number of farmers in Saskatchewan. And yet you stand in 
your place and you say, yes we should have more farmers. Well 
I find that hypocritical. And it’s not the truth, Mr. Minister, and 
I know it’s not the truth, because you do nothing to keep the 
farmers from sliding off the land. 
 
(2015) 
 
Another indication of that is what I’d like to go into now. I’ve 
talked about this in this legislature before and asked you 
questions on it — the seriousness of the lack of moisture in many 
parts of this province. We have seen about a week ago where 
Alberta put $20 million into relief for the shortage of water. 
We’ve seen in the past programs by governments to help farmers 
who won’t have grass for their cattle, who may not have a crop. 
And I’ve asked this question: what are you going to do about it? 
The answer I’m getting is, it’s too soon, it’s too soon to do 
anything about it. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I would ask you right now: in southern parts 
of this province and western parts and somewhat in the central, 
there is a lack of grass, there is a lack of feed for cattle. Are you 
. . . I had people in my office today asking what was going to 
happen, what the government was doing? And I said, well I don’t 
know but I’ll ask them tonight. Are you going to be putting in 
any programs or implementing any plans to ensure that farmers 
that don’t have grass, don’t have grass to range their cattle on, 
will be able to move those to pastures that can sustain cattle? 
Maybe in the North? Are you going to give them any support in 
transporting those? Are you going to have any programs whereby 
we can move feed around the province? And I’d just like you to 
tell me what you plan on doing to let farmers know exactly what 
they can expect from your government right now, with regards to 
the potential drought? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I can say to the hon. member that the 
restructuring of debt that he talked about in the last tirade that he 
had on his feet was . . . One clear example of restructuring that 
we’ve been involved in has been the production loan program 
where we extended it over 10 years. He just won’t seem to 
acknowledge that. And they won’t acknowledge that it’s over a 
billion dollars and that it’s at a fixed interest rate over 10 years. 
And that’s exactly what the farmers wanted — exactly what they 
wanted. They asked for it. They said they want it fixed. They 
want it over the long run. And they came back to us from the 
wheat pool and from the SARM and from the commodity groups 
and said, that’s what we want to see happen. So again I remind 
him, because we’ve just done that. 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

930 
 

And he mentioned the budget — he said, well where was it in the 
budget? Well firstly, before the federal budget they announced 
the deficiency payments. And then he stood up and said, well it 
wasn’t in the budget. Farmers wanted it ahead of the budget. 
 
We did the same with respect to restructuring the production loan 
before the budget, which is over a billion dollars, but it means 
they have to make $200 million a year less in payments this year. 
We did that ahead of the budget to respond quickly. So I’ll just 
mention to the hon. member that the cash and the amount of 
money out there for helping people, and we continue to discuss 
with them. 
 
Now I will review today, for the hon. member, that we have a 
water corporation, and the Saskatchewan Water Corporation 
deals with water management problems on an ongoing basis. 
That’s why we set it up years ago so that it could deal with 
agriculture, municipalities, PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 
Administration), federal government, all kinds of organizations, 
towns and villages, they go to the water corporation. 
 
And there is assistance for drilling; there’s assistance for casing; 
there’s assistance for pumping; there’s assistance for equipment; 
there’s assistance for survey. And there is, in an ongoing 
program, assistance for farmers with respect to the movement of 
livestock, the movement of hay. 
 
We had a meeting today, Mr. Chairman. We had the flax growers 
in on this discussion on drought to see if we needed to add or top 
up any of the programs. We had the flax growers, we had the 
Saskatchewan canola growers, the Saskatchewan soil 
conservation association, we had the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation. We had SARM, we had Saskatchewan PULSE 
Crop Development Board. We had the SSGA (Saskatchewan 
Stock Growers Association). We had the Saskatchewan Cattle 
Feeders Association, Western Canadian Wheat Growers, United 
Grain Growers, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the Saskatchewan 
Stock Growers. I mean, we met with these people today, again, 
to ask them about their advice in terms of, should we provide 
cash to farmers, should we pay it to move feed, should be pay it 
to move livestock. They recommend to us as we’ve done before. 
You give the money to the farmer and let him decide. 
 
We are going to be providing additional assistance, and I’ve said 
it, time and time again, you can get assistance now. But 
additional assistance with respect to drilling for water, for piping 
water, for putting casings in, we’ve got a complete set of 
programs that are there now. I mean, the Alberta government just 
caught up to us in terms of the programs that are there. 
 
We have had many programs in place. There isn’t the Alberta 
water corporation, as far as I know. We have a water corporation. 
That’s what it does. In the middle of southern Saskatchewan, in 
Moose Jaw, that can canvas the West — finally. and we will 
continue. But the result of the discussions we had today, we’ll be 
announcing additional things that we will do for farmers, and we 
can continue to announce additional things right through the 
summer, depending on how it goes.

But I would go back to the hon. member and say that one of the 
most important things that we’ve done in this province, in 
southern Saskatchewan, was to put together Gardiner dam and 
Diefenbaker Lake. And whether he appreciates it coming from 
the north central, north-east part, I can say for southern 
Saskatchewan, it’s been very important to us. Water for Moose 
Jaw, water for Regina — good, clean, fresh water that we 
pipeline in here is very important. We want to do more of that. 
We want to manage water better. 
 
And I’m sure that he’ll stand in his place tonight and say, well, 
Mr. Premier, if you weren’t building Rafferty dam and Alameda 
dam, you’d have more money for farmers. We’re building those 
dams to conserve water, to manage the water so people in 
southern Saskatchewan can have access to water. We’re 
rationing water in my constituency. Communities like Midale or 
Macoun, the Boundary dam is very low. And we’re producing 
two-thirds of all the electricity in the entire province, coming out 
of that power station, and we don’t have enough water. We want 
to be able to manage water year round. 
 
And the NDP is against it. I mean, you’d probably stand there 
and be against Diefenbaker lake and Gardiner dam and all that 
project because it makes for irrigation, it’s water supplies for 
cities, town, villages, and farmers; it generates electricity. And 
you’d be against it. It doesn’t make any sense. Rural people in 
southern Saskatchewan want the water corporation; they want us 
to manage water; they want us to encourage irrigation. People in 
Regina have demanded pipelines. People in Moose Jaw want 
good, clean water. They understand that people in southern 
Saskatchewan want access to good, clean water month after 
month, year after year. We need that management capacity and 
those kinds of dams. We could help a great deal with that kind of 
water management. That’s why we are dedicated to doing some 
structural changes here in southern Saskatchewan to make a 
significant difference. 
 
So you will continue to hear releases and new ideas and new 
programs come out with respect to the water corporation, with 
respect to agriculture and the movement of livestock or feed, or 
certainly assistance to the individual farmer and rancher so he 
can decide for himself. There’s already incentives to explore 
more for water drilling; we’ve got seismic information coming in 
from all over the country; we’re putting together many kinds of 
groups between municipalities, towns, agriculture people, and 
others to make sure that we don’t miss any opportunity. 
 
And we would gladly respond to positive suggestions that you 
might have with respect to water conservation. How do we 
conserve the water if we don’t put up structures? How do we do 
that? 
 
You will not talk about the international price of grain as a 
problem; you won’t talk about how we manage water. It’s again 
back on the government, what’s the government’s solution? You 
won’t talk about spending and building things. You will just talk 
about more government grants and solutions that would come 
just from government. 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

931 
 

I will say, you’ve asked for more money for farmers, and at the 
same time you criticize me for giving them money because they 
might appreciate it politically. I mean, you’ve got to be fair. If 
we provide the money, and we do it, and they asked us to, and 
they acknowledge that . . . What is it — you can’t stand to see 
that? I mean, you want to see more and more government money, 
and at the same time you stand there and say, but for Heaven’s 
sakes, imagine they might think you’ve done a good job; 
politically they might support you. If you’re going to ask for — 
and mostly the NDP do, and certainly socialists do — more and 
more government, more and more government, then you stand 
there and say, well yes, but Mr. Premier, if you do more 
government then you’re going to be influencing them. Well I can 
only say, you can’t have it both ways. Okay? 
 
If you want to see deficiency payments, you want to see help, and 
they acknowledge that we’re doing it and they acknowledge that 
you didn’t. Fair enough. 
 
I mean today you might not be able to be elected in Humboldt, 
and obviously across rural western Canada and in Manitoba, 
clearly you don’t get a great deal of support because you 
wouldn’t build dams, you wouldn’t manage water, you wouldn’t 
help the livestock associations and others except for some plan 
to have supply management in beef and they reject it. I mean they 
don’t want any part of that. 
 
And you have . . . Well I can just say, we met with people today, 
they gave us good suggestions, we have a very powerful water 
corporation that has the resources to help out. We will continue 
to do that. And the suggestions that were suggested today will be 
coming out to add to and top up programs that we have and we’ll 
continue to monitor it right throughout the spring and the 
summer. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, back to the questions. 
 
We have a situation in Saskatchewan this spring where we’re 
seeing farmers with cattle who are looking at extended periods 
of dry hay feeding because the grass isn’t coming, because the 
ground is so dry that the grass won’t start. Are you going to stand 
here and tell us that you really don’t have any program in place 
or looking at any programs that will assist farmers with locating 
pastures? Will you be assisting farmers with locating pastures? 
Will you be assisting in helping organize the transportation of 
cattle if necessary? Will you be assisting them as far as moving 
feed if necessary? Will you be doing . . . first of all, let’s just start 
with those two or three suggestions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I just finished . . . I mean 
no wonder that taxpayers wonder about the estimates. I just 
finished saying to you: today our agriculture caucus met with the 
Saskatchewan Stock Growers, with the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool, with the SARM, with feed growers, to discuss the various 
kinds of things they would like to see done. And you ask me if 
I’ve got any plans or programs. We’ve always had a plan and a 
program; we’ve always announced it in time to move cattle or to 
move feed or to pump water, and so . . . I can just share with you 
that we do that.

We have ongoing programs for test drilling — 50 per cent per 
foot to a maximum of $3 per foot if the hole drilled to a base of 
groundwater exploration for individuals. We already do that. 
Deep well assistance — for wells drilled beyond 236 feet, 
one-third of the cost beyond the 236 foot depth for individuals, 
farmers, or ranchers. Community well assistance — 50 per cent 
of the cost of the investment in well drilling and development for 
rural and small urban communities. Dug-out pumping — cost 
recovery program, equipment at rentals so 225 for the first mile 
of pipe and one pump per farm to farmers; separate rate of $300 
for first pump and a mile of pipe for urban centres. Dug-out and 
small reservoir construction — one-third of the cost less PFRA 
assistance of 1,650 for individuals, farmers and ranchers. 
Municipal water assistance — variable formula for water 
supplement, supply investigation and development. 
 
Along this we have the Alberta program. And what they’ve done 
is just catch up to us, just catch up to our programs. We met with 
farmers and ranchers today to design every kind of program we 
may need from week to week. And we will be implementing it; 
we will be monitoring it; we can provide the money; we are 
encouraging their fullest co-operation. They have confidence that 
we will respond at the right time for all those things that we need. 
 
So I can just say to the hon. member these programs are in place. 
The water corporation has them. The agricultural departments 
have them. The Alberta program was way behind; they’ve come 
up now to where they’re going to match us, for example, on test 
drilling and on deep well assistance and so forth. So I’m glad 
they did catch up. 
 
We’ll be out there again looking for ways to provide financial 
assistance to the livestock industry, particularly, and to the towns 
and villages that are short of water when they need it. This is the 
28th of April, the grass . . . I mean, sure it’s dry. I’m not sure 
every rancher . . . or all farmers and ranchers have written it all 
off, but obviously an inch or two or rain at any time would 
provide a great deal of grass. We’ll watch it every day, every 
week, with these people I’ve just talked about. 
 
They suggested what we should do and how we should do it, and 
we will follow their suggestions and co-operate and provide 
assistance and money for finding water, delivering water, 
pumping water and moving livestock or feed — whatever the 
farmer wants — any combination of the above to make sure that 
we, again, stick up for rural Saskatchewan and go to bat for them, 
provide money to them. And it costs us tens of millions of dollars, 
literally billions of dollars — not hundreds of millions, but 
billions — on an annual basis now. And we will stay the course 
to help farmers because we believe in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, I don’t know when the right 
time is, if it isn’t right now. One farmer — and I quote from April 
16 of the Leader-Post — says he has about: 
 

. . . 300 animals in the Maple Creek area, says he will have 
to choose between selling his cattle or 

  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

932 
 

moving them to greener pastures if it doesn’t rain “almost 
immediately.” 

 
He can’t bank on finding the pasture, he said, “because I’m 
not the only guy looking for it.” 

 
When is the right time? I mean, if now is not the right time to 
have programs in place so the farmer can make a decision, when 
is the right time? After the farmer sells and has to sell his 300 
head of cattle? I mean, you can drag your feet on this as long as 
you like but that won’t help those people who need the 
organization right now. And I’ll tell you, as far as your pumping 
program is concerned, there’s many people in the south-west area 
of this province who tell me they’ve got nowhere to pump from. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’ll ask you this — two questions. First of all, 
are you going to be looking at freeing up some Crown land, 
possibly in the North where there is pasture or parkland or 
something — some places like that where you can range cattle 
on? And when, when are you going to announce this program? 
When is the right time for you to announce your feed assistance 
or locating pasture program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member knows — 
well, I’m sure he must if he has anything to do with agriculture 
— that we’ve had very few crop failures in April. I mean, if you 
are going to have a drought, it might as well be in the winter-time. 
And that’s what any farmer will tell you. 
 
We are prepared to provide assistance to people to either move 
their cattle or to move feed to their cattle. And you were talking 
to this individual who says he wants to move cattle up north. 
There’s only a limited amount of any kind of grassland available 
in northern Saskatchewan and most ranchers and farmers know 
that. We will make sure that we have all available land available, 
or there to be surveyed and assessed by the ranchers and farmers 
in southern Saskatchewan. 
 
At the same time, maybe he wants to choose to bring feed in 
because of the price of barley, because of a good hay crop and 
feed crop next year. It may be the choice for him to not move the 
cows, keep them next to the water, and move the feed closer to 
the farm. He will be able to do either one. We will provide the 
assistance to the individual and we . . . That’s why we met with 
the farmers today, so that they could tell us what to do and how 
to do that. And we said, well it’s not even May 1. We’re watching 
it very carefully, it still freezes most every night; the grass has 
not started to turn. You had six-tenths of an inch of rain south of 
Milestone near Weyburn — welcome. If they can more and more, 
obviously it will make a tremendous difference. So we’ll watch 
it week after week and be prepared to have a program that is 
available to all these farmers. 
 
If you want me to say, will there be, will there be a program, yes 
sir, there will be a program. And farmers can count on the fact 
that there will be a program. What they have to decide now — 
and I recommend that they do that, in talking to their neighbours, 
the SARM, and the various livestock associations — make up 
your mind what would be the best thing to do with the money 
that we’re going to give

you, because we’re not going to come out with likely a feed 
assistance or trucking assistance. 
 
Give the money to the farmer, let him decide whether he wants 
to move feed in or move cattle out. He should be looking at those 
alternatives, because if we do come out with assistance — when 
we do, and we will — he should make that decision as early as 
possible, and then we’ll be able to help him to the maximum. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 
wanted to get into this section of the Agriculture estimates. I have 
not been accused of being a farmer, I don’t think. I do fly over 
the south country twice a week, and I can say, Mr. Premier, that 
the problems are really graphic. 
 
Two weeks ago I went down to Assiniboia. Lake of the Rivers is 
not dry but it’s very close to it. I then went from Assiniboia to 
Coronach; Lake Montague is dry, Willow Bunch Lake is dry. I 
don’t think there is a slough south of the Qu’Appelle Valley. I 
think that’s probably an accurate statement, and there are a whole 
lot of dug-outs which are dry. I wouldn’t want to guess the 
percentage, but there are an enormous number of dug-outs that 
are dry. I think it’s a once in a lifetime situation — the drought 
in southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Old-timers tell me that the situation got this bad in the middle of 
the ’30s, but they also tell me that it hasn’t been as bad since. I 
do want to join with the member from Humboldt in urging upon 
you the urgency of the matter. You know you say we are 
monitoring it and we’re consulting. That’s exactly the farmers’ 
concern is that you’re just monitoring it, you’re consulting, but 
you’ve had no concrete programs. The time is long overdue when 
you should have had something. 
 
Mr. Premier, you say that we’ve never lost a crop in April, well 
that’s true if you’re cereal, if you grow grains. That’s not true if 
you’re concerned about hay. You can indeed lose a hay crop at 
this time of year, Mr. Premier. You may . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . the member from Morse, who is making such a 
sterling contribution from his seat, disputes that. You can’t 
dispute that there’s not likely to be any water down there for 
cattle this year unless there is an enormous amount of rain. Those 
dug-outs aren’t going to fill up without an abnormal amount of 
rain and neither are the ponds. Neither are those lakes going to 
fill up. 
 
Mr. Premier, the time is long overdue when you should have had 
the program and you should have had it announced. Even the 
Government of Alberta has a program and has it in place. Mr. 
Premier, you referred to a number of programs. Those are 
ongoing programs most of which were in place long before this 
government took office. A lot of those programs are of long 
standing. They were never designed to deal with this kind of . . . 
what I really believe is a once in a lifetime situation — and I 
could go on for some time naming the lakes in southern 
Saskatchewan which are bone-dry — has not happened within 
the lifetime of anyone except the very old. 
 
So I say to you, Mr. Premier, the time is long overdue when you 
should’ve given some assistance. To say you’re consulting with 
it is to say that you’re two months behind 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

933 
 

the problem. You should have some programs in place and you 
should have some assistance in place for these people who are 
very hard pressed. 
 
Mr. Premier, there are I suppose, an endless number of stories. I 
recall the other day in the Leader-Post a dairy farmer from 
Weyburn who’s hauling water for dairy cattle — 10 gallons of 
water per cow per day. That’s 4,000 gallons a day. My guess is 
that the dairy business — couldn’t put a precise figure on it — 
my guess is the dairy business isn’t that profitable that he can 
afford to do that for very long. 
 
When I was in Assiniboia a couple of weeks ago farmers 
expressed their concern that they might not be able to haul from 
the town of Assiniboia because the town of Assiniboia itself has 
water rationing. None of the city fathers or mothers, as the case 
may be, have expressed the thought that they might cut off the 
farmers, but the farmers themselves were expressing some 
concern about it. 
 
The time, Mr. Premier, is long overdue when you should have 
had a program. To say you’re consulting and you’re monitoring 
is to admit to us you’re way behind the eight ball and it’s time 
you caught up. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I guess your view would differ from 
all those association members that I’ve had the opportunity to get 
the message from. Today they said that it’s too soon to announce 
incentive programs for moving livestock. 
 
We encourage the drilling for wells. I mean, you mentioned the 
dug-outs. I mean, certainly, if it doesn’t rain or snow there’s not 
going to be water in the dug-outs — I know that. But you can 
drill, you can drill for water, and people are finding water across 
southern Saskatchewan because they’re drilling for it. And 
they’re finding it in homes and towns and villages, and they’re 
doing it. And there’s drilling crews all across southern 
Saskatchewan. We’re picking up a lot of that expense right now, 
and they are drilling, and farmers — your neighbours, or where 
you used to be from — are drilling and finding water. They know 
that. Now I can’t fill the dug-outs if there’s no water, but we can 
go underground, and our incentives now are in action. I mean, 
they’re doing it; they’re out there finding water. 
 
Secondly, I would say to you that when this happens I really can’t 
understand why you would be against managing this water like 
something like Rafferty dam. And if you flew over the Souris, 
you’d see that it was dry — it’s dry. Now if we could manage the 
water — when it’s rushing down there and providing all kinds of 
water, and we lose it into the United States and then into the 
ocean, if we could manage it, we can have it year-round. And it 
can be a long lake there; it can be a 20 or 30-mile lake with access 
to water. I mean, that’s what Boundary dam is, correct? I mean, 
that’s how we cool the water at the power station there now. 
We’ve dammed that water in Boundary dam, and I think you 
thought that was all right. We want to conserve more water with 
Rafferty and Alameda. That’s what it’s for — I mean, for power 
projects, for people. Estevan will soon be rationing water because 
we have no other source.

And we’re drilling and we’re looking. Now it makes my point: 
the water table’s been going down for 10 years. We want to build 
dams so that we can manage the water. We’ve got a drilling 
program across the country, and they are drilling. And from 
Moose Jaw north-west, out through Grayburn, Archydal, right 
through to Rowletta and Lake Valley and Brownlee they’re 
finding water, and they’re drilling 3, 4, 500 feet, and they’re 
finding it with incentives that we’re providing. And I am happy 
that they are. 
 
Now announcing a program for farms . . . What the farmers say 
is, it’s not time to move the cattle right now. We can either move 
feed to where the water is, or we can drill for water because 
you’ve got an incentive package out there, or maybe we’ll have 
to consider moving the livestock off that area because there’s no 
water or feed. 
 
But we’ve got surplus fed supplies. You can go along No. 1 
Highway and you see feed stacked up from last year, all for sale, 
good feed, barley prices. It may be a lot cheaper if the farmer 
makes up his mind to bring the feed supplies to where the water 
is or where his cattle is. 
 
Now we said to the farmer — and I’ve said it before and I said to 
our people as they met with them today — we’ll provide 
assistance to the individual; let him make up his mind. But I 
would listen to this group say this is no time to start talking about 
we’ve got to move the cattle tomorrow out of southern 
Saskatchewan. We’ve had snow storms and rain in . . . We’ve 
had a foot of snow in the end of May, and you know that. So you 
could be moving all the cattle up there and yet have a snowstorm 
and water down here, and you could have grass that’s going to be 
quite good. We want to make sure, while there isn’t a crop failure 
in April, there isn’t a grazing crop that is completely gone on the 
April 28. 
 
Now I would like to see more rain, but I will just say to you, we 
will provide assistance, certainly. I would ask the farmers now, 
as the livestock people did today, they said, you get ready to 
make the decision whether it’s best to move the feed to the water 
. . . (inaudible) . . . go find water, or move cows, because we’ll 
provide you with the money, not truckers and not subsidized 
feed, but we’ll provide you money to go drill for water, or to 
make up your mind. But they said don’t encourage a lot of people 
to go shipping cattle all over northern Saskatchewan on April 28. 
And I kind of agree with them. 
 
I think this is too early to say, all right, away we go, the herds are 
moving north. It may be the case that some will have to go north, 
and obviously, you know, our livestock numbers are up so there’s 
not a lot of room, certainly isn’t room for 30, 40, 50,000 head or 
100,000 head to move up there. I mean that’s . . . clearly there 
isn’t. And unfenced bush is not going to be the answer for herds 
of beef that have been raised on the range in southern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So obviously, feed to the farmers, water incentives, and the 
combination thereof, and we’ll be ready with money. But I tend 
to agree with the farmers today, don’t encourage them all to start 
moving cattle on the end of April, because it’s just too early. 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

934 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Premier, it may be or may not be 
too early to move cattle. I suspect that with some of the pastures 
as dry as they are, there is going to be some damage done to those 
pastures if cattle are grazed on them at this point in time. And for 
some there may not be a lot of option. 
 
Mr. Minister, one or more of the people that you met with may 
have thought it too early to start moving large number of cattle. I 
doubt that any of the farmers you met with told you it was too 
early for an assistance program. I really doubt that. 
 
Mr. Minister, and Mr. Premier, it is long overdue. This problem 
has been apparent since the middle of March. It has been apparent 
since the middle of March that there isn’t going to be any 
significant run-off. It has been apparent that there’ll be no surface 
water to speak of except with respect to very good dug-outs. 
 
Mr. Minister, you say to the farmers, tell us what you ought to 
do. I think, Mr. Premier, the process is really the reverse. They’re 
paying a fairly healthy amount of taxes to pay the salaries of 
some very competent people, and I have no doubt that they are 
competent. They expect, Mr. Minister, you to provide some 
solutions to which they can say yea or nay. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is: when are we going to see 
something and when are you going to stop avoiding the problem, 
which I think is what you’ve been doing? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Farmer Ned. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — When you say to them . . . Well someone, I 
think it’s the farmer from Albert South, accuses me of not being 
a farmer. I say to the member from Regina South . . . Well I see 
everybody is pointing fingers at everybody else and nobody 
claims to have made the remark. Let me say to all of the members 
opposite that agriculture in this province is of such importance 
that I think all members should take an interest in it. This is 
something that goes a little beyond some of the smaller 
industries. 
 
(2045) 
 
And I make no apology for getting into the Agriculture estimates 
while admitting that I have not lived on a farm for a very long 
period of time and don’t have an intimate knowledge of it. I do 
have some smattering of an idea, I say to the member from Albert 
South, as to how important the industry is. 
 
To get back to the Premier, I think you owe us some idea of when 
you think you’re going to quit avoiding the problem and start 
dealing with it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I was just reminded, and 
for the hon. member, that if you were going to plan on, as if you 
suggest, moving cattle into northern Saskatchewan, if you took it 
into the area of Shellbrook-Torch River, into the bush, you’d find 
there’s still a foot of snow. The grass is not growing in northern 
Saskatchewan, and it doesn’t in April, okay, and it hasn’t for a 
long, long time.

So what the farmers were saying to us, and the ranchers . . . I 
mean, clearly this is just a little bit too early to talk about taking 
the cows and moving them all north. It hasn’t even begun to grow 
grass in northern Saskatchewan where you know you may have 
excess bush and unfenced area and so forth. I mean it’s just . . . 
the timing is . . . all they want to know is that will we provide 
assistance in finding water? We said yes. Will we provide 
assistance in pumping water and drilling? Yes, we will. Will 
there be assistance when the time is right to either move feed or 
move cattle? We said, you bet there will be. They said, that’s all 
we want to know. But don’t encourage people to either sell off or 
to move up North or do a whole bunch of things on April 28 
because it’s not the time. 
 
What Alberta did, and I think they might have got you a little 
excited, they caught up to us. They’ve got a program that is very 
similar to us; they don’t even have a water corporation, as far as 
I know; they don’t have the capacity in the programs that we do. 
But I am sure you would acknowledge that in the past when there 
was drought problems or flooding problems or snow problems or 
frost problems with the livestock industry, we have been there 
every time, and believe me, we’ll be there this spring with 
assistance for farmers and ranchers in southern Saskatchewan if 
it continues to stay dry. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Premier, you may or may not have 
been there every time. You have been there in a very tardy way 
every time. 
 
Mr. Premier, I can’t believe that when the problem has been 
apparent for at least six weeks — and it is at least six weeks since 
everybody knew that there was going to be a major problem, once 
the snow disappeared the frost went out of the ground — it was 
apparent to everyone it was going to take a really major amount 
of rain to fill up those dug-outs and sloughs. Mr. Premier, when 
it has been reasonably apparent for six weeks, it’s difficult to 
believe you don’t have some idea of what you’re going to do. 
 
When we ask you for more specifics as the time and program, 
you dash off into the safety of what you believe is a weak side of 
a larger question, and that is moving cattle. You seem to think 
that that’s too early. 
 
Mr. Premier, I’d ask you to stop dashing off into the safety of 
that, and deal with the more general question of when you’re 
going to stop avoiding the problem and provide some programs 
and give us some idea — although you may not be able to flesh 
it out in detail, give us some idea of what you think the program 
would look like. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I can only say to the hon. member, we 
talked to the livestock people in municipalities today, and they 
recommended that we pay farmers. So if you want to know what 
it looks like, any information or cash that we’re going to do will 
be to the farm family as opposed to either those that are selling 
feed or trucking cattle or anything else. Let the farm family 
decide. That’s what will happen; that will be the nature of the 
program, and they know that. They’ve gone home to tell their 
friends and neighbours and the municipal councillors and others 
that that will be the program. We’ve got drilling incentives out 
there now so that they will pick up 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

935 
 

half the costs. We’ll continue to do that in co-operation with the 
federal government. 
 
We just don’t want to get people too excited about thinking about 
moving all the cattle north because you can’t take tens of 
thousands of head and find space for them. And as I just 
mentioned, it’s just way too early, it’s just way too early to think 
moving them any place up north. 
 
I could add . . . I was just reminded that because of the mild 
winter, there are less cattle in the feedlots because they wintered 
well and they’ve made the market. There will be capacity in 
feedlots across southern Saskatchewan to provide feed for 
cow-calf pairs this spring. And in many cases with the feedlot, 
I’m sure, as you know, there’s a good water supply, so you may 
find the capacity there in many cases for the cow-calf operation 
as opposed to trucking them up north or something else. 
 
But all those alternatives were presented to us, but the farmers 
said to us, and the municipal councillors, design the program for 
the farmer so he can have the cash. I said, that’s the way we’re 
going to do it. The only question you have left is: how much? 
And we will obviously assess the amount of help that will be 
needed and we’ll be announcing that at the appropriate time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Premier, you apparently don’t want to 
tell me when. Whenever I ask you when you think you’re going 
to quit dilly-dallying around, you give us yet another song and 
dance about how it’s too early to move tens of thousands of cattle 
north. I frankly don’t know whether it is or it isn’t. 
 
I tell you, Mr. Premier, that it’s not too early to be announcing 
some programs with respect to some parts of the problem. Mr. 
Premier, I would ask you to deal with the question of when. I’ve 
got a very clear understanding that it’s your understanding that 
it’s too early to ship every cow north. Not yet. I thank the Premier 
for that, although I didn’t ask that. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Premier, if you want to answer the question as to 
when and in what time frame you think you’re going to provide 
something a little more specific for the farmers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve said to the hon. 
member, I believe five times now, the farmers met with our 
people today and they recommended not to announce a program 
to move cattle. Now what are the alternatives? The alternatives 
are to move the feed or to drill for water; I mean, that’s all that’s 
left. Right? We are providing the incentives now to drill for water 
and people are finding it so they can keep their cattle at home. 
And secondly, we will provide them with financial assistance for 
feed or for moving cattle when they choose, and they know that. 
 
Now all that’s left is the date that I’m going to say, here’s the 
financial assistance. That’s all that’s left. What they advised me 
is: don’t get them excited about moving a bunch of cattle or feed 
right now when it just frankly isn’t the time. And that’s all I can 
share with you. I respect their view.

I can say to you, there will be an announcement. It will be cash 
to the farmer so he can decide what he wants to do. That’s what 
will be the case, and I can only say that, out of respect for the 
municipal councillors and the livestock organizations and others, 
that’s what they recommend. We will be prepared to announce it 
at any time, to say: this will be for the farmers and they can 
choose what best to do. And obviously, I will advise my hon. 
friend once more, it’s too early to move cows to the north part of 
Saskatchewan . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . to move cows to the north part of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — That’s right. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, if the Premier . . . I want to 
make an offer to the Premier: if he has to leave for any reason, I 
can give his answer. So I’ll . . . Mr. Premier, I want you to know 
you’re free to leave for a period of time unless you have a new 
answer because I can give the one I’ve heard 10 times during the 
last half hour. 
 
Mr. Premier, I just have one more question. Can you give us your 
assurance that you won’t set up the horrendous bureaucracy that 
you — in which it takes months and months to get payments — 
that you’ve set up with respect to crop insurance in the past, that 
you’ve set up with respect to the gas tax receipts? 
 
Can you give us your assurance that it’ll be simple and 
straightforward, and if they have to mail receipts for payments 
for trucking hay or digging for water, drilling for water, that 
they’ll get their money back within a reasonable period of time, 
they won’t have to wait for months and months while you sort 
out a zillion documents, which is what you’ve done with crop 
insurance in the past and it’s what you’ve done with the gas 
receipts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member can’t have 
it both ways. He says the water programs and incentives have 
been in there for years. And you know what the applications are 
to PFRA and to the water corporation for your assistance. We’ve 
provided assistance before, and people send in their forms and 
say, this is the number of cattle; I want a cash advance, or I want 
this program or that program. And we process it; sometimes we 
pay it at the point immediately, and other times we’ll pay it 6 
months later when we find out how many cattle are moved and 
how much water is needed and how much feed and the extent of 
the problem. 
 
So it hasn’t been a bureaucratic problem. The farmers have 
applied; they know that they can get it. If you’re right — and you 
said that, you know, the programs have been there for some time 
in terms of drilling — well, they apply. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Crop insurance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Crop insurance. We have made many 
modifications to crop insurance at the recommendation of 
farmers. And then they . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well of 
course it’s a plus. They appreciate those changes. Now we’ve got 
a better crop insurance. 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

936 
 

We now have a larger coverage. I mean, I’m sure you went 
through the estimates with the minister from crop insurance. But 
it’s very well received; it’s a huge corporation; it’s doing a good 
job, and we continue to make modifications in terms of all kinds 
of programs like that. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the opportunity to 
participate in the agricultural estimates, and I want to say from 
the outset that I consider myself as much a farmer, from 2802 
Calder Avenue in Saskatoon, as the Premier from Albert Avenue. 
The only difference is, Mr. Premier, that I am a little bit older and 
you have a permit book . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and I am 
wiser. And I am wiser. 
 
I want to tell the Premier that I gave up my permit book a few 
years ago because I wasn’t actively participating in farming any 
more. So that’s the only difference. My roots Mr. Premier, are 
ingrained in rural Saskatchewan, as you probably well know. I 
have a number of brothers who are farming; I have a number of 
brothers-in-law who are farming; my father-in-law farms. And I 
think they’re pretty good farmers, but they find themselves in a 
real crisis at this particular time. 
 
I want to say to the Premier that I recognize that part of this is 
due to international, and there is no controls that we in Canada or 
on a national-provincial level can have any effect. However, Mr. 
Premier, I would like to have, if I could, some straight answers 
from you. And I’m dead serious on this. There are many farmers 
in Saskatchewan, and I have personal knowledge of it, who 
simply will not survive this year, through no fault of their own. 
The problem started, certainly, in the last four or five years, and 
they were certainly because wheat went down to $2 a bushel and 
yes, the future looked bright and they expanded and got caught. 
 
These farmers . . . I was talking to one the other day, a very close 
friend of mine, who simply hasn’t got the money, the operating 
funds, to put in his crop this spring. He can’t put it in. He doesn’t 
have the funds. Credit unions won’t lend him the money. The 
banks won’t give him the money. And this young farmer, who is 
27 year old, unless a personal friend comes through for him, will 
probably lose his farm. He has two young children. His debt is, I 
think, around 150 to $200,000 and he simply cannot make a go 
of it. 
 
I’m asking you, Mr. Premier, Mr. Minister, isn’t there something 
that the provincial government can do, that you can do under your 
leadership to help these kinds of farmers. Now there are lots of 
them like that, lots of them. I’m sure you know as many as I do 
who are in the same position. I think that’s what my colleagues 
were trying to drive at this afternoon. And I listened to the 
debates 95 per cent of the time. I was in this House listening. 
 
And all I want from you is, very succinctly, isn’t there something 
that you and this province can do for those farmers who will find 
themselves in the position where they no longer will be farming 
after this spring unless someone comes to their rescue now? The 
banks and credit unions won’t. And they won’t because the debt 
that they have accumulated over the years is now worth more

than the land they own. 
 
And I think you alluded to that this afternoon. But that’s the 
problem that we have, and that’s the problem that we’ve got to 
address. And I’m asking you right now: isn’t there something that 
you could come up with for those farmers? It may not take all 
that much money to do it. And I know, Mr. Minister, that the 
funds are limited. But surely, surely to goodness we have some 
money in the treasury that we can use to apply to those farmers 
now so that they can at least, in the next two or three weeks, put 
in their crops. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well two observations from the hon. 
member . . . to the hon. member. If his relative or his friend wants 
to write me as the Minister of Agriculture and go to counselling 
assistance, they can get up to $100,000 guaranteed loans. And 
we’re helping all kinds of young farmers through counselling 
assistance. And with The Farm Land Security Act in, and other 
things, we can protect them, we can look after them, we can do 
much. And it’s a council of peers, fellow farmers, that sits around 
there and they say, well now, young fellow, if you do this and 
this, we’ll help you and we’ll . . . The government backs up their 
loans, and we’ve done that for thousands of people. That’s why 
we set it up. 
 
So send that young fellow in to us, and say, young fellow, tell us 
about your problem. The counselling and assistance people sit 
down there, and they know agriculture; they know his situation; 
they’ve seen many people through it, and they can guarantee tens 
of thousands of operating dollars, of operating money to him so 
that he can service his debt with the credit union or whoever he 
has it for. I mean, that’s what it’s set up to do. That’s what it’s 
set up to do. 
 
(2100) 
 
Now I come back to you, and I ask you very sincerely, and you 
felt some compassion for those people. All right. Do you feel 
compassion for Steve Daskosh? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Let’s not get on to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I’m asking you? He needs $100,000, 
and I ask you, do you know his family? Do you know his 
children? I ask you because this is a farmer, this is a real person, 
somebody’s relative. And I ask you . . . 
 
Counselling assistance is available, and what bothers me about 
you standing up and looking compassionately is that you will turn 
your back on people like this. That’s what bothers me. Why 
wouldn’t it bother other people? I mean, here we have you and 
your friends foreclosing on this farmer and you’re standing up 
and pleading for another one. That’s what people need to know. 
They need to know. 
 
I’m asking you, how do you feel? How do you feel about this 
farmer at Albertville? NDP lawyers foreclosed on this farmer, 
and he needed $100,000. And you stand up there and say, well 
could you help. Well of course we help farmers, and the 
counselling assistance is available. But don’t you plead just for 
one set and then turn around and have your leader foreclose on 
others. People in this 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

937 
 

province will find that out, I’ll say that to you. So don’t stand and 
tell . . . And the reason that this young farmer is in trouble to start 
with is because when interest rates were 20 per cent, he never got 
a dime from somebody that was in government. That’s what 
caused the problem. 
 
Now, I will never, ever forgive the NDP for not helping farmers 
when interest rates were 20 per cent because it put so many of us 
out of business. And you know that. And then you stand there 
and you plead and you say, well, can you help me. We set up all 
kinds of programs. You send that man to the counselling 
assistance and we’ll help. But I remind you, Steve Daskosh from 
Albertville is a farmer who needed some help. And what he got 
was foreclosure action from an NDP law firm. And he is pretty 
upset, and I read it in the legislature this afternoon, and I will read 
it every day to remind people that that’s the kind of thing when 
you’re asking for help. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, these are farmers — these are young farmers 
that need help. They don’t need to be foreclosed on. That’s why 
we set up counselling assistance and, Mr. Chairman, we will 
continue to help them. That’s why we provide the assistance — 
because we care. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I 
want to ask a few more questions . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
I simply am not going to, simply not going to get into that. Mr. 
Chairman, I want to simply tell the Premier, I want to tell the 
Premier that this young farmer, Mr. Premier, wasn’t farming in 
1971. This young farmer started farming in about 1973 or 1974. 
 
Now I’m waiting for the member from Lloydminster to . . . As 
soon as the Minister of Agriculture takes an interest in his 
agriculture estimates again, we will get on with the Estimates. 
But, Mr. Premier, I’m not going to get into that debate with you 
on foreclosures, because there is simply . . . it won’t help any 
particular farmers. 
 
Mr. Premier, the farmer that I was talking about was not farming 
in 1974-75. He took out a loan under your government and 
purchased the land, and he simply has been unable to pay that. 
And I’m not blaming you for the loan. You never heard me 
accuse you of that. I was very sincere in asking you for some 
assistance and you turn around become totally political — 
partisan politics in this when I’m trying to get some answers from 
you as a responsible Minister of Agriculture. 
 
You can do all the fighting you want and the partisan politics 
with your lawyers. It doesn’t bother me a bit. I, first of all, don’t 
believe one word of what you are saying, and I don’t think most 
of the farmers, and the people in this province have a hard time 
believing what you are saying. Because you have dealt in half 
truths one too many times, Mr. Premier, one too many times. 
 
Mr. Premier, the debt that the farmers have incurred — and our 
critic has been talking about that — the debt, and you yourself 
have admitted it, has gone from 1.2 billion in 1971 to 5.7 billion. 
And I said it wasn’t totally the province’s fault. It’s an 
international problem and I recognize that. And I recognize that 
you and the Prime Minister of Canada have done something to 
try and resolve this problem. But the problem has simply been

exacerbated. The problem is worse today than it was six years 
ago, much, much worse, and you’ve got to address that. 
 
There are farmers, and there are hundreds of farmers who will 
simply not be able to put in their crop because they haven’t got 
the operating funds to do it. And all I asked to do is to tell me, do 
you have some programs in existence that will help these farmers 
whose equity in their farms has decreased? 
 
An Hon. Member: — And they would have had a lot more 
money in their pockets if you’d have done something with high 
interest rates. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Well, there is the member from Lloydminster 
who is simply the expert on everything. Mr. Member, you should 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ask your brother-in-law. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister . . . Yes . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — The brother-in-laws you’re talking about; 
they don’t even support you. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, the member form Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster is such an expert in everything. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Your brother-in-laws are related to me, 
and they don’t even support you. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Well you could say whatever you wish. See, 
that’s all that you guys are interested in, is in partisan politics. 
 
But let me just put it this way. Mr. Chairman . . . the member 
from Cut Knife-Lloydminster, the only sad thing about him is 
I’ve known that guy for about 20 or 25 years, and yet I have to 
find at any one time that he makes any sense on anything or could 
even . . . or begin to understand anything about anything. 
 
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Yes, for not too long. Wait till next Tuesday or next Wednesday. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I want to ask the Premier again: Mr. Premier, the 
debt that the farmers are facing in this province is astronomical. 
And I think the agriculture critic was very sincere when he asked 
you, isn’t there something that can be done in restructuring this 
debt. There is no relief coming in the next two or three years. 
International prices, if you read the economics, agricultural 
economics, there is going to be no relief in the next two or three 
years. So we have to confront the problem right here in 
Saskatchewan, here in Canada. that means that that debt has to 
be restructured. That debt has to be restructured. 
 
And what we’re asking you today is, isn’t there something in the 
interim that you can do; first of all, to help those farmers for 
operating funds; secondly, to help the farmers in the next year or 
two so that they can survive in restructuring that debt. 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

938 
 

Is there any possibility that you can, in the next year or two, in 
the next six months, make an announcement that you will say to 
farmers, yes, we are going to help you restructure that debt 
because we also recognize that on an international scene we are 
not going to have any major changes, and therefore, in order to 
save the farmers, I am going to go to bat for you. And as you said 
some time ago, I will open the treasury and I will help you. Isn’t 
there something that you can do in the next six months to help 
these farmers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we are, and it’s 
ongoing every day. The counselling assistance can — and I’ll 
advise the hon. member — consolidate debt as well and help 
people restructure with their peers watching them, provide the 
operating money so that they can make their payments. It’s a 
combination of things that would help, and I would just 
encourage the hon. member to invite anybody that may be in 
some difficulty to come to counselling assistance. 
 
We’ve done the extension of the production loan program to cut 
the payments in half, and he’s aware that it’s over 10 years at a 
fixed interest rate; continue to have deficiency payments which 
is cash; continue to have zero-rate interest for the livestock 
industry — all those programs, plus ongoing assistance that can 
provide for all kinds of various unique situations. 
 
So we are restructuring on a daily basis, and we are counselling, 
we are providing the assistance and providing the cash and, 
indeed, Mr. Chairman, we’re providing the guarantees, 
government-backed guarantees for these young people so that 
they can go back into the farming business so that they can make 
their payments and carry on through this particular period of 
time. 
 
So I just say to the hon. member, they appreciate the interest rate 
help and the counselling and the guidance. They have often said 
to me, I mean, my gosh, how awful it would be if we hadn’t had 
any interest rate help. And that’s the way it was going. And you 
understand that they wanted help; they got it; they appreciate it. 
 
It’s difficult; almost half their income now comes from 
government. And we are continuing to provide more counselling, 
more guarantees, more restructuring. Every day it’s going on, and 
it’s a massive program of restructuring that takes place day after 
day in the province. And we have the money to back it up. We 
have put the treasury right at stake — billions of dollars. You’re 
aware of that. We’ve extended it over a longer period of time. 
We’ve cut their payments by up to 200-and-some million dollars 
this year that farmers would not have to pay just on their 
production loan itself. So that’s a lot of money, a lot of backing, 
a lot of guarantees — plus cash they don’t have to pay back in 
deficiencies. 
 
So we’ll continue. We meet every week with farm groups to find 
out other things that we can do to help them. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, you can talk in 
circles all you want. You simply are not wanting to address the 
restructuring of the long-term debt for farmers, which is 
absolutely essential if you’re going to

stop the farmers from leaving their land. 
 
Mr. Premier, you talk about not having sufficient money. I 
simply want to ask you this: do you think it is fair that the public 
should subsidize out of public funds? 
 
People who have outside income of 65 and 70 and 80 and 
$90,000 a year, to subsidize the amount of public funds when we 
have thousand of farmers out there who simply can’t make a go 
of it. That is what’s wrong with your program, the loan 
production program; you gave it to everyone; there were lots of 
people who simply didn’t need it. As the one farmer said on a 
radio show, he had invested it in Principal Trust. And he said, 
Mr. Premier, well, the money is gone. Now you try and get it. He 
obviously didn’t need it. 
 
And what I’m saying to you is, I think that simply there’s 
something wrong with your program when you are subsidizing 
people who are not actively farming, who made most of their 
money from outside income. You are supporting those out of 
public funds, and yet we don’t have sufficient money to help 
those farmers who are in desperate need and will lose their farms 
because you say there isn’t sufficient money and you won’t 
address the problem of long-term debt. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to the universal 
program, we’ve had universal programs in the province for a long 
time. The cash advance system at the elevator is for every farmer 
regardless of their income. They’ve been able to go to the 
elevator . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . They get zero interest, so 
that protection goes . . . zero interest that can last for months goes 
to the wealthy, goes to the wealthy farmers, it goes to those that 
have little income, it goes to all of them. And he’s saying now 
that he’s against this universal program. He’s against the cash 
advance at the wheat board . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’m not saying that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well all right, then tell me . . . That’s a 
universal program for people of all incomes; they can go get a 
subsidy on their interest rates, that’s what they can get. 
 
The production loan program is for all those that want to apply. I 
didn’t force them to apply, and they get a subsidy on their interest 
rates, that’s all it is. At the elevator you get the same thing. The 
cash advance for farmers is the same thing. 
 
You have not done your homework or you’d be against 
universality in health care and in education and in cash advances 
and the elevator system and the wheat board. The member from 
Quill Lakes — and I have been into this many times — those 
universal programs are well appreciated. That’s why we’ve 
designed them that way. 
 
Well, if the problem is because of the cash advances that are 
universal at the wheat board level, then I think the NDP better 
stand up and say they don’t think that all farmers should get cash 
advance. Production loan is just a cash advances. You have got 
to pay it back at 6 per cent — at 6 per cent. And all we said is 
that you apply; if you’d like to have it, we’ll help you. And it’s 
for everybody. 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

939 
 

(2115) 
 
I have been through this argument many times with the NDP. 
They like universal programs when they’re in power, but they 
don’t like universal programs when they’re not. I would say the 
production loan program, like the cash advance for the livestock, 
like the cash advance for the elevators, when you go into your 
elevator, that’s for everybody. Those that don’t need it usually 
don’t apply. Some will take that money out for months, and they 
have for the elevator company and the wheat board. They’ve 
stuck it in the bank for 6 months. When they haul their grain back 
in, they can then pay it back and they’ve made that money. It’s 
been going on for years. Do you know why? Because nobody 
figured they were smart enough to pick between that farmer and 
that one and that one and draw the line around the community 
and say these people can do this, but these people can’t. 
 
Now, you know that. You know that. You’ve picked . . . You tell 
me and you pick the farmers that are not entitled to participate in 
a cash advance mechanism. You tell me how you’d pick that, and 
I’d be glad to sit down and talk with you how we’d design that 
this farmer couldn’t, this area couldn’t, this farmer can’t have 
cash advance and that one can. That gets pretty difficult, and I’m 
sure that you would acknowledge that. 
 
So when you’re picking the farmers, you want to make sure that 
you’re fair. And what we’ve done is we’ve said, look, cash 
advance works at the elevator system, it works for the livestock 
industry and they like it. It worked for production loan. It works 
in education and it works in health care. Let’s stay with 
universality because it’s the fairest way to do it. Those that don’t 
need it won’t apply. Most of them, those that do, can. And the 
money, most of the money goes to the people in need. So the 
principle is well received in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier, I want to ask you a 
personal question. Do you believe that it is fair for the loan 
production program to . . . production loan program . . . that it 
should give the Premier of this province subsidized loans? Now 
this is nothing new because you admitted that you had taken out 
the nine and three-quarters publicly, so everybody knows that 
you took out a loan, and I think that you’d admitted that. Do you 
think that it is fair for someone that is not an active farmer, like 
yourself, who . . . I assume you consider yourself a full-time 
Premier of this province and a full-time Agriculture minister, and 
therefore you will have no time to do active farming. Do you 
think that that is fair for the people out there to subsidize you — 
with an outside income, I would assume, of 75 or $80,000 or 
more — that they should subsidize an individual like yourself 
when there are farmers out there who are going to be losing their 
farm because you say you can’t help them now, this spring, 
because you don’t have any money? 
 
That’s my problem that I have with your program. I don’t think 
that I should have qualified for that production loan program. I 
don’t think I needed it, and I don’t think, Mr. Premier, that you 
are in such financial straits that you would have need it. And that 
money . . . And I don’t

know how many others there were. I’m sure there were thousands 
of others in this province, like you, like myself. I didn’t qualify 
because a few years ago I gave up my permit book, but if I would 
have had my permit book, I would have qualified, no questions 
asked. That’s fine if you have unlimited moneys, but when you 
have limited funds and you say to the farmer that’s going out of 
business, I can’t help you because I don’t have any more money, 
and yet are quite prepared to help those who don’t need the 
money, who have another source of income and who work 
full-time at another job, do you think that that is being fair to 
those farmers who are now in financial straits? I don’t think it is. 
That’s why I have an objection to your program, and I’d like to 
you to comment on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ll be glad to 
comment on it because the hon. member has now made the 
argument, and he continues to and his colleagues do, that you 
cannot have a universal program for somebody that makes over 
60,000 or 80,000 or 100,000 or $200,000 . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, that’s what you just said. You said if 
somebody is making income in excess of whatever the number, 
50,000 or 100,000, you can’t have a universal program because 
if you do you’re taking money away from those who are lower 
income and you should be using it. Now if that principle applies 
to farmers, it applies to health care. 
 
Now you used to be the minister of Health. You’re telling me 
now that we can’t subsidize, have a universal health care 
program. If somebody downtown, somebody sitting in the 
gallery, is making $100,000, therefore they should pay for health 
so we have more money for the people who don’t have that 
income. Is that what you’re saying? Well it’s the same principle. 
You have made the point that anybody that has income can’t have 
universal programs because you use all that money for the 
wealthy and you don’t have the money for the poor. Now you’ve 
said that. 
 
You said that principle apples in agriculture. You’d say, does it 
apply to education? Should those that have higher and higher 
incomes pay more for education in the public education system? 
Is that what you’re saying? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Extra tuition. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Extra tuition for people who are above 
50,000 or 60,000 or 70,000. You obviously haven’t thought 
through this, have you? 
 
An Hon. Member: — But you have no logic to . . . (inaudible) 
. . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The logic is perfectly clear; either you’re 
for universal program or you’re against it. Okay? Now you are 
obviously in your heart of hearts against universality because you 
said in agriculture, if you make over 60,000, you shouldn’t be 
able to apply for the cash advance at the wheat board or 
production loan program. 
 
Now that’s a universal program. So you would start to pick 
farmers and pick people in health or in education and say, rule 
them out, rule them out, they can’t have any money. So they 
come back and say, all right you want to have no universal 
program; fair enough. I have, as any 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

940 
 

other farmer that farms, a permit book and I farm the land. And 
you’re saying that somebody that does that, or has off-farm 
income because their wife worked, or they work in a coal mine, 
or they work in an oil patch, or they have work after work, they 
do extra trucking, that they could no longer qualify because they 
have a permit book. 
 
Well I will say to the hon. member, he does not think it’s fair that 
universal programs are fair. He doesn’t say. And he says this isn’t 
a good way to help the low income farmers. I will again remind 
the individual, the universal programs in this province are a lot 
fairer — okay? — are a lot fairer than the Leader of the NDP and 
his little law firm foreclosing on farmers no matter what their 
income. That’s not decent. It’s not fair. And people in this 
province should know that. It’s not fair. You want to talk about 
fairness; you’re against universality, and then you come back in 
and say the NDP law firm from the Leader of the NDP can come 
out there and foreclose on people, but that’s perfectly fair. 
 
Well I mean I don’t know how many times that . . . We provide 
universal programs in agriculture and health care and education 
and we’re going to continue to do that. That’s a policy because 
we believe in it. Secondly, we don’t think that people are too 
proud of the new NDP leader and his law firm foreclosing on 
farmers to make a living. And the whole public should be aware 
of that. And if you think that’s the answer, you talk to people he 
has foreclosed on, and they’re a little bit upset to say the least. 
And they’re not just farmers, it’s home owners as well. 
 
So when you’re talking about redoing programs, if that’s the man 
that’s going to be premier, a lot of folks in this province are going 
to be awfully worried about how they’re going to treat their 
homes, how he’s going to be treating their farms, how he’s going 
to treating their businesses, because they’ll remember, at 20 per 
cent interest rates there wasn’t a dime. They’ll also remember 
that when he didn’t have a living in the legislature, he was out 
there making a living on them. That isn’t fair. It isn’t principled. 
And a lot of people in this province are going to . . . in fact, 
people across the county know it. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, me thinks the man protests too 
much. You know all afternoon, how many times has he referred 
to our leader? He is really worried about our leader because he 
knows he’s popular out there, he knows what the polls are saying, 
and he just can’t get him off his mind because he knows that by 
1990 or 1991 our leader will be sitting there, and you will be out. 
That’s why you’re so concerned — that’s why you’re so 
concerned, that’s why you’re so concerned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — You couldn’t care about the other problem; 
you’re concerned about your own skin over there. That’s what 
you’re concerned about. And, Mr. Premier, you have been too 
untruthful, half truths too much, too long, and people just won’t 
believe you. Just like last year when you . . . Ten days before the 
budget came in, you made a nice little speech in Saskatoon saying 
that the deficit would be over $1 billion. Ten days later, when 
you knew the budget had already been

finished, everything was finished, the Minister of Finance comes 
in here and says the deficit will be $577 million. You said over a 
billion dollars 10 days before — 10 days before. I’ll say to the 
Premier, it’s time that you were honest with the people of this 
province. 
 
And when you say that you are for universal program, why didn’t 
you apply that to the senior citizens? If you were so sure of your 
universal program, why, when you give the heritage grant, do 
you give a means test to senior citizens? 
 
When I was in Eastview the other day doing a little bit 
campaigning, a lady said, no way would she vote for you, for the 
simple reason that you had put her on a means test. And she 
regrets the fact that here you are at the public trough making 65 
or $70,000 as the Premier of this province, and yet you are quite 
willing to ask her to subsidize you in the production loan 
program. Mr. Premier, I’m saying to you: if you don’t have the 
money for the senior citizens, why then do you expect the senior 
citizens to subsidize you when you’re already making 75 and 
$80,000 on money not related to agriculture? 
 
Mr. Premier, as I indicated at the outset, you know, you are a 
farmer because you have a permit book, but you’re not an active 
farmer. You can’t grow wheat on Albert Street. And the little 
time that you have to go out on the farm there doesn’t make you 
an active farmer. And if it means, Mr. Chairman, that the Premier 
has a permit book so that he can be subsidized by senior citizens, 
there are going to be a lot of senior citizens out there who are 
going to be dissatisfied with that kind of a program. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Premier, if you don’t have money for those 
young farmers who are going out of business this spring because 
they haven’t got the operating funds, and you think that they 
should subsidize you, you’re badly mistaken. That’s one thing 
that they won’t forget. 
 
I ask you again, Mr. Premier: when are you going to come to 
grips with the long-term debt of this province that is facing the 
farmers and restructure it and help those farmers? But I know, 
Mr. Premier, you’re not going to address that problem. You 
haven’t all afternoon. All you want to do is try and make some 
partisan politics here, and it’s just impossible to ask you any 
more. I hope you don’t even answer, because it won’t relate to 
the problem. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, I want to ask you a couple of 
questions related to the Saskatchewan Council for International 
Co-operation, which refers also to — and if I go back to the 
budget statement here — refers to item 20 from the Agriculture 
ordinary expenditures. 
 
Now in these expenditures here you budget . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. I’d ask members to please 
refrain from chirping across the floor. It’s difficult to hear the 
member from Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In your matching 
grants for international aid you’ve allotted $850,000. Now when 
we look at this, this money as being spent by non-governmental 
organizations on 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

941 
 

behalf of the government. I understand most of it’s spent . . . I 
believe all of it is spent in terms of matching grants. When we 
look at what we do for the world here in Saskatchewan — and 
Saskatchewan, when you look at the entire global scene, is in a 
relatively good position economically, relative to many other 
places in the world . . . And we help out in many ways. We help 
the rest of the world as a trading partner. We help many with our 
trade in many parts of Europe, Germany, Great Britain, France, 
and Japan and the U.S.A. 
 
Of course all of that is working fine for us. But there is a certain 
part of the world that needs help considerably, and I think we 
should be putting some effort into that. I’m talking specifically 
about the Third World . Now the kind of help that we can do best 
to the Third World, I think, is the kind that is being done by the 
non-governmental organizations through something like 
matching grants for international aid. 
 
Now these folks that do this volunteer work — and I’m saying 
it’s the best work because if you go abroad and people ask you 
where you come from and they ask you whether you’re an 
American or whether you’re Canadian and you tell them you’re 
a Canadian, they will quickly, in Europe at least or in Africa 
where I’ve been, they’ll quickly smile at you and say, well I’m 
glad to meet you, and I’ve heard a lot about Canada. And a lot of 
the stuff that they’ve heard about Canada has come through these 
non-governmental organizations, particularly people in the Third 
World — non-governmental organizations. 
 
Now the people that sponsor, that do this volunteer work for us, 
have found that they’ve had their budgets cut over the last two 
years — increased slightly this year. I acknowledge that. They’re 
wondering what your plans are for the following years, whether 
there’s a reason that you’re cutting them back from what they 
used to get from the provincial government; whether you feel that 
our missionary purpose should no longer be what it was in the 
past, and whether they can expect the grants to be restored in the 
future years, Mr. Premier. 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — We will continue to fund SCIC 
(Saskatchewan Council for International Co-operation) and the 
matching grant program, so that in fact we can lever the dollars 
as far as possible. 
 
One of the things that we can do as well is to make sure that the 
receiving countries, and I understand that’s the case now, are 
correspondingly raising the prices for the farmers in those 
countries to encourage food, and in many of them we found that 
that was not the case, and in fact there was a discouragement. 
 
So we find in Ethiopia, I believe, as an example, that they are 
now paying farmers more to encourage that incentive package. 
And so we will be glad to continue to support SCIC, to make sure 
that good agricultural projects and food projects are in the mill. 
We want to avoid the money going into any kind of political 
organization. You know, I mean, you’re sending money into 
Ethiopia as you know with a very radical government — 
extremely radical — that will spend tens of millions of dollars 
celebrating its

anniversary while people are starving. 
 
We still send money there, but we’re asking the government and 
putting some rules on it to say please start raising the prices to 
farmers to be fair to them. And even though they have their 
Marxist philosophy, we’ve overlooked that, to a large extent, so 
we’ll help people because they need help. 
 
I would also add that, with respect to helping developing 
countries, if we would reduce the tariffs between countries so that 
people in developing countries can sell their produce to the 
developed countries and make money, then they’ll have more 
income and they’ll do better. The best thing that we could do for 
a developing country is trade with them to provide access to real 
dollars that they can use because they can grow various kinds of 
products or other things, and provide goods and services to us 
and we can help pay well for them. 
 
So as I mentioned to the 1,100 students that were here in the 
mock model U.N. the other night, I said that we should have 
nuclear peace and we should have trade peace, because the 
number one thing that we could do to improve the prosperity of 
developing countries is trade with them, without hassle, without 
tariff, and without subsidy. And that would be good for a lot of 
their families, a lot of their people, and frankly, would lead to 
them feeding themselves, as opposed to us applying sanctions 
and not trading with them and the tariffs and the kinds of things 
that have got us into the trouble over decades and decades in the 
past. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Premier, I think you’ll understand that 
the reason that we can’t trade with many of the African countries 
is not because we put up trade barriers against them but simply 
because they can’t afford to buy it . . . buy our goods. 
 
Now the question that people from the SCIC would like to know 
is whether or not that $50,000 that was added to last year’s 
budget, whether that’s allocated specifically for a matching 
emergency fund as one of their recommendations, or whether 
that’s just an increase in the funding to be added to the matching 
grant program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — It’s to follow their recommendation, and 
we agreed with them that it was a very good recommendation, 
that in case of emergencies, if we’ve got funds sitting there 
available, they can just go right into wherever there has been an 
earthquake or whatever it is, you could do a lot good, rather than 
applying for money or going though forms. The money is there. 
It can be allocated very quickly, and within hours you could have 
money, blankets, food or other expenditures, airplanes, to deal 
with emergencies . We thought it was a good idea, and we 
provided the accommodation. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you for that clarification. My last 
question was with respect to the placement of the matching grants 
for international aid which has been with the Department of 
Agriculture for some times. Is there any consideration on your 
part to moving it from the Department of Agriculture to some 
other department, say, the department of intergovernmental 
affairs? Reason being is that it’s a pretty small, little thing, and 
it’s an item 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

942 
 

that gets sort of buried in the Agriculture department because 
Agriculture permeates the entire province mostly nowadays with 
other problems. The people in the organizations feel that they 
might get a slightly more equal or perhaps a greater focus and a 
greater emphasis if they were put into another department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I listened to their request and I said I 
would consider it, but I am not convinced yet that it isn’t a food 
agricultural aid program that doesn’t belong in Agriculture. 
 
When you move it into intergovernmental affairs, it competes 
with language issues, constitutional issues, jurisdictional issues 
internationally, and you get into all kinds of wrangling. And if 
you wanted it buried. I mean that would be the place, frankly, to 
put it because you’d run into all kinds of the first ministers stuff 
in the international things . 
 
In Agriculture it has a priority, and it’s there and we deal with it, 
and because it deals with food and agriculture as it should, I 
think, you know, it fits with the other programs we’ve had, and 
in some case we’ve provided 25,000 metric tonnes of aid to 
Ethiopia and we’re glad to do it in programs here with the 
farmers. So you put it into intergovernmental affairs, it will be 
with an awful lot of other things, and I’m not so sure that it would 
get the attention that it does right in Agriculture. I’ve said I would 
consider it, I will continue to, but so far I’m not convinced that 
isn’t in the right place. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
would like to ask you one more question regarding ACS and 
FCC. You said that you have a chart in your equity financing 
program booklet that gives the number of foreclosure actions 
started from 1981 to 1987. Could you give to me a breakdown of 
those foreclosures between ACS and FCC for those years? If you 
don’t have it right now, that’s fine but I could have it tomorrow 
morning. Is that possible? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — No, it’s not possible. You can get from 
Credit Union Central, if they want to give it to you, what 
foreclosures they’ve had; you can get from the Farm Credit 
Corporation their foreclosures. These are notices of foreclosures 
that include all institutions, and we’ve put them together, because 
once you get into the very specific kinds of information on bank 
and credit union by credit union, then you get into farm by farm, 
and I think you can look at the averages and get the same amount 
of information that you may need. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, on page 7 of the Farm Finance 
for the Future report by your M.L.A. committee, table 2 says: 
“Notices of farm land foreclosures in Saskatchewan,” and it goes 
from 1981-82 at 196, to 1987 at 976. Now, Mr. Minister, surely 
you know how many foreclosure actions ACS has initiated. And 
surely you know how many foreclosure actions Farm Credit 
Corporation has initiated. Could you give me, Mr. Minister, 
could you give me those two numbers, one for ACS and one for 
FCC (Farm Credit Corporation). 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, we have asked 

consultants to provide us with an overview of the industry so that 
they can pull it together. I can say that I can’t speak for the FCC, 
and I’m not going to give information from the FCC. You can 
write the federal government and ask for it. 
 
With respect to other financial institutions, you’ll get it from 
them, not from here. So they are lumped together to protect the 
confidentiality of the institutions, and I think that’s only fair. So 
you’re certainly entitled to write the banks, the Credit Union 
Central, the FCC and others to ask and see if they will give it. I 
suspect what they will do is give you the industry picture, as we 
have. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m not going to settle for 
that. I want to know how many foreclosure actions — let’s start 
slowly for you, for your sake — how many foreclosure actions 
has ACS started or initiated since 1981-82 up until the present 
time? Do you have that figure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well we have information for 1986-87, 
’87-88. For 1981 to date we can have it perhaps by tomorrow and 
share it with you. 
 
Loans outstanding as of ’87-88, we would have . . . number of 
notices filed — number of notices with respect to the farm 
foreclosures: 55 in 1987-88; and for 1986-87 the number of 
notices filed with the farm land and farm debt boards was 20. So 
55 in ’87-88, this is for the Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, capital loan programs — 55 notices filed in 
’87-88 and 20 for ’86-87. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — And you will supply the ’81 to ’86 figures per 
year tomorrow, okay. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, in your equity financing booklet you have 
the FCC numbers, so surely you have those numbers. It is as 
much responsibility upon you to know those numbers, and it’s 
incumbent upon you to let me and the people of this province 
know those numbers. So you’ve gathered the numbers in that 
booklet from FCC; why can’t you give them to us today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I’ve said to you, I can’t give federal 
numbers and I’m not going to give you. You can apply to the 
federal government and farm credit. You can write their head 
office for the number and they’ll perhaps give them to you; and 
the banks and the credit unions will do the same. They are not 
my responsibility and they may or may not want you to have that 
information. And then you may ask them in what areas, in what 
town, in what village, and what farmers; let them decide whether 
they want to give you that. 
 
You’ve got here the total so that you know what the trends are. 
We’ve provided you some information with respect to the 
agriculture credit capital loan notices. I recommend that you 
write the institutions and the Farm Credit Corporation and get 
that information from them directly as opposed to from this 
office. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — So FCC foreclosure actions are not your 
responsibility to monitor in this province. Is that what you’re 
saying? I find that hard to believe. 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

943 
 

Mr. Minister, I want to change, now, the topic for a moment. You 
have, throughout this day, told us that you consult with farmers 
and farm organizations to make sure that your new and fantastic 
ideas are just A1, so that they all support farmers and keep them 
on the land and make sure that there’s no hardships put upon 
them. I want to turn for a minute to the situation with regards to 
the community pastures. 
 
Community pastures, as you well know, had a policy change 
effective November 1, 1987. Mr. Minister, I’m sure that you must 
have had some consultation with some people before you 
changed that policy. Could you just enlighten me as to who you 
consulted and what basis that . . . what was the reason for 
changing the policy and what groups that you consulted with? 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we have traditionally 
provided about 70 per cent of the bulls in the community pasture 
— at least up until the last few years — and about 30 per cent 
have been private. Farmers and ranchers came to us and said: 
could we put more of our own breeding stock in? Could you have 
a little more flexibility? So we talked to them across the province 
and we said, well sure, we can have flexibility. If you want to go 
as high as 50-50, we could have that as a policy — that we can 
go to 50-50. So we advised them that that was the case. 
 
For the small operator, some of them were concerned and said, 
well, what if I don’t want to do this and I’ve only got 20 cows or 
25 and I don’t want to buy a bull, will you continue to provide 
the breeding stock? We said we would so that the small operators 
can still have the government breeding service that is there. We’ll 
go to any combination that the farmer and ranchers want. 
 
In some community pastures in some areas they’ve got a very 
aggressive bunch of farmers and ranchers where they’ve got — 
they went out and bought very expensive breeding stock and 
they’re doing this to upgrade their herds. In others you’ve got 
various combinations of mixed farms and smaller operations, and 
they want just, you know, the normal government bull and we’ve 
provided those. So it’s complete flexibility, as I say, that we’ll 
provide the bulls, rest assured, if you want it that way. But if you 
want to move in with your own breeding program because of 
particular crosses and hybrids or your various other breeding 
programs, by all means we’d be glad to accommodate you. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena was at a meeting that a number of 
community pasture patrons organized to come into Regina to talk 
to me because they were frustrated — they couldn’t get any 
answers out of the government. At that meeting the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena said no, we didn’t consult with the patrons 
of the community pastures. And you say that you consulted with 
the people in the programs in the pastures. Could you clarify that 
little discrepancy for me? Did you consult or did you not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, I mean, I don’t take you at 

your word, on you describing what goes on at a public meeting. 
I would say that farmers and ranchers advised us that they wanted 
more flexibility to use their breeding stock, and we said, by all 
means. We’re at 70-30; if you want to go to 50-50 we’ll go for it. 
And others said, no I don’t want to go that far, and we said fine. 
So some of them now have gone to 50-50, some are 70-30, some 
are 80-20 — doesn’t matter to me. 
 
We’ll provide the breeding stock if they like. We’ll provide the 
flexibility for them to use community pastures and their own 
livestock if they like. It’s completely up to them. I mean, if you 
want to gather some of your friends and say that you don’t like 
the production loan program or you don’t like the breeding 
program or you don’t like this or that, I’m sure that you can stand 
there and make up stories about our agriculture. And you will, 
you know, continue to do that if you like. But of course we talked 
to farmers, and we would be glad to be as flexible as possible to 
provide them with the breeding program that they would like to 
have. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, that’s not the truth. And you 
can talk to any one of those 25 or so people who were at that 
meeting, and they will tell you the same thing. You don’t have to 
believe me, but I hope you believe them. And now, Mr. Minister, 
I say to you that despite your rhetoric about consultation, you do 
not consult with those people involved. 
 
There is 53 pastures around this province, and I have had contact 
. . . people in those pastures contact me and say, look, this is not 
a good change. You’re eliminating the bull program over a period 
of three or four years, and then you turn around and say that . . . 
You backed off; you say, well we’ll provide bulls if you need 
them. But, Mr. Minister, where in your policy have you indicated 
that? Have you changed your policy since November 1, ’87? All 
that we have is your rhetoric. 
 
And you know, once that the farmers get up in arms because you 
don’t talk to them, and they come in to Regina, and they write 
letters — and I’ll give you an example of one right here. This is 
from the Nokomis provincial community pasture, and I’ll just 
read it; it is very short. It says: 
 

We, the undersigned, have participated in a general meeting 
of the Nokomis provincial community pasture and have 
participated in the unanimous passing of the following 
motion: 
 
Whereas the compensation program has been a source of a 
profit for the government in recent years, and whereas the 
breeding program has improved quality of cattle in the 
livestock industry in Saskatchewan at no significant cost to 
the government, we, the patrons of Nokomis provincial 
community pasture, are strongly opposed to the changes in 
the associated policies for the 1988 grazing season. 

 
Firmly opposed. signed by the patrons of that pasture, Mr. 
Minister. Another letter from Pleasantdale community pasture, 
signed by the advisory board. 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

944 
 

And I have a list of many, many pastures here who have 
complained to me and said, look, what can we do about this. You 
came in, in the fall of 1987 with a new policy, the policy that the 
majority, the large majority of patrons of those pastures knew 
nothing about — and they will tell you that, you don’t have to 
believe me — and you stand up in your place in this legislature 
and you say that the people in the community pastures wanted 
that change. Now, Mr. Minister, that is complete garbage, and 
that is why they don’t trust you any more. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have said that you were going to supply bulls 
— correct me if I’m wrong — to any patrons of those pastures 
who requested them. That is a change from your policy. Mr. 
Minister, my question is this: are you going to change your policy 
to reflect that change of attitude that you have had? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, our attitude is to provide 
bulls where they want government bulls and to provide private 
bulls where they want private bulls. Now if he doesn’t believe 
the people he talks to, let’s just count the bulls. Okay? Last year 
we bought 275 bulls. Last year government bought 275 bulls; this 
year we bought 92 bulls. What does that tell you? It tells you 
almost 200 bulls were purchased by farmers and ranchers 
because they wanted their own breeding stock. 
 
So just count the cows if you don’t believe the people. I’ll tell 
you, we bought 275 bulls last year, 92 bulls this year, which tells 
me that farmers — somebody would like to have their own bulls 
to the tune of about 200 bulls that they bought themselves. They 
wanted the flexibility. 
 
So I said, we’ll supply the bulls that you like, we’ll provide the 
private sector if you like. Obviously an awful lot of farmers and 
ranchers figured it was a good idea because they’ve gone for it. 
They like it. And what that says to me is that when we talked to 
farmers, they said, I’d like to have my own bull in the community 
pasture; we said, fine with us. They’re doing it. 
 
Look at the number — look at the number. We bought 275 last 
year and only had to buy 92 this year. Somebody picked up the 
slack. Some private bulls are there because certainly the cow 
numbers are up. So obviously the private sector has picked it up 
and they’re glad to get better breeding stock. They’ve done that, 
and where needed we bought bulls. It’s exactly what we’ve been 
trying to do, Mr. Chairman, is provide the flexibility to the 
community pastures so that in fact they can feel satisfied that they 
can have the best program any place in Saskatchewan or any 
place across Canada. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, during 
your estimates today, I think any that will have been watching 
will have been deeply disappointed — tremendously 
disappointed in your performance, your hedging, your attitude of 
slandering people, and half-truths instead of dealing with the 
major problem that is confronting this province. 
 
Mr. Premier, you sent out a group of your MLAs and a road 
show, and their evidence indicates here, and I want to read it: 

That the Farm Credit Corporation estimates that 11 per cent 
of Saskatchewan farmers are insolvent, while an additional 
28 per cent are having considerable cash flow difficulty. 

 
We tried to raise that, Mr. Premier, as a serious crisis that is 
facing this province and you have refused, absolutely, to address 
it. And I say to you, Mr. Premier, you do a disservice to your 
office and as Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Do you realize, Mr. Premier, that last year, in 1987, that the 
number of notices of land foreclosures increased to 976 — 976 it 
increased to. And do you know why, Mr. Premier? Because the 
federal financing corporation for farmers, the Farm Credit 
Corporation, what they did was to lift the moratorium on 
foreclosure, and it rose from 358 in ’86 to 976. That’s what 
happened. 
 
And, Mr. Premier, you didn’t even have the decency to stand on 
behalf of the farmers of Saskatchewan to make representations to 
the federal government in this very difficult time, to continue the 
moratorium of foreclosure, and you allowed it to go forward, and 
as a result it increased from 358 to 976. And you stand here and 
you say, I am a friend of the farmer. Well a few farmers are 
having great difficulty in concurring with that. 
 
In this report also, Mr. Premier, in your own member’s report, it 
indicates that one-third of the farmers currently holding 
three-quarters of the debt may not have the resources to continue 
farming. That is the magnitude of the crisis that is before us here 
today, and you won’t even indicate to us in seriousness whether 
you’re prepared to sit down with the federal government, through 
the Farm Credit Corporation, and participate in a method of 
restructuring the debt so that farm families can remain farming, 
because this industry will turn around; this industry will turn 
around. But I’ll tell you, unless we take action today, we’re going 
to lose many of our young farmers. 
 
You know, the Premier stands here and he says, well, what we 
have to do is deal with the international problem. And you know 
what is happening today? The United States, which he is saying 
that we have to enter into a trade arrangement, is breaching that 
very spirit of the free trade, the Mulroney-Reagan trade deal, 
because they have gone on many occasions into our markets, 
highly subsidized sales to India and other places in the country. 
And this Premier doesn’t even have the decency to stand up to 
the United States or make representation to his friend Brian to 
come to the aid of the Saskatchewan farmers. As long as there is 
no agreement — and I know we have to work towards an 
agreement because massive subsidization by countries will put 
us into problems. But I’ll say, Mr. Chairman, that as long as 
United States is subsidizing, and as long as the European 
common market is subsidizing, I say that we have to come to the 
rescue of farmers in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — We have no other choice, other than what I 
anticipate is going to be the . . . We have two choices; we have 
two choices. We can as a country indicate our support to the 
agricultural community. We can do that. 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

945 
 

We can restructure the debt during this difficult period. And we 
can continue to subsidize or we can do what the trend is 
developing by the Tory government in Ottawa and the Tory 
government here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And obviously the outcome of the policies of 
these two governments is to see that the erosion of some 33 per 
cent of our young farmers are in danger of losing their livelihood. 
 
So I say to you, Mr. Premier, it was a disappointing day for the 
people of Saskatchewan, both rural and urban that have watched 
you. This is one of the weakest, one of the most disgusting 
displays of seriousness in addressing an issue of the magnitude 
that we have before us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And I say, Mr. Premier, you’re going to be 
before this legislature for some considerable time unless you 
change your attitude. It is your duty and your obligation to come 
into this legislature and to deal with the crisis that is before us in 
a civilized and an intelligent and in a positive manner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And the best that you could do is sling half-truths 
and to run at the Leader of the Opposition. Your concern is not 
the condition of the farming economy. Your concern is what the 
member from Riversdale is going to do to your political future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 
 
(2200) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That’s what we heard today in this legislature, a 
frightened Premier whose support is eroding across this province 
unequalled. I’ll tell you he came in with a bang, but you wait till 
the bang you hear when the people of Saskatchewan and rural 
Saskatchewan turns against this Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And in closing, my final remarks. There’s going 
to be a couple of by-elections which you failed to call for many, 
many, many, months after his member resigned. And I say to you 
here tonight, wait and see when the people of Eastview and 
Elphinstone speak come next Wednesday. It will indicate how 
popular and how trusted this Premier is. Here is the Premier who 
promised to maintain the health care of this province. You know 
what he did when he got elected — he reversed it and he 
destroyed a program that was needed in rural Saskatchewan. 
What a shame. 
 
And when he said . . . as I said before, the major problem with 
this Premier is that he has only one friend, and it happens to be 
the big corporate outside of Saskatchewan friends, and that’s who 
he’s catering to. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I have a considerable amount to say, and I 

say to this Premier that he’s going to be here until he answers 
some questions and comes forward with a proposal to protect our 
young farmer in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — It being 10 o’clock, Mr. Speaker, I would move 
that the committee now rise and report progress and ask for leave 
to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:04 p.m. 


