


















































March 28, 1988 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 March 28, 1988 
 

155 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Neudorf and the amendment 
thereto moved by Ms. Simard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join in the 
debate and, as well, congratulate the member from Rosthern and 
the member from Moosomin for an excellent job of moving and 
seconding the address in reply to the Speech from the Throne. 
 
I thought tonight, Mr. Speaker, I would cover three areas 
particularly as it relates to the Speech from the Throne delivered 
last Monday, March 21: talk about the kindergarten to grade 12 
system, Mr. Speaker, review the last year and look at the 
upcoming agenda; and spend a few moments on the 
post-secondary education side, the universities, colleges, etc.; and 
end up with a few remarks relative to my constituency, and 
particularly as it relates to the opening of the legislature this last 
week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On the kindergarten to grade 12 side, Mr. Speaker, because I am 
not an educator by profession I have used the last year as a 
learning experience, largely. And over the past year particularly, 
I’ve used one day a week — usually Mondays, Mr. Speaker — to 
go into the schools across this province. I know you and some 
other MLAs have had occasion to accompany me on some of 
these visits, and it has been a tremendously valuable experience to 
myself. 
 
The usual format for these visits has been to spend some time with 
the teachers in the staff room, then to spend some time with the 
students answering their questions, and then coffee or lunch, for 
example, with the members of the board. And over this last year, 
or year and a few months, we have now had an occasion using that 
format to meet something in the order of probably 900 to 1,000 
teachers. Very often their concerns relate around the core 
curriculum, and as well, of course, more recently the outstanding 
contract negotiations. 
 
In this same format I’ve had a chance now to meet something in 
the order of probably 10,000 young people, and then take their 
questions. I find them extremely enjoyable and their questions are 
always interesting. They range from what do I do, what about free 
trade, what do MLAs get paid, will I get into university, why did 
you spend $10,000 on the tree in the foyer of our new high school 
when what we need is new textbooks, my dog is sick — I even 
had that question once, Mr. Speaker — how does our educational 
system compare to other countries, and are we losing ground. 
Some very thoughtful questions, Mr. Speaker, from some of these 
young people. 

And as well, when I’ve met with the boards, and I think I’ve had a 
chance now to probably meet one out of seven, one of the six 
boards across the province, and I find these are very genuine and 
sincere individuals who have a very good understanding. I’ve 
learned a lot, Mr. Speaker, over the last year and I know there’s 
lots more to learn. 
 
But this evening, Mr. Speaker, what I would like to do is share 
with you and other members of the legislature some of my 
observations over this past year, some of my observations seen 
and felt. They may not be the reality, Mr. Speaker, nothing is ever 
as it seems, but some observations and some perceptions. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, I wish all people in Saskatchewan could 
see what I have seen on these tours of Saskatchewan schools. I’ve 
seen fancy buildings, and I’ve seen some not-so-fancy buildings. 
I’ve seen new schools and I’ve seen old schools. I’ve seen the 
young people in the shops and industrials arts, and I’ve seen the 
children in their libraries with their books, and I’ve seen them in 
their resource centres, and in their class-rooms with their 
computers. I’ve seen children in the class-rooms, and I’ve seen 
children in the labs. I’ve seen native children in an alternate 
school; a slain deer ready to be dressed as part of their studies. 
And while all of this is important, Mr. Speaker, mostly I’ve seen 
happy children and enthusiastic children. 
 
Now I’m not pretending to have seen it all, or to know it all 
certainly. And I probably can’t appreciate fully, as the teachers on 
the front line can, the implications of changing family structures 
and child abuse and child hunger and over-zealous parents and so 
on, Mr. Speaker. But I can’t help remark at what tremendous 
opportunities these children of ours have in the schools today, 
what tremendous strides forward, Mr. Speaker, in our schools over 
the last decade or two. Certainly, what strides forward since I 
attended grade 1 some 35 years ago at Hepworth School in a small 
country school in rural Saskatchewan. Indeed if one sits back, Mr. 
Speaker, and surveys and thinks about what I have seen as 
Minister of Education, I and you and all members of this 
legislature have every reason to feel good and to be proud. 
 
Even on the funding issue, Mr. Speaker, those who came before 
me left a very solid foundation. Over the last half decade we have 
seen something in the order of a 60 per cent increase in per pupil 
funding for education and yet there are 4,000 fewer students in the 
system. So we have more money, less students, and even after 
inflation, Mr. Speaker, this is a very healthy increase. 
 
The public, too, Mr. Speaker, feel very good. I asked about 
education, asked if it is doing a good job, over 80 percent of the 
public will resoundingly say, yes, our school system is doing a 
good job. For the most part the public feel good about education. 
 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, and yet I detect some slight undercurrent in 
society, some sense that they aren’t totally confident in our school 
system. I detect some hesitancy; I detect some insecurity; I detect 
some reservations about what we are doing. There are some 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

156 
 

nagging doubts, Mr. Speaker, and there are some bothersome 
questions. It’s almost paradoxical. I see all these wonderful things 
in the schools across Saskatchewan, and yet there are the questions 
and the reservations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now maybe the questions aren’t really surprising when one thinks 
about it. I spent much of the last year talking about the new 
economy, the shift from the resource-based economy to the 
knowledge-based economy, the information era, the technological 
era, call it what you will, Mr. Speaker. And in this era I’ve talked 
about how education will be critically important to our children’s 
future. 
 
Now probably every minister of education who came before me 
has said education is important. Maybe they even said education is 
critically important. Society has always viewed education as 
important. But I say to you, Mr. Speaker, in the knowledge-based 
economy of the future, education will indeed be critically 
important. 
 
Now I know that you and I when we go to our constituencies on 
the weekend or during the evenings or on the time we are not 
sitting, and if you are to go on to coffee row or on to Main Street, 
you wouldn’t hear people talking about the knowledge economy 
or the information age. That’s not how they articulate this 
changing world that faces us. They don’t sit and talk about the 
implications of the technological era or the knowledge-based 
economy while they are sipping their coffee. What they talk about 
is, will my child get a job, will he get into university, how will he 
deal with the changing world, how will he deal with this rapidly 
changing world, how will he deal with these technological 
changes that faces him or her. 
 
But underneath, Mr. Speaker, they know that it is indeed education 
that will be the key to their children’s future opportunity, to their 
children’s future security, and to their children’s future prosperity. 
They are pinning their hopes on education, Mr. Speaker, and I 
would suggest to you that they have a phenomenal expectation, a 
phenomenal expectation of the education system. 
 
Because of this, Mr. Speaker, and it was indeed about a year ago 
when I spoke to the spring council of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation, I said then, Mr. Speaker, that we would see education 
under intense scrutiny, that education would go up on the Richter 
scale of public concern. 
 
But what has happened since I made that statement a year ago, Mr. 
Speaker, to the STF spring council? Well, look at some of what 
has happened over the last year. Has education gone up on the 
Richter scale of public concerns? Well, I would suggest to you, 
Mr. Speaker, that it has. And I would refer to you a study that was 
undertaken t his last year by Southam Inc., a very good study on 
illiteracy across Canada. And we’ve seen over this last year 
headlines that read . . . for example, there’s one from the 
Leader-Post of last November ’86, “Illiteracy rate in province said 
about 32 per cent,” Mr. Speaker. Another headline here from a 
September ’87 Star-Phoenix, “Americans score higher on literacy 
test.” And indeed, Mr. Speaker, the Leader-Post, recognizing 

the importance of this issue certainly to the print media, did a 
special report on the whole issue of literacy itself, which I think 
underscores the point I was making, Mr. Speaker, that here’s one 
dimension of education, the whole question of illiteracy in the 
adult population, as being a critically important one and the fact 
that we’re starting to see more and more about that. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, over the last year, we saw the Toronto Star, 
another eastern-based publication, do a report card on their 
schools. Not very often that we see that kind of thing being done 
in the media, but they did a report card on education in Ontario. 
 
Closer to home, Mr. Speaker, the University of Saskatchewan 
Alumni Association, in their publication called The Green and 
White — for those of you who graduated from the University of 
Saskatchewan, you probably received that — they published the 
results of a quiz that was given to first-, second-, third-, and 
fourth-year university students. And a headline in the 
Star-Phoenix, dated February of this year, the headline read: “U of 
S students fail pop quiz.” And some of the kinds of questions on 
this quiz, Mr. Speaker — this was a quiz given to first-, second-, 
third-, and fourth-year students — was, for example: who was the 
Leader of the Official Opposition, Ottawa; what is the name of the 
first book in the Bible; identify things like: SDI (strategic defence 
initiative), the Group of Seven, Meech Lake accord, and those 
kinds of things, Mr. Speaker. And it made a fair headline and a fair 
story because the reality is the students didn’t do nearly as well in 
this quiz as one might have expected. Interesting that the quiz was 
being done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As well, over the last year, we saw a book on education make the 
Time’s best-seller list, Mr. Speaker — Allan Bloom’s book, The 
Closing of the American Mind — made the Time best-seller list. 
Now I’m not saying that by raising this example, Mr. Speaker, that 
I subscribe to what he said in the book, but it’s been a long, long 
time, at least not in my recent memory, when a book on education 
actually made the Time best-seller list. And that’s doing something 
in this day and age when we see all the books on diets and 
exercises and all those kinds of things that make the best-seller list, 
Mr. Speaker. And also, Mr. Speaker, that led to a review even in 
some of our own papers here. “Book raises questions on value of 
today’s education,” was one of the headlines as a result of that. 
Another headline in recent days was, “Yen for educational 
excellence puts Japanese on top.” And even last week in the 
Leader-Post, March 25, we had a headline, “Canadian students lag 
behind in science.” And the article went on to say: 
 

Canadian high school students are among the world’s worst at 
mastering science, while its 14-year-olds are among the best, a 
new study indicates. 
 
An international education agency, tested high school students 
in 13 countries on their knowledge of advanced biology, 
chemistry, and physics and Canada (Mr. Speaker) ended up 
11th or 12th in every category. 

  



 
March 28, 1988 

157 
 

And this professor here suggested that we ought to have a national 
debate on Canada’s education system. Well I, myself, Mr. 
Speaker, have suggested a national education strategy, or at least a 
national agenda. 
 
(1915) 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, over the last year we’ve seen the whole 
issue of private schools here and in other provinces gain some 
exposure, partly, I suppose, because of the fact that over the last 10 
years enrolments, while still small, have doubled in this province. 
Enrolments in private schools have doubled. Now that sounds like 
a lot, but in reality we’ve gone from about one-half or 
three-quarters of 1 per cent of our 200,000 school children in 
private schools to 1.5 per cent. So it’s not a big number but it’s 
doubled, and perhaps there’s something there for us to take note 
of. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, just in this last month the CTV (Canadian 
Television Network) network did a survey of grade 12 students 
across the country — co-operating networks, including the one 
here in Regina, CKCK-TV, and they gave a quiz to some 500 or 
550 grade 12 students here in Regina. “Testing the Class of ’88,” I 
think it was entitled. And one of the questions that they asked in 
this test that they gave to the grade 12 students, Mr. Speaker, was, 
name two premiers and the provinces they represent. Another one 
of the questions was, they showed the students a map of the world 
and they said, shade in the area that represents Canada, draw in the 
map of Canada. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in the first instance, name two premiers and 
the provinces they represent, only one out of three students could 
do that correctly, Mr. Speaker. And in terms of drawing a map of 
Canada, only one out of two students could do that correctly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now those are fairly disturbing results, Mr. Speaker. But whether 
it’s the literacy study or The Green and White survey or the 
articles or the books or the private school studies or even the CTV 
quiz, Mr. Speaker, you can see, as I said earlier, that education is 
higher on the Richter scale, there are more and more people 
expressing an interest in it, including the media, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now one can legitimately ask, are any of these studies or books or 
quizzes or articles accurate or useful? And that’s up for debate, 
Mr. Speaker. But there is a larger question, and that question is: 
why all of a sudden are we seeing all these studies and books and 
quizzes and articles on our educational system? And all are asking, 
at least in the authors’ minds, whether our children have a solid 
grasp of the fundamentals. They’re asking about basic knowledge 
— the premiers and the provinces and the maps of Canada and 
who’s the leader of the official opposition and what does Meech 
Lake mean. They’re asking about the fundamentals, literacy, 
reading and writing, and numeracy, Mr. Speaker, arithmetic, 
history and geography and science — general knowledge, the 
fundamentals, how do our children stack up. That is the gist of all 
of this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And consider as well that these books and articles and quizzes are 
not the work of some ideological self-interest group out to prove a 
point or grind an axe. Some may be 

out to press a point, but most are not. So I ask you and other 
members, Mr. Speaker, then why all the public attention of 
education in the popular media? Why, when in the past, for the 
most part, the only thing you ever saw the media commenting on 
was the minutes of the local school board meeting? Why then all 
this attention? 
 
I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that they are reflecting some 
of the same concerns and nagging doubts and questions and 
observations that I spoke of earlier. I would suggest to you that in 
the public’s mind, when it comes to the fundamentals in 
education, there is uncertainty about our school system. Let me 
repeat that, Mr. Speaker. I would suggest to you that in the 
public’s mind, when it comes to the fundamentals in education, 
there is uncertainty about our school system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A further example of what I’m talking about, Mr. Speaker: there 
was a paper presented at the Canadian Education Association 
conference in Vancouver last summer. In this conference, in this 
paper, the presenter surveyed some trends and some questions that 
had been asked of society in general about education. And it was a 
retrospective survey, Mr. Speaker, and one of the questions went 
like this: when people in 1964 were asked — this is 1964, Mr. 
Speaker — parents were asked, people were asked, in 1964, do 
you think your children are getting as good as or a better education 
than you got when you were in school — this is 1964, Mr. 
Speaker — well 74 per cent of the population then said, and 
believed then, that their children were getting as good as or a 
better education than they got. That’s in 1964. 
 
In 1987 when that same question was asked, 1987: are your 
children getting as good as or a better education than you got; the 
percentage dropped down to 41, from 74 down to 41. And when 
they surveyed those who themselves had some education, maybe 
not unlike in this room, Mr. Speaker, the percentage dropped 
down even further to 29 per cent. Twenty-nine per cent believe 
that today those who have some education . . . At least 29 per cent 
believe that the children are receiving as good as or a better 
education than they got. 
 
Now those of us who know what is going on in education and who 
have seen what I have seen, would say, nonsense. Yet, Mr. 
Speaker, that is what the perception is. 
 
In the same survey, 88 per cent said, we are either going to have to 
make major or minor changes to the educational system if we are 
going to overcome the challenges that face Canada. Now these are 
Canadian numbers, Mr. Speaker, and we need to explore them 
further relative to Saskatchewan. We have done some work on 
this, some surveying, and I’ll have more to say on that later when 
we get those results in. But I doubt, Mr. Speaker, if the overall 
trends will be different. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said I’ve had some sense of some 
uncertainty, some nagging doubt, some reservation, some 
questions, and I’ve not been alone as I think all these surveys and 
quizzes and articles would point out. And it has very much to do 
with society’s view of how well our children are being schooled in 
what you and I might have called the fundamentals. 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

158 
 

But I also sense, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a general unease among 
parents with some of the teaching methods we have been using. 
Every time I talk to a group of parents, I emphasize the new issues 
we want to deal with, like creative thinking and critical thinking 
and independent thinking — the new basics, social and personal 
development. 
 
And what do they raise with me? Well, they raise that their kids 
can’t spell and that they can’t write grammatically correct. It 
almost seems as if some of the professional methodology that we 
have introduced, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is becoming between us 
and the parents. And on the issue of standards and exams, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I sense we are vulnerable here also. There is 
more desire to see some greater uniformity of standards than we 
have come to feel comfortable with. There is a desire for a high 
standard of academic attainment, and we must look at this issue, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker — and I’m not referring to some kind of 
survival of the fittest mentality — but we must look at this 
question of standards and assessments rationally and humanely 
and honestly. We must too look at the notion of some form of 
standardized provincial assessment process. 
 
As well, I sense that we may be perceived to be emphasizing 
process at the price of content. And there is a message here for 
colleges of education and the way they plan and allocate time in 
their curriculum for students. There is also an important message 
for educators and how we think about and talk about our goals for 
education. 
 
Well if I could summarize in one sentence what I think parents are 
trying to tell us here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is this: we must put 
behind us the notion that it doesn’t matter what we teach, it’s how 
we teach that counts. We must put that notion behind us, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, because the public clearly believes that it matters 
very much to them what we teach, it matters very much to them 
what we teach. And we must put behind us that notion that it 
doesn’t matter what you teach, it’s how we teach that counts. Well 
it does matter, and I would suggest to you that perhaps there is a 
feeling that we are neglecting an important part of what many 
view as our intellectual heritage. We must find and strike the right 
balance, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now I’ll be the first to admit that tours through schools, articles, 
quizzes, papers, what — you name it —that these signals are not 
conclusive, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I have to tell you that this is 
what the vast majority of parents are telling myself and, I believe, 
other elected representatives. 
 
What I am talking about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is not an 
ideological or political issue. Indeed some of the references I made 
were from other provinces right across this country. I know that 
some of these issues — departmental exams and assessment and 
standardized testing and some of those kinds of things, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — I know these are highly contentious issues, but 
we have to talk further about them. We must tackle the issues 
head-on. The public expects us to address these concerns, and if 
we do not, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will feed existing suspicions 
that the educational system is out 

of touch. 
 
Well I ask, Mr. Deputy Speaker, an examination of these issues. 
Do we fear the answers? I say I doubt it, but the public expect us 
to examine the issues. In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to 
contemplate or at least speculate on why the public have some of 
these questions and reservations and concerns I’ve talked about. 
At least, I’d speculate on one reason why, and I would speculate 
especially relative to that 70 per cent of the people in society who 
this very day do not have children in school, but who are 
taxpayers, and who are interested because they may have 
grandchildren or nieces or nephews or just because they 
themselves know the importance of education. 
 
I want to speculate, and I would offer up this scenario, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Consider someone watching this television debate 
tonight. Perhaps they don’t have children in school; maybe they’re 
not unlike my mother, who is somewhat close to being retired on 
the farm, a former teacher herself, obviously very interested in 
education. But if she listened to this debate and other debates in 
this legislature on education, or this afternoon in question period, 
she would have heard us talking about educational funding and 
universities, professors on strike. Through the estimates last spring 
she would have heard us talking about core curriculum, common 
essential learnings, EDF (the education development fund) 
aesthetic education, in-service; all those kinds of things, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
But I ask you, do you think the average person sitting there tonight 
watching this debate really understands what the system or the 
professionals are talking about when they talk about things like 
common essential learnings, or even core curriculum, or the 
education development fund? Does that really tell you anything? 
Or in-service — does the average person really know what that 
means? 
 
Well I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that the average person 
does not understand what we are talking about when we talk in 
those terms. If we talked about an excellence fund in education or 
a fund that put books and computers in hundreds of schools across 
this province, then it would mean something, perhaps. But to talk 
about common essential learnings when more likely people 
understand the situation better if you talk about reading, about oral 
communication, written communication skills, literacy — they 
understand that. But common essential learnings, I’m not so sure, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I would suggest to you and other members of this legislature 
that we in education over the years haven’t clearly and simply 
articulated what we are doing. And I say that, knowing full well 
that we have more open-house nights in our schools, more 
parent-teacher interviews than ever, more newsletters than ever. 
But I would suggest to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we haven’t 
clearly and simply articulated to the larger public what we are 
doing. 
 
And I would say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we must tell in 
every way possible our philosophy of education and what we are 
indeed doing. In the next year I see myself turning my head to that 
task particularly. We need to tell 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

159 
 

people, we need to tell people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that our 
society remains firmly attached to the traditional concept of a 
well-educated person — a strong command of language, both 
written and spoken; an understanding of the fundamentals of math 
and science; a sense of past striving and future hopes of our 
country in as many cultures; or the old basics, as some might have 
called it. 
 
And if our children, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are to master the new 
technologies, it is vital that they acquire a firm footing in the 
knowledge and the wisdom upon which these technologies are 
based. We must, too, equip our children with the new skills they 
will required in the 21st century, Mr. Speaker — a familiarity with 
computers, the ability to learn independently, a capacity for 
creative and critical thinking — the new basics, if you like, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And in all of this we must provide for students with special needs. 
Simply, clearly, our philosophy must be told. And in this context, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we have to reconsider whether some 
of the modern approaches have gone too far in stressing flexibility. 
Society values clarity in expression, Mr. Speaker. They value 
precision in grammar and spelling. And they feel we may have 
had insufficient emphasis here, I would suggest. We need to take a 
close look at what is going on in the teaching of language arts. 
 
(1930) 
 
Well the framework for all of this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
provided by Directions, that five- or six-year study that led to the 
blueprint called Directions. It was concerned with finding how 
best to deal with the new pressures, the new issues, and the new 
technologies that confront us. The legacy of that exercise is that 
we have a huge agenda of exciting and challenging new ideas to 
incorporate into public education. And I look to these ideas to 
invigorate the profession, the department, the officials involved, 
the trustees, for many years to come. 
 
Well perhaps the best way, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to take account 
of what I have said tonight relative to the kindergarten to grade 12 
system, perhaps the best way to take account of it is in the form of 
some caveats or backstops. I think what the public are asking for is 
a kind of guarantee or assurance, a guarantee that in the process of 
change we will respect community values and expectations — that 
we don’t throw out the baby as we change the bath water, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Well what will be some of the initiatives, issues, and questions that 
we will be dealing with in the year ahead? First and foremost is 
the implementation of core curriculum. Certainly we must address 
the extent to which the new curriculum will define measurable 
standards of attainment. And it must be made clear that in the area 
of basic academic skills we are aiming for a higher standard. We 
all appreciate also that a major in-service training program will be 
needed, and work is going on within the department to develop 
mechanisms for achieving this lifelong learning for the teachers 
themselves, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The knowledge and skills obtained by young people 

through the core curriculum are those needed by all students 
regardless of their future goals. The core curriculum will serve 
well that nearly 60 per cent of our grade 12 graduates who go on 
to post-secondary education, and as well will serve those students 
in the same way who enter the work-force directly after high 
school. 
 
At the same time as we develop core we must also strengthen 
support and programming for students with special needs, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. This is something I feel strongly about, and a 
working group has been set up between the departments of 
Education, Health, and Social Services to look for better ways to 
deal with the problems of handicapped children, child abuse and 
neglect, and other social problems. 
 
As you know, a ministerial advisory committee on monitoring and 
evaluation has been set up to look into student assessment and 
other issues. As I have said, this is clearly an area in which we 
have to come to terms with public expectations for both higher 
standards and greater uniformity of assessments. 
 
In northern Saskatchewan I will be setting up a . . . Sorry, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. In northern Saskatchewan I have set up a task 
force to look at a range of issues, including the high drop-out rates. 
I would like to see some innovative new approaches to delivery of 
education in the North. 
 
M. le président de la chambre, comme vous le savez, notre 
province a signé et ratifié l’accord du Lac Meech et nous en 
sommes fiers. Ce gouvernement n’a pas hésité à se compromettre 
pour assurer un Canada uni tout en respectant la... accueilli le 
Québec au sein de la Confédération canadienne a aussi assuré la 
préservation de la langue et de la culture des minorités officielles. 
 
Selon l’esprit de cette entente que nous avons endossée de bon 
coeur, la province se propose de travailler conjointement avec la 
communauté francophone non seulement pour préserver la langue 
et la culture françaises mais aussi pour les promouvoir. Ce 
gouvernement a l’intention d’aider sa minorité francophone à 
réaliser ses attentes et à combler ses aspirations. Nous ferons donc 
tout ce qui peut être fait raisonnablement et dans la limite du 
possible. 
 
C’est ainsi que j’ai l’intention de convoquer sous peu des 
représentants de la communauté francophone à me rencontrer, 
afin... conjointe à la question de la gérance des écoles 
fransaskoises. Dans un esprit de respect mutuel et de collaboration 
nous arriverons, j’en suis sûr, à une entente qui bénéficiera non 
seulement à la communauté francophone mais aussi à la 
population de la Saskatchewan en général. 
 
In the field of employment equity, we will be pressing for 
measurable results in improving promotion opportunities for 
women and minority groups in the profession, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And finally, with respect to private schooling, we have not 
finalized our plans relative to the Dirks report. Feedback is still 
coming in and all responses will get serious consideration, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

160 
 

As you can see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a formidable agenda. 
It will push all of us to the limits to achieve it, but I truly believe 
these measures, if we are to sustain the high measure of public 
support and the high level of standards that we have this very day, 
that this is indeed an exciting and right-minded agenda, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
It’s not a time for finger pointing. I would say to you that this is an 
exciting and challenging agenda that we can all be a part of. The 
system — all of us — is under intense scrutiny. There’s a 
phenomenal expectation by the public and it’s not just the teacher, 
or just the trustee, or just the administrator, or just the government, 
or just the department. We’re all in this together and I look 
forward to working with all of those in education as we embark on 
this very exciting agenda in the months ahead, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And now as it relates to the post-secondary education system, just 
a very few words. As all members will know, last year was a very 
busy time in our post-secondary side — a year of change, a 
change of some new directions, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I just 
want to again publicly make note of the tremendous effort and 
co-operation and dedication by those who work and serve at 
universities, and community colleges, and our technical institutes, 
and in adult basic education; volunteers who serve on boards; 
volunteer tutors relative to literacy. I just want to acknowledge 
their tremendous effort and dedication and co-operation over this 
last year. 
 
I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that much has been done in 
terms of restructuring our post-secondary education over this last 
year, but it was . . . And change is never easy, but I’m more 
convinced than ever that these changes were the right changes to 
position Saskatchewan ahead, literally, of the rest of the world 
when it comes to new directions and new opportunities for our 
young people; for lifelong learning for all of our population as we 
approach the 21st century. So my thanks to all those who were 
involved. 
 
We’ve seen positive changes, Mr. Speaker, in adult basic 
education. Saskatchewan probably leading the nation as it relates 
to the literacy initiative. Certainly in the skilled training, the 
institutes with their new autonomy, the new Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology, with the flexibility. 
Their centres of excellence, the universities — in many instances 
they’ve sharpened their focus, not trying to be all things to all 
people. 
 
In native education, certainly, some major strides forward. The 
new Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology is 
the result of an agreement struck with Gabriel Dumont Institute. 
We have joint management of the Saskatchewan institute. We 
have a native studies division, Mr. Speaker. The Gabriel Dumont 
Institute has contracted to provide the management for us on that 
and when that board is struck, Mr. Speaker, I expect to have native 
representation there as well. So we’ll have it at both the 
management level and at the board level, Mr. Speaker — very 
exciting, and I would suggest, charting some new territory across 
North America once again. 

The standardization between our two universities of first- and 
second-year arts and science so that we can deliver arts and 
science, not just in our universities — our two universities, our 
two campuses, where we have some overcrowding, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — but as well the standardized arts and science delivered 
through this regional college network, the new regional college 
network across the province. They’re out of basket weaving, 
they’re out of aerobic dancing, and they’re into more adult basic 
education, more institute programming, and more university 
programming. What a great day that’ll be when we can offer 
first- and second-year arts and science across this province. 
 
Or what about, Mr. Speaker, this summer in fact, very shortly, the 
summer centre of . . . Summer School of International Languages 
at the University of Regina, in conjunction with Luther College  
— an initiative, I would suggest to you, that will serve our people 
well as they go into the global village of the . . . in the next two 
decades as we approach the 21st century. A chance to take that 
language, whether you’re a business man or a student, whether it’s 
one of the languages that will serve one well in the Pacific Rim 
countries of south-east Asia or in South America or wherever; an 
opportunity to get some sense of the language at this international 
language centre, Mr. Speaker, some sense of the language and 
some sense of the culture. That will give our people the 
competitive edge in doing business in that important trading area 
of the world. 
 
The national forum in Saskatoon, the National Forum on 
Post-secondary Education, that was quickly dubbed the Saskatoon 
forum — Saskatchewan and Saskatoon once again distinguishing 
itself in terms of taking a leadership role in charting the course for 
post-secondary education for the 21st century and beyond. 
 
The Distance Education Council. I would acknowledge their help, 
Mr. Speaker, as they help us formulate the use of new technology 
to deliver more education across more and more of this province. 
You know, we can line these satellites up around the earth, Mr. 
Speaker, and deliver Saturday night hockey. We can deliver the 
Olympics; we can just about deliver anything; but somehow we’ve 
been behind in terms of delivering educational television 
programming across the vast geography of this province. And how 
useful that will be, not only in the what we traditionally call 
southern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but as well, in northern 
Saskatchewan particularly. 
 
The national education strategy. Our efforts there are ongoing. We 
hope to have something ready for the first ministers when they 
next meet. The new agriculture college at the University of 
Saskatchewan, a green light even in these tough times, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker; and the upgrading of libraries not only in Saskatoon but 
in Regina — the deal that Ernie Ingles put together here with UMI 
(University Microfilms International) where he levered one 
million dollars into two or three millions of dollars in microfiche 
technology, etc., etc. 
 
He continues to be very innovative. The other day he stopped by 
my office and he’s got a program going now entitled, “Bushels for 
Books.” And in conjunction with 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

161 
 

the wheat pool, farmers can make a donation to the University of 
Regina by dropping off grain of any grade, and the proceeds can 
be earmarked to the University of Regina to buy more books and 
magazines for the university library. 
 
And he points out in this brochure that it’s the University of 
Regina that’s looking at a way to turn grain into bio fuel. They’ve 
got research relative to a computerized tractor, and they are doing 
work with grasshoppers and other pests that are well known to our 
farmers. So there’s an example there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, an 
example of innovative funding and financing for the library, good 
for the farm community and good for the University of Regina. 
And my congratulations to him and to all his colleagues at the 
University of Regina. 
 
As well, we’ve seen an additional half a million dollars last year 
pumped into our regional college and our regional library network 
— all those community libraries and towns, like in my area, in 
Stoughton and other small centres, the bookmobiles, an extra half 
a million dollars across the province to sort of regenerate their 
book stock, Mr. Speaker, was well received out there. 
 
Well, now I’d like to close off, Mr. Speaker, with a few remarks 
relative to my constituency. And I want to particularly just 
concentrate on one area tonight of my constituency. And it has to 
do with the opening of the legislature. I had occasion to invite as 
my guests to the opening of the legislature, eight young people — 
one of them was my son, but seven of his former class-mates from 
the Weyburn Comprehensive High School in Weyburn. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, these young people that came as my guests, 
how impressive they were. And I have no doubt that these young 
people that came as guests — who watched the proceedings and 
the opening and attended the banquet —that these people 
represent our future leaders, Mr. Speaker. I had with me a young 
lady by the name of Cathy Grams, and another young lady by the 
name of Tasha Fogel and Heather Radine and Pam Mainil and 
Brigitte Piwarski and Sandy Bergveinson and a young fellow by 
the name of Aaron Woodard. And they joined us in here, Mr. 
Speaker, in the Chamber for the reading of the . . . Lieutenant 
Governor reading of the throne speech. And afterwards I had a 
chance to meet some others who had come to the Assembly for 
the tea. I was able to take them on a tour of the Legislative 
Building, Mr. Speaker, and include a couple of extras that most 
people don’t get a chance to see when they visit here. I took them 
into the cabinet room, and, as well, the Premier — although busy 
in his office— took five minutes to say hello to him and show 
them his office. 
 
(1945) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I raise this because here were seven or eight 
young individuals — such fine young people — and I was 
absolutely proud to be able to have them as my guests, and 
humbled to be able to accompany them at this opening session. 
 
And I have no doubt that if we were to meet these young people 
10 and 20 years from now, that there’ll be 

agrologists and doctors among them, business men and business 
women amongst them, entrepreneurs, teachers, writers, journalists, 
musicians, and they’ll be filling the jobs of the future, Mr. 
Speaker. They distinguish themselves, they are fine young 
citizens. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and all members of this 
Assembly, they did their school proud and they are going to do 
their province proud in the future as well. I just have that sense, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And of course, they went to the dinner that night. I suppose it was 
their first exposure to the group of protesters that were across the 
street from the Ramada Renaissance, a coalition number . . . 
whatever that was. And I’ll have a little more to say about 
coalitions later on. And as well they went to the banquet, Mr. 
Speaker, and they enjoyed this aspect of it. And I think it was 
important; I think that’s one of the big advantages of the opening 
night, is that it’s one of those nights, as you well know, Mr. 
Speaker, politics is set aside. If the Lieutenant Governor speaks, 
and you speak here, Mr. Speaker, and the Premier speaks, and the 
Leader of the Opposition speaks. Politics were set aside that night, 
as always, Mr. Speaker. The politics were set aside and all of the 
speeches, including your remarks, Mr. Speaker, focuses and 
focused rightly so on what parliament really means, about what 
this parliamentary democracy really means, and about the freedom 
that comes with it — that privilege that we enjoy, the 
responsibilities that we as citizens have to ensure that that 
privilege is maintained and strengthened, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think it was important for our young people to see that dimension 
because too often what they see is that 20-second clip or that three 
paragraphs in the newspaper, that confrontational, sensational 
aspect that, I guess, is what sells newspapers and what buys 
advertising on television, Mr. Speaker. And I think it was 
important for these young people to see this because it gives them 
a larger sense, perhaps, of why really we are in politics, why all of 
us, I suppose, are engaged in public policy, and in the ongoing 
matters as it relates to public policy on a daily basis. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, these young people will be the decision 
makers of the 21st century. I believe those students left here and 
went back to Weyburn with a better understanding of this 
institution and what it stands for. And I say, Mr. Speaker, what an 
absolute pleasure it was for me to host these bright and energetic 
and intelligent and enthusiastic and idealistic young people. Let 
me tell you, they are ready to take on the future. 
 
Now here, Mr. Speaker, are these young people, these youth, 
ready to take on the future. And what is one of the biggest threats 
that faces their future this very day, Mr. Speaker? What is one of 
the biggest threats to the economic and social well-being of these 
young people as we approach the 21st century? Well I’ll tell you 
what it is: it’s the view of the NDP and Liberal Party in 
Saskatchewan and in Canada, that they want to tear up their future 
by tearing up the free trade deal, Mr. Speaker, because that’s what 
that deal speaks directly to. It speaks directly to their future 
prosperity, their future economic security, their future social 
well-being, and to whether in fact they will have the job 
opportunities of the future, Mr. 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

162 
 

Speaker. Because that’s what that free trade agreement is all about. 
It’s about opportunities for our youth, quality jobs for our youth, 
Mr. Speaker. And we’re not talking about having a future for these 
young people where we’ll see them relegated to some mere 
service sector economy, but we’re talking about jobs in the area of 
biotechnology and hi-o-tech, and processing, and manufacturing, 
and upgrading, and paper plants, and packing plants, and those 
kinds of things, as we continue to diversity our economy and trade 
with not only the United States but all nations of the world, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well unlike the NDP and the Liberals who say we will tear up the 
agreement, the PC Party of Saskatchewan and our Premier stand 
for opportunity for those young people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The Liberals and the NDP will tear up 
the agreement; they will tear up the opportunities for these young 
people; they will tear up their enthusiasm; they will tear up their 
idealism; they are ready to go into the 21st century, but it’s the 
doom mongers and the naysayers of the NDP and the Liberals in 
this province and across this country who would deny them that, 
Mr. Speaker. And they have the audacity to say they support the 
young people of this province. They say they support the young 
people. 
 
Interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the finance critic, 
in the days before the House opened up and some of the rhetoric 
of the other opposition members — they said, well going into this 
legislature, we’re going to make sure the people understand what’s 
happened relative to taxes in this province. In fact there was a 
headline in today’s paper: “Koskie calls for tax break.” 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, order. I’d just like to remind the 
hon. member that it is not permitted to use other member’s names 
in the House. 
 
Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — You’re quite right, Mr. Speaker, and I 
apologize for that slip. 
 
The point I wanted to make here, Mr. Speaker, is somehow the 
opposition are concerned about taxes in this province and this 
country. That’s what they say out of one corner of their mouth, 
Mr. Speaker. On the other hand, they say that they don’t want the 
free trade deal. And what the free trade deal would do, Mr. 
Speaker, is move those duties and taxes and tariffs off the goods 
that our people will buy. 
 
Now how do you square that, I ask them, Mr. Speaker? How on 
the one hand do you say you’re in favour of lower taxes but on the 
other hand you say we want nothing to do with this deal — keep 
the duty on, keep the tariff on, keep the taxes on that put consumer 
goods higher and higher and higher, that make shoes more 
expensive, that make this suit more expensive, that make half-ton 
trucks more expensive, that make refrigerators more expensive, 
that make microwaves more expensive. And I’ll tell you what, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s those duties and those tariffs and those taxes 

that hit the people the hardest because they spend, relatively 
speaking, a larger percentage of their income on those very items 
— clothing and shoes for themselves and their family. 
 
So I ask you: when the NDP and the Liberals say they’re against 
the free trade deal, they’re against our young people, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s who they’re really against. And they’re also against the 
poor because they want the poor to continue to pay those taxes on 
all the things that they have to buy on a daily basis. And they have 
the audacity to say that somehow they are the only ones who have 
an understanding of those sectors in society. I say, Mr. Speaker, 
they are sadly mistaken and they have a double standard here. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I made mention earlier of these young people 
that I had as my guests, their first exposure to some demonstrators 
and some picketers across the street from the banquet at the 
Ramada Renaissance that night. And, Mr. Speaker, the other thing 
I’ve noticed about the NDP, over this last year, it doesn’t matter 
what the issue is there is an NDP-inspired coalition to deal with it. 
I mean, we have seen so many coalitions spring up over the last 
year, Mr. Speaker, you almost have to keep track of them by 
assigning a number to them. 
 
And it was with interest therefore, Mr. Speaker, that I read that the 
January-February 1988 issue of Briarpatch, a well-known 
magazine across Saskatchewan, the article is entitled: 
“Saskatchewan Coalition for Social Justice.” This just underlined 
the observation that I, myself, had made, Mr. Speaker. As I go 
through this article, you have so many . . . It just makes the point 
about how everything is dealt with today, at least in the NDP’s 
eyes, by coalition. Coalition number one was entitled here, Equal 
Justice For all, a Saskatoon welfare rights group proposing 
developing a network in the city to share information and plan 
action around the cuts. 
 
Number two, the Saskatchewan Social Justice Network. Okay? 
Now they’ve got some laudable goals and objectives. They’ve 
included a public call for Grant Schmidt’s resignation. Now 
there’s a laudable . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Might I once more remind 
the hon. member that he is not to use another member’s name in 
the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker, again. Okay, here’s 
the third one, Mr. Speaker. The Prince Albert Citizens for 
Tomorrow, or PACT for short. And they’re there to oppose the 
economic and social policies of the government. That’s a blank 
there - I have to put a blank in. 
 
Oh, then there’s the fourth one. PACT supported by another 
coalition, TEARS, which organized to oppose the closure of 
Prince Albert North Park Centre. Now it doesn’t say in here what 
TEARS stands for. T-E-A-R-S. That was number four coalition, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Then we went over to the fifth one here. Since the summer, PACT 
has changed its name to the Prince Albert Coalition for Social 
Justice. Now I hope I haven’t confused you or lost you in this, Mr. 
Speaker. What we 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

163 
 

had is we had PACT, which stands for the Prince Albert Citizens 
for Tomorrow. PACT changes its name to the Prince Albert 
Coalition for Social Justice. Are you following me here, Mr. 
Speaker? That’s coalition number five. That’s the easiest way to 
keep track, is assign a number. That’s coalition number five. 
 
And then here’s the good news. A further meeting on May 2, 
attended by more than 80 people from 50 organizations, 
established an interim planning group - that’s an IPG, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s number six. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Somebody 
said is that 80 out of a million in the province. Well, anyways, Mr. 
Speaker, all I’m telling you is that I’ve lost track of all these 
NDP-inspired coalitions, but for those of you who are interested, 
watch for the coalitions people’s congress set for April 1 and 2. 
And at that time, it will all come together. We will have a coalition 
vision statement, and I’m sure we’re all awaiting with baited 
breath for that day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other day as well in the debate here, Mr. Speaker . . . if it isn’t 
coalitions, the favourite subject for the NDP is, you know, those 
rotten multinationals. And they have sort of rotten multinational 
speech number A, they have speech B, speech C. 
 
Well you know, it never fails to amaze me how the member from 
Prince Albert, for example, and he must just cringe when he hears 
this talk go on, because I’ve been into his town on several 
occasions over the last six months, and in fact our caucus and 
cabinet met there in the last couple of weeks and we had a fine 
tour of the new paper plant that Weyerhaeuser, this multinational 
company, Mr. Speaker, is building there. And I’ll tell you, before 
that we went to Hudson Bay and I had a chance to tour the 
aspenite plant there, learn a lot more abut the forest industry — 
and I thank my colleague, the member from Kelsey-Tisdale for 
helping arrange that tour. It was just an excellent tour, and in fact 
this summer I hope to return there and take my children through 
there so they have a better understanding of the forestry industry. 
 
Buy anyway, back to Weyerhaeuser, Mr. Speaker, they always are 
picking on these big rotten multinationals. And I had to question 
that because it was just this past January where I read in the local 
paper here, the Star-Phoenix, the headline went something like 
this: Weyerhaeuser converts PAPCO into profits. That’s a pretty 
good deal. Not only do they give us a bunch of money to buy it 
but they turn it into profits, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Then there was another one of these rotten multinationals, 
Maclean Hunter donated $3 million to schools, and 
Weyerhaeuser’s helped us with a school that burned down, put 
some portable Atco trailers there for us, and we thank them for 
that. You know, I have to ask myself when I see stories like this, 
does this somehow sound like a rotten multinational, Mr. Speaker? 
Well I doubt it. 
 
But the story I want to get to is the one that relates specifically to 
Weyerhaeuser and education and what they’re doing there because 
I want the whole world to know what this multinational is doing in 
Prince Albert 

with this new paper mill. Because when we had this tour, I had a 
chance to talk to a number of the people there and they explained a 
number of things to me, Mr. Speaker. But one of the things they 
explained to us was some of their key beliefs and practices, and in 
fact their education philosophy that they bring to that city, Mr. 
Speaker. And their philosophy talks about things like education as 
an ongoing activity, it’s based on assessed need, it’s consistent 
with adult learning objectives. 
 
Or to put this in a much more practical sense, Mr. Speaker, I want 
to tell you what they’re doing at that mill as they move into the 
start-up phase. They run five shifts there, Mr. Speaker, and you 
know what? Every fifth week, your shift, that shift, when it gets 
into production, that shift will not go onto the plant floor, Mr. 
Speaker. All those people, instead of going onto the plant floor to 
watch and control and manufacture the paper, you know where 
they’ll go, Mr. Speaker? They go into the classroom. every fifth 
week, they spend an entire week in the classroom, constantly, so 
in 50 weeks of the year — what is that? — ten weeks spent in the 
classroom. 
 
(2000) 
 
Now can you imagine that, Mr. Speaker, if before you and I could 
do our jobs in this legislature, every fifth week when we came 
here they sent us to school to get it right or to study it or to do it 
better? Or the nurses in this province — every fifth week when 
you come to work, you don’t go onto the nursing floor, you go 
into a classroom or an institutional setting to learn more about 
your profession. Or doctors or veterinarians or teachers — every 
fifth week is spent on education. 
 
Now I take my hat off to that multinational corporation. What a 
tremendous investment in their employees. What a tremendous 
investment, Mr. Speaker. And what do they do in that week? They 
do education, training and safety, continuous improvement, 
problem solving, learning about the plant operation from A to Z, 
and sufficient time during working hours to do the above, and this 
value-added time will be made available indefinitely, Mr. Speaker. 
Well I take my hat off to those people, let me tell you, and I say, 
what a tremendous, tremendous opportunity for people in Prince 
Albert and area. 
 
Well I want to close with an issue, Mr. Speaker, that . . . I want to 
close with an issue and spend a few minutes on an issue that 
surfaced over this last week, and it has to do with the shenanigans, 
at least as they are reported in the papers, relative to the NDP — 
the shenanigans leading up to the NDP nominating meeting. The 
NDP Party president of the constituency . . . and what I’m talking 
about here, Mr. Speaker, was reported in the newspapers, and 
these were all Leader-Post, March 23, 24, 25. First headline was: 
“Membership issue stokes hot NDP nomination race,” and the 
story goes on to read, and I quote: 
 

Only days before the NDP nominates a new candidate in 
Regina Elphinstone, some party members admit their 
memberships have been bought from them by those seeking the 
nomination or by individuals working for the candidates. 

  



 
March 28, 1988 

164 
 

Another one talks about emotions flaring: one candidate withdrew; 
another denied he had paid for party memberships in return for 
support. And then another — the final headline this past Friday 
was “Rules Committee clears up NDP membership issue.” The 
story went on to say, and I quote: 
 

The controversy over membership irregularities erupted this 
week with reports that some individuals had their $8 
membership fee paid by candidates or individuals working 
for candidates. 

 
And so I raise that, Mr. Speaker, as one dimension of what I want 
to talk about. 
 
But I would also refer you to a story in one of the earlier 
newspapers that talked about an NDP . . . Well here it is. This was 
in the Leader-Post in the last month or so, I don’t have the exact 
date. The headline on this one was, “Romanow . . .” Sorry, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. I’m sure the hon. 
member from Weyburn will not want to keep doing this in the 
remainder of his speech. That’s the third time now and I ask him 
to try to remember not to break that rule. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I do not want to be 
disrespectful of your Chair. I get caught up in the enthusiasm of 
debate, and I apologize again to you and other members of the 
legislature. 
 
The headline went on... It referred to the hon. member from 
Riversdale, the Leader of the Opposition, and it went, “(This 
member) . . . and free food lure few students.” 
 
And it talks about: 
 

An offer of free food and beverages is usually enough to 
bring budget conscious university students running. but 
Tuesday a free lunch wasn’t enough to lure more than a 
handful of university students to see the opposition leader, 
and he was at the university as a guest of the University of 
Regina Young New Democrats, a group that booked the 
Education Building auditorium in preparation for a crowd. 
But the crowd never materialized and by 12:30 p.m., the time 
he was to speak, only one student was seated in the 
auditorium. 

 
And that was in spite of the fact that there was free food as a lure, 
Mr. Speaker. I know we’ve got free memberships, we’ve got free 
food, but then again that story shouldn’t have surprised us because 
when that same member went to the university in Saskatoon last 
fall, the headline at that time said, the same member faces flak 
from U of S students. So despite what they like to say about their 
close connections with the youth and somehow that they relate to 
the youth and their lure of free food to the youth, Mr. Speaker, 
they are sadly out of touch with our youth. 
 
And I raise this issue, Mr. Speaker, and this whole question of the 
shenanigans at Elphinstone last week because the question comes 
right down to this: what does it really mean to be a member of a 
political party? What 

are the principles and the philosophy behind holding a NDP Party 
membership or a PC Party membership? Well I don’t know what 
the NDP Party membership says, Mr. Speaker, but on the back of 
my Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan membership 
card this is what it says. It says: 
 

A heritage of freedom based on individual initiative, honour, 
integrity, and individual moral responsibility. 

 
It says, “equal rights under the law without discrimination.” It 
says, “government as the servant not the master” and, “social 
progress based on the needs of people, not as a means to power,” 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I don’t know what it says or what it means to be a 
card-carrying NDP member, Mr. Speaker, but given what has 
happened over the last few weeks and what I’ve referred to here 
earlier tonight, I wonder if it means the party is involved in those 
kinds of apparent shenanigans. It seems to me the first line strike 
out . . . a heritage of freedom, Mr. Speaker, based on an individual 
initiative, honour, integrity, and individual moral responsibility. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, through all of this, whether it’s the education 
opportunities we shall provide for our young people and indeed all 
adults; whether it be the Weyerhaeusers of the world or in our 
traditional school systems and educational systems; or whether it 
be the free trade initiative and what it means to our youth; or for 
that matter, any issue that faces in an economic or social sense, 
Mr. Speaker, the issue is one of the world is changing and so must 
we. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that we’re going to bring the NDP 
into the 21st century whether they like it or not. They may come 
dragging and kicking; they may want to go back to the future, Mr. 
Speaker; but the reality is the world is changing and so must they. 
 
We haven’t seen much of it yet. They cling to the old ways. 
They’re change resisters; they don’t want anything to do with free 
trade; they don’t want anything to do with opportunities for our 
young people. They don’t want anything to do with diversifying 
our economy. It might have a multinational in there, whether it’s 
the agriculture economy or any other. But that is what sets them 
apart from the rest of us, Mr. Speaker, because our youth are ready 
to take on the future, we’re ready to take on the future. Sure, 
there’s uncertainty. Making change is never easy, but if we do not 
take it on, Mr. Speaker, we do a disservice to our young people. 
 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, these young people are so perceptive. 
I’ve been into these schools. Like I’ve said, I’ve talked to about 
10,000 of them and they ask such good questions. And they know, 
and they know. They know in this free trade agreement, for 
example, that there are no ironclad guarantees. There is no 
ironclad guarantee in that free trade agreement that they’ll be 
assured of economic and social well-being. They know that. They 
don’t even expect that because they know there are no free lunches 
and they know there are no guarantees in 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

165 
 

life. 
 
But they say one thing, Mr. Speaker, that agreement represents 
one tremendous opportunity, and it’s an opportunity we are going 
to make sure that they get, Mr. Speaker. And for that reason I’ll be 
supporting the main motion, Mr. Speaker, and voting against any 
amendments. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for me 
to rise in this throne speech debate, particularly after hearing the 
previous speaker, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education. 
 
I sat here and I listened very . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and as 
my colleagues here say, and I listened and I listened and I listened. 
And there’s a few things that I would like to reply to at this 
particular time, Mr. Speaker — reply directly to the minister on 
some of the issues that he raised, because I think there are a few 
issues that he raised that need to be addressed from another point 
of view, not just the point of view that the minister talked about. 
And I’m going to be talking about some of the educational issues 
that he raised, Mr. Speaker; some of the misconceptions that he 
left about Weyerhaeuser, Mr. Speaker; some of the 
misconceptions that he’s leaving about what free trade does for 
our youth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me start, first of all, with a couple of comments that the hon. 
minister made regarding initiatives in education. The minister 
talked about illiteracy, and of movement towards illiteracy, and his 
initiative, and his government’s initiative towards illiteracy. Every 
time that he talks about illiteracy he approaches it from the same 
point of view, Mr. Speaker, and I saw him do it again today. Mr. 
Speaker, you can approach the point of illiteracy in Saskatchewan 
by looking at the past record and you can say, we in Saskatchewan 
have gone from 50 per cent illiteracy to 25 per cent illiteracy in 30 
years, so Saskatchewan’s school system is doing a good job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Is that what we’re getting from the minister? Is 
that what we’re getting from the minister? No. He keeps raising 
the issue from the point of view of: we’ve got 25 per cent 
illiteracy. Gee, our people are illiterate. And he raises all these 
studies, and he quotes from the Star-Phoenix, and he quotes from 
the Toronto Star, and always from the same approach, as if to lay 
the blame, to set the mind-set to lay the blame. Who is to blame, 
Mr. Speaker? I think it behooves the Minister of Education to 
promote education not to try to discredit it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — He talks about private schools and the need 
and the demand — a demand that has increased from three-quarter 
per cent to 1 and a half per cent, yes. And how does he address 
that issue? Knowing that in this rural areas that we cannot have 
our public system. We can’t have it vulcanized, we can’t afford to 
have it 

vulcanized. There’s a school system out north-west of Swift 
Current, Success and Pennant, that are struggling to keep their 
little schools. And what is he promoting? He’s promoting 
privatization by putting on a study of privatization; a study 
commissioned to one of the former defeated ministers, a Mr. 
Dirks, who works for a private school at this stage, Mr. Speaker. 
That is not helping the public system. That is not helping the 
public system deal with the problems that it has come up with. 
 
The minister says, why are we seeing all this? Why are we seeing 
all of these questions and these articles in the newspaper? If the 
minister had been around, he would know that this is nothing new. 
The education system in Canada and the education system in 
Saskatchewan thrives because it does a critical self-analysis. And 
this is good; it should continue to do a critical self-analysis. It 
doesn’t mean that things have gone to the dogs as they put down 
in their throne speech. It’s the government that’s going to the dogs, 
not the education . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — We want to talk briefly about the methodology 
that’s coming into place, Mr. Speaker, the methodology that the 
education system is putting into place; the methodology that deals 
with integrating what is becoming known as the common essential 
learnings. 
 
I put it to you, Mr. Speaker, that in five years the idea of common, 
essential earnings should become just as well known as the idea of 
social studies and mathematics and sciences to the ordinary person 
here now. That’s what should happen, and that’s what will happen 
if the department doesn’t get in the way. 
 
(2015) 
 
I look at this as a breakthrough. It is not something that’s 
happening, that’s going between the department and the parents, 
or between the teachers and the parents — it’s a breakthrough, it’s 
a great big breakthrough. And if we really want our children and 
our future generations here in Saskatchewan to compete in the 
21st century as the minister mentions, this breakthrough should be 
supported so that we can make it. Because if we don’t make it in 
education we’re not going to make it anywhere else. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister previous 
talked briefly about Weyerhaeuser. And he indicated that they 
have an excellent, excellent education program, and on that I will 
concur with you, Mr. Minister. I had a visit with the folks at 
Weyerhaeuser and I will back you up on what you said there — 
their five-shift system with one-fifth of them always on 
educational in-services leave is good. I only wish that we were all 
able to participate in it in our school system and more industries 
were able to participate in it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — But your alluding that perhaps it was such a 
good deal, I want to deal with that. Because I want 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

166 
 

to set the record straight on that, because there was the member of 
Shellbrook-Torch River who misled us somewhat the other day as 
well. 
 
Now let me just go back to that. And when I say these things, I say 
nothing bad or I do not intend to cast aspersions on Weyerhaeuser 
or their employees. But I want to set the record straight on what 
exactly happened in the entire deal. Let’s look at the deal. This is 
the government that decided it had to piratize all of our public 
assets and it started quite early with the idea of PAPCO. This is a 
company that has assets of over 300 million — had assets of over 
300 million. They made a profit for Karl Landegger, who was the 
chief executive officer for the company of Parsons & Whittemore. 
They made a profit in 1980 when PAPCO bought the company — 
the province bought the company over — made a profit of $27 
million; in 1981 made a profit of $24 million. And at that stage the 
government had taken it over because we needed to rationalize the 
usage of the wood. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, then the Tory government got into power. 
Unfortunately, they lost money three years out of four. But even 
taking that into account, that they lost money three years out of 
four, if you average that with the previous years, the average profit 
of PAPCO would still have been in the vicinity of 20 to $30 
million a year. And that money, a lot of it was used to put in the 
services like education and health in this province. 
 
But what happened is they made an announcement. This 
government made an announcement that they sold PAPCO for 
248 million. And they added to that. Not only did they sell the 
PAPCO assets, they also gave them, gave Weyerhaeuser a forest 
lease management agreement — gave them rights to the complete 
forest. They spent $7 million on highways, or they’re spending in 
the vicinity of $7 million on the highways. And I want to relate 
this back, Mr. Speaker, to the throne speech. So what has 
happened is after all of this was brought to the public, Mr. 
Speaker, that they sold this mill for $248 million, and it was 
disputed? They concocted a story that the mill was losing $91,000 
a day. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it looked to me that if the mill was able to 
make money in the years of the Blakeney government in ’80 and 
’81 and then lost money for three years out of four during the 
present administration, was that a reason to sell PAPCO, or was 
that a reason to get rid of this government? 
 
But they made up this story. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s bad enough 
that the mill was sold for under price. But the thing is, to this day, 
we have not collected a cent. And that is one of the reasons why 
our provincial deficit is so great. Not one cent. They sold it to 
Weyerhaeuser saying that Weyerhaeuser doesn’t have to make a 
darn, a payment at all unless they make 12 per cent profit - not at 
all, unless they make 12 per cent profit. Now what a deal. 
 
I could sell the minister’s land if he would like me to. So I could 
give it to anybody for no money down and I wouldn’t have to 
make any kind of repayments until they make 12 per cent profit. I 
could sell your car, Mr. Hon. Member, for the same kind of a deal. 
I could sell anything 

under those conditions. And I would have liked to have been 
offered the deal to buy PAPCO, I know I could have found people 
that would have bought it at that kind of a deal. That’s the problem 
with that deal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well as a result of the knowledge about the deal, along with the 
concocted story of $91,000 cost per day, the people of Prince 
Albert, in my district . . . the people of Prince Albert and the 
people of Saskatchewan questioned this and said, hey, this 
government can’t be trusted — they can’t be trusted. And as we 
look at more, at additional things that happened, we can see that 
the privatization aspect that they are including is becoming more 
like piratization — as my colleague from Moose Jaw North has 
indicated over the past few months, that it’s piratization — 
because what happened next? We have privatization, deregulation 
and harmonization and free trade — all these things fit in the same 
basket. 
 
What happened next? We had the deregulation of natural gas sales 
in Saskatchewan. Now by this deregulation, the city of Prince 
Albert lost $424,000 from the pulp mill, because Weyerhaeuser no 
longer bought their gas from Saskatchewan Power. Well the city 
was somewhat embarrassed by this. They went into negotiations 
with Weyerhaeuser, and Weyerhaeuser said yes, it may be a little 
stringent on your budget, we’ll come through with a $250,000 gift. 
So they came through with their gift for the city of Prince Albert, 
in lieu of that, in lieu of those taxes which we were not able to 
collect. 
 
Well that particular act of piratization cost the city a difference 
between 424,000 and 250,000. The difference is 174,000, Mr. 
Speaker — that’s what it cost the city of Prince Albert. And it did 
cost the city of Saskatoon an amount as well for Saskatoon 
Chemicals, because they are, I believe, under the same condition. 
Well that’s two acts of piratization, but that’s not where it ends, 
Mr. Speaker. What about the third act? On November 5, right here 
in this Chamber, we passed . . . the government introduced and 
passed Bill 77, and this Bill exempted Weyerhaeuser from a 
surcharge on power now - an exemption of $510,000. Now 
remember, we’re talking about this poor company that’s only 
making about $80 million this year. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, do you think they might have consulted the 
mayor and the city council of Prince Albert? Do you think they 
might have consulted the MLA from Prince Albert, or my 
colleague from Prince Albert-Duck Lake? Not a chance. They 
may have consulted the member from Shellbrook-Torch. Now the 
mill sits in his riding, but the taxes are paid to my city. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask: who needed that relief from taxation at this 
time? Who needs it? Small business or a giant multi-national like 
Weyerhaeuser, who as I said, is claiming to be making over 80 
million this year. Who’s doing it? Well I’m not here to blame 
Weyerhaeuser. I think that they went into the negotiations like any 
corporation would. A corporation is there to make profit for 
shareholders, and they went in there and negotiated and negotiated 
hard. I only hope that the government and their negotiators, those 
that are negotiating on behalf of you and me, Mr. Speaker, had 
half the smarts that 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

167 
 

Weyerhaeuser has. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that is what this business of piratization is 
doing to the taxpayers in Saskatchewan. Let me give you a few 
more examples. The Saskoil shares that were sold two or three 
years ago. We remember Saskoil as a company that was doing 
well, was paying dividends. These dividends were being used, in a 
small part, to pay for our schools and our roads and our hospitals 
and more than that, it gave us a window on the world of oil - it 
gave us a window on the world of oil. Because we know that in 
order to tax that accurately, to tax justly, we have to know what 
the oil industry is doing, just like if you’re going to deal with 
PAPCO or with Weyerhaeuser, you have to know what they’re 
doing. Well what happened? Because they sold that, they gave 
away the evidence. They gave away the evidence which resulted 
in a loss of $1.5 billion of oil revenue to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me explain that, Mr. Speaker. In 1981, during the time of the 
Blakeney government, the oil revenues, the taxation revenues to 
this government was 1.1 billion . . . Pardon me, the oil revenues 
were 1.1 billion, and then in ’82, the oil revenues total to the oil 
companies went up to 2.2 billion - that nearly doubled. Well what 
happened to the government revenue in that same period of time? 
 
An Hon. Member: — It must have gone up. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Do you think it went up? Do you think it 
doubled? It went from 720 million, Mr. Speaker, to 680 
million - 680 million. Whoops! Oil revenue going down, but 
which way are our taxes going? The ordinary taxpayer, which way 
are they going since ’81? Have they gone down? 
 
What about our deficit? What about our provincial deficit? Has it 
gone down? It’s up at $3.4 billion. But what we have, Mr. 
Speaker, is a government that’s gone to the dogma; gone to the 
dogmatic dedication to piratization. 
 
Do you think that they’re trimming expenses, Mr. Speaker? Do 
you think they’re trimming expenses in office space? So what’s 
the latest news? A 10-year lease for some brand-new office space 
in a hotel that charges $100 a night during the week. That’s going 
to cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan $12 million a year for 
60,000 square feet of prime space, luxury space, while other 
spaces like T.C. Douglas house is becoming empty, buildings that 
are paid for — T.C. Douglas Building. 
 
What’s happening here, Mr. Speaker, is this government is using 
public money, your and my money, for private profit. 
 
I want to talk a little more about privatization in a different area, 
Mr. Speaker. I saw, in Prince Albert, 180 aged, mentally retarded 
citizens moved from their home to a new home . . . to new homes. 
They were privatized. This place that they lived in was accepted. 
They loved it. When they were forced to move, the families were 
somewhat upset because it caused difficulties with families. North 
Park Centre used to be . . . work as a respite home as well, but the 
place was privatized or piratized. And what happened, some 
people ended up 

being moved to Valleyview and some to satellite homes. And I 
hope they’ll do as well there. There’s no reason they shouldn’t, 
after the displacement. But what we did is, we lost a program. 
What we did is we lost a program. We lost a program . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’m going to quote you on that one. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Now the minister says here he’s going to quote 
me on it. Please feel free to do so. Please feel free to do that. 
 
(2030) 
 
We now have a piratized building. The pirates came in, moved 
everybody out. The building is empty, Mr. Speaker, the building is 
empty. What are you going to do with the building? When are you 
going to let us know what you’re going to do with the building? 
 
In the meantime, we have some people that have been moved to 
satellite homes. Now the satellite homes, there is a loss of program 
for the people and there’s a decrease in the number of staff. They 
were used to having staff which would come shift after shift after 
shift, always being fresh and being cheerful. It’s pretty difficult, 
Mr. Speaker, to work in an intense environment like that for 
12-hour shifts, and expect to keep your spirits up year after year 
after year. 
 
Well why did they do it? Because they were bent on piratizing and 
because they were bent on union busting. You and I both say, Mr. 
Speaker, 400 dental nurses sitting here in that gallery - in your 
gallery. We saw them in tears as the dental plan was piratized. 
What has the result of this piratization been? We went from a 
dental plan which had 92 per cent utilization by children in 
Saskatchewan down to a dental plan which now is recording 60 
per cent utilization. And as I travelled through the rural areas in 
the Shellbrook-Torch River and in the Kinistino area, and over 
towards the Biggar area, I heard the same thing mentioned over 
and over again. The farmers, the young farmers with young 
families keep saying, you know, the other plan was no problem, 
but what I’m seeing now is an increase in cost to myself. I see that 
I have to take some time out to travel to take my children to a 
dentist, and also I have to take them away from school. Now we’re 
waiting, Mr. Speaker. We’re waiting for the minister and the 
Premier to announce how they’re going to replace this dental plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk briefly about piratization in education, 
what is happening there. Last year we saw the government remove 
the control from local areas in the cities — remove control for the 
community colleges in the cities. What they did is they put the 
control of the community colleges into SIAST, the Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology, and then together 
with those they started their act or piratization. 
 
Now what is the first act? You’ve got to discredit the system. That 
is the first act of piratization. If things are working good, discredit 
it so that you can use your dogmatic approach to piratize it. 
Discredit it. So what did they do? Well first of all they cut 1,100 
spaces — cut 1,100 spaces. I visited Wascana Institute today, and 
they 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

168 
 

tell me that the enrolments are down. I asked them why are the 
enrolments . . . the enrolments, why are they down? The 
applications for next year are down. I asked them why. They said, 
well, there is confusion. With 1,100 spaces cut, some people feel 
that maybe there are going to be more programs cut this year. 
Some programs have been shifted and moved around from one 
place to the other. They said, but mostly what’s happening, is that 
there is no proactive campaign to let people know, and let students 
know, where the programs are. So they’re trying to reduce the 
demand. 
 
Another way of reducing the demand is to put a deterrent fee on 
for applications. Now we know that there’s never been a fee for 
applying to an institute in Saskatchewan until last year. Now 
we’ve got a $25 fee, which is non-refundable, every time you 
want to apply to the institute. So a person is going to think twice. 
If there’s a big line-up, as there was for a while right after the cuts, 
instead of thinking, well, gee, I’d like to go to school, and I’m 
willing to take two programs — I’ll apply for this one and this 
one, hoping that one will come in, now what happened is we’ve 
got this $25 fee. So now they’re thinking twice and sometimes not 
even applying because they know that there’s a waiting list and 
they can’t get their money back if there’s a waiting list. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now what’s happening is that the people are getting 
tired of waiting to be able to get into our accredited schools, like 
SIAST, and more and more are turning to the private schools in 
Saskatchewan. They’re being forced to turn on it. Now what’s 
happening there is, instead of paying in the vicinity of 900 to 
$1,400 tuition, they end up paying 3,000 or $4,000 a year tuition. 
All right, that’s a choice a person can make and that’s fine, but if 
they pay $3,000 or $4,000 tuition fee, I would . . . And if my 
daughter did that, or my neighbour’s son, I would expect that they 
would get a top-notch course every time, guaranteed. 
 
Now the difficulty here is, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had student after 
student come to me and tell me, look I took a tourism and travel 
course at a private vocational school and when I went to look for a 
job, they laughed at me. They laughed at me. As a matter of fact, 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a group of students in Saskatoon now who 
are suing one of their private schools because the quality of 
education offered was below their expectations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the private school situation in Saskatchewan, the 
post-secondary, private school situation in Saskatchewan is in a 
buyer beware situation because the minister has not addressed the 
problem of regulations. 
 
Now I have written to the minister on behalf of students, and he 
has replied, yes, that he thinks it should be looked at. Mr. Speaker, 
I would urge the minister to look at it and look at it quickly. And 
we need to act on it, Mr. Speaker, because there’s no point, there’s 
no reason why the youngsters of Saskatchewan who are looking 
and trying their darnedest these years to get an education and get 
something that will help them into the job market, there’s no 
reason why they should have to get into a buyer beware situation. 
That is why we have governments. That is why we have 
departments of education so that those 

things are looked into, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Before I close, Mr. Speaker, I have one more 
remark I want to make, and that is relating to the day-care centre 
that is supposed to be in at Woodland Campus of SIAST. In the 
fall of ’86 and prior to the fall of ’86, when the planners were 
building the school and prior to that when they were planning the 
school, they decided to put an early childhood development course 
in there, because we knew that there was a demand and all 
educators knew and the industry knew that there was a demand for 
more workers in day-care centres. So in their wisdom, they 
decided to establish a course at the Woodland Campus. There is 
already a course also at Kelsey. 
 
The government of the time built the facility, followed up by 
adding $41,000 worth of equipment to the facility, followed up by 
hiring at least three people to run the facility, followed up by 
spending money, by writing a brand-new program — I would 
estimate that would have cost them in the vicinity of 40 to $50,000 
— followed up by enrolling students in October of 1986 in that 
program, 30 students who had been there since this time; followed 
up by applying for a licence to the day-care centre. And what do 
you think has happened, Mr. Speaker? Do you think we’ve got a 
day-care centre there now? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Must have. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well you’d think you would. You’d think you 
would with all of that money put into it. But what’s happening, 
Mr. Speaker? Sadly there is no day-care licence. We’ve got 
everything there, all of the components there, except the little 
children. A specialized facility made for a special program, but no 
commitment to putting a licence and to getting the children in 
there, Mr. Speaker. Rather a sad situation. 
 
Now after repeated attempts by the professionals involved, the 
government continues to refuse. Now what is the reason? Are they 
putting a quota on day cares, a quota on children? It just doesn’t 
make sense, Mr. Speaker, it does not make sense. I’ve written 
three letters to the minister and all I’ve got is that he’s . . . The 
only reply that I’ve gotten is to the effect that he has some 
“concerns about a day-care laboratory”. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
decision has been made. 
 
And I ask the members of this government to follow up and give 
Woodland the day-care centre licence that it needs. There are 30 
students in that program right now who were told back in October 
that they would have that licence in December of ’86; then they 
were told they would have it in March in ’86; then they were told 
they would have it in September; then there were told in this 
legislature that they’d have it by December of ’87. And it’s still 
not there. And I ask this government to come clean, give us a 
day-care licence so we can go ahead with the job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, it saddens me when I see a 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

169 
 

government that is more bent in a dogmatic direction to piratize 
this province than it is to fulfil the needs of this province. It’s too 
much like a bunch of pirates who have robbed and looted and are 
out there selling it off. For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I will not be 
voting for the budget, I will be voting for the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the 
opportunity to take part in the debate, and I think the hon. member 
from Saskatoon Nutana for so graciously yielding and allowing 
me the opportunity to take my place next in the debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before getting into any substantive remarks, I should 
be remiss if I did not congratulate, albeit in absentia — and I hope 
you forgive me for saying that, Mr. Speaker — the new Leader of 
the Opposition. We look forward to his participation in the 
legislature as leader. We look back with fond memories on his 
past record of service to the people of Saskatchewan and look 
ahead to working in the rest of the term of this particular 
Assembly over the next couple of years, working hopefully 
co-operatively together, looking for solutions to some of the 
problems that currently beset the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also extend to you good wishes on being back in 
the Chair. It is good to see you back, sir. You do bring a degree of 
impartiality to this House. You are respected, I believe, by all 
members, and I would like to say, sir, that I really admire your 
patience and good humour. I honestly don’t know how you do it 
most of the time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just a word or two about my own constituency. 
Being a minister I don’t often get the opportunity to take part in a 
lot of the debates that go on in the House — private members’ 
day, some of the other things that happen, so I don’t get often the 
opportunity to mention the constituency of Turtleford which I 
have the honour to represent here in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
It is a fairly large constituency, Mr. Speaker, it sprawls over some 
150 miles wide and 90 miles long. The backbone of that 
constituency, of course, is our agrarian society supported to some 
extend by the forest industry — no small extent, one should 
mention. And I want to comment on that perhaps a little later, too. 
 
But it is a constituency that is in a particularly attractive area of 
our province. The country is rolling. We have lots of nice little 
hills, or as the Duke of Edinburgh said when he was here, what 
hill my friend, because he couldn’t see it that way. But to those of 
us who’ve lived on the prairies for a number of years — and 
Lordy knows I haven’t lived here all my life; as everybody here 
knows, I’ve been here about 22 years; my heart is here, Mr. 
Speaker — I do see this constituency as being set in one of the 
prettier areas of Saskatchewan. And I don’t think there’s too many 
people who’d dispute that. 
 
But probably more so than the attractiveness, the physical 
attractiveness of the ear with its rolling hills and numerous lakes 
and rock and bush, probably more 

attractive to anybody who visits the area, Mr. Speaker, is the fact 
that it is populated with some very friendly, amenable, amicable 
folks in that particular area of the province. They’re pioneers by 
and large, or the sons and daughters and the granddaughters and 
grandsons of pioneers, Mr. Speaker — people who arrived from 
other parts of the world, as I indeed did myself, people who chose 
to settle in that area, to take on the back-breaking job of farming in 
an area that was covered with rock, that was covered with scrub 
bush and an area that is, as I said earlier, heavily forested for most 
of it. 
 
(2045) 
 
I’d like to turn, Mr. Speaker, to a couple of other issues, a couple 
of things that have tended to distress me in probably the last 12 
months since I’ve been a member here. For the first few years 
perhaps, Mr. Speaker, you may even recall, sir, that I was quite 
possibly branded as one of the less disciplined members of the 
House. Now I don’t know if that was a fair assessment of my 
conduct in the House, sir. I do recall that I did sit over there in the 
Tory overflow of 1982, and I was never slow to join in debate 
from my seat. I certainly wasn’t slow to get into what I now 
realize was nothing less than mud slinging on occasion. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I came to realize that it doesn’t take much 
intelligence and it doesn’t take an awful lot of thought to get into 
an exchange of insults. It reminds me of people who talk about 
going camping and say, I’m going to go out there and I’m going to 
rough it, Mr. Speaker, the skill in going camping is to be 
comfortable as one can possibly be in the outdoors. Roughing it — 
any ass can live rough in the wilds; anybody can walk out totally 
ill prepared. 
 
Now my analogy, Mr. Speaker, is just meant to demonstrate that 
in our daily exchanges here in the legislature, it really doesn’t hurt 
if we try to treat each other with some dignity and some respect. 
 
And I think that’s important, and more importantly, sir, probably 
when we leave the legislature because we do get into moments of 
rancour, and a little acrimony comes in, and perhaps a few 
vituperative comments pass across the floor, and we don’t always 
feel particularly good about it afterwards. At the time there’s 
probably some small gratification and some small satisfaction in 
saying, I got in a zinger today and I really insulted someone, and 
perhaps, Mr. Speaker, I really hurt somebody’s feelings. And I’m 
not really sure that we serve our constituents in our own 
constituencies, or in fact the people of Saskatchewan, when we 
engage in that type of debate. And very often, sir, it’s not debate 
from our seats. And I’m just not sure that that is the best way to 
serve the people of the province. 
 
It was pointed out to me by the various school groups in the past 
who’ve sat in these galleries, Mr. Speaker, who said that, in 
conversations afterwards in the members’ lounge or in my own 
office, well, why do you people behave like children? 
 
And at first I used to laugh that off and think, well, we’re 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

170 
 

not behaving like children, we’re just engaging in a little friendly 
exchange of insults. But, Mr. Speaker, perception becomes reality, 
and in fact, what happens is so many of these people see the daily 
conduct her in the Legislative Assembly, the perceive what is 
going on, and they translate that into being reality, and saying, 
these people are behaving like children. And when I hear that - on 
several occasions, more than once, Mr. Speaker — then I become 
concerned about, what do people think of my role as an elected 
official? How do they see my conduct in here? Do they see me as 
being a reasonable, sane individual trying to make rational 
comments, ignoring comments from people who are still on their 
seats, Mr. Speaker, and not being drawn down into some kind of 
gutter debate — get in the gutter, lie down and shoot up? I mean, 
surely there has to be something more meaningful to being an 
elected representative, not only in the province of Saskatchewan 
but in any province in this country or indeed to the national 
parliament. 
 
I don’t believe my job is to come in here and attack the members 
of the opposition. I don’t believe my job is to exchange insults. I 
do believe that as long as I am in government I have an obligation 
to listen to the members of the opposition and listen for creative 
solutions that they may want to bring forward. I believe that is 
what the people of Saskatchewan are looking for. I think in the last 
12 or 15 months, especially since the last election — and I’ve 
really had time to reflect on this — that that more accurately 
reflects that attitude and the aspirations of the public who were 
gracious enough to elect all of us to the high office, and indeed, 
sir, it is a high office and an honour to be a member of this 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
And I had partially this conversation with the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana at the end of one of the sittings last week, so 
this comes as no surprise, at least to her. I know it may come as a 
surprise to some of the other members of the opposition, 
especially those who were here in 1982 and would remember 
some of the comments I directed at the former Leader of the 
Opposition and perhaps some other members of the opposition at 
that time. But I assure you, sir, that this position which is occupied 
by all of us is one that is not to be taken lightly. It’s not something 
that should be demeaned by poor behaviour in the Assembly or 
certainly not by bad manners. 
 
There’s an old saying: manners maketh the man — probably 
maketh the woman too, sir. I think it’s very true. And I think we 
are being judged by the public of Saskatchewan to some large 
extent on how we conduct ourselves when we are on our feet in 
the Assembly or even on our bottoms in this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, for the people who sit in the galleries during question 
period and at other times of the day. 
 
Now having said that, sir, I will be taking issue with some 
comments that have been made by various members of the 
opposition. That, sir, is the strength of our democratic 
parliamentary system, and that, Mr. Speaker, is why we are 
elected. We do have partisan political parties in Canada. That is 
the strength of the system. The fact that within our democracy we 
not only tolerate but we encourage diverse opinions, is what 
makes the system work. This system, sir, cannot work if we do not 
have 

freely elected representatives who will support and advance 
different viewpoints in this forum, that was set up for just that 
purpose. So naturally, as a politician, as an elected member for the 
Progressive Conservative Party, I am partisan, no less or no more 
partisan than the members of the opposition who have taken their 
turn in advancing their viewpoints. Naturally, sir, I intend to 
advance my viewpoints, which, in some cases, are diametrically 
opposed to opinions that have already been forwarded in the 
House to our side of the House. 
 
I’d like to begin, Mr. Speaker, by making a comment or two about 
the situation in Big River which is in my constituency. It’s been 
alluded to in the Assembly earlier today by an old friend of mine, 
an old sparring partner actually because he’s my critic for one of 
my responsibilities, the hon. member from Athabasca. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, yes, yes, there have been some problems in 
Big River in that some people are going to find themselves out of 
work — not a lot, but a few will find themselves out of work in a 
few months, with changes that Weyerhaeuser corporation is 
making in the way that they do business in that particular 
community in supplying the needs of the Big River mill. Sir, it 
gives me no comfort whatsoever to know that there are a handful 
of families going to be affected in this manner — it gives me no 
comfort whatsoever. 
 
I do intend to speak, and I have already, with officials from 
Weyerhaeuser. We have talked about people who are working in 
the mill and giving them the right of first refusal of jobs in Prince 
Albert so that they can continue to be employed. And I want to 
explore with those officials what other possibilities may exist for 
the families in that area. But having said that, sir — and not trying 
to defend any company because it’s not my role and I feel no 
compunction nor compulsion to do so . . . However, I have to 
point out, sir, that when Weyerhaeuser came into this province and 
Weyerhaeuser wanted to take over the operation of the Big River 
saw mill, they took over a losing operation. They took over a 
concern that had lost millions of dollars over the years. This was a 
sieve, sir, and the money was just freely flowing through it. It 
could not be allowed to continue for ever. That was the reality of 
the situation. The people of Big River were aware of that, and they 
knew that the government couldn’t go on for ever pouring 
taxpayers’ dollars — millions of dollars a year — into that 
operation and a losing concern. 
 
What Weyerhaeuser did, Mr. Speaker, was take the mill, turn it 
around and turn a half million dollar loss in the first half of the 
year into a half million dollar or more profit for the rest of the year 
the first year they were in operation — and they’re doing better 
now. What they have done is ensured that the mill is viable for the 
future, and for the people who are working there. They didn’t say 
at any time they could continue with exactly the same numbers 
they inherited in the mill, or they could use the same number of 
contractors or the same number of truckers. They’re changing the 
trucking system to become more efficient. In fact the discussions 
are still going on about using the triple-axle system and the heavier 
weights. I don’t believe that that is a viable alternative to the 
current trucking situation there. Our resource caucus is still 
discussing this, and we want to have further discussions before 
any 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

171 
 

final decision is made in that regard. 
 
But sir, I do appreciate the problems that are being sustained 
currently by a few families in Big River who are looking at six and 
eight months from now of potential unemployment. And 
everything will be done, everything will be done to mitigate that 
situation as far as possible. 
 
M. le président, je n’ai pas parlé français il y a vingt-cinq ans. 
Ainsi, j’ai oublié pas que beaucoup de vocabulaire et beaucoup de 
grammaire. Mais, je crois c’est très important pour moi à essayer à 
parler en français, à parler au communauté francophone. En effet, 
c’est très important pour tous les membres do la législature à 
essayer à communiquer avec le communauté francophone. J’ai 
l’intention cet été, peut-être à Jonquière. Ed Broadbent, chef de 
NPD, NPD en français, a étudié à Jonquière cet hiver. J’ai 
l’intention d’essayer à parler meilleur que maintenant. Je ne parle 
pas bien, mais si on parle lentement, je comprends. Mais tous les 
gens - non, pas tous les gens; beaucoup de gens de langue français 
parlent trop vite pour moi. Mais si on parle lentement, je 
comprends. 
 
J’ai un ami qui est francophone. Il dit même chose. Anglais, il dit 
les anglais parlent trop vite pour lui. Ainsi, même chose, tous les 
deux. Peut-être nous avons peur de parler en français parce que 
nous avons peur de faire erreur. quel dommage, M. le président. Il 
n’y a pas de quoi. Mais, c’est important pour nous à essayer à 
parler en français. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel strongly that we have to make some 
movement, given the recent court decision towards a recognition 
of French language rights in Saskatchewan. And saying this, sir, 
and standing here tonight and baring my should, I know that this is 
not without some degree of controversy. But, sir, I would also 
remind the members of the Assembly that Saskatchewan under the 
leadership of our Premier, and supported by almost all of the other 
members in this House, did in fact ratify the Meech Lake accord, 
and we were the first province outside of Quebec to do so. And, 
sir, that’s very significant and that indeed is very important. And 
we should not lose sight of that, because right in the Meech Lake 
accord it says Canada’s a bilingual country. And, sir, that includes 
us. 
 
Now that doesn’t mean, in my view, that we are saying to all of 
the people of Saskatchewan, it has become necessary for 
everybody to become immediately bilingual. That is not the intent, 
Mr. Speaker. I believe the intent is to say we recognize that we do 
have a francophone minority who are part of an official language 
policy of Canada that has been instituted in years gone by, the 
Official Languages Act came in in 1969. It’s been here for a long 
time; that’s almost 20 years. We had a constitution passed in very 
recent history that, in fact, excluded the province of Quebec. We 
now have an opportunity to include the province of Quebec within 
one country of Canada and within our constitution. I think, sir, it 
would be a terrible pity if we did not pursue this and bring about a 
successful and mutually advantageous conclusion to the types of 
discussions that are going on now. 

(2100) 
 
In my area of responsibility within my portfolio, I have some 
responsibility for multi-culturalism, which is one of the areas I 
enjoy the most. In that regard, sir, I have contact with various 
members of the francophone community representing, perhaps, 
different viewpoints. Sir, they are not strident, for the most part, 
the people I deal with. They are not bigots, and they are not 
zealous. They are asking us to live up to the Meech Lake accord 
which was duly ratified within this Assembly. 
 
I, for one, like the terms of the Meech Lake accord. I like what it 
tries to do, and I would like to bring about, in some form, an 
agreement with which we can all live, as I said, a mutually 
advantageous agreement for both the anglophone and the 
francophone community in Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re not being asked to go overboard. The issue is not French 
immersion. The issue is the laws of Saskatchewan and their 
translation into French. And I believe that our laws that can be 
translated into French and perhaps ought to be translated into 
French, at little pain, at little cost to the government or the rest of 
the people of Saskatchewan. And I think, sir, that we are going to 
have to move some degree in that regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I turn now to some comments that have been brought 
up in the Assembly in the course of debate. And I realize tonight 
I’m following some fairly emotional speeches and some spirited 
speeches. Certainly one of the advantages of getting into the 
debate some days along, is that one does have the advantage to 
peruse speeches, particularly of members of the opposition, 
because you know we don’t always agree and we have ways of 
expressing to each other, perhaps not always in the most polite 
terms, our disagreements. So I’d like to just explore this a little 
further. 
 
One thing I’d like to take a look at is some of the things the Leader 
of the Opposition had said. Well he admitted in his opening 
debate, Mr. Speaker, that he had some big shoes to fill. He’s 
absolutely right, he does have big shoes to fill — the former 
leader, a distinguished parliamentarian, a distinguished leader of 
his party, and certainly a distinguished former premier of this 
province. What did worry me though, was when the Leader of the 
Opposition indicated he wouldn’t be trying to fill those shoes. I 
began to get a wee bit nervous as to exactly what he meant by that. 
I thought he would have come up with some fresh and meaningful 
ideas, as I said earlier, perhaps some creative solutions. I for one, I 
believe I’m an open-minded individual, and I’m open to listening 
to constructive criticism and to ideas no matter what the source. 
And if the Leader of the Opposition has some of those ideas I’d be 
pleased to hear them and consider them. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what did we hear? We heard the same old 
socialist litany — encouraging private enterprise and individual 
initiative and truly supporting freedom of individual citizens is 
somehow suspect and somehow evil. That concerns me, Mr. 
Speaker. That makes me very worried. 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

172 
 

Acknowledging the influence and the importance of the 
market-place in the provincial, national, and the international 
economies is wrong, was what I heard from the Leader of the 
Opposition. And the problem with members opposite is that when 
they governed they ignored some basic tenets of effective 
administration and economic theory. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, oh, oh, you just talk about 
administration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, please don’t call the hon. 
member from Quill Lakes to order; I excuse his bad manners all 
by myself. He should save his bad manners, his rudeness, his 
ignorance for someone who may be impressed by it. I certainly am 
impressed by none of those failing attributes which he so aptly 
displays day after day here in the legislature. Actually, Mr. 
Speaker, I find him a constant source of embarrassment, as not 
only do most members here but anybody who happens to sit in the 
gallery. And I invite him to continue to make a fool of himself so 
he continues to make those of us on this side of the House look 
good. Thank you, sir. 
 
Mr. Speaker, effective administration isn’t handling every detail 
yourself, running every facet of a huge and varied enterprise as 
though you, as the administrator, were an expert in every area. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s just not possible. Yet that is what the opposition 
tried to do. That’s what they wanted to do when they were in 
government. They said government should be in the business of 
farming; government should own all the land and just let the 
individual farmers rent it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, last week I listened, as did most of the 
members in here, to the Leader of the Opposition when he 
delivered a lecture to us on morality. That’s right, Mr. Speaker, a 
lecture on morality. But, Mr. Speaker, I ask you, in 1980 and 1981 
when the people over there were in opposition, and the now 
Leader of the Opposition was in fact the Deputy Premier at that 
time, where was the morality in allowing 22 per cent interest rates 
to drive people off the land and drive people out of their homes? I 
ask you, Mr. Speaker, was that moral? 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the opposition decided that they would buy 
land from farmers and then rent it back to them — take the land 
away and rent it back to them —was that a moral decision? And, 
Mr. Speaker, where is the morality in a leader of the opposition 
who ignored 22 per cent interest rates, who bought the land from 
farmers and said you can rent it back? Where is the morality in 
that gentleman who lectured us? Where is the morality in that 
gentleman being involved in a law firm, working on behalf of a 
bank who is now foreclosing on those very same farmers and 
saying, you are now driven off your own land? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition, when they were government, also 
said, government should be in the business of owning and 
operating potash mines, uranium mines, and the oil industry. They 
said, government should be in business, and they proceeded to use 
revenue and future revenue, by borrowing, to get their government 
into the business of farming, potash business, uranium business. 
And they fixed it so that they would 

basically be telling private oil companies how to do business in the 
oil patch. As a result, there was very little activity in 
Saskatchewan’s oil patch under their administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in effect what we had were socialists in capitalist’s 
clothing. They had a chairman of the board mentality; create 
Crown corporations, appoint their ministers to be chairmen of the 
boards — socialists in capitalist’s clothing. 
 
Instead of sticking with encouraging the development and the 
diversification of our industrial and business sector, regulating it, 
Mr. Speaker, and then sitting back to collect the tax revenue and 
take pride in the creation of jobs and related economic activity, the 
opposition felt that because government already had its hands in 
so many different pies it just needed a few more responsibilities. 
So instead of concentrating on the areas of health care and 
education and justice and the protection of our citizens, where 
government truly ought to be involved, Mr. Speaker, the 
opposition wasted energy and financial resources on getting 
government into business — getting government into business, 
Mr. Speaker, even though the track record of government in 
business is something less than impressive; even though 
governments the world over have a record of taking even 
profitable enterprises and making poor business decisions and 
losing the taxpayers’ money, all in the name of business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has chosen a different path. We 
don’t believe that this government, or any government, should 
waste the time, energy, and money of the people of Saskatchewan 
by being involved in areas where private enterprise is perfectly 
willing to put up capital and take the risks. We’re concentrating on 
what we believe should be the involvement of government — 
protection of our citizens, protection in the areas of health care and 
education, to give them the best chance in life possible, and, Mr. 
Speaker, doing this in the most efficient and responsible manner 
which we can muster, keeping in mind all of the time it is the 
taxpayer who is footing the bill. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition said, there’s only freedom and 
private initiative if you have money. Mr. Speaker, I have difficulty 
in believing he said that. I would hope that when he said that there 
was some other meaning than the one I’m taking from this. But 
the bare words were — and again we go back probably to 
perception becomes reality — and the perception of what he said 
that day was: if you have money, then you have freedom, and you 
can afford private initiative. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there are hundreds, thousands, hundreds of 
thousands of people, immigrants, who came to this province, 
grandparents and great grandparents who came here without 
money. They came here to Saskatchewan and they chose 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because they were choosing freedom 
over some other life-style which they could no longer support; 
over a life-style which was struggling them and they have to get 
out and they wanted to get away and, Mr. Speaker, they chose 
Saskatchewan. 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

173 
 

And what did they ask for? Freedom. That’s all they asked for. 
They came with no money, seeking freedom, and they found that 
freedom in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Immigrants are still 
coming into this province today, men and women who do, in a 
very real way, contribute to our cultural mosaic and our economy 
and, Mr. Speaker, they do it with very little more than their own 
individual initiative. 
 
The first responsibility of government is to regulate, to ensure that 
those with power do not abuse it — that our laws are obeyed for 
the safety of all of us. Equally as vital, I feel we must provide our 
citizens with health care and with education, the necessities that 
will give each of them the ability to use their individual initiative 
to find a meaningful and a productive place in society. And 
thirdly, I believe — and this government, I am sure, believes — 
we must foster an environment where individual initiative can 
flourish and can be rewarded. 
 
We also have a responsibility, Mr. Speaker, to those in our society 
who, through no fault of their own, through sickness or perhaps 
other circumstances, find themselves in the most unfortunate 
position of where they cannot look after themselves. Mr. Speaker, 
we have a moral obligation to those people to look out for their 
welfare, to look out for their health, to look out for their 
well-being. Mr. Speaker, unless we have fostered, created, and 
nurtured a prosperous society, we will find ourselves unable to 
fulfil our moral obligations and duties to our fellow human beings. 
 
Yes, certainly there is an ideological difference between this 
government and the members opposite. We both recognize that 
and we both freely admit it. We believe in individual initiative and 
of course we believe in freedom. I know the members opposite 
would probably reiterate those sentiments. Perhaps the difference 
lies in how each of us want to go about achieving individual 
initiative and freedom. 
 
We believe in private enterprise and recognizing the folly of 
unnecessary government interference in business. We believe in 
providing our citizens with opportunity, Mr. Speaker, but I believe 
that the members opposite think that government, somehow 
omnipotent, must take control of every aspect of life in our 
society, whether or not the government really knows what it is 
doing. And as the Leader of the Opposition did, they call into 
question the qualities of individual initiative, of private enterprise, 
and most surprisingly, Mr. Speaker, of freedom. These are 
qualities of our society that this government respects, and we will 
fight to preserve on behalf of the people we serve. 
 
(2115) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, I shall be supporting the 
motion and voting against any amendments which are offered. 
Thank you for your patience. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I would first of all, like many 
of the other speakers before me, want to 

congratulate the mover and seconder of the throne speech, the 
member from Rosthern and the member from Moosomin. I think 
that it is generally conceded, at least on our side of the House, and 
I think generally conceded by the public, too, that their job is a 
difficult one, even as our job is a difficult one trying to speak with 
the Minister of Education again hyping away from his seat. 
 
But their job is a difficult one, for their job is to sound optimistic, 
to sound positive, to sound upbeat about a throne speech that 
really wasn’t. Their job is one of sounding that they’re 
overwhelmed about a throne speech that’s generally conceded to 
be one of the more underwhelming ever. So theirs is a difficult 
job, and they deserve our congratulations for doing the best under 
trying circumstances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the throne speech reflects the government’s vision 
of the future, then it might be said — looking at that throne speech 
— that the government is myopic indeed, that they do not see 
things clearly, that they only see the future very vaguely. And this 
comes as no surprise. This comes as no surprise to the people of 
Saskatchewan, not any more. They know that the government is 
listless. They know that this government and the PC Party has lost 
its spirit, has lost its drive, has lost its innocence. 
 
Let me put this in some perspective, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 
was a government that was first elected in 1982 on a tide of 
optimism, on a tide of great expectations for the future. 
 
I think all of us can remember their slogan, there’s so much more 
that we can be. The people of Saskatchewan remember that 
slogan, and the people of Saskatchewan believed the PC Party that 
there is so much more that we can be. They believed that as the 
PCs did, that whatever problems face Saskatchewan, whatever 
problems there might be, the PCs would solve these problems and 
move Saskatchewan forward to new heights. They all believed 
that there was so much more that we could be, and that’s what the 
majority of people believed. 
 
And that’s why they elected in 1982 a PC government with the 
largest mandate that’s ever been enjoyed, I think, by any 
government in this province. It was simply overwhelming. There 
was never more a case of where a party running for office and 
trying to form the government that was more in sync with what the 
people were believing and thinking — never more. 
 
But I think that faith and that confidence, that confidence was 
shaken badly during the first term, shaken very badly — and I’ll 
get to that — but obviously not shaken enough because the PC 
government was re-elected. They were re-elected with a majority 
of the people of Saskatchewan supporting them. But given our 
system of constituencies, we understand that. That’s the type of 
democratic system we have, even if the Minister of Urban Affairs 
has some ideas about that type of system not now being good for 
urban governments, whereas it might be good for rural 
governments. But that’s the system we have. 
 
Today is an altogether different matter. Today, a year and a half 
after the last election, the great majority of people in 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

174 
 

Saskatchewan are disillusioned, if not fundamentally opposed to 
the present government. 
 
And I guess we need to ask ourselves, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what 
accounts for this. What accounts for this massive reversal of 
public opinion from 1982 when the people truly believed that this 
government represented all of their best interests, to the situation 
we have today where so many, where the great majority of people 
in Saskatchewan stand fundamentally opposed to the PC 
government? What accounts for this massive turnaround in a 
space of less than six years, where it has taken many previous 
governments many more years to get to that point? What accounts 
for a party and a government reversing from one of hope and 
optimism to one of hopelessness and despair? What accounts for 
government reverting from one of ideas and creativity such as they 
were in 1982, to one of mental stagnation? What accounts from 
turning from energy and enthusiasm in 1982 to one of tiredness 
and listlessness today? What accounts for a government turning 
from compassion, such as it was in 1982, to a fundamental lack of 
caring in 1988? And what accounts for a government that was 
generally conceded to be a populace government, turning from 
populism to one that is increasingly perceived to be serving 
narrow, narrow interests. 
 
I might say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that not only the general public 
but I think that also many members of the Progressive 
Conservative Party are disillusioned and are beginning to turn 
their backs on the PC party. And I think we have to recognize that 
most PC party members are, or perhaps I should be speaking in 
the past tense now, were honest and decent people. And I 
certainly, and I think others, would disagree with their perception 
of how society should be run, of how government should work, 
about how various sectors of the economy might come into force 
in running this province; we might have those disagreements. I 
recognize, and I think many others recognize, that in the main the 
PC party members are, or I should say were, honest, decent, and, I 
think, compassionate people, and after all this is a party that has a 
strong, strong strain of civil libertarianism. This is the party that 
was the home of John Diefenbaker, a man known throughout 
Saskatchewan and through this country for his compassion, a man 
known for his strong stands on fundamental human rights. And so 
when I think of the members of the PC party, at least in the past, I 
think of honest, decent, caring people. 
 
And I wonder, too, what accounts for their lack of passion now, 
and what accounts for their lack of support for their government. 
 
Why is it that the throne speech is lost on them as it is lost on the 
public? Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to do a brief comparative 
analysis of events in 1982 — to look at the type of government in 
1982 and then to look at what we have today. I think that it would 
be illustrative. It’s important for the people of Saskatchewan to 
focus back and then to look at the present to really begin to 
understand why it is we have such a throne speech; why it is we 
have the government we have today. 
 
And first I’d to look at the question of consultation. If any words 
describe the PC Party in 1982 they were the words 

of listening and consultation. This was a party, in 1982, and a 
government that believed strongly, very strongly, that listening to 
the people, consulting the people, was fundamental to running 
good, sound, solid government. that’s what they believed, and they 
set out to practise that. They made it clear that they did not, could 
not, relate to the NDP. They said the NDP in 1982 had not been 
listening, and that’s why there was such a great turnover in public 
support, and that they were not going to go in that direction, that 
they were going to listen, that they were going to consult, and that 
they were fundamentally different. 
 
Well what about today? I think that it’s increasingly clear that this 
government no longer listens, that this government no longer 
consults. There is an increasing perception that this is a 
government that is more inclined to want to push its own views of 
what they think should happen in Saskatchewan. Not for them to 
listen to the public, but to go to the public and to stage manage 
public hearings to push their own points of view. 
 
I have a sense, and members on this side have a sense, that the 
government is now afraid of the public. If we look at the hearings 
on the trade deal, the Mulroney-Reagan trade deal, if we look at 
the hearings, first by a government task force taking care to meet 
with selected people, and then the so-called free trade town hall 
meetings stacked with Tory supporters trying to make sure that 
only the right questions would get asked — and I say that that’s 
illustrative not of a government that wants to listen, not of a 
government that wants to consult, but of a government that is 
afraid of the people’s opinions; afraid of the people’s points of 
view; has its own very clear ideas about what it wants to do, and 
will manipulate things in a way to push those views down the 
throats of people. 
 
If we look at privatization, we look at the recent article by Bruce 
Johnstone in the Leader-Post where he quotes the member from 
Indian Head-Wolseley, the minister for privatization, who says: 
 

My role will be to talk to Saskatchewan people and I don’t 
want any secrets. It’s all going to be laid out . . . (the member 
for Indian Head-Wolseley) said. 

 
And Mr. Johnstone goes on to describe how the minister travelled 
to Chaplin to talk to the Sask Minerals employees about the 
sodium sulphate plant. And Mr. Johnstone says he, the member 
from Indian Head-Wolseley, the minister responsible for 
privatization — they call it public participation, or participation — 
that: 
 

He wouldn’t tell the employees who the buyer is. He 
wouldn’t say . . . there will be any lay-offs. He wouldn’t say 
anything about the deal . . . 

 
And Mr. Johnstone goes on and said that if the minister 
 

. . . was serious about getting the public involved in the 
privatization process, he would have met with Sask Minerals 
employees weeks, if not months, ago to discuss the 
government’s 

  



 
March 28, 1988 

175 
 

privatization plans. He might have asked . . . (them a number 
of questions). 

 
But in any event, Mr. Johnstone concludes that privatization, as 
such 
 

. . . won’t succeed if it’s done in a hasty, half-baked manner, 
with little or no consultation with the employees or the 
public. (And) despite their assurances to the contrary, the 
Tories are continuing to do the latter. 

 
Mr. Johnstone has an interesting perspective that what the 
government seems to be more interested in doing is not consulting, 
not listening to the people, but seems to be more interested in 
doing something that’s called damage control. But damage control 
is not necessarily listening or consulting the people. 
 
One only has to look at another recent example, the question of 
farm equity financing, to know that this is a government that’s 
afraid of the points of views that farmers might express, and has 
articulated its own ideas about what needs to be done, and has sent 
out a road show of MLAs to go around the province and say, well 
this is what we want to do, pushing their own views on the farmers 
of Saskatchewan, but not really opening up and not really listening 
to the people of Saskatchewan. They’ve been going through the 
motion, they’ve been orchestrating consultation. They really do 
not believe that the people have anything valuable to say to them 
any more. 
 
If they are listening, or if they are consulting, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
sure not with the people of this province. When you consider the 
fact that last year 90,000 names were tabled in petition form in this 
Legislative Assembly; when you consider the fact that 11,000 
people, in the largest demonstration in Saskatchewan history, 
would go to the steps of the legislature, and the Premier and the 
government refuses to treat their concerns in any real, substantial 
fashion, but simply sides it off by saying, well those are just NDP 
supporters — you know, I’m glad that he said that because I had 
no end of calls from people that signed the petitions, to say, well 
I’m no NDP member, but I’d like to be one now since they called 
me one. 
 
(2130) 
 
But is that listening to the people of this province when one-tenth 
of the population expresses concerns about health care and the 
government can do no more than say, well those are simply NDP 
supporters? Now is that listening to the people? Is that saying the 
people have real substantial concerns, concerns that need to be 
acted upon? That’s not what the government did. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they do seem to be listening to some people 
however, at least that’s my perception. I have a perception that 
they are listening to Brian Mulroney, and the minute Mr. 
Mulroney, the Prime Minister, says something, they listen. How 
else are we to interpret, for example, the issue of de-indexation of 
pensions? How are we to interpret senior citizens in this province, 
as in many others, being outraged by the federal government’s 
plans of that day to de-index pensions. 

How are we to interpret a Premier who would not, not on their 
behalf, express his concerns to Mr. Mulroney about the federal 
government’s plans. Luckily enough, Mr. Mulroney, in that 
instance, did listen, and his Minister of Finance did back down. 
But I tell you, it was no thanks to the Premier of this province; it 
was no thanks to the government of this province. They didn’t 
listen to the people of Saskatchewan, or if they did listen, they 
simply ignored them. They chose to listen to Mr. Mulroney 
instead. 
 
And I might add that another good example of that is the question 
of the CF-18 contract, a contract that notwithstanding the opinions 
of experts and government civil servants in Ottawa, that should 
have been awarded to Winnipeg and to Manitoba, was awarded to 
Montreal instead. And people in western Canada were outraged, 
with the exception of the Tories opposite, because they listen to 
Mr. Mulroney, they do not listen to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Another group that they seem to be listening to, Mr. Speaker, are 
the bankers who handle our debt, the bond dealers, the credit 
rating agencies. A quiet word over the phone lines from New 
York, Toronto, from the bankers there seems to count for far more 
than the voice of the people. How else does one explain the very 
drastic action that the government has taken with respect to the 
farm production loan program? How does one explain a situation 
where farmers were in crisis some two years ago, and on that basis 
the government gave them a farm production loan to help them in 
their time of need, and now that times are even worse, and it’s 
generally conceded that farmers are even in a tougher crisis than 
they were two years ago, in far worse shape than they were two 
years ago, this government is now setting out with extremely 
tough security provisions, extremely tough security provisions, to 
get the money back. Now’s the time they could use the money, but 
now’s the time the government is saying, we’re calling in the 
chips. We want our money back. 
 
There’s no such thing as being able to carry the debt forward. 
there’s no understanding that perhaps we might tie a repayment to 
an improvement in the farm economy. No, this government wants 
the money back. And this is a government, if the government 
members are to be believed, this is a government that prides itself 
in the close support that it has of the farmers. This is a government 
that states almost daily that we have a close relationship with the 
farmers. The farmers trust them, and we’re the farmers’ friends. 
That’s what they say. 
 
Well how does one account then for this get tough attitude, these 
drastic measures with the farmers, other than the Minister of 
Finance gets his calls from the bankers in New York and in 
Toronto and they say, we have some concerns about the size of 
your debt; we have concerns about the interest rates that might be 
charged in the future unless you begin to do certain specific things; 
that money that you’ve loaned out to farmers has got to start to be 
repaid, because if you don’t do that, the interest rates will reflect 
our opinion. 
 
So very clearly, Mr. Speaker, we have a sense that if this 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

176 
 

government is listening to anyone, they’re listening to the federal 
government, to Brian Mulroney; they’re listening to the bankers in 
New York and Toronto, but they’re certainly not listening any 
more to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — You know, the very, very thing that they 
accused the NDP of in 1981 and ’82 has now beset them, and then 
some. And the people know this; and is it any wonder that the 
people of Saskatchewan are now tuning them out. 
 
In 1982 the government made it clear that it represented all of the 
people. That all were to be included in the government’s planning 
for our future — that none were to be excluded. There is a sense 
that this is a populace government, that it represented all. It 
represented farmers and workers, employers, and employees, big 
business, small business, the rich, the poor, the middle class, rural, 
urban, young, old, native, non-native, men and women. And there 
is a sense there, a strong belief that this government represented all 
the aspirations of the people in Saskatchewan. 
 
And what do we have today? Do we have a populace government 
today? No, we do not, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have a 
government that has introduced deep divisions in our society, a 
government that seems to believe that you can win if you divide 
and conquer, if you play that game; that if you divide the 
population enough, that you just might be able to conquer the 
population. 
 
This is no longer the government of all of the people, but only of 
enough people to hopefully get re-elected next time. And I say that 
there is a major difference. This is a government that has alienated 
urban areas with extreme ignorance and, I might say, 
incompetence on the part of the minister. It alienated the poor with 
savage attacks. It alienated the sick with attacks on health care. It 
alienated working people through pandering to the interests of big 
business. It alienated the elderly. It alienated the middle class with 
attacks on their pocket-books. It alienated small business because 
of the incompetent handling of our economy, and it alienated the 
youth because of the attacks on the education system and the lack 
of any real action on youth unemployment. And they have 
alienated women through their insensitivity. And now the 
government also is alienating the farmers and those in the rural 
areas. 
 
At one time most people believed that the PC government 
represented their points of view and their dreams and their 
aspirations — no longer. They see the member from Melville, the 
Minister for Social Services, picking on those who cannot defend 
themselves, and they ask themselves, well, who’s next? They see 
him at meetings in the countryside, wearing his commie-busters’ 
military cap and say that this is not representative of the problems 
facing Saskatchewan. They see a minister with a vicious sense of 
morality and with little compassion. They see a Premier who 
seems increasingly receptive to the views of U.S.-based religious 
leaders who espouse extreme narrow points of view, and they are 
concerned. And is it any wonder the general public feels 
alienated? And is it 

any wonder that many members of the PC government are 
disturbed? And remember again, that this is a PC Party of John 
Diefenbaker, a man who believed passionately in the rights of 
people, and one who cared for the downtrodden. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan know that this PC 
government, which once believed in the politics of inclusion, now 
practises the politics of exclusion, and they cannot support this. 
And I would suggest to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that if there is 
no other reason — if there is not other reason for the defeat of the 
PC candidates in the upcoming by-elections, if there is no other 
reasons than for a PC defeat in the next general election, it will be 
because the PC Party has turned from a party of practising the 
politics of inclusion, or believed in the politics of inclusion, but 
has gone from that to a party which practises the politics of 
exclusion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — One of the hopes of many in 
Saskatchewan was that when the PC government was elected in 
1982, that they would at least maintain the standard of ethics and 
morality in government, if not supersede the standards of ethics 
and morality in government. 
 
Many hoped that when it came to the question of patronage, that 
the PC government would decline to participate. That’s what 
people believed. If for no other reason then, the PC’s in opposition 
had raised this to be a significant problem. They said, this is 
something that must be cleared up. And how quickly and how 
devastatingly those hopes were dashed. 
 
Have we ever before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the history of 
Saskatchewan, seen such avid practitioners of the art of patronage 
as this government? Have we ever seen such avid practitioners? 
Whether it’s George Hill, Louis Domotor, Pal Rousseau, Paul 
Schoenhals, Ralph Katzman, Gordon Dirks, Tim Embury, Paul 
Schoenhals we’ve mentioned. Gordon Currie was mentioned by a 
member opposite. Jack Sandberg was mentioned. The government 
House Leader says there is a couple more. Keith Parker, the 
former member for Moose Jaw. 
 
You know, when you look at the list of former PC cabinet 
ministers and former MLAs, when you look at that list, you would 
say that the government is practising the politics of inclusion, that 
they want to include that old group when it comes to handing out 
work and rewards, because certainly there are very few excluded. I 
think the former member for Regina Victoria, Metro Rybchuk, 
might have been excluded, but we’re not entirely sure about that. 
And we asked a question last year, what was wrong with Metro, 
and why wouldn’t you give him a job as well? because you gave 
everyone else a job. 
 
I think the point of the message is, Mr. Speaker, that when it 
comes to patronage, their government’s purse knows no 
draw-strings. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2145) 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

177 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — And when it comes to selling assets, when 
it comes to buying supplies, when it comes to renting services, or 
what you have, this government does not display any sense of fair 
play. 
 
You know, the public tender call is like the whooping crane, like 
the call of the whooping crane; it’s rare indeed; it’s like an 
endangered species in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — This government has a new creature, or 
listens to a new call. It’s called the proposal call, you know, where 
the lowest price for the best produce need not stand in the way of 
other political patronage considerations — and this wallowing in 
the trough disgusts the public. It has especially disgusted those 
who have traditionally done business with the government and are 
used to fair play. 
 
You know, and in defence of this new record of patronage, this 
patronage of immense proportions, the government offers a timid 
defence. They say, well everybody does it. They’re saying in 
effect that two wrongs make a right, and this is supposed to 
placate the public. 
 
But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, even if the public subscribe 
to the notion that everybody does it, they also know that nobody 
does it quite like the PC government has done it in this province, 
and if the general public, or more of the general public had been at 
the opening dinner for the Legislative Assembly this session, they 
would have been treated to the spectacle of the president of the 
property management corporation — dare we call it the patronage 
management corporation — the person who’s in charge of the 
day-to-day patronage for the government, standing arm in arm, 
arms around the shoulders of all the big Tory fund raisers also 
present at the dinner — and the public of Saskatchewan, they 
would not approve. 
 
You know, government advertising provides another interesting 
example of a government saying one thing but doing another. I 
think we can all remember the attacks on the NDP government 
prior to 1982 about, oh, you shouldn’t use taxpayers’ money for 
advertising. And I happen to agree basically with that point of 
view; I agree with that. The PCs said, no more, no more of that if 
we form a government. Yet we see a government now that’s 
spending record sums on advertising, and all their friends in those 
agencies making sure that the Phil Kershaws and the Spence 
Bozaks and the like are all amply rewarded for past service to the 
Conservative Party. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, notwithstanding a booming economy in the 
years preceding 1982, the PCs made it clear that they would do 
better, and this is their strongest belief of all. They said, look at the 
support we have from big business, look at all the people in our 
caucus with business experience. They said the defeat of the NDP 
would signal that Saskatchewan was indeed open for business. 
They even had a conference called, open for business, the open for 
business conference, chaired by that former close friend of the 
Premier, and I might say a 

former financial wizard, Will Klein. 
 
And people now ask: what has happened? Well the record hasn’t 
changed, but the reality has. Virtually very little major economic 
development takes place in Saskatchewan without the government 
paying heavily to see that it takes place or stays afloat. Whether 
we look at the oil patch, which members opposite are fond of 
boasting about, but we have to remember that we paid a price of 
one point some billion dollars to ensure that kind of activity would 
take place; whether we look at the upgrader that they’re very fond 
of talking about, but if one examines the financing of the upgrader 
it’s clear that governments are virtually paying all of the bill for 
the upgrader; when one looks at the bacon plant in North 
Battleford, one recognizes that that would not have happened if it 
hadn’t been for massive give-aways and grants to Peter 
Pocklington; when one looks to Canapharm which couldn’t stay 
afloat without heavy government intervention; when one looks at 
the high-tech companies that seem to be going under in this 
province, that are not doing well, and the government having to 
support them; when one looks at a major hotel and convention 
centre development in Regina and begins to understand that if it 
were not for the government’s involvement, it wouldn’t take place. 
 
You know, the Premier is fond of saying that the NDP buys, but I 
ask, pray tell, just what the PC government is doing, if not buying 
economic development. And I say to the government, you can fool 
the people, or you can try to fool the people, but they know that 
you have let them down. You have let them down because they 
expected a great deal more from you than you have delivered. 
They believed the rhetoric of 1982; they believed you when you 
said there was so much more that we could be. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the PC government’s economic development 
strategy is a joke. They have no clear idea of what they are doing, 
other than buying economic development activity. The people 
laugh. The people laugh because they hear the rhetoric, but they 
see the reality. 
 
There was a very strong expectation, Mr. Speaker, in 1982 that the 
PC government would be as competent, if not more competent 
than the preceding NDP administration when it came to managing 
the affairs of the government. There was a sense that, given the 
business expertise that the government had —and they had it —
there was a sense that, given that business expertise, the affairs of 
the government and of the province would be well-managed. 
 
Of course we know the reality is much different, and I need not go 
much further than the government’s record of yearly deficits to 
illustrate my point that this government is truly incompetent. 
There is hardly any other word to describe them in that sense. 
They are incompetent. The PC government spent money like 
drunken sailors, and I would say that I would apologize to any 
drunken sailors that I might have offended — spent money like 
there is no end, and, surprise! — the incurred deficits. 
 
After 11 years of surpluses, the PC government has rung up 
deficits every year. Now most people that administer a 
  



 
March 28, 1988 

178 
 

budget — whether it’s the household budget, whether it’s a 
business budget, any kind of budget — know a simple truth, and 
that is that if you spend more than you take in, if your expenses 
exceed your income, you’re going to incur a deficit. Most people 
know that. But it seems that successive PC finance ministers have 
become immersed or so engrossed in the exoteric of financial 
management that they’ve forgotten a simple truth, that if you 
spend more than you take in, you’ll end up with a deficit. 
 
And not only had they sight of that basic action, but when it comes 
to forecasting deficits, they’ve really taken incompetence to new 
heights. How can a Minister of Finance project a deficit of $400 
million one day and end up with an actual deficit of $1.2 billion. 
And how is that possible? No, either the minister prevaricated, or 
he’s grossly incompetent. And I’ll be kind on this occasion, Mr. 
Speaker, to say and to suggest, that he’s grossly incompetent. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan recognize that. They recognize 
this government is incompetent. And there is other reasons that 
they believe that. They remember a sell-off of Highways 
equipment on 10 cents on the dollar. They remember the Pioneer 
Trust fiasco. They see the government paying handsome rents for 
empty office space throughout the province. And they see a 
cabinet that has over time been filled with more than its fair share 
of people who — well, for want of a better term — seem to be 
rowing with one oar in the water. 
 
You know, when it comes to health care the people really know 
that they’ve been led down the garden path. You remember that 
this is a government that promised in 1982 that the NDP was not 
doing enough when it came to health care and that they would do 
far more, and that whatever problems there were in health care 
would be resolved, and that we were moving forward with a PC 
administration to bigger and better health care. 
 
Well what do we have? The people of Saskatchewan know the 
reality. They know the reality of a gouge prescription drug plan. 
they know the reality of a dental program for children which has 
been decimated. They know the reality, even if they’re personally 
not on it, but certainly from friends and family, of long, long 
waiting lists in Saskatchewan as never before. 
 
And now the government says we cannot afford health care. We 
should go study it and come up with some creative solutions. But 
you know, no matter what the government says about spending 
more on health care, the people of Saskatchewan, when it comes 
to health care, will simply not believe them any more because the 
divergence, the gap between what they said, and the actuality, the 
reality, is just so, so far apart. 
 
One aspect of this government that has been much debated in this 
House is the matter of taxes. And I guess one really needs not go 
beyond the question of taxation to know why so many people in 
Saskatchewan are disillusioned and turned off with this 
government. People still remember the promises — we’re going to 
lower your income tax; we’re going to do away with the sales tax 
— but again they know the reality. And no matter what you say, 
they know the reality of increases in tax, of new taxes, 

of flat taxes, and they know, too, about the increase in the sales 
tax. Again, a very large gap between what you said then and the 
reality now. And you wonder why people are disillusioned. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could go on and on and on, even in Regina, 
about the water problem in 1982, that the solution proposed by the 
government of the day was not adequate, and that we were going 
to have a pipeline — without question — and they still don’t have 
the pipeline. Instead we’ve reverted back to the solution that was 
being put forward by the government of the day. 
 
In any event, I could go on and on, but my time is running out — 
go on and on about why the people of Saskatchewan are 
disillusioned with the government and why they can no longer 
relate to the government. The throne speech confirms what they 
know; a government that had creativity, a government that had 
energy, a government that had enthusiasm in 1982, is simply no 
more. They have a government that is exhausted; they have a 
government that is tired; they have a government that is listless; 
they have a government that is devoid of original thought; they 
have a government that no longer listens. And I suppose that, too, 
describes the throne speech, because I tell you, it surely does not 
capture the hopes and aspirations of the people of Saskatchewan. 
It does not level with the people of Saskatchewan about the 
situation that we find ourselves in today. 
 
And it’s for those reasons I cannot support it. But I just want to go 
back to one thing that I said, Mr. Speaker, one thing that they 
should know, that as long, as long as you want to turn away from 
the politics of inclusion to practising the politics of exclusion, to 
keeping groups out, to dividing, to say we don’t want that group 
support; we don’t want that group support; we’re going to beat up 
on this group because it might get that group support — as long as 
you play that particular game, you will lose in the upcoming 
by-elections; you will lose in the upcoming general election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the motion, but I will be supporting 
the amendment. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:59 p.m. 
 


