


















































May 30, 1988 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 May 30, 1988 
 

1669 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Urban Affairs 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 24 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Prior to our 
dinner recess, the member from Regina North East asked for me 
to announce our decision on the ward system, and I should . . . I 
advise him this: following my consultation with SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) last week, we 
made certain recommendations. And the member knows and is 
fully aware of various committee structures that are in place and 
exist in government, and one or more are probably in discussion 
as I speak concerning our recommendations. 
 
Hopefully, the final decision will have been made by the time 
we meet in this Assembly tomorrow. Whether the 
recommendations are altered or indeed accepted or not will 
dictate the content of the announcement that will follow. 
 
The member also knows that it is against the rules of this 
Assembly to anticipate a Bill and debate it, and as such, I ask 
him now to leave this matter and proceed with Committee of 
Finance of the Department of Urban Affairs as we had 
originally agreed and anticipated this discussion would be this 
evening. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I was going to 
allow, and I still will, some of my colleagues to pursue some 
other questioning, but the minister has tempted me to get into 
this matter, again, simply because he continues to avoid 
answering a very important fundamental question which is 
important to urban municipalities in Saskatchewan. 
 
He says a decision will be made and will be announced 
tomorrow, and I am glad. I asked him just before supper 
whether he would announce it tomorrow as he had committed 
it. We’ll hold him to his word. 
 
The thing is, Mr. Chairman, that the government has already 
made a decision. For the minister to say that no decision has 
been made is not correct because the government has already 
given notice to the two pieces of legislation which are necessary 
to have introduced to this House in order to make changes to 
the municipal electoral system. 
 
So the minister knows what the decision has been, but he 
doesn’t want to come forth and indicate that in the House. Fine. 
There’s no way I can make him do that, and I just want to point 
out to the minister that it may be that we don’t debate the Bill 
during Committee of Finance because the Bill isn’t here. I 
accept that. 
 
But we’re here to debate government policy, and government 
policy will determine whether, in fact, the minister arbitrarily, 
against all of the advice that he’s got 

from every sector in Saskatchewan, brings in legislation to 
abolish the ward system from urban municipal elections. That’s 
the issue here. And why the minister cannot come forward and 
give us an answer today is beyond me, other than once again he 
has dug in his heels even though he’s knows very well that the 
position he took earlier is the wrong one. He’s become 
extremely stubborn on that count and therefore will not say, so 
that the public will know, what his position will be. 
 
Now he mentions that he has met with SUMA and had a 
discussion about the issue. I know that. I also know that after 
that meeting, the president of SUMA, one of the vice-presidents 
of SUMA, came out of that meeting and said to the media that 
they advised the minister that he should not proceed with what 
he had announced, and that is, the abolition of the ward system. 
 
I simply want to ask the minister this, this question: did you 
listen to the president of SUMA and are you going to take his 
advice? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, certainly I 
listen to SUMA, as I always do, and if and when the 
announcement concerning the ward system is made, I will be 
prepared at that time to debate it fully. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Okay, then. That’s obviously . . . The 
minister refuses to answer so I won’t pursue it for now, but I 
will leave this in reserve — I want to debate with the minister 
all of the merits of the ward system. 
 
I have here a document presented to the city council of Regina 
at which time I think it’s very well stated — it’s a speech in 
itself — why the minister is wrong and why the cities of Regina 
and Saskatoon and Weyburn and Estevan and Prince Albert and 
Melville and Yorkton have all said to the minister that he 
should not interfere with the democratic rights of the people of 
those urban communities to determine what their municipal 
electoral system ought to be. I’m quite prepared to debate that 
when ever the time is right. 
 
I have here letters written to the minister, many of them from a 
number of municipalities, telling him that he’s wrong, and as 
the newspaper story in the Star-Phoenix of May 17 says, that he 
should stop flogging the dead horse. 
 
Well I hope tomorrow the minister will be able to stand up in 
this House, or wherever he’s going to make this announcement, 
and make it clear to the public of Saskatchewan that he’s no 
longer going to flog the dead horse. I’m sure that there will be 
an awful lot of people out there who will be relieved and will be 
appreciative of him if he were to shore up his courage and make 
that kind of decision, in spite of his desire to insert 
Conservative political party politics into the electoral system, 
and in order to try to elect some of his friends to municipal 
politics, and take away a very good system in which there is a 
high level of public participation. I guess we’ll just have to wait 
until tomorrow though. 
 
I have some other colleagues of mine who want to pursue some 
questions with the minister at this time, and I shall bow to them 
for awhile and come back to this. 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1670 
 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I 
would like to address some questions to the minister in regard 
to funding for the Wakamow Valley Authority, which falls 
under his jurisdiction, and not only the level of that funding, but 
the fairness of that funding. 
 
And I know, Mr. Minister, we currently have a Bill before this 
legislature which will freeze the funding to the Wakamow 
Valley Authority, and I know in committee we’ll have a chance 
to discuss these issues again, but I want to raise them with you 
tonight. 
 
I want to ask very simply, Mr. Minister, why you consider it to 
be important to fund the Wakamow Valley Authority at 
something less than all of the other like authorities in the 
province of Saskatchewan? You can correct me if I’m wrong, 
Mr. Minister, but following your 20 per cent across the board 
cut in funding to the valley authorities in 1983, my 
understanding now is that the Meewasin authority in Saskatoon 
is funded at a level of 4 mills; the Wascana Authority here in 
Regina at a level of 4 mills; the Chinook Authority in Swift 
Current at a level of 1.85 mills; and Wakamow in Moose Jaw at 
a level of 1.6 mills. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I would ask you why you think the Wakamow 
Valley Authority deserves less per capita funding than the other 
valley authorities in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I guess about 
the only thing that I can tell you is that the original funding 
formula was established by the NDP with Wakamow. So why 
don’t you ask your new leader why he set it up the way he did? 
He was part of it; we weren’t. That’s number one. 
 
Number two: trying to help Wakamow Authority as we do — 
I’ve met with them on several occasions, and we recognize the 
terrific job that Wakamow in particular does with volunteers 
and with fund raising and the like — we, too, then try to get 
them to qualify for other programs of government. And we’ve 
been successful in that regard as it relates to getting them to use 
the New Careers to help them with some of those projects. 
 
If you start adding some of those programs into it, it gets their 
level of funding pretty near on a par, or higher than the others. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, on your first point, you indicate 
that the funding was established in 1981 under a New 
Democratic Party government — you’re absolutely right. It was 
under a New Democratic Party government that the Wakamow 
Valley Authority was established to the delight of the Moose 
Jaw people. The funding was established at 2 mills, initially, for 
the developmental stage, and you know well that that was 
intended for the developmental stage, and that once the valley 
authority was operational, that funding level would be 
increased. That was the intention, and you know that, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Now you’ve had seven years to do something about it, so let’s 
not be blaming it on something that happened in 1981. You’ve 
had seven years to bring Wakamow’s funding more in line with 
the other valley authorities. You’ve not done that. In fact you 
applied to Wakamow 

the 20 per cent across-the-board cut as you did to every other 
valley authority. 
 
I want you to answer the question, Mr. Minister: why you 
consider it to be fair that Wakamow should be funded 
significantly differently than the other like valley authorities in 
the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, for that member to 
tell me that I should be aware of NDP intention, I’m sorry, but I 
can’t take that seriously. You know, why didn’t the NDP have it 
in line as the first place, in what the question is. Why didn’t 
they set it up properly in the first place? And if it was an 
intention, why didn’t they set it up for more than an intention? 
So that’s boloney. 
 
As far as the actual budget is concerned, the funding for it right 
now, and forgetting about the intention and all the rest of it, the 
funding to it now has been across the board, equally applied to 
all the urban parks, Wakamow included, with the exception that 
we try to do a little bit extra for Wakamow as it relates to 
qualifying them for other government programs. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I’m not hearing an answer to my 
question. If you are the minister responsible — I think that’s 
true, Mr. Minister — why do you consider that Wakamow 
should have a lower per capita funding base than the other 
valley authorities, including Chinook in Swift Current? Why 
should that be, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I think it’s fair to say that if our 
government found ourself in the position to restructure the 
funding formula, we would probably do that regardless of what 
your intent was. Because I don’t believe what you intent was, or 
you would have protected it in some other manner. So what 
we’re doing now is going along at the best we can, keeping in 
mind the entire government budget. 
 
I believe that we have a real good working relationship with 
Wakamow; we will continue to have that. And as soon as the 
government’s fiscal situation improves that we can deal with it 
and, in fact, enter new negotiations with Wakamow, we would 
like to do that. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Well then, Mr. Minister, will you answer why 
it is then that the Chinook, the Chinook Parkway in Swift 
Current, which was established by your government, was 
established at a higher funding, per capita funding rate? Why 
did you find it important to have Chinook have a higher level 
than Wakamow? It’s 1.85, I understand now, as opposed to 
Wakamow’s 1.6. What’s the difference? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, the member’s 
right. But when we consult with people — as is our habit on 
this side of the House — and negotiate a deal with them — that 
happens to be the deal that was negotiated — and so we 
followed through with it and gave them that funding on that 
basis. 
 
As I said, we didn’t negotiate the deal; you did with Wakamow. 
And you can stand up here and gloriously say, oh yeah, but our 
intent was . . . We put our money 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1671 
 

where our mouth is. We talked to them; we listened; we 
negotiated, and we established the funding formula on that 
basis. Don’t blame your problems on us. 
 
(1915) 
 
But having said that, we will continue to work with Wakamow 
as we have in the past. They understand our situation. They’re 
not bellyaching and crying and complaining. They think that 
we’ve been pretty fair and reasonable under the circumstances, 
and they know that one day they will have the opportunity to 
come with us and negotiate a new situation for them that they’ll 
just be pleased with, that they couldn’t arrive at with the NDP. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, every time you write a budget, 
you renegotiate. Now it’s not fixed in stone, the funding, that’s 
clear. In 1983 you cut it 20 per cent. Now that means that in this 
year you could have raised it 20 per cent. Now let’s not try and 
suggest that what was established in 1981 as a developmental 
base of funding was intended to last for ever and ever. 
 
You say that Moose Jaw people and Wakamow people have not 
lobbied you for some change in this, that somehow we’re all 
very satisfied with it. Well let me quote you from a letter that 
was widely distributed in Moose Jaw from the then board 
chairman of the Wakamow Valley Authority. He says: 
 

Among the existing urban park authorities, Wakamow has 
always received the lowest tax base support. We have tried 
in the past to convince the province to at least return to its 
original funding base and preferably to match the city of 
Moose Jaw’s contribution. Simply stated, we have not 
been successful. 

 
Mr. Minister, you know full well that you’ve been lobbied by 
the Wakamow board and Moose Jaw people, individuals and 
groups, to at least restore the funding to the original 2 mills. 
You’ve not done that. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you consider, if you’re not going to change 
the funding level, would you consider the arrangement that 
you’ve made with the city of Swift Current? Whereas in Moose 
Jaw we face a 40-60 split — 40 from the province, 60 locally 
— in Swift Current you’ve gone on a 50-50 — 50 from the 
province, 50 from the city. Would you at least consider then 
matching the city of Moose Jaw’s contribution? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, renegotiation of a 
deal with Wakamow is not the point of debate tonight. They 
know the situation. I’ve met with them. They know that we’re 
going to be responsive. They know that we’re prepared to enter 
renegotiations at a time that we can afford it. Presently, and 
they understand it and they think it’s fair, all of the urban park 
budgets are dealt with unilaterally. And if one gets more, the 
other will get more. If one’s cut back, the other one is cut back. 
They understand that; they recognize it; they’re prepared to deal 
with that. They’re still mad at you guys for getting the short end 
of the stick originally. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, that you persist in 

suggesting that the problem faced today is somehow related to 
the developmental funding that was started in 1981 is just 
ridiculous. You know that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — You have a responsibility to the Wakamow 
Valley Authority and to the three other authorities in this 
province and I want to know why Wakamow has been singled 
out for this unfair treatment, because that’s what it is. 
 
Since 1983 you started the Chinook. You started it. You started 
it at a better funding level than you’re prepared to give to 
Wakamow. I want to know why Wakamow receives this unfair 
kind of treatment from you and your government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, it wasn’t us that 
singled out the unfair treatments, to quote the member. It was 
your government of the day, the NDP government, that singled 
out the so-called unfair treatment to Wakamow Valley. So don’t 
try to saddle my horse in some saddle that I don’t want to wear. 
I’m wearing enough saddles right now. 
 
So that when you talk about renegotiation, that’s one thing. 
When you’re talking about budgets, that’s another. And I speak 
very often with the members of Wakamow. They know exactly 
what the situation is. They know how they received unfair 
treatment at the outset from the NDP, in so far as they got a 
little and a promise, and the promise never did materialize. So 
now they recognize what the situation is. They’re prepared to 
wait, and as soon as our fiscal plan improves, we’ll be in a 
situation to renegotiate with them. 
 
But in the meantime, don’t think for a moment that they’re not 
pleased as all get out when we can get them to qualify for an 
additional program through government that they take 
advantage of. And they’re just tickled when we’re able to put a 
deal like that together. And you, being a member from Moose 
Jaw, should know that better than anybody. I don’t hear any 
complaints about the Wakamow funding when I walk the streets 
of Moose Jaw and when I visit with my friends and all the rest 
of it. They’re happy with what’s going on over there. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister; one, I am sure, without a word 
of a lie, that I speak to those folks involved on the Wakamow 
board much more frequently than you do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Two, I am certain that I speak to people on the 
streets in Moose Jaw much more frequently than you do. So 
trust me, Mr. Minister, when I tell you that Moose Jaw people 
are not happy with this inequity in funding that has gone on. 
 
Now you, yourself, a few minutes ago . . . Let’s take your 
position, all right? The funding at the beginning was unfair. 
You just said that. It is within your power, I assume, to change 
that unfairness. What I’m asking you tonight is, why will you 
not change it, then? And if we’re going to wait — if we’re 
going to wait for your 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1672 
 

government to somehow become fiscally responsible, we’ll be 
waiting a long time, Mr. Minister. So will you commit to 
addressing this inequity in the funding to Wakamow? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, we’re finally 
getting somewhere tonight in this Committee of Finance in so 
far as the member admitted that at the outset there was unfair 
funding — for that, congratulate you. 
 
Now having said that, we are trying to deal with this matter of 
unfair funding as best we can. Wakamow authority knows that 
and as soon as we’re in the position to renegotiate their 
agreement we will. They know that. Until then they’re treated 
as all the rest of the urban parks in the province are treated. 
They’re satisfied with that. Coupled with the fact that wherever 
possible they can implement another government program, they 
are able to do that. So I think that you’re flogging a dead horse. 
And they understand exactly where we’re coming from. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, let me reiterate. In 1981, 
Wakamow Valley was founded by a New Democratic Party 
government. The funding rate was established at 2 city mills. 
The intention was, and it’s widely known and widely 
recognized, that once operational that funding level would be 
increased. 
 
In 1983 your government came along — and those weren’t such 
tough years yet, Mr. Minister. Remember, oil prices were world 
high. You hadn’t yet run up the huge deficit. Times weren’t so 
tough in 1983 — across the board 20 per cent cut. At that time 
your government said, now when conditions improve we’ll 
readdress the funding — when conditions improve. It’s gone on 
and on and on. Every year you say to Wakamow, you say to the 
people of Moose Jaw, well when conditions get better, we’ll 
look at this. The city of Moose Jaw has maintained their share 
of 2 mills. If you’re not going to change your 1.6, would you 
then at least match dollar for dollar the city of Moose Jaw 
contribution? Would you go to a 50-50? Would you change that 
arrangement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, if I’m going to 
renegotiate a new agreement, it’s certainly not going to be with 
him, because I can tell what their intentions are, you know. 
They do one thing and say another. And oh yes, but we’re going 
to do this; we’re going to do this. We’ve lived with your 
intentions and they understand that. They heard about all of 
your intentions. So as a result, when the time comes for us to 
renegotiate, we will be able to renegotiate that. 
 
And if the member from Saskatoon Nutana has anything to say, 
instead of yipping and interrupting the conversation, just stand 
up and say something. But in the meantime, just be good 
enough to sit there and stay quiet for a minute. 
 
I’m talking to the member from Moose Jaw who’s concerned 
with the funding level at Wakamow. If you’ve got something to 
ask about Meewasin or anything, stand up and ask it. Don’t just 
yip from your chair. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I’m not sure what you had for 
supper, but something seems to have upset you 

tonight. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve spoken about other programs that your 
government may be willing to avail to Wakamow. You have an 
interest in the Wakamow Valley Authority. What programs are 
you speaking about for this funding year, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, we’re always 
in consultation with the urban park authorities, as we are with 
Wakamow. And in the event that we’re able to make a 
proposition with them and something that they can qualify for 
in another government agency, we will do that and they will be 
notified and they’ll just be tickled. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Minister, I don’t want to belabour this 
because I can see we’re not going to move very far, and I know 
some of my colleagues have other concerns about other valley 
authorities and many other issues under your jurisdiction. 
 
Let me just emphasize with you that I speak on behalf of many 
Moose Jaw people when they see that the Wakamow Valley 
Authority, which we very much appreciate, which is one of the 
most exciting developments to happen in our community in the 
last number of years, which holds great potential for our city . . . 
Mr. Minister, may I urge you, if you won’t do it this year, to 
next year look at addressing the unfairness in funding to the 
Wakamow Valley Authority. Would you at least give us a 
commitment that you’ll be willing to look at it next year and 
take some positive steps instead of just coming to this House 
year after year after year and saying, well when times get better, 
we’ll look at it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, if and when we 
have the opportunity to renegotiate a different situation with 
Wakamow Valley, we will do that, and it certainly won’t be any 
credit to you. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The minister, who is so long on charm and 
diplomacy this evening . . . Mr. Minister, I would like to return 
to the subject of the Wascana Centre, something we discussed 
the other night. 
 
Mr. Minister, you made the suggestion that the situation as I 
described it was not accurate. Just for your benefit, I want to 
review what has happened in the Wascana Centre. In the 
Wascana Centre, Mr. Minister, I may say that from your own 
estimates, you are spending less now than you were . . . than 
was budgeted for that development in 1981-82 when we left 
office. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Wascana Act itself sets out the level of 
funding, and has set out the level of funding. As the member 
from Moose Jaw correctly pointed out, it was 4 mills. You then 
reduced it, reduced the level of funding, in 1985. You’re now 
spending just a mill and a half, the equivalent of a mill and a 
half. Bill 23, which we dealt with the other day, froze the level 
of funding for last year and this year. 
 
Mr. Minister, since 1982, since you took office, the CPI 
(consumer price index), cost of living, consumer price index, 
has gone from 107 to 139.5. That’s a 30 per cent increase. Your 
spending, level of spending in this 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1673 
 

government, Mr. Minister, has increased by 50 per cent. It’s 
gone from 2.4 billion to 3.6 billion. During that period of time, 
Mr. Minister, the level of funding at the Wascana Centre has 
actually gone down. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you refer to the estimates for the department of 
government services in that year, you’ll find that there was 
budgeted in ’81-82, $893,330,100. You’re actually spending 
less now that you were when you took office. This at a time, 
Mr. Minister, when cost of living has gone up by 30 per cent, 
the level of government spending has gone up by 50 per cent. 
 
Mr. Minister, the underfunding in the Wascana Centre is 
beginning to show. Mr. Minister, this centre was for many years 
a centre of . . . source of great pride to the people in the city of 
Regina and, as the member from Regina North East pointed out, 
to people from around the province a place of great beauty. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s just one more, one more success story which 
has degenerated under this government. This place, Mr. 
Minister, is simply not in the condition it once was. 
 
In some parts of Wascana Centre, the weeds are a disgrace. Mr. 
Minister, I refer in particular to the area in front of the 
Legislative Building and between the walk and the lake. The 
area got so badly infested with weeds last year that it was all 
torn up. That, Mr. Minister, is just simply neglect. 
 
Mr. Minister, there are areas of this Wascana Centre, which 
used to be as green as a carpet, which are now brown. I know 
the minister is going to inform me the one thing he may know, 
that that is a drought. I recognize that, Mr. Minister, but there 
have been dry periods before and this centre has never got into 
the condition that it is. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Minister, this is not a large sum of money. It would not 
have taken a great sum of money to keep this Wascana Centre 
in the condition it was. You haven’t done it. You have cut 
funding, cut funding very severely, and it’s showing. The place 
has deteriorated. It is either brown from lack of care, or green 
from being infested with weeds. I don’t mean to overdo it. It is 
still an area that is appreciated by the people from Regina and 
the people of Saskatchewan but it has deteriorated rather badly. 
Just one reason for it, Mr. Minister, is because you won’t pay 
for its upkeep. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, if you won’t redress this problem, 
provide this centre with the sort of funding that it needs to 
maintain it in the first class condition which it once was. The 
additional funding, Mr. Minister, wouldn’t produce a noticeable 
dent in the government’s advertising budget. In fact that 
additional funding that’s needed wouldn’t produce a noticeable 
dent in the cost of flying ministers from one end of this globe to 
the other. Mr. Minister . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not me. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, the Minister of Urban Affairs 

says he never left his backyard. Well, Mr. Minister, if you take 
a drive through the Wascana Centre, I think you would see what 
I mean if you are honest with yourself. This place, Mr. Minister, 
needs additional funding if it’s going to be maintained in the 
condition that it once was. I ask you: will you not increase the 
funding so that this place can be restored to the place of great 
beauty it once was? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know if I should get 
upset with the member from Regina Centre on behalf of his 
constituents, and on behalf of all the tourists, the people of this 
city, and indeed the people of the province, for how he . . . and 
for that matter, the employees of Wascana Centre. You know 
very, very little about the operation of the Wascana Centre, and 
when you make outrageous statements that you have just made, 
you should be ashamed of yourself and offer an apology to the 
Wascana Centre Authority. 
 
I can tell you this, and this is actual fact, so if in your mind — 
and I believe that’s where it is — you see deterioration, it is in 
your mind and your mind only, or else you are faulting the 
employees that work so hard in trying to maintain that 
landscaping and the irrigated areas of this Legislative Building 
and other areas of the centre. 
 
Current practice, landscape maintenance standards which have 
not been changed since the centre began 25 years ago, have 
never been changed in 25 years — the same standards. I can 
read you the technical data that I have been supplied with by the 
authority as to how that relates in the applications of the 
fertilizers and the mowing and the watering and the weed and 
the chemical and all the rest of that stuff. And, I suppose, offer 
an apology in some areas, rightfully so because this year the 
building lights work will have certainly a short-term effect on 
irrigation of the lawns in front of this legislature because as 
those lights are installed, the irrigation system must be kept off. 
So as a result, and coupled with the drought, it may very well be 
that a watering was missed. But recent improvements that have 
been done, that have absolutely nothing to do with the funding. 
 
The funding was done by the three levels, the three partners, 
and agreed to. And I can show you and tell you what areas we 
have cut back on and are saving the dollars on, and those are 
basically undeveloped areas that are still waiting in various 
stages of development that don’t have irrigation systems, and as 
a result of the drought, probably won’t need any cutting this 
year in any event, but are still maintained to the degree that they 
can be maintained with regard to noxious weeds and all the rest 
of it. 
 
But Wascana Centre Authority has done turf renovations along 
Lakeshore Drive last year. That might be the brown grass that 
you saw. Maybe the turf that was replaced, 4,200 square yards 
of it, didn’t catch. Don’t fault the employees that laboured very 
hard to put that down. 
 
Over 400 trees planted in the legislative area last summer; 
perennial flower-beds replaced on the east side and on the west 
side. I mean, you’ve see it if you walk around this building. 
And to stand here and to slam those workers for Wascana 
Centre Authority, that aren’t 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1674 
 

employed by government, that belong to a third-party 
independent contractor, I think you should be ashamed of 
yourself. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, I don’t think the 
employees of the Wascana Centre will believe for a moment 
that I was faulting them. Mr. Minister, if that’s the best defence 
you can offer, I think I can simply rest my case and say that the 
allegation’s been admitted. 
 
Mr. Minister, back in another era, when governments used to 
disclose information rather than try to conceal it, the budget for 
the Wascana Centre grounds maintenance was set out. Of 
course, it no longer appears anywhere in the estimates and we 
simply have to take your word for it, Mr. Minister. And frankly, 
I don’t believe you. I am not going to express myself any 
further than that. Just suffice it to say that I just don’t believe 
you. 
 
Mr. Minister, the grounds are simply not in the condition that 
they once were. Now for you to stand here and say that they are 
in the same . . . that exactly the same maintenance and care 
takes place, I just simply don’t believe it. I just simply don’t 
believe it, Mr. Minister. 
 
I walk through these grounds several times a week, Mr. 
Minister. I have an opportunity to observe it. I ask the minister: 
when was the last time you walked around the lake? Because I 
do it several time a week as part of a regular exercise program, I 
see it and I have seen those grounds deteriorate, and deteriorate 
rather badly. There’s no question, Mr. Minister, but what it’s 
underfunding. 
 
As I say, I gave you the figures on the statutory grant. I can’t of 
course, give you the direct figures on maintenance because you 
no longer will give us the facts. You just want us to take your 
word for it. 
 
Mr. Minister, it ought to be apparent from the results of my 
colleague in Regina Elphinstone and the results of my other 
colleague from Saskatoon Eastview, the public in Saskatchewan 
are tired of this approach of you saying, I’m not going to give 
you the facts but just trust me. They don’t trust you. They do 
not trust you in urban Saskatchewan and I quite frankly think 
that they trust you a lot less in rural Saskatchewan as well. So 
don’t stand up, Mr. Minister, and say, we’re doing exactly what 
we did, trust us. I don’t trust you and neither does anyone else. 
 
Mr. Minister, the figure for the grounds maintenance which was 
set out, as I say, subvote 18 in the 1983 Estimates; the figure for 
’81-82 was $1,608,460. I ask you, Mr. Minister, if you have the 
figure for the maintenance, if you have the equivalent figures 
for 1988. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, you don’t have to trust me. 
The member from Regina Centre doesn’t have to trust me at all. 
This is fact: I will have a letter that I would sure like to get 
published from the Wascana Centre Authority on exactly those 
standards and how they have been maintained, because it’s not 
me misleading the public on this one, my friend. I can tell you 
that that is fact — that maintenance standards have not changed 
one iota. 
 
And it’s a figment of your imagination or else a degrading slam 
to the employees of the Wascana Centre when you 

emphatically state that you see deterioration on the grounds. 
And if there are any, it has nothing to do with the funding or the 
maintenance schedule of that maintenance. So you’re way off 
base there. 
 
As I mentioned before, and I can’t give you that figure that you 
asked because it’s not in my estimates, but rather in the 
government property management Crown that takes care of the 
lands and that has the deal with the Wascana Centre Authority, 
who act as an independent third-party contractor to them. And 
when they set out the fact of their budget and they’re going to 
spend this 8 or $900,000 — whatever that figure is — they 
agree with the authority as to what areas of land will be 
maintained, so that as a result if they either apply it to one of 
several areas. They can do it with regard to snow removal; they 
can do it with regard to undeveloped areas of the centre, or 
whatever. Not what you stand and try to get the people of 
Regina Centre and others to believe. 
 
And you’re unbelievable because what I state is fact and it’s not 
a matter of trust. And I can establish that fact and you can’t — 
other than slam the workers for doing a poor job. That’s your 
only statement, and I won’t do that because they are doing a 
good job and they are living up to the same standards that have 
been in existence and have never changed. So you’re off base. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m giving you facts. 
I’m giving you facts. I’m saying that the statutory grant has 
actually decreased by about 1 per cent. I am saying that you no 
longer give us the figure for maintenance. Mr. Minister. . . and 
your comment, by the way, that the level of funding is 
established independent of government, that brings me to my 
second complaint about the way the Wascana Centre has 
developed over the years which is not directly related to 
maintenance, although it is indirectly. 
 
Mr. Minister, for many years . . . the member from Moose Jaw 
centre was right. For many years the level of funding in the 
Wascana Centre was set at 4 mills and thus governments had 
the . . . the two levels of government and the university paid 
their share. It was kept out of the political realm and the 
grounds showed it. They were kept up in good shape. 
 
You people took over. You couldn’t leave anything alone. You 
immediately changed the funding system to suit yourself. In 
1984 or ’85 session, I’m not sure which, you introduced 
legislation which arbitrarily changed the level of funding and 
arbitrarily reduced it. You said at that time, Mr. Minister, that it 
was a temporary thing. Well here we are four budgets later and 
it’s still being kept at that artificially low level. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, my second complaint with respect to the 
Wascana Centre is that this centre, and the level of funding used 
to be beyond political debate, and that was true for 25 years. 
You people came along; you changed it. Now this government 
arbitrarily sets the level of funding. You do it by legislation, 
Mr. Minister, and the results out on the grounds show it. 
 
I know the minister is going to get back up and pretend that I 
have somehow or other defamed the workers. I don’t think you 
believe that, Mr. Minister, and if you do, 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1675 
 

you’re all alone. Nobody else does, neither your colleagues nor 
the workers nor the public of Saskatchewan. I am not, of 
course, talking about the job the workers are doing. I’m talking 
about the job you’re doing in providing this centre with 
adequate funds. 
 
I say again, Mr. Minister, that CPI (consumer price index) has 
gone up by 30 per cent, the level of expenditure by this 
government has gone up by 50 per cent since you’ve taken 
office, and the funding in the Wascana Centre appears to have 
dropped and it’s starting to show. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, if you’d leave aside the area that you 
patently refuse to deal with anyway — that’s the level of 
funding. I want to deal in facts; you simply want to give me 
inflamed rhetoric. Leave that aside, Mr. Minister, and address 
yourself to the system which has developed with respect to the 
funding, whereby this government arbitrarily sets the level of 
funding of their own volition. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have brought the Wascana Centre back into 
the realm of public debate. And I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, 
that if you don’t revert to the system we had, this centre is 
going to go on deteriorating until you people finally run out of 
time and have to call an election and another government comes 
in which is prepared to do a more competent job. 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t want belabour 
this, and I suppose we could argue on it all night. But first of all 
again, he doesn’t know where to look. And it’s, I think, $1.9 
million — not in my department, never has been in my 
department — and it’s 1.9 million. You mentioned a figure of 
800,000. I don’t know where you got that from. It’s 1.9 million, 
I believe, or 1.6. 
 
In any event, ours that we show in our department is basically 
for statutory funding. Although it includes a portion of 
maintenance that is administered equally between the three 
parties, the bulk of it is set aside — the bulk of the statutory 
funding is set aside for developmental purposes. 
 
And right now we are in the throes of doing a new 
developmental plan for the Wascana Centre Authority; you 
might have seen the advertising. Here again we’re going out for 
public input — first time ever in 25 years. That’s never 
occurred before. We believe in outside consultation, and that’s 
occurring. So we’re getting input from all over. 
 
We’re not behind on our developmental stages, and it’s 
proceeding, and the plans are there, and there’s nothing being 
delayed. And in spite of that, the last two years — compliments 
to all of the management and staff at the Wascana Centre 
Authority — they have a surplus of funds and have had for the 
last two years. 
 
So, you know, you’re arguing something that . . . You’re really 
not familiar with the internal workings of how the Wascana 
Centre Authority operates, and the relationship that I have with 
it and as chairman of that authority. And as far as the 
maintenance part is concerned, it never was in Urban Affairs; 
it’s not part of our funding. It appears in 

another line, and it’s quite a bit more than what you had said 
earlier in the day. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you patently have the figure. 
What is it? What is the figure for the maintenance of the 
Wascana Centre. You patently have the figure; you just gave it 
to me in round terms. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I’m just going by memory now, and I’d 
have to look. I’d have to get my . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
I’m sorry that the members laugh at me, but my mind is just not 
capable of assuming all these figures, and you want me to be 
accurate. And I’m trying to be accurate, but I believe that the 
government contracts with Wascana Centre Authority to do 
certain maintenance on government grounds, and it’s in the area 
of 1.6 or $1.9 million, and it’s somewhere in there. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, I believe it’s 1.6. 
That’s exactly what was budgeted in 1982. I rest my case, Mr. 
Minister. You are spending almost precisely this amount now 
on maintenance that you spent in 1982. 
 
The figure in 1982 — incidentally, I have it before me — was 
$1,608,460. Mr. Minister, I believe that’s still the figure today. 
You are spending no more on maintenance now then you were 
in 1982. Inflation has eroded the value of a dollar by 30 per 
cent, Mr. Minister, and I suggest to you that you are . . . Well if 
the minister can find within the current Estimates an equivalent 
figure for maintenance, I’d appreciate seeing it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I found it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — All right. I’ll sit down and let you give it to 
me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you. I’d like to thank the member 
from Regina Centre, because I don’t want him to inadvertently 
dig himself into a hole that he can’t get out of. But it’s in 
Finance; it’s on page 41, and it’s subvote 15, and it’s slightly 
over $1.9 million — a significant increase from the 1.6 of 1982 
that you were talking about. And it’s for maintenance of 
grounds. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, that’s approximately a 13 per 
cent increase. Mr. Minister, if that’s accurate and it appears to, 
that is a 13 per cent increase during a period of time that 
inflation has decreased the value of the dollar by 30 per cent. As 
someone behind me points out, it’s approximately 1 to 1.5 
percentage points a year. It hasn’t kept pace with inflation, Mr. 
Minister, and I rest my case that you have not adequately 
funded the Wascana Centre — that appears from your own 
figures. One or one and a half percentage points per year will 
. . . does not keep pace with inflation. The Wascana Centre 
shows it. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Minister, I would like to ask you a couple 
of questions in relation to the communities. First of all, just 
some basic questions in regards to The Northern Municipalities 
Act. How many communities are being served by The Northern 
Municipalities Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I understand, Mr. Chairman, that there are 
36 communities. 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1676 
 

Mr. Goulet: — Out of those 36 communities, how many of the 
communities have a sewer and water system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Now, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to tell the 
member from Cumberland that we don’t have an exact figure 
but it’s half — either a couple of under or a couple of over half. 
The water and sewer is primarily a water Crown corporation 
responsibility, as he knows. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Yes, I recognize that it comes through water 
corporation. I know that you’ve been visiting the northern 
communities in SUMA and so I just wanted to put it on the 
record that you knew about the situations about sewer and water 
systems. 
 
What about the area of . . . Out of those 36 communities, how 
many have a community hall and also a fire hall and fire trucks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, the member is asking some 
questions of an exacting nature that it’s difficult for me, as 
much as I’d like to give exact numbers that I can’t. I would 
guess, again, that about half of the communities would have a 
fire truck of one type or another. 
 
Regarding community halls, again the majority would have a 
community hall of one fashion or another that would be 
combined with their town hall requirements or the community 
hall or indeed maybe perhaps a community hall and fire hall 
combination. They use all of those facilities as best they can to 
get them through their needs. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — So in regards to the information you’ve given 
me, Mr. Minister, only about half or a little over half of the 
communities have basic services in the area of sewer and water, 
and also in the area of fire hall and fire trucks. 
 
Mr. Minister, shifting off into another area. This past year there 
was transfer of Crown land to the municipalities within the 
radius of the communities or municipalities. For a long time 
now . . . And you’ve heard it probably every year, that there 
was resource development occurring close by the communities. 
And we know that, whether it’s the forestry operations beside 
Pinehouse or other communities and so on. The communities 
wanted to extend their boundaries so that, in fact, they could get 
part of the revenue base that was going to the corporations that 
were developing — let’s say, as a example, a forestry base. 
 
I was wondering whether or not the minister is intending to deal 
with this particular issue in the future with the northern 
municipalities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, the member brings up a 
question that, in my frequent visits to my northern communities, 
is quite a commonplace question. I’ll give him the same 
response that indeed I give to the mayors and alderman of my 
northern communities, and that is that the forest management 
licence agreements are not my responsibility, and as a result, I 
can’t respond for the minister in charge. 
 
Regarding the boundaries and the Crown lands within 

their boundaries, yes, I can respond to that. We have been 
working with the communities for a long time. They have their 
boundaries established. And I have told them, and we are now 
in the process of transferring all vacant Crown land within their 
boundaries indeed to the community. And they’re all pretty 
excited about that because now, as a result of them having 
access to those lands, they will have lands that they can set 
aside for development areas of residential or even of a 
commercial nature should the occasion arise. And they’re very 
excited about having those lands transferred. So we’re just in 
the middle of that transition phase right now. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — How many of those communities are getting 
how much Crown land? Which communities are getting what 
amount of Crown land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll expand a little further 
on my last answer. All communities with their existing 
boundaries now will be having transferred to them all vacant 
Crown lands. Because all of the surveys on those are not yet 
complete, we are not in a position to give you a total acreage 
involvement except to say that this could be calculated roughly, 
I guess. 
 
If you were to measure all of the boundary sizes of each 
community and apply an average, I guess, you could get some 
kind of a figure that way, but then you’d have to recognize that 
the lands would still have to be vacant lands and so there’d be 
some allowances for that. 
 
I suppose as this legal process and survey process continues, 
then we’ll be in a point to determine the total amount of land 
that has been transferred. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Well we’ve been using approximations this 
evening because you didn’t have the information at hand. 
Approximately how many communities does that entail? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Once we get through the legal process, all 
of the communities will benefit. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — In regards to the . . . Can you get me an 
approximation then on the amount of acreage that might entail 
on the few that you know already? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — You, know, Mr. Chairman, we don’t have 
that information here, and if you’re testing my memory, I guess 
I’d have to go back to when the announcement was made. And 
we had a meeting in La Ronge at which most of the 
communities along the east side, certainly, were represented. 
And we had visual aids that we were using to show approximate 
acreages as best we could figure them out. 
 
(2000) 
 
And it would be in the thousands of acres, but that would be 
about the best accurate description that I could give you right 
now, because my mind is so fuzzy on it. It might be six or 7,000 
acres in total. Somewhere . . . You know, it’s not like a 100,000 
acres or anything of that magnitude but somewhere in that 
smaller area. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Is the minister prepared to forward me that 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1677 
 

information, then, as soon as he gets all the specific information 
into those areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I don’t have any trouble supplying that to 
you at all, because it’s a far different issue than land entitlement 
and all the rest that’s going on with the federal government. 
This is just a straight northern municipal situation, dealing with 
the boundaries of the communities and the lands therein, and it 
was well accepted and our people in the North are very excited 
about it. 
 
And I certainly don’t mind keeping you informed to the best of 
my ability as time goes by. We might even have some 
preliminary information that we could send you, of boundaries 
of existing municipalities, that we could forward to you that 
would at least outline to you where the boundary is. And the 
lands therein would be transferred, but keep in mind that not 
necessarily 100 per cent, because they have to be vacant or 
unoccupied or whatever lands. Those would be transferred. But 
it would give you some idea of the total size of the area that 
we’re prepared to transfer these Crown lands to. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — One of the issues that’s more exciting for the 
people is a possibility still of the expansion of boundaries. And 
while I know that the forestry aspect is outside of your 
jurisdiction, what is within your jurisdiction is the expansion of 
boundaries, you know, at the community level. 
 
What can you say at this time in regards to the possibilities of 
expanding, you know, the boundaries outward from the 
community level? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, as I explained to the communities 
when I was there and they asked that question, as well, along 
with the expansion of the boundaries comes the legal 
responsibility of maintaining those. So that means all kinds of 
things. That means serviceability; that means possible 
roadways; it certainly means fire-fighting and the like, so that if 
they wanted to expand their boundaries to an area — you know, 
using any community that you choose, to an area 20 miles by 20 
miles — they would then have to assume the responsibility for 
that area, and whether or not they could deliver and still stay a 
viable community would be questionable. 
 
They understand that, and I think what they’re more concerned 
now with, rather than expanding their boundaries, is completing 
this initial situation of getting all the land within their 
boundaries, which is something that they’ve never had before, 
and to give them a land base with which to work. That’s what 
they’re looking forward to receiving now. I think that their 
discussions of expanding their boundaries have come to an end. 
I believe that they have concerns and are questioning the FMLA 
(forestry management licensing agreements) agreements, and 
that’s fair game. But I don’t believe that it entails their 
boundary sites. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Getting now to the overall operating grants. 
Last year the operating grant was about 5.2, and this year is was 
again 5.2, which was increased with your special meeting to 5.6 
million in La Ronge, when you met with the municipalities. So 
there was about a $400,000 

increase. The question is, exactly where did the slightly over 
$400,000 come from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — That increase comes from the northern 
revenue sharing trust account and it’s not a budgetary item so 
we took that increase from there to provide to the communities. 
So that with the new formula that’s in place, we were able to 
provide a zero safety net for the communities. In other words, in 
spite of the fact that the formula might dictate a lesser revenue 
sharing, we have maintained a zero base for them so no 
community will be allowed to go below last year’s revenue 
sharing and in the meantime those communities that grew and 
expanded will be able to get their typical increases with 
affecting any of the other communities. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — So in other words there was really no increase 
in the overall budget but was actually only taken out from the 
northern revenue trust account then. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well they’re certainly going to receive that 
money but it’s not a budgetary item because we deal with the 
northern revenue trust account in a different fashion and as a 
result, that money is accumulating there for us to be able to use 
that for this special kind of a purpose. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Where does money for the northern revenue 
trust come from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — The revenues basically come from the 
property taxes, leases, permits, and the sale of Crown land, so 
that as that money goes in there we keep it in trust for these 
purposes. 
 
That’s also where another non-budgetary item appears and as 
you know I was able to announce a new capital program for the 
North and that won’t appear in the book either because that also 
comes from the same fund. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — In other words, the money that was increased 
was definitely not from the provincial budget then, and it was 
just money that has been revolving in the North, you know, 
from the collection of leases and from the leases, for example, 
that trappers pay into, and also the assessments and the taxation 
systems from the municipalities. That’s where the revenue 
comes from, then. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well you’re not quite right because it is 
like provincial money that goes in there. Because it’s tax dollars 
generated from outside of those boundaries, of the boundaries 
of the local communities up there, and the Crown lands and the 
Crown land sales and the like, which is basically provincial 
funding that, rather than going into the Consolidated Fund, 
we’ve set up the northern revenue sharing trust account. And 
it’s kept and maintained there so that we can continue to build 
on that, as we are, and be able to supply, you know, an endless 
source of funding, we hope, if it’s maintained and not spent. 
And that’s what our attitude is so that the communities of the 
North will always have a very stable source of income as a 
result of the interest that is generated from that trust account. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — When there is an increase in the amount 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1678 
 

 of money from the trust account, is there a corresponding 
decrease in the amount going to the operating grants? In the 
long run, do you see that happening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — No, I don’t believe so because that trust 
account continues to grow. And as the outside taxes come in 
and are put in there, and as the Crown land is sold and the like, 
and all those moneys accumulate there, what we would like to 
see is a little bit of a nest-egg, if you like to call it that, that we 
can sit there and deposit. 
 
We might have some long-term plans for the communities in 
that regard a well, but in any event, if it’s entrusted as it is to sit 
there and grow, we would be able to fund the communities from 
the interest of that fund which would give them a stable base on 
and on and on if nobody ever spent, you know, if the 
government of the day didn’t take and deplete the funds of that 
trust account agreement. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — After the meeting that was held in La Ronge, a 
lot of the people were waiting, of course, for the capital grants 
announcement. But a lot of the people were saying that the 
money that’s being revolved around, you know, comes a lot 
from the community level, outside the community level in 
regards to the leases, and so on. 
 
Now a lot of them were saying that the revenue base, let’s say 
from the mine and from the forestry, is not accessible to the 
same rates of profit that the large-scale corporations make. As I 
talked, people talked about the fact that — well even for the 
record — SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation) makes $60 million this year. And there’s about 
$700 million taken out from northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And what the municipalities were saying — and the same holds 
true in regards to education — but rural municipalities are 
saying that if there is a rise in the area of profitability and the 
exploitation of resources in the North, there should be a 
corresponding rise in the level to build the infrastructure on the 
community level so that the sewer and water systems and 
everything like that, that are not half there, and also in regards 
to the fact that half the places don’t have fire trucks and so on, 
and the fact that you can build a better community 
infrastructure could be utilized. What can the minister, you 
know, say in regards to the hopes of the people in northern 
Saskatchewan in that particular regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I suppose that all I 
can tell the member is that there there’s two accounts up there, 
one that I’m familiar with from my prior portfolio. That’s the 
northern revolving account. That’s the one that the communities 
could have the opportunity of getting involved in. 
 
But the northern trust account has no community money in it. 
The money from that comes from the taxes that are collected 
from the mines, comes from the other taxes that are collected 
from outside of the boundaries, and as a result of that, overall, 
there are an awful lot more dollars per capita spent on our 
northern communities — a lot more dollars, both in the area of 
revenue sharing per capita and in the area of capital per capita, 
than in the South. 

So what you’re getting into is the old discussion up there of the 
royalties from the mines and the tree leases and all the rest of it. 
Well that’s Consolidated Fund money the same way as in the 
South we have oil revenues and we have potash revenues, and 
that’s distributed provincially, as is the other money distributed 
provincially. 
 
And I don’t think that it’s fair to say, or to expect to say, that 
these dollars belong to the North and those dollars belong to the 
South. They go into the Consolidated Fund, and that’s what 
keeps this province viable. And that’s part of our resource base, 
the same as the grain farmers and agriculture being the number 
one industry in this province. 
 
And all of those moneys . . . That’s why we’re in a position to 
give the hospitals, to give the schools, and to give everything 
else to the North that they require to enjoy a good life-style; that 
we try to be fair with, and keeping in mind the special needs 
that they have in our northern communities, is why we provide 
a greater per capita situation from my department in so far as it 
relates to both capital and revenue sharing. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Since you’ve gone in on a general provincial 
revenue and expenditures, one has to look a bit at the facts in 
regards to the North. I mean, it’s your government who cut off 
the food subsidy program that was around, while there is still 
subsidy for booze and the like. And we raised that issue, you 
know, many times in the legislature. 
 
We also, you know, talked about the fact of the housing . . . 
You know, in regards to Sask Housing, there was a tremendous 
number of houses that were built in the North, you know, prior 
to the ’82 period, that did not get a corresponding amount of 
increase when you government came into play. 
 
But, in fact, I could go on and mention other facts. But what the 
people are saying is that the Consolidated Fund remained 
exactly the same, 5.2 — 5.2 million last year; 5.2 million this 
year. And that there was also a rate of inflation to consider. 
 
You know the costs of building a road, the costs of storing 
water in northern Saskatchewan, is way higher than in southern 
Saskatchewan. You cannot apply exactly the same standards, 
and that’s why you’ve got a bit of a corresponding level of 
expenditures that are slightly greater. 
 
(2015) 
 
But what the expenditures are in the past six years is that they 
have been narrowed back again. They’ve gone down. Were 
there was a great degree of difference in expenditures during 
prior to the ’82 period in regards to the North, overall that 
expenditure has shrunk more between ’82 to the present. 
 
And what the people are saying is this. They would like to see a 
formula. This year you . . . They said you created a formula 
which was basically one where you robbed Peter to pay Paul; 
where you basically shifted the expenditures from the larger 
communities, from Creighton and La 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1679 
 

Ronge, to the smaller communities, which creates friction 
between the smaller communities against the larger 
communities. 
 
But what the people did say is that there was really no 
long-term strategy; that while the revenue trust fund account 
resolves a problem for a year, the new formula does not take 
into consideration a more long-term approach. And a few 
people were worried about that aspect. They said, what will 
happen next year, and they wanted your reassurance in that 
particular regard to say, okay, this formula is not only fair this 
year, but it will be fair in the future — that there will be no 
corresponding aspect where the larger communities have to 
suffer for the standards that they have helped build up in 
northern Saskatchewan. And that was a concern that they had. 
 
What does the minister have to say in regards to this concern by 
the municipalities — that indeed you will see a great degree of 
fairness on especially the larger towns who have set standards 
in the North before? And what can be said in terms of a more 
longer term strategy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the member 
from Cumberland is raising an issue that is not true. I don’t 
believe that you have discussed enough with the elected 
councils of the North. Maybe in some selected seats of . . . or 
some selected communities of your constituency, you may 
have. 
 
But I can tell you that the long-term outlook for the North is in 
very good shape right now. And I consult with all of the 
communities, not just a select few, but I consult with all of the 
communities and regularly. And I think you’re prepared to 
admit that. 
 
And I can tell you that the new revenue-sharing formula that 
was implemented this year included many, many, many ideas 
that originated from a proposal put forward by the west side 
mayors’ association, that maybe some members on the east side 
didn’t particularly see eye to eye with, but the majority did. So 
we used some of their ideas. We used many others from the east 
side included. 
 
There is a long-term strategy in place already for the capital 
program. We were able to renew for another five years the 
capital program that had been in effect for five years that was 
just expiring. 
 
The transfer of the Crown land that has been in the works for a 
long, long time is now coming forward to fruition with other 
long-term plans. I know, speaking in my other portfolio of 
housing, we have long-term plans there. And as far as it relates, 
Mr. Chairman, to the actual expenditures, for instance on 
revenue-sharing side, certainly we recognize the additional 
costs involved with our northern communities. And that’s why 
our northern communities receive in the area of $225 per capita 
on revenue sharing — $225, while in the southern communities 
they’re only receiving 90. Now that’s over twice as much. That 
recognizes, to a great degree, the difference that exists between 
North and South. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I guess what they’re saying is, and the 
reference points here, Mr. Minister, is this: there is about a $700 
million revenue base in northern Saskatchewan. 

There is, even for one corporation, Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation, it made $60 million last year — $60 
million. There’s a lot of corporations that make a tremendous 
amount of profit from northern Saskatchewan development. 
 
What you have not really talked about in your presentation is 
the fact that you will not move to try and even get one-quarter 
of a per cent of that which would help out build more fire halls, 
another quarter per cent which would put in a lot more sewer 
and water systems. That in fact you refuse to get some of the 
money that is put in by the largest corporations, and instead try 
and get more money from the trappers who have to pay their 
leases and so on. 
 
And that’s a point — I don’t want to belabour the problem, so 
I’ll just make that point, and because I know we will disagree 
on exactly that point, and maybe pass it on to another member. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I too don’t want to belabour 
it, and I appreciate the questions. I suppose I’ll just stick to my 
original response, because I see it all the time and I get asked it 
all the time by the mayors. And where they talk about that, you 
know, I just simply say, well what about the potash; what about 
the oil royalties that go into the same fund, you know, and are 
shared equally throughout the province; what about agriculture, 
our number one industry, of which doesn’t exist in the North? 
 
So I think that, all in all, fairness is the key, and if we can be 
fair with all the citizens of the province, I think that that’s 
something to look forward to. And we have a good rapport 
going now with the communities in the North. I’m very pleased 
about that. We seem to be on the right track. The councils up 
there are working diligently, and I believe that we have a good 
understanding and things will continue to work out well for our 
friends in the North. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have some 
easy questions for the minister for a while. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to clean up a couple or three small items 
here so that those officials that may be responsible for this — I 
will deal with the questions and then they won’t have to either 
stay or come back. And then if it’s okay with you — I notice 
you’ve got your housing corporation people here. If we can 
treat both departments together, we can ask some questions 
about the housing corporation and hopefully get that done 
tonight as well. They might as well start coming down if they 
wish. 
 
Now I’m not sure whether you’re the minister responsible here, 
but I’ll give you the information on this one topic, and if you 
are, then please provide the answers; if not, then I will certainly 
have simply provided this for you as information so that maybe, 
as the Minister of Urban Affairs, you might follow up. 
 
Now it is my understanding that all municipal employees — or 
certain municipal employees except those in Regina, Saskatoon, 
and Prince Albert — are members of the Municipal Employees’ 
Superannuation Commission. That’s their umbrella, okay? 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1680 
 

Now my information has been, and there’s been a concern 
expressed to me, that about a year ago the provincial 
government, by order in council, took over all of their finances 
but left the commission in place. And this is an order in council 
that was brought forward apparently by the Minister of Finance. 
That was at the time questioned by the employees and by the 
commission because they were fearful that some of their ability 
to influence the plan and the legislation would be reduced. It 
seems that prior to this, and from the times that I can recall back 
in the days when I sat on that side of the House and you weren’t 
here yet, that when the superintendent of pensions 
recommended amendments, they were pretty well automatically 
brought in as changes. 
 
I want to know, Mr. Minister: why was this change made? Are 
you familiar with the change, and can you explain why the 
change was made? And if you can’t, were you cognizant of the 
fact that this was happening when it happened a year ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I suppose that I could tell 
the member from Regina North East that this does come under 
the Department of Finance and the Minister of Finance is aware 
of what you’ve brought up. So I suppose all I’ll say is I can take 
this information to him and you’ll have the opportunity to ask 
him those questions. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. I will most certainly want to 
do that or my colleague, the Finance critic, will; but somebody 
will. I want to raise this with you while I’m doing this because 
as the Urban Affairs minister, you no doubt will have some 
interest. And I’m sure that . . . I don’t know whether you have 
been contacted but if you haven’t been, you may be. 
 
But I am told that some amendments were proposed, quite a list 
of them, at least four categories, four or five, and the Minister 
of Finance has declined to introduce those amendments in the 
spring session. Now would you be so good as to consult with 
the Minister of Finance, find out what the problem is, and see if 
you can jack him up a little bit so that he will at least do what 
has always been done in the past and pay attention to 
recommendations that have been brought. There are no 
financial implications. This is one of those pension plans that 
not only is fully funded but it has a surplus in it, which is I think 
quite commendable and that should be encouraged. And as a 
matter of fact, I’m told that — this is back a little ways so 
maybe things have changed, but at the time I received this — 
the minister had refused, not categorically, but seemed to show 
no interest in bringing those amendments. So will you 
undertake to discuss this with the Minister of Finance on behalf 
of these employees? And we will do the same when the 
Minister of Finance is here in these estimates. If you do that, I 
have no further questions on this item. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I can assure the member 
that I will take this information directly to the Minister of 
Finance, and when the opportunity presents itself, either in 
question period or at some other point in time in this Assembly, 
you could ask the same questions of him then. 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. If only you had 
been so co-operative when we talked about the ward system. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I think he’s backing off. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — It seems to me that maybe he has 
softened up some. 
 
I want to ask you, not many, but a few questions on the 
Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency. And I 
understand that this agency is now fully functioning. Can you 
tell the House and report to the House whether the agency has 
caught up on the backlog of reassessment. I can recall a few 
years ago, there was a very extensive backlog. What stage is all 
this at, and what is happening to make sure that it is caught up, 
if it hasn’t been? 
 
 Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, yes, SAMA (Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency) is off and running, and as we 
all know, SAMA was set up in an Act of this legislature. The 
board consists of two members of SUMA, two members of 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), 
one from SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association), 
two government appointees. 
 
They’ve been established just a little over a year now. They are 
in the process of starting a new assessment manual which will 
begin the new assessment procedure in the province of 
Saskatchewan. It is an independent third party. I have an awful 
lot of . . . I hold an awful lot of hope that they will be able to 
solve or go a long way in solving assessment problems that 
exist in our province. The assessment problems are not unique 
to Saskatchewan. They exist all over this Dominion of Canada. 
We hope that this new form of assessment, taking it out of the 
realm of government and into an independent body, will 
certainly go a long way in establishing what will be seen as fair 
assessments equally throughout the province. 
 
As far as it relates to the backlog, and you mentioned 
assessments, and I believe that what you might be referring to is 
there was a . . . The only backlog that I’m familiar with was a 
backlog on appeals of assessments. And I am pleased to tell you 
that the entire backlog of the appeals have now been heard. 
Decisions will be rendered shortly. 
 
There are a bunch of appeals that are outstanding on one 
particular issue that they are dealing with to try to resolve, 
because when those one or two that they are getting opinions on 
now are resolved, it will then reflect on the balance. But I 
believe that all of the appeals have been heard to the end of 
March of 1988. They’ve caught up pretty well, and they hope to 
stay on target now, if that’s what you were referring to. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I was referring to both. You’ve answered 
my next question which was going to be on the appeals, when I 
last checked, and I . . . This was not official information but it 
was reported to me some time in February or January that there 
was something like 300 assessment appeals backlogged. And if 
you’re telling me 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1681 
 

that that has now been caught up, then I certainly want to say to 
the Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency a word of 
commendation for having done that because, as you know, 
some of these things left over a long period of time are not very 
helpful to anyone. 
 
(2030) 
 
Now can you tell me . . . There is this board which is appointed, 
and I know the representation on it, but there is also 
representation from the government. Can you tell me how often 
it meets? Does it meet regularly, on a regular basis, or as 
required? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I can’t give you the precise date because I 
don’t have any control over their meetings. But I can tell you 
that they met pretty regularly, and I would suspect that it’s more 
than just scheduled meetings, and that they indeed go through 
regular meetings — particularly right now — being that they’re 
involved in this whole new assessment manual. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Can you report to the House how — 
there must be a way to pay for the costs of these people- they 
travel. Are the members of this board on a retainer? If so, 
what’s the retainer? Is there a per diem that is paid? How does 
the system work? And how much is it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Being that it is an independent agency, I 
would like to advise the hon. member, Mr. Chairman, that they, 
in fact, did establish their own fees, their own remuneration, 
agreed to at the board level. And I don’t have that information 
with me as to indeed what they set that up at. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — They do report to the legislature; I have 
the annual report here. The government does provide funding. 
One would think that one of your officials might have that 
information. If they don’t, maybe they could get it for me and 
provide it. And I don’t need that now, Mr. Minister. If they can 
discover that and provide it for me, by letter, before the 
beginning of the next session, I would be appreciative and we 
would let that go. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — What I’ll do . . . I will take this 
undertaking, Mr. Chairman, and I hope that it doesn’t lead to 
questions at this point that I can’t respond to. If the information 
that the member is asking for is or should be public knowledge 
regarding the remuneration of the board, I will undertake to 
have that information sent very, very quickly. 
 
If, in the event that that is not public information, just as 
perhaps some of the information that might be withheld by a 
city from me is not available, then of course, my hands would 
be tied, but there might be some other way that you could get 
them. But I will undertake to look into that for you, and if 
possible, I will provide you with that and I’ll do it pretty 
quickly. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I appreciate that, Mr. Minister, and I will 
leave it for you to pursue that. I do recognize the new 
arrangement under which the municipal assessment 
management, Saskatchewan Assessment Agency exists, and I 
respect that. But because there is 

government money involved, one would think that there is 
therefore some responsibility on the part of the government to 
ask these kinds of questions, not in the negative or derogatory 
way, but simply as a responsible act of government who must 
then report to the legislature. 
 
I have no further questions on that, and I won’t have; so if you 
have officials who were particularly responsible for that, there’s 
no need for them to remain or come back. 
 
We have some questions that we want to ask on the housing 
corporation, so if you want to have your officials handy . . . I 
noticed they were coming down the stairs. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Just a question to the minister on SAMA 
before the officials leave. My understanding is that the 
assessment has been recently done, I think, within the last three 
or four years in the resort villages area. How soon would you 
expect the next reassessment to come? How often would you 
expect this cycle to come there again, particularly, say, in the 
Emma Lake, Candle Lake areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — According to the Act right now, as it’s 
spelled out, they have to do the cycle every seven years or no 
later than nine. It’s my understanding that SAMA has a little 
difficulty with that schedule in legislation and they may be 
recommending a change. And they may indeed, because it’s a 
new functioning group, as you know, have some other 
recommendations that they will bring forward to me to bring to 
the Assembly. 
 
So certainly if there are any changes requested by them with 
relationship to their operation, it would require legislative 
amendments, and at that point, obviously, I would have people 
with me that would explain the reasoning behind it and the 
why’s and the wherefore’s. 
 
So that all I can tell you right now is that the legislation 
stipulates seven years, no later than nine, and the assessment 
manuals are always in a constant revolving process to be 
maintained. 
 
So when it is related to a specific concern . . . I’m not in a 
position to tell you, but I know that the area that you mentioned 
of Candle Lake, is . . . I received a lot of letters from residents 
of Candle Lake, or property owners, concerning their 
assessment. I have brought it to the attention of SAMA. The 
board is presently looking at it. 
 
So that’s why I have so much hope that SAMA does indeed 
work out, because as these letters come forward we have an 
independent agency to take them to, to deal with, and hopefully 
they’ll be able to resolve some of these problems. Or if not, 
then at least you have an independent third party that says, 
here’s how it is, and it compares to this and this and this, and it 
will be set forth in that fashion. So I’m familiar with the — and 
so is SAMA — with the problem that you just brought up. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Just to confirm, then, SAMA does not have 
to wait for the entire seven-year cycle to pass before they can 
take some type of action — either a reassessment or to make 
recommendations to the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — It’s not that they would make 
recommendations to me, because they indeed control the 



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1682 
 

assessment, so it all depends on where they reach in that cycle. I 
would suspect . . . And again I can’t put words in their mouth. If 
they choose to become involved in the middle of a cycle, I 
suppose being that they’re the agency responsible, so long as 
they’re living within the legislation that dictates how it must 
work, then they would be able to resolve these problems. If not, 
that’s when they would then come to me and ask for a change in 
legislation, so that they indeed could deal with any specific 
problems that might arise that they could do something with. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The Urban Affairs and Sask Housing votes 
are two separate votes in the estimates. Unless it’s mutually 
agreed by the minister and the opposition, it would be easier for 
the Chair to deal with them separately in the estimates. The 
member from Regina North East. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — We’re prepared, under subvote 1 to in 
general cover the whole field, and because I think housing will 
take less time, we would like to deal with it now and not have to 
call the officials back again another day if we can finish it 
today. So, if it’s mutually agreeable, fine. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Yes, I have my officials here. I have Larry 
Little, to your right, president of Sask Housing, and other 
housing officials behind. So you could just ask the general 
questions that you’d like to ask and following that, for the chair, 
the chairman could call for the votes and subvotes in an orderly 
fashion as per each department, if that’ll help facilitate. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his new 
officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — To my right Larry Little, president of Sask 
Housing; behind Mr. Little is Ron Styles, the vice-president of 
program operations. Right behind me is Ron Sotski, the 
executive director, property management and field services; and 
to Mr. Little’s right, we have Larry Boys, the vice-president of 
finance and administration. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and 
welcome to the officials in this year’s issue or the edition of the 
estimates on Sask Housing Corporation. 
 
A number of issues I’d like to raise with the minister tonight 
and with the housing policies of the Sask Housing Corporation 
under the rubric of this first subvote. 
 
The first issues I’d like to talk about is the question of 
privatization and the minister’s plans vis-a-vis privatization and 
the Sask Housing Corporation. I noticed in last year’s estimates 
the minister made some mention that in fact there were plans 
afoot to dispose of some of the assets of Sask Housing 
Corporation and I wonder if you would care to tell the 
Assembly tonight precisely what assets were disposed of and 
what are the plans in the coming years for the disposal of assets 
from Sask Housing through the privatization schemes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I think that about the only 
area of any significance is the area as it relates to staff housing. 
And it’s fair to say that that particular area, if you want to put 
the word “privatize” to it, has been ongoing for the last few 
years. We inherited a portfolio of staff 

housing from the other departments of government into Sask 
Housing because we were capable of administrating it and 
renting them and repairing them and the like. 
 
But what’s happened over a period of time is that we have more 
staff housing than we have staff. They’re primarily in northern 
Saskatchewan. They were set up in communities that housing 
would have been difficult for them to have access to and now 
that is not as dominant. So that we will continue an effort to 
privatize the staff housing where the staff housing is in direct 
competition to the private market-place, in any given 
community if that in fact exists. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, the question was: how many 
units of staff housing or how many units of housing have you 
sold off in the last year and could you tell us how many more 
units you plan to put on the market-place? And maybe you’d 
like to tell us in what communities those units exist. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, in 1985 there was a total of 
31 units that were sold; 1986 a total of 26 units; 1987 a total of 
23; and as the member is probably aware, these figures are 
based on a calendar year because that’s the housing 
corporation’s operation is on a calendar year. So that that would 
be up to the end of December. 
 
And then recently a major one, that I’ll point out to you because 
it was major, was that we sold a 72-unit apartment building in 
La Ronge and we did that primarily because, Mr. Deputy 
Chairman, it was in a market community where there are 
several privately owned apartment buildings that the 
government was in direct competition to and this ownership 
was no longer needed to support government programming, in a 
nut shell. 
 
(2045) 
 
So the sale was done by public tender, advertised in February of 
1988. Seven bids were received and it was sold for a price that 
was within the price range provided by an independent 
appraisal. And also a condition of the sale was that the owner 
was required to enter into a lease to provide the government 
with long-term access to the apartment block at reasonable rents 
to cover the students that required space in our northern college. 
 
So that was all taken care of. It was discussed with all of the 
players at the time that would have been directly involved in it 
and there was no particular problem that was brought to light by 
anybody that was involved in the sale of that project. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder . . . Two 
questions out of that. First of all, in regard to the 72-apartment 
building, would you tell us who the successful bidder was and 
also the tender price paid for that. Also would you tell us 
whether it was the low bid. And thirdly, in regards to the 
long-term arrangement with the government as to access for 
people who are going to use that particular facility, could you 
provide us with the documentation as to what has been signed 
which will guarantee a rent cap on the units. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, Deputy Chairman, the 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1683 
 

property was sold to the high bidder. I think you just 
inadvertently used the low bid by mistake, but the high bidder 
for the building received it. It was sold to Reisinger 
Developments Ltd., of Saskatoon — and I don’t have the 
foggiest idea who the principals of Reisinger developments are 
— for $1.1 million. 
 
And I’ve been advised that the arrangement has been concluded 
and is satisfactory, but we don’t have copy of that 
documentation. I don’t know whether the Department of 
Education would have access to it or not. I believe that’s who 
the lease would be signed with — wasn’t it? The Department of 
Education? I don’t even know what government agency signed 
the document, but I don’t have it, so that I can’t obviously 
supply you with that. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, just on that last point, you 
made the assertion that there was guarantees built into an 
agreement that had been signed. You don’t appear to be aware 
of this agreement. And all we’re requesting is the 
documentation which will guarantee, as you say, the students 
who are attending the colleges in La Ronge access is at a 
reasonable rate given that the apartment building has now been 
privatized. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well I don’t choose to get into an 
argument, Mr. Deputy Chairman, and it’s with the property 
management Crown. If we’re in a position to get that document 
on behalf of the member and send it over to him, I certainly 
have no problem with that. And if that document is available to 
us for that purpose, we’d be glad to supply it. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Okay. In regards to the original question I asked 
on privatization, you talked about the staff housing as being the 
housing stock which was going to be put up for a bid and put up 
for privatization. Have you had any discussions with the 
Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation in regards to selling 
off the existing housing stock owned by the Sask Housing 
Corporation, outside of that designated as staff housing? Have 
you entered into any of those discussions with the CMHC 
(Canadian Mortgage and Housing Corporation)? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I’ve been advised that about the only 
privatization — if that’s the word that you want to apply to it — 
is the normal. There is no abnormal form of discussions going 
on that you have been alluding to. The only normal thing, that I 
would call normal, is where Sask Housing has huge land 
holdings throughout the province, and if we’re able to sell a 
block of land to a developer, most of the time it’s done in 
agreement with the local municipality, where they have a 
partnership agreement with us. And, you know, if somebody 
comes along and wants to buy a parcel of land or something 
like that, the it’s sold and obviously it would be privatized, but 
it would be done in that fashion. But there is no large wholesale 
attempt of any kind to dispose to a bunch of Sask Housing 
Corporation assets, no. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — The question, Mr. Minister, to be clear is that I 
just wanted to know, because there had been some discussion 
earlier on that one of the major reasons that you weren’t going 
to sell off the stock of Sask Housing was that CMHC had 
objected to it, and I allude to the . . . or I 

refer to your comments made in the last year’s estimates. I just 
wanted to know whether or not you have, in fact, entered into 
discussion with Canada . . . CMHC so that you, in fact, can go 
ahead with plans to privatize housing stock, or is, in fact, that 
your objective? Do you now admit that public house stock for 
social objectives is the way to go? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well I think that what I pointed out last 
year was, I said, even if we had visions of privatizing a lot of 
our housing stock, that CMHC, who was our major partner, 
would have to agree with any of the propositions we had, and 
probably that’s the remark that you’re alluding to. 
 
But my opinion hasn’t changed. I think wherever we can, either 
make renters owners, that that would be ideal, or where we have 
a problem with some housing where payments are so far in 
arrears that people will never be in a position to catch up and 
become an owner. And if that required a write-down by 
governments to make them a real honest-to-goodness, 100 per 
cent owner of housing that they could afford rather than never 
getting anywhere, I believe that it would only be common 
sense. And I think that you would even agree that wherever we 
could make that kind of a transition so that these people could 
become real, live home owners, that that would be the ideal 
situation for us to get to. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well that may all be well provided that there is, 
in fact, adequate housing available for those who are not in the 
position to put together the capital necessary to either make the 
down payment or to have the long-term financial commitment 
needed. 
 
While we’re on that, because there is certain other forms of 
home ownership which have been developed in this province — 
and I speak specifically of co-operative forms of home 
ownership and some of the housing co-ops that had been 
developed in this province up until recently — has the 
department plans to develop other forms other than single 
family, single dwelling home ownerships? Are you, for 
example, now considering putting back into place the 
co-operative home ownership program and co-operative 
building program so that housing co-ops can once again flourish 
in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well I think that we’re always looking for 
ways to improve housing in our province. And as a result we’re 
in constant consultation with the home builders of this province. 
And I believe that through consultations with them, in the event 
that particular industry, Mr. Deputy Chairman, would ever 
require a boost and that they asked us to consider implementing 
some type of a home program or home building program, that 
we would probably entertain that request. But we don’t want to 
artificially inflate the market, so that we have to be awful 
cautious if and when we introduce any new kind of a building 
program. 
 
Right now our efforts are certainly concentrated on enriched 
housing for seniors. We introduced last year, as was discussed, 
the innovative housing program which will help to maintain an 
independent living style for the seniors of our province. That 
innovative housing program has worked extremely well, and 
because of getting 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1684 
 

involved with communities and various third-party groups, we 
find the government isn’t building these homes all alone, but 
rather the communities and other organizations come into play 
with us. And because of the partnership arrangement that’s 
involved between Sask Housing and these other various 
communities, what we find we were able to trigger many, many 
more units than government alone could ever hope to build by 
themselves. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, once again we get into the debate 
where you say that housing has to be a totally market-oriented 
development, that the development of housing must be based on 
market needs and not on social needs. And we’ll disagree on 
that, and we’ll disagree for time immemorial on that, because 
this side of the House believes that the government has to take a 
leading role in providing housing to those people who need 
housing and has to take a leading role in providing different 
kinds of housing, flexible and innovative kinds of housing. 
 
Unfortunately — and you’ve mentioned your innovative 
program and we’ll get to that in due course — unfortunately 
what’s happened is that your blind faith in the market-place to 
provide housing for people in this province has resulted in a 
whole strata of people, particularly in urban Saskatchewan, who 
are now without adequate housing. And I speak specifically of 
low income families, a great many of whom are single-parent 
families, and a great many of those who are headed by women 
who are put in the position of not having adequate and decent 
housing. I also speak of native people in this province who are 
in a position of not being able to live in adequate housing 
because of your blind adherence to some so-called magic hand 
that operates in the so-called mythical market-place. 
 
And I submit, Mr. Minister, that what we’re talking about here 
is that there are social needs and it’s a question of how you 
develop a housing program for Saskatchewan to meet those 
social needs. And I would also submit that when we get to 
examine your innovative program, you will see that, in fact, that 
there are a great many loopholes, loopholes caused — and gaps 
in your program — caused by that blind adherence to the 
market-place. However that is not the intent of my question at 
this point. 
 
I want to ask you a question concerning privatization because I 
still haven’t gotten an answer in regards to your relationship 
between Sask Housing Corporation and CMHC. And the longer 
you sort of not answer the question, the more suspicious we on 
this side of the House get that you have engaged in some kind 
of discussions with CMHC in order to begin a process of 
privatizing the public housing in this province. 
 
Now would you please put my mind to rest and say that those 
discussions are not ongoing, that you have not had those 
discussion, and that it is not going to be corporation policy to 
privatize public housing, public housing in this province? Can 
you tell us that that, in fact, is your policy — that you do not 
intend to privatize public housing in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I don’t know why the member is getting all 
excited and worked up about it. We have no 

discussions going on with CMHC about the privatization of 
public housing. And he started talking philosophies and 
market-place and all the rest. I really don’t know where he is 
getting to, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 
 
All the public housing that the corporation is involved in now is 
going to low income people, and that’s exactly what we’re 
doing. So obviously the housing program that I was referring to 
— and that’s to create new starts for the people that want to 
have their own first home or something. We came off a very 
successful first home program and the like, which was brought 
into force a couple of years ago, and was done at the urging of 
the home builders. That’s what I was talking about — about a 
home program. But for housing starts . . . 
 
When you talk about the rest of our programming that Sask 
Housing is into now, it is public housing, and it’s all designed 
for low income families. It’s being done with the help of 
communities and church groups and all the rest of it that 
address exactly that kind of people. And, you know, the 
member can see where our housing went to in Regina last year. 
We had one project — the old boy’s home as it’s fondly know 
in Regina, that was done with the Salvation Army, 40 units. We 
had 46 units built last year in family income in Regina, or for 
low family income in Regina, and these efforts will continue. 
So I think all in all the corporation’s activities are still the same; 
nothing is changed. We’re still involved in all of that area. 
 
(2100) 
 
There are other program delivery areas that we got involved 
with, with our estimates last year that have worked out very 
well, where we transferred some programs back to CMHC 
because what happened was that it was a duplication of work 
and there were two government agencies to deal with instead of 
one and people found that they were getting the run-around 
from the governments by going from one to the other. 
 
So that in this fashion, all of the programs, that at the time we 
decided it would be a good idea to transfer back to CMHC, has 
indeed worked out to be just that. And the interest groups that 
work alone with CMHC are simply delighted that they have 
only one government agency to deal with now. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, I will take it that it’s going to be 
the policy of the department that you don’t intend to privatize 
public housing. I believe that’s what you said, although in an 
extremely obtuse and roundabout way. But we won’t press that 
issue any more. 
 
But we will press the second issue, which to raise is that in your 
little speech there, you talked about how the department or how 
Sask Housing Corporation was meeting the needs, the 
legitimate, social needs of people in this province. I want to beg 
to differ with that analysis because I think quite frankly, sir, that 
a document such as the mayor’s task force on women’s issues, 
which identified housing in Regina as a key need, is not being 
met. In fact, not only is it not being met, we are facing a 
situation where the need for low income housing, particularly 
for single-parent families, and particularly for single parent 
families headed by women, is growing and 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1685 
 

that Sask Housing has not put that priority — it has not placed 
that kind of thrust in meeting what is a growing social need in 
this province. I wonder, sir, whether in fact Sask Housing had 
read the report, and if, having read it, whether it has begun to 
initiate any research of its own in regards to some of the 
recommendations and some of the findings of that report, and 
whether or not that Sask Housing is getting off its butt and 
looking around the province to see in fact there and how this 
growing social crisis can be dealt with through government 
initiative, through government leadership, and through a public 
housing program which meets the needs of poor people in this 
province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, certainly Sask 
Housing keeps a pulse of all the various recommendations and 
statistics that are brought forth by various interest groups, and 
it’s very difficult to determine, in fact, which numbers are 
accurate, which numbers are right on, and the like, and whether 
they’re ours or theirs or whatever. 
 
So I guess it’s fair to say that what we do is recognize that, yes, 
public housing is a thing that exists with us right now and that it 
must be addressed, and I believe that we do that. For instance, 
since 1982 we have subsidized almost 2,200 . . . almost 2,200 
family units have been subsidized by Sask Housing 
Corporation. That’s a significant number, Mr. Deputy 
Chairman. I can tell you that of that number, Regina is getting 
more than its fair share. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well the fact of the matter is, Mr. Minister, 
whether its Regina or whether it’s Saskatoon, the statistics — 
and it’s not our statistics — the statistics generated by 
organizations like CMHC and by Statistics Canada point to a 
growing and increasing social housing crisis in this province. 
 
And if you want to talk about the record since 1982, if you want 
to talk about the record, what have we seen consistently since 
1982 is Sask Housing falling behind need. The demand is 
outstripping the supply in regards to the construction and the 
maintenance of public housing units, and public housing units 
targeted for those who section 13 of the act setting up the 
corporation is intended — those vulnerable groups in the 
society who can’t afford to go into the market-place and to try 
to outbid each other for housing that a great many of us do 
enjoy. The facts of the matter are, and the statistics in the 
mayor’s task force prove, that what we are seeing is a 
developing crisis. 
 
What I want to know from you, and the rhetoric aside: what are 
you planning to do about increasing the supply of public 
housing? How many public housing units are you going to put 
on the market this year, are you going to make available? How 
many new public housing units do you plan to make available? 
And are you going to develop some kind of affirmative action 
program that will open the way for the poorest of the poor, 
which are single families headed by women, so as to provide 
their families with the kind of housing that’s needed by them? 
How many units are you going to build this year? Could you 
give me a run-down on that? And what are your plans for 
1988-89? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I should 

point out a few facts as well to the member opposite who seems 
to have total disregard for the market-place. His philosophy, I 
guess; I hope I don’t ever have a philosophy like that but . . . 
 
Saskatchewan enjoys the lowest price houses in the country. 
That is a fact. And because of the prices being affordable to the 
majority of the people that live here, we find that we have the 
highest numbers of young people in the country being able to 
afford a home, a house of their own, right here in 
Saskatchewan. And we also find that low income families enjoy 
that same situation. We have more low income families by far 
then other provinces because of the fact that here in 
Saskatchewan we enjoy that low market prices in comparison to 
the rest of the country. 
 
I’d hate to be a low income earner in Toronto. We all hear the 
stories about the cost of housing in Toronto. I suppose I’d even 
hate to have to supply public housing in Toronto at those prices. 
It could keep a government broke doing that. 
 
But to be more specific, this year, through the federal-provincial 
housing agreement, we will be delivering 521 units. One 
hundred and fifty low income family units will be delivered 
throughout the province, and some 40 to 60 will be located in 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, the provision of low income 
housing units in Saskatchewan — and I think that there is a 
relationship and one would like to draw that relationship here in 
this province — that because of the efforts of the previous 
government to develop a large public housing sector, one of the 
reasons why land developers and building speculators can’t . . . 
and real estate speculators can’t drive up the housing prices to 
prices that are totally out of whack with reality, as they are in 
Toronto or as they have been in Vancouver and as they were in 
Calgary, is precisely because there is a large stock of public 
housing which was built because there was government 
recognition that housing is a public right. And that in the only 
way in order to try to control a market-place gone crazy, as it 
has in Toronto, is to, in fact, engage in a major public housing 
project as the previous government did, much to its credit. 
 
Now you say, Mr. Minister, that there is going to be between 51 
and 60 units built in Regina for low income families. I wonder 
if you would care to tell us where those low income units are 
going to be built. Is this just a projection or have, in fact, 
tenders been called? And have, in fact, plans been drawn up and 
concrete work undertaken in order to build that number of 
units? I wonder if you would tell us where those units are going 
to be built. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, regarding the last 
question first. We’re out to competition now on the innovative 
housing program. That competition closed May 26, so we’re 
just nicely starting to assess the various proposals that have 
been put forward, including some very good ones by church 
groups. And you know, we’re going to have to assess exactly 
how that’s going to work out. 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1686 
 

But again we see here, unfortunately, where the opposition 
members are not really aware of how a department functions. 
We’ve seen examples of it in other areas, and again we have the 
situation right now. 
 
I don’t want to demean the member opposite, but when he talks 
about the price of land and, you know, kind of says it’s our fault 
and where is the low cost housing and the like, well I should 
pint out that the city developed a place in Regina called 
Richmond Place, and the lots there are very, very expensive — 
hardly low income. So you see the city doing that. Now the city 
happens to be our partner in land, and they dictate that if we 
develop land and put it up for sale, that we must charge, must 
charge the market price for that land because the city gets the 
profits. So that as a result, I suppose even if we wanted to 
develop the land and put it out at half price of the market for a 
family income, we wouldn’t be allowed to do so because the 
city wouldn’t get the profit. 
 
So our hands are tied through all of these agreements that have 
been put in place. And all of these agreements were put in 
place, in fact, by the NDP government. So we’re hamstrung 
with these development projects and the like, if we wanted to 
go out and develop the land. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, that is what I call drawing an 
extremely long bow, trying to link the development of 
Richmond Place and the development of public housing in this 
province. And for any minister of the Crown to stand here, and 
a minister responsible for Sask Housing Corporation, to try and 
amalgamate the two, indeed brings one to the question of 
sympathy, and it’s a question of demeaning. And I’m certainly 
not going to demean the minister by going out to that level of 
long-bow drawing. 
 
The facts of the matter are — and we’ll get back to the original 
point of the question — is that there is a need for public housing 
for low income families, particularly low income families 
headed by women. For example, in a 1986 survey done buy the 
City of Regina, your partner in the development of housing in 
the city, it showed that there were 600 families on social 
assistance, and that of those 600 — pardon me, of the survey of 
600 families on social assistance, between 42 and 50 per cent of 
these families were paying rents greater than the rents set by the 
Saskatchewan assistance program. 
 
That shows two things: one, that the levels granted by social 
assistance payments are indeed totally out of reality with your 
mythical magic machine there, the market-place, or it shows 
that in fact that the market and the poor people are being asked 
to pay unrealistic rents. Some people would say that they’re 
being gouged; however, we won’t want to use those terms and 
demean the minister. 
 
We had 41 people, clients with three persons in the family, paid 
an average of $435 for rent and SAP (Saskatchewan assistance 
plan) allowed $375 per month. There were 45 clients with two 
persons in the family who paid an average of $413 in rent and 
SAP allowed $355 peer month. It’s obvious there’s a prima 
facie case here that, in fact, that relying on the market to 
provide housing for poor people doesn’t work because poor 
people can’ 

afford the housing. And that is what we are talking about 
tonight — poor people. We not talking about Richmond Place. 
 
If you want to talk about housing prices and land prices, we can 
look to the private developers to see the kind of public housing 
they’ve developed down in Wascana View in this city. And I’m 
quite sure that you’re familiar with Wascana View. And I’d like 
to ask you how many people who are on public assistance in 
this province or in this city can afford to live in Wascana View. 
 
(2115) 
 
And by the way, are you planning to build some public housing 
in Wascana View, since it has been the policy, or at least it was 
the policy of Sask Housing Corporation not to ghettoize 
recipients of social assistance into poor people’s ghettos, but in 
fact, in order to develop the community without ghettos to 
spread people throughout the community. Is Sask Housing 
going to demand that the developers like Cairns build low 
income housing in their developments, like the Wascana Views 
or like the Parkridges or like the Lakeviews of the city. 
 
It’s obvious, Mr. Minister, it’s obvious that your reliance on the 
market-place has been a failure. These statistics prove it. There 
are people in the city who cannot afford housing. The number 
of people in the city who cannot afford housing is growing. And 
when I listen to you answer, and you said between 51 and 60 
units were going to be made available, and then you turned 
around and said, but we just have these proposals put forward, 
it’s obvious you have absolutely no idea of what you’re going 
to do in terms of solving this problem. 
 
I want to ask you again: what are you, through Sask Housing, 
going to do in terms of the construction of low income housing 
units so that poor people can live in decent housing in the city? 
How many are you going to construct in the year? Do you have 
a number or is it just up for review? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, if the member 
opposite is suggesting for a moment that the government build 
everybody on social assistance a house, I mean, he’s starting to 
be far-fetched. 
 
I don’t believe that it’s the responsibility of the government to 
build everybody that’s on social assistance a house. And he says 
that I’m stretching a bow. Good grief, he was the one that 
brought up the land. I’m talking fact. I’m talking development 
of public housing. We have land to develop, lots of it, that is a 
burden to the taxpayers of this province right now because the 
NDP bought lots of it. And we’re paying interest every year on 
that land and those landholdings, lots of it. 
 
And yet when we go to our partners like the city of Regina to 
develop some of our land because we’ve got lots of it, what do 
they do? That’s where Richmond Place come in. They say, no, 
you hold on to it because we get the profits. So we pay interest 
to hold on to, lots of it, while they develop Richmond Place. 
Are they concerned with public housing and low income 
families? You go out there and try to buy a lot at Richmond 
Place if you were 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1687 
 

on low income. And that’s a development by our city. 
 
Now he stands up here and says that, you know, we’re supposed 
to do something about it when our partner in land isn’t at all 
interested in what we do with the land except hold on to it, pay 
money for it, pay interest on it, and develop it; and yet when we 
do finally develop it, develop it and sell it at market price 
because they don’t want to lose the profits associated with that 
development or with their other developments. 
 
I can tell you this, and I can tell the member that, Mr. Deputy 
Chairman, we are delivering a higher percentage of our budget 
now to low income families than has ever been done before in 
the history of this province. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, if one looks at where over 
1987 the housing projects that were developed — and we’ll get 
to that — but when you look at the list and you want to say, and 
stand here and say, that there’s a greater percentage of the 
budget being devoted to low income housing, that is contrary to 
the facts put out by your own department, but we’ll get to that a 
little bit later. 
 
It is not good enough, sir, for you to stand here and blame the 
city of Regina for your inaction in developing low income 
housing in this city. It is not your . . . doesn’t solve the problem 
for you to stand here, or try to blame the city of Saskatoon, or 
the city of Moose Jaw, or the city of Yorkton, or where any 
place where you hold land. 
 
Your responsibility and your mandate as the minister 
responsible for Sask Housing is to provide housing for poor 
people. And yes, Mr. Minister, it is the government’s 
responsibility to ensure that all people in Saskatchewan live in 
adequate housing. That is your law; that is the law of this 
province. You are mandated under the Act which sets up the 
Sask Housing Corporation, article 13, to do that. 
 
And if you’re going to stand here and say that you’re going to 
be derelict in your duties, then I guess you’ll take the political 
consequences for that — like you and some of the ministers of 
the government who consistently ignore the law just because it 
doesn’t happen to suit your blind, ideological fate to a 
market-place which doesn’t provide housing for poor people. 
Because the facts of the matter are this: the poor people in this 
city, the poor people in Saskatoon, the poor people in rural 
Saskatchewan cannot afford housing. That’s why Sask Housing 
was set up in the first place. Its mandate was to be able to 
provide decent housing and decent accommodation for people 
who didn’t have the money and who can’t afford the prices 
charged in the private market-place. That’s the mandate of the 
corporation, and it’s obvious, sir, that you’ve forgotten that part 
of the mandate. 
 
I want to ask you again: how many units, how many units will 
be built by Sask Housing for poor people in the city of Regina 
in this year? How many units are you going to build? You have 
failed to answer that question. I want to know how many 
people, how many units you are planning on building? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I’ve already 
answered that question, so you obviously didn’t listen. I 

said 40 to 60 are going to be built this year in Regina. 
 
Saskatchewan has one of the highest percentages of home 
ownership in the dominion of Canada — one of the highest 
percentages of home ownership. And it’s probably the biggest 
single investment that most of us will ever make — our home. 
And pride of ownership goes along with being able to own your 
home, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 
 
So what we have done is we’ve come up with the home 
program to help the people protect that investment. Whether 
they’re rich or whether they’re poor, they can still take 
advantage of those programs. And they can improve their 
homes and get adequate shelter at very reasonable costs if they 
apply on the loan side — a $10,000 loan for improvement at 6 
per cent. I mean, you can’t get better than that probably 
anywhere in the world. 
 
They say they care about families. What did they do when they 
were in charge? They let the interest rates go up to 21 or 22 per 
cent; they could care less whether they made the payments on 
their houses or not; they could care less whether people were 
going to lose their homes or not. They didn’t care; they didn’t 
try to do a darn thing. 
 
Some facts, Mr. Deputy Chairman — and maybe we don’t go 
around talking about our accomplishments enough in the public 
housing sector, but since 1982 to the present, 7,220 units of 
housing have been built; 2,893 units were for senior citizens, 
2,827 for low income families. 
 
And yes, we removed the moratorium that the NDP government 
placed on nursing homes; we removed that moratorium and put 
up 1,500 nursing home beds — something that they dared put a 
moratorium on. And they have nerve now to stand here . . . and 
the Leader of the Opposition scoffs at that. You were in charge, 
sir, when you put that moratorium on. And we’ve got quotes 
about what you had to say about putting that moratorium on. 
You should hang your head in shame instead of standing up 
with pride and saying how you put that moratorium . . . You 
were proud of that accomplishment, weren’t you? You should 
be ashamed, the member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
An Hon. Member: — . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . judicial 
inquiry of 1990-91, boy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — There he goes. I must have struck a nerve 
with the Leader of the Opposition; he seems pretty adamant in 
changing his mind right now. Kind of hurts when it comes 
home and you get it drilled into you that you were the one that 
put the moratorium on. You, sir, quit building the nursing 
homes in this province, not this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, the subsidy provided by the 
province for the social housing budget has increased from $10.2 
million to $20.1 million — doubled. And I suppose I could on 
and on, but I’ve struck enough nerves, and out of respect for the 
time to finish these estimates tonight, I’ll stop there. 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1688 
 

Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, with the kind of answers 
that you’ve been giving, the length of time you’re taking to give 
those answers, I have very grave doubts that we’ll be done 
tonight. In fact, you can be assured that we won’t be done 
tonight. 
 
Now here we have the minister responsible for the Housing 
Corporation, who brags about how the greatest percentage of 
his budget in the history of the province is going to be spent on 
low income housing, and when he’s asked in the House how 
many units are going to be built in the city of Regina, he 
doesn’t know. It could be 40, or it may be 60, or it may be none, 
because he’s going to depend on the vagaries of the so-called 
innovative housing program and the market-place to build poor 
people’s housing. 
 
Now what kind of an answer is that, and what kind of a 
government is that? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Government by chaos. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — You know, it is total, total government by 
chaos, and the person sitting on the right to you should be 
reprimanded for allowing that kind of chaos to go on in the 
department and allowing that kind of mismanagement to go on 
in the department. 
 
How can you stand here, come to estimates with the spending 
priorities for the Sask Housing corporation, and not know a 
simple answer like how many low income units are you going 
to build in the city of Regina? What is the answer you are going 
to give me now when I ask this question: how many low 
income units are you going to build in the city of Saskatoon? Is 
it 20, is it 40, is it 60, or is it just a number that you and the rest 
of your government folks like to pull out of the air to try to 
come up and make up answers? How many? 
 
Why can’t you come clean with the people, Mr. Minister? Why 
can’t you come clean and say, we’re reviewing it; we don’t 
know. Because it’s a simple question: all I want to know is, 
how many units of poor people’s housing are you going to 
build? Could you answer me that? You say between 40 and 60 
in the city of Regina. How many are you going to build in the 
city of Saskatoon in the coming year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, they don’t understand 
business; we’ve already clarified that. They don’t understand 
how the Wascana Centre Authority works. They don’t 
understand much about the urban revenue-sharing formulas and 
all the rest of it. And now they come along to this department. I 
wish that they would study . . . We’ve got a federal-provincial 
housing agreement. That agreement clearly dictates the number 
of units. 
 
So if you think that I’m being vague, it’s because we’ve got an 
agreement in place. And I suppose that if you want it exactly, 
I’ve told you for the third time, 40 to 60 in Regina, minimum 
will be 40 according to the agreement. And in Saskatoon there 
will be a minimum of 50. Now if we expand on that because of 
the innovative housing, and if I could say 50 to 60, then 
probably that’s what it would be. I mean, you’re asking the 
question; I’m 

giving you an answer. And you want to know exactly whether 
it’s 63 or 49 or 46 or some other silly figure. I mean, what’s the 
difference? I say 40 to 60. It’s going to be a minimum of 40, 
and in Saskatoon it’ll be a minimum of 50. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Minister, you characterized it perfectly. It’s 
a silly figure. It’s a silly figure because it’s not nearly enough. It 
doesn’t go anywhere near meeting the needs. For example, the 
Silver Sage Housing Corporation, of which has a relationship 
with your corporation, has 1,352 people on a waiting list — 
1,352 people waiting for public housing. Now when they get 
the public housing — and earlier on I referred to the chaos 
that’s in your department, and it’s not me saying that it’s in 
chaos. We look at a paper and it says, “Governments are slum 
landlords in Regina.” And when they say governments, they’re 
talking about your government and Sask Housing Corporation. 
We see a headline that says . . . We see that there are empty 
houses, houses going empty, subject to vandalism; houses 
which are being left in deplorable conditions; houses which 
could be, if a little bit of initiative were shown by your 
department and by your officials at the housing corporation, 
that could go and develop some kind of housing program. 
 
Mr. Minister, don’t you understand when you have 1,352 
people or thereabouts on a waiting list for one of the non-profit 
housing corporations that are operating throughout this 
province, don’t you understand that 50 low income units isn’t 
going to be enough? Don’t you understand that when you find 
between 42 and 50 per cent of the poor people receiving 
Saskatchewan assistance plan payments can’t afford the rent of 
the house that they’re living in, that the rent is not covered by 
their payments, don’t you understand that there’s a problem? 
Isn’t it about time you exhibited some leadership in the area? 
 
And now you keep blaming that, we’re partners; our hands, are 
tied by Regina and our hands are tied by Saskatoon, or 
whoever. Well you’re responsible, Mr. Minister, to strike out 
boldly, to go to those people. And if you’re saying that Mayor 
Schneider and the city of Regina is tying your hands and that 
Ted Cholod won’t allow you to build the houses, well then it 
seems to me that you should be able to use a little bit of your 
political muscle, what little you may have, to say, look, there’s 
a problem in this city. There’s a problem in this city. We’ll get 
bi-party or tri-party agreement to solve the problem. 
 
We don’t need more Richmond Places. What the heck we need 
is more low income housing so we don’t have people living in 
the kind of slum conditions that these headlines talked about. 
Isn’t that your responsibility as the minister for Sask Housing, 
to go out there and say, let’s solve this problem? You know. I 
mean, it’s not a question of political issue. The moment you go 
forward and do that, or instruct Mr. Little to go forward and do 
that, we’ll be there cheering you on, you can bet your bottom 
dollar. Because we know that there’s a problem in this city. We 
know there’s a problem in Saskatoon. We know there’s a 
problem in this province with the deterioration of housing stock 
and a deterioration of housing stock for poor people. You know, 
we’re developing slums in this city, slums that weren’t there 
before, slums that Sask Housing 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1689 
 

Corporation could do something about. 
 
What I’m asking you is: what is your plan, what is your target, 
and what is the government going to do? Stop blaming people. 
What the heck are you going to do about solving this problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Here we go again, Mr. Chairman. They 
don’t do their homework, and they come into these estimates 
absolutely, totally unprepared. And it’s really a shame. 
 
You know, the numbers that I’ve been talking, Mr. Chairman, 
don’t include what the member just brought up about Silver 
Sage. Silver Sage is one of the programs, for instance, that we 
transferred to CMHC, so that as a result, additional units are 
being put forward into this city by the federal government — 
numbers that I’m not even talking about because they’re federal 
numbers. And they would just simply add to the numbers that I 
have told you. 
 
Now as far as it relates to funding for Silver Sage, this year 
$658,000 is going to be spent with Silver Sage on maintenance. 
Silver Sage is responsible for the administration of those funds 
and also for their tenants. The story that you referred to — 
again, you didn’t do the research broadly enough — the story 
was done by a young student who, not an experienced 
journalist, who I can’t identify. They took pictures of a home 
that was all . . . the repairs were already in progress, so if they 
were going to fix the sewer line, of course there’s going to be a 
hole in the floor in the basement. How are you going to fix the 
sewer? From the roof? They’ve got to chop a hole in the floor. 
So they took the picture then and they said, look at what we’ve 
got. 
 
And now, just to end the Silver Sage thing once and for all, 
because I’m sure that perhaps even the hon. member, 
Rosemont, would back off, here’s a letter from the general 
manager of Silver Sage Housing Corporation. Now pay 
attention; I’ll read you a part of it: 
 

Funding levels are adequate and conserve our common 
goals if cost efficiency is sought and wise use of available 
resources is a constant objective. The alleged shortfall of 
funding has been seriously and unfairly stated in the press. 

 
This comes from Silver Sage. This article did not come from 
the Qu’Appelle district chiefs, the board of directors of Silver 
Sage Housing Corporation, nor from myself as general manager 
of Silver Sage Housing corporation. So there you have it. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I wonder, Mr. Chairman, if the minister, 
following the normal procedure, will table that letter that he’s 
just read from, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I read it into the record. I 
believe that’s sufficient. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Chairman, it’s my understanding that when 
a minister refers to a document which is not a briefing note — 
and he specifically said it was a letter, that a letter that he 
received — I ask you that you have the member, the minister 
table that document, sir. 

 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I read it into the record, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Point of order, Mr. Chairman. I think I’ve raised 
the point of order. I’ve said it before. I believe that it’s the 
custom and the duty of the minister to table the document. He 
specifically referred to it as a letter, not as a briefing document, 
or not as something that is not subject to cabinet confidentiality. 
And I ask him to please table the document from which he read. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’m looking up the ruling now, and I’ll 
make a ruling on it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, the reason for hesitating 
was because the letter wasn’t written to myself. But on 
reflection, if they insist that I table it, I have no problem with 
tabling it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Item one agreed? The minister is tabling the 
document. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I’m glad 
the minister complied with the orders of his boss and followed 
the rules of the parliamentary system here. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve made constant reference tonight to the 
great strides that your government has made in providing 
housing for senior citizens. I wonder, sir, that there is a proposal 
had been put before Sask Housing Corporation from Pioneer 
Village in the city of Regina, and your partner, as you refer to 
it. 
 
I wonder if you would make announcement tonight to tell us 
that, in fact, it’s the intention of Sask Housing Corporation to 
approve the proposal made by Pioneer Village, or will you tell 
us once again that there is some technicality that prohibits you 
from allowing the needed construction at Pioneer Village to go 
ahead. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I understand that Pioneer Village have 
entered the innovation housing competition, and as such I’ll 
make an announcement at an appropriate time if they’re 
selected through the process. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well I wonder, Mr. Minister, could you tell us 
at what stage of the process is their application and what 
possible reason could you see for stalling that process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll be glad to send the 
member the innovative process, which is a public little booklet 
on what you go through to enter the innovative competition. 
 
I’m surprised that you didn’t make yourself available to that, or 
make that available to you earlier in the year, being that you’re 
the critic of Sask Housing. I would have thought that at least 
you would have gone through that. It was widely distributed. 
There were a series of public meetings held throughout the 
province at which these booklets were distributed. 
 
I’ll forward one to you. It clearly outlines in there the 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1690 
 

process of the innovative housing. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — There’s no need to try to put on a little show. I 
happen to have a copy here and I’ve read it. 
 
That’s not the question. What I wanted to ask you is, is where is 
the application for Pioneer Village; what is the thinking of the 
corporation in regards to that application? We’re sitting here 
with housing which is shut down on Pioneer Village because 
it’s not fit to live in, and the Pioneer Village, the largest senior 
citizens’ housing complex of its kind in North America, has 
made a proposal to go ahead and refurbish that housing. I just 
want to know, where’s the process stand? When can Pioneer 
Village expect a response to their reply? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, this is in a 
competition and they applied for it as part of that competition. 
In fairness to everybody that entered that competition, how can 
I possible make an announcement? 
 
The member says that he has that innovative housing booklet 
and that he’s read it. Well if you’ve read it, it clearly outlines in 
there how the competition process works. And part of my 
problem with Pioneer is that originally, when this was offered 
to them, they weren’t in a position and they weren’t ready to go 
ahead with any kind of project. 
 
And then now, you used the word “refurbish”. I wish they were 
going to refurbish their units, but I understand that here we have 
some units 25 or 30 years old that they’re going to demolish. 
Well are they suggesting for a minute that every 25- and 
30-year-old house in this province be demolished? Because if 
that’s the case, we wouldn’t have any houses left in this 
province. I wish they would refurbish it. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — It’s interesting, Mr. Minister, that you point out 
precisely what’s wrong with your innovative housing project — 
competition — having one group compete with another group 
for needed funds. 
 
You said nothing about the need, and I don’t know when the 
last time you were at Pioneer Village, but I certainly invite you, 
and I’ll take you myself to go through some of the units which 
are now no longer occupied because of the condition they’re in. 
And yes, I’ll allow you to enter the territory of Regina 
Rosemont, and you can come in and take a look at Pioneer 
Village and of the kind of situation that exists there. 
 
Why do people have to compete for housing? The need has 
been established. Why would they have to compete? What is it 
about this competition, right? I mean, they run you around in 
track shorts or something to try to get public housing, and 
public housing which is needed and when there’s been a 
demonstrated need. You know, what’s this fetish with 
competition? It’s just part of your blind ideological approach to 
meeting basic human needs, in this case senior citizens’ needs. I 
mean, you can’t judge anything on their merit. You can’t judge 
anything in regards to what’s needed. You have to develop 
some kind of competition and some kind of market-place 
oriented project so in order to meet your 

blind partisan faith. 
 
I’m sure, Mr. Minister, when the project is approved, because 
the need will have been amply demonstrated and the proposal 
will have been shown to be a good proposal, that the people of 
Pioneer Village will appreciate it. But they’d certainly 
appreciate an announcement so that they can go ahead and do 
the planning and go ahead and do the building that’s necessary 
on at Pioneer Village. 
 
However, Mr. Minister, I’ve got another group of questions I’d 
like to ask, but before I do that, my colleague from Saskatoon 
Centre has some questions that he’d like to ask, and I believe 
some of the other members have questions that they’d like to 
get on the agenda now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — The . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Don’t 
like to hear this do you? Need is always considered even in our 
innovative housing process. And along with the need, 
cost-effectiveness comes into play and it only makes common 
sense. And I don’t believe that you can place enough emphasis 
on the common sense. 
 
(2145) 
 
And I’ll refer to last year’s success. We assisted in a total of 
245 units through the innovative housing program. Now that’s 
245 units that would have been there ordinarily, and that would 
be it if they were just ordinary assisted units without the 
innovative process. But when they were combined with the 
innovative process, when we took those projects and assisted 
245 units, what ended up was the private third-party groups — 
the church groups and the like — provided a total of 302 units 
as a result of the innovative housing process. Now that’s a 
dramatic number of increased housing units for the public 
because of this process. 
 
As a matter of fact, this is the first time it was tried in Canada. 
The results are so startling that CMHC is now considering 
implementing this across the country because of the fantastic 
results. And you stand up here and seem to knock it for some 
reason that you can’t even put your finger on, and you say that 
the innovative process is being knocked and kicked around. 
Talk to some of the church groups. Talk . . . Well, I’ll wait for 
the member from Saskatoon, and I’ll ask him if he talked to 
McClure and see what their opinion is on the innovative 
housing process. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, I have two areas that I want to briefly ask you 
questions about. 
 
The first, Mr. Minister, relates to the policies of CMHC towards 
co-op housing in Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, you will be 
aware that under new CMHC policies co-op housing projects in 
this province are only eligible for 30 per cent of the spaces in 
that co-op housing project to be funded as low income spaces, 
which means, in other words, Mr. Minister, that the other 70 per 
cent of the spaces have to be self-financing spaces where the 
occupants of the co-op housing project pay the full cost of rent 
themselves. My understanding now, Mr. Minister, is that this 
federal funding is coming through the province 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1691 
 

and that the province is administering the funding and passing it 
along to co-op housing projects. 
 
My questions to you, Mr. Minister, are: number one, how much 
federal funding are you getting in the current fiscal year for 
these 30 per cent CMHC-funded co-op housing spaces? And 
number two, Mr. Minister: whether you are prepared to make 
representation to the Government of Canada, specifically to the 
minister responsible for CMHC, that this 30 per cent of funded 
spaces by CMHC be increased, so that at least 40 per cent of the 
spaces in any co-op housing project would be designated for the 
working poor if you like — lower middle income persons who 
don’t qualify for the current CMHC subsidy but need some kind 
of assistance in order to be able to afford housing. So, Mr. 
Minister, in effect under these revised plans, 60 per cent of the 
spaces in any co-op housing project would receive some level 
of funding through CMHC, administered by your government, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
So I’m wondering if you could respond to that. This is, you will 
have been aware, is the request that the Co-op Housing 
Association of Saskatchewan has made to CMHC and to your 
government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, here’s another example of 
the members not doing their homework. That’s a federal 
housing policy. Sask Housing has nothing to do with it. I can’t 
respond to any of that. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, do you not acknowledge 
that it’s the province that handles the money? That’s my 
understanding, and if it doesn’t come through Sask Housing, 
then what government department in your government receives 
the money, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — CMHC delivers the program. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — You’re incorrect, Mr. Minister. CMHC 
administers the program but the money, as I understand it, after 
checking with the co-op housing association, comes through 
your government. And therefore, Mr. Minister, you have a say 
about the policies that CMHC sets. You’re certainly in a 
position to lobby them, and as I understand it you administer 
the funds and pass them along to co-op housing projects. If 
that’s incorrect, perhaps you can inform me. But that is my 
understanding after talking to the co-op housing project groups, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — No, Mr. Chairman, it’s a federal program, 
and they just unilaterally dictate to us what we become involved 
in; they tell us the amount, they deliver the program, they’re in 
charge. We have nothing to do with it; you’re in the wrong pew. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, I want to ask you one final 
question in this regard then, and that is whether you, as minister 
responsible for Sask Housing and responsible for shaping 
housing policies in this province, are prepared to make 
representation to CMHC and to the federal minister of CMHC, 
that the 30 per cent allocation for low income 

persons being eligible for a subsidy from CMHC be increased 
to 40 per cent? And that in addition, CMHC fund at least 20 per 
cent of the spaces in a co-op housing project for middle income 
earners, if you like, so that in effect, Mr. Minister, 60 per cent 
of the spaces, rather than 30 per cent, would be subsidized. 
Otherwise, Mr. Minister, under the new CMHC policies a lot of 
co-op housing projects will simply not be viable, Mr. Minister. 
And you, I’m sure, are fully aware of that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well you know, what can I tell you. I 
suppose that every province is caught up in the same thing. It’s 
a federal policy. If the federal government chooses to listen to 
the provincial ministers, so be it. But conversely, if they don’t, I 
mean what are we supposed to do about it? We’re trying to 
develop our federal-provincial housing agreements as best we 
can. We don’t ever want to be caught in the position again of 
having to put a moratorium on nursing homes. And as a result, 
we’re constantly renegotiating these federal-provincial 
agreements to see where we can get to. And I believe that we’re 
spending our money wisely. We’ve come up with a new 
program, as we’ve discussed, the innovative housing program. 
If we can help the co-ops with their project, we certainly will. 
But I’m in no position to dictate to the federal government. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well clearly, Mr. Minister, it seems that 
you’re going hand in hand with the federal government as part 
of a strategy of eroding the success of co-operative housing in 
this province and in Canada. That, Mr. Minister, is what you’re 
all about. It’s obvious from your comments that you have no 
intention of making representation to the Government of 
Canada or to CMHC. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want you to provide me in writing with 
assurance that the province has nothing to do with 
administering these CMHC funds. I’m very surprised to hear 
your comment that you have nothing to do with it. And I’d like 
your officials to check back and assure me in writing that you 
have no responsibility for this, and I’ll be passing that letter on 
to co-op housing groups in this province. 
 
I’ve one other question for you, Mr. Minister, and that is: I 
wonder if you can tell the Assembly if you can provide us with 
a comparison, Mr. Minister, of the number of low income 
housing projects and, specifically, the number of spaces that 
you constructed in 1988 in comparison with the year 1981, Mr. 
Minister? Can you tell us for Saskatoon, Regina, Moose Jaw, 
and Prince Albert how many low income housing spaces were 
created for low income people in 1981 as compared to 1988 for 
each of those four cities? Could you provide us with that 
information, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I don’t think so, Mr. Chairman, because 
construction hasn’t started for 1988. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well maybe you could provide us with a 
comparison of 1987 with 1981, Mr. Minister. Would you be 
prepared to do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, some of the figures that I 
have — I don’t have all the figures that he asked for, 
  



 
May 30, 1988 

 

1692 
 

 obviously, but I have a figure here that indicates the number of 
units in 1980: total social housing delivery in 1980 was 1,360 
units; in 1985 was 1,083; and the other figure that I have, in 
1986, was 925. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, were those the figures for the 
province as a whole? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I am advised that that’s figures for the 
whole province, yes. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, what we see from those 
figures is a substantive reduction in funding for low income 
housing in this province, Mr. Minister, and clearly a deliberate 
policy of consistently cutting, between 1981 and 1985 to 1987. 
We see cuts, Mr. Minister, if I heard you correctly, of more than 
400 units. Can you confirm that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told that in about 1986 
or thereabouts the federal government starting delivering some 
units that aren’t included in those figures — that weren’t 
delivered in the prior ones. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — But will you answer my question, Mr. 
Minister? In terms of the units that you delivered, can you give 
us those figures again? Over 1,300, as I understood it, in 1980, 
and in comparison with that, only approximately 900 in ’87. 
Can you give us those figures again please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Yes, 1980 was 1,360 units; 1985 was 
1,083; and 1986 was 925. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — So, Mr. Minister, what we have is a cut of 435 
units to low income people per year by your government 
between 1980 and 1987. I wonder if you can explain to the 
Assembly, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you can justify this cut of 
435 units per year for low income people in this province at a 
time, Mr. Minister, when there’s a desperate need for affordable 
housing among the poor in this province — a priority, Mr. 
Minister, that obviously your government doesn’t recognize. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, certainly there are 
other things that we got involved with. We introduced a 
build-a-home program that provided $3,000 grants to 
purchasers of new homes, and 5,455 grants were committed, for 
a total expenditure of almost $16 million, and that assisted the 
total starts of that year reached 7,200 units. 
 
And the first-time, new-home-buyers’ grant introduced in 
March of ’86 provided a $3,000 grant to first-time home buyers 
of new homes, and that initiated over 3,500 starts. So we’re 
delivering units in a different fashion now. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:58 p.m. 


