


















































April 5, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 5, 1988 
 

319 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk: — I hereby report that I have examined the petition 
under rule 11(7) and I lay it on the Table for reading and 
receiving: 
 

Of certain citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 
praying that the Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 
urge the Government of Saskatchewan to join the 
petitioners in their support for Wald Ambulance Ltd. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to members of the 
Assembly, a group of 10 students from the Maple Creek 
Learning Centre. They are accompanied by their teacher and 
chaperon, Jackie Harapiak. I welcome them here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The centre is provided through the Cypress Hills community 
college, which is a very active college in the south-west. I hope 
you had an enjoyable trip up this morning, and I hope you will 
enjoy the proceedings this afternoon. I’ll be meeting with you at 
approximately 3 o’clock for pictures, and I’m sure you’ll have 
many questions. And we’ll have refreshments in my office. I 
would ask members to please welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Settlement Agreement by Farmers with ACS 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. My question today has to be directed to the 
Deputy Premier, in the absence of the Minister of Agriculture 
and the Premier. And it relates to the agricultural credit 
corporation, ACS, and a settlement agreement between ACS 
and a farm family or, putting it more accurately, farm families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they ask me to start all over again because I see 
the Premier and Minister of Agriculture has shown up, so if that 
is permissible I’ll start. My question therefore is to you, Mr. 
Premier, in your capacity as either Premier or Minister of 
Agriculture — take your choice. 
 
Mr. Premier, my question relates to the agricultural credit 
corporation, your ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan), and a settlement agreement as ACS has been 
urging farm families to enter into — farm families in serious 
difficulty with respect to their financial operations. This 
settlement agreement between ACS as advanced by ACS allows 
the farm family to wipe the slate clean of the debt with ACS. It 
then goes on to say in the agreement as follows, in clause 3, 
quote: 

 

The Borrowers (referring to the farmers), the Borrowers 
understand and agree that they will not in future be 
entitled to receive, and shall not apply for any grant, loan, 
cash advance, guaranteed loan, financial assistance or 
benefit whatsoever provided by ACS or its successor 
corporations under any act of the legislature of 
Saskatchewan or the regulations thereunder (end quote). 

 
Now, Mr. Premier, my question to you is this: how, sir, can you 
and your government explain this extremely restrictive and 
limited clause which has been inserted in your corporation’s 
ACS agreements with respect to quit-claim proposals or 
settlement agreements of the farmers of Saskatchewan who 
need a break? How is that explained? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will review in some detail 
the clause the hon. member refers to. I would say at the outset, 
when you’re in situations where farmers are in extreme 
difficulty and you’re going to write off the debt and you’re 
finished with your dealings with them, then I’m sure that some 
restrictions have to be put into place so that in fact they just 
don’t go to another arm and another arm and another arm to get 
more money at the same time. Now it seems to me that there is 
some balance there where you’re looking at providing some 
assistance on one hand, but in some cases where the farmer is 
obviously going to leave, that he doesn’t have access to other 
forms of credit so that one side of government or one arm of 
government doesn’t know what the other arm is doing. So I 
think, I’m sure, you’d have to be very careful. 
 
I will go back and examine the paragraph in detail and be 
prepared to respond when I have a chance. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Premier, and I thank the 
Minister of Agriculture for that answer which says that he’ll go 
back to take a look at it, and I highly commend him for that, 
and I think he should do it. Because  Mr. Speaker, new question  
this clause says that the borrowers understand and agree that 
they will not in future, with no limitations  so that any farmer 
who might have been able to get out of the financial situation 
that he or she finds himself in, with no restriction in the future, 
is forbidden to receive any of the benefits of Saskatchewan law 
or any of the benefits of ACS with respect to farming programs 
advanced by your government, or even subsequent 
governments, in the future, whatsoever, for ever. Now I think 
that that surely is a very Draconian provision. 
 
If my understanding is correct, I would urge the Premier to look 
at this clause very, very carefully, to undertake an examination, 
and, if my interpretation is correct, to indicate to the House 
whether or not he’ll be making and directing an appropriate 
change to that form. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I will get back to the hon. member. If 
this clause says that you can’t get more money  
  



 
April 5, 1988 

320 
 

until you pay back what you owe ACS, there’s some validity to 
that. Because if you’re going to say, well I’m not going to pay 
off ACS, but I’m going to go and I can get money from this 
department or this department or this department, the 
government is saying, now hold it, you can’t have it both ways. 
If in fact you’re not going to be making your payments, then 
you’re not going to be getting other loans from people before 
you at least pay what you owe to the agriculture credit 
corporation, or else everybody would want  you know, what 
I’m saying, everybody would want to say, well I won’t pay my 
ACS, but I’ll go to another department and get some cash here. 
 
You have to have some guide-lines there, so that if the man or 
the woman or the family is saying all right, that’s it, I’m done 
with you. you know, let’s say okay, fair enough, if you’re out of 
farming and you don’t want to do anything else, then don’t 
come to us for other loans when you still owe us money. That’s 
what I suspect this clause is about. I’ll go back and I’ll review 
it, and I’ll be glad to share that information with the hon. 
member. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, new question to the Premier. I 
have a copy of the agreement in front of me. The one that I have 
is dated the 23rd day of December, 1987, and at some 
appropriate time under the rules I’ll be pleased to forward a 
copy to the Premier or his office so that he can be assisted in the 
review of the situation, but I want to assure you that what this 
agreement is between ACS is a straight exchange where the 
borrowers surrender a number of matters, ranging all the way 
from land to equipment, in exchange for an agreement that they 
now have the slate wiped clean with respect to their borrowings 
to ACS. I understand that, so this is not a question of shopping 
for credit. But what I don’t understand is clause 3 which says, 
quote: 
 

The Borrowers understand and agree (this is after the 
exchange has been made) that they will not in future be 
entitled  

 
And I won’t take up the time of the House to read this clause 
again, but in future they’re not going to be entitled to get any of 
the benefits ranging from loans, cash advances, under any 
statute under ACS’s administration or involvement whatsoever, 
full stop. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Premier, that clause is an extremely Draconian 
provision, one which is bound to handicap farmers who may be 
struggling to work their way out of financial debt and still see 
the light at the end of the tunnel for some future farming. And 
now by this provision, if it remains in the agreement, they will 
be for ever stopped. Will you please direct your ACS to look at 
this and to undo this provision so that farmers can get back in 
where their circumstances warrant it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — So I understand the question clearly, are 
you saying that it would be all right in that clause 3 if there be 
no future borrowing by that individual until he paid back what 
he owed? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, no. That’s not the issue, Grant. 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, that’s the whole issue. The whole 
issue is either you have to pay back or whether you don’t. 
You’re saying, all right, don’t pay this back, but you can go 
borrow other money from ACS or from other departments. 
 
Now look, what they’re saying is that if you want to — and I’ll 
go back and look at it — if you want to go borrow from some 
other department of government, then fine, but you’re not going 
to get more funds from the government until you pay back what 
you owe. it seems to me that you’ve got to have some 
reasonable nature of fairness there or else everybody would go 
into ACS and say, I’m not paying back beaus I can borrow from 
every other department. Now you can’t have that. 
 
So we’ve got to have a mechanism if you want to settle this and 
your counselling assistance people want to have a farmer settled 
out from under an ACS situation, they have to have some 
guide-lines in terms of what he can go borrow from what other 
departments, or else he just goes from department to department 
to department. 
 
Now, if you’re saying that as long as he pays it back then he can 
go borrow, then that would clear up your question. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 
Premier, and I don’t want to over politicize this, but I do 
think that the answers by the Premier are good examples of 
why the Premier should take a look at another cabinet shuffle 
and get a full-time minister of Agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Because, Mr. Premier, Mr. Speaker, the 
document says clearly under clause 2: 
 

Upon full satisfaction by the Borrowers of the conditions 
set out in section 1 of this agreement  

 
Section 1 sets out all the payments that the borrower has to have 
made to ACS: 
 

Upon full satisfaction by the Borrowers of the conditions 
set out in section 1 of this agreement, within the time 
limited  ACS shall forgive the Borrowers from the Loans 
(full stop). 

 
Paragraph 3 is what I’m directing your attention to. It’s after 
that exchange has taken place. And paragraph 3 says, after that 
time, the borrowers in the future are hereby denied the right of 
any cash, grants, loans or any other farm support that ACS 
might have in store under this legislation or future legislation, 
and binds the governments of the future. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Premier, and I ask you to take a look at it from 
that point of view, this provision is a Draconian measure which 
would bar farmers from getting back on their farm lands if the 
circumstances warrant. Won’t you agree that’s unjustifiable and 
you should force your ACS to withdraw that clause? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
April 5, 1988 

321 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I mean, if you don’t want this to get 
partisan, then don’t get too excited, okay? 
 
If ACS is going write off and forgive $300,000 from a farmer, 
or 100,000, then what we have to do is be careful that the 
farmer doesn’t come in the next day and borrow another 100 or 
another 50 or another $300,000 from another department when 
he already owes the money. 
 
Now we’ve got to be fair. We’ve got to be fair to all the farmers 
out there when we strike a forgiveness clause with somebody 
that is not going to pay and says, it’s over, I can’t make any 
payments. Now you have to be careful so that they can’t come 
in and get more money from here and more money from there 
when they’ve already said, I’m finished with it, I can’t make the 
payments. 
 
Now if you’re saying you can forgive them and then have them 
come into another department and borrow another 100,000 for 
this or another 50,000 for that, that gets a little bit difficult, and 
you know  You know why a clause should be there to say, if 
you want more money, then you’re going to have to pay back 
what you owe. 
 
Now something reasonable in that term is only going to be fair 
or else everybody is going to say, I’m not paying it back 
because I know I can borrow from another department and I 
don’t have to pay the money back. We’ve got to be fair to 
everybody out there, and if we’re going to have some 
forgiveness, then we say, you can have access to other lines of 
government departments, but maybe you should pay back what 
you owe before you get another $50,000 or another $100,000. 
 
Now I’ll go back and review it, and I’ll be glad to give you the 
specific details of all kinds of things that they could get access 
to, and I don’t have all those with me here today, but all the 
things they could get access to if they’re going to be forgiven 
the money they owe. 
 
I’ll say this in final point, Mr. Speaker. When we lend money to 
farmers, we expect them to pay it back, and I think that’s the 
only fair way to treat the taxpayer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary to the same 
minister. A couple things become obvious in the exchange 
that’s just taken place, and one is that the minister doesn’t 
understand, as Minister of Agriculture, what’s in the 
agreements that are being put in front of Saskatchewan farmers 
to sign — doesn’t know what’s in the agreement as the Minister 
of Agriculture. 
 
The second point that comes very obvious, Mr. Speaker, is not 
only does this government want to remove farm families from 
the farm, they want to assure that they can never get back on the 
farm, and if they do it will certainly be without government 
assistance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Obviously, the Minister of Agriculture has 
lost control of the situation with agriculture in the province of 
Saskatchewan. When will you honour the 

request that many people are asking you to do, and that’s resign 
as Minister of Agriculture and let someone handle it who can do 
it as a full-time job which it warrants in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows that 
this government, and this Minister of Agriculture, have helped 
contribute about $2 billion in deficiency payments to the 
farmers of Saskatchewan and western Canada, and they didn’t 
have to pay back a dime of it. I’m talking over $2 billion. 
 
At the same time, over one-point-some billion dollars out to 
farmers at low, fixed, long-run interest rates. That was never 
done before, and he’s standing up and saying, well, we need 
some more. So we went back and we said to farmers, if you 
need cash advances for the livestock industry, we’ll provide 
that; if you want natural gas on your farms, we’ll provide that; 
if you want individual line service in your communities and 
farms, we’ll provide that; if you want money to move livestock 
into areas of drought, if you need help because of grasshoppers 
or flood, we will do that. The list goes on and on and on. 
 
And when interest rates are high, Mr. Speaker, we were the first 
that went right in there and said, we will hold those interest 
rates down and protect farmers. Mr. Speaker, I will say, more 
money and more programs and more cash, Mr. Speaker, have 
gone into the hands of thousands and thousands, literally tens of 
thousands of farmers, across the province of Saskatchewan and 
western Canada as a result of this government, and frankly, Mr. 
Speaker, at least in part because of this Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

French Language Rights in Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question on a 
new topic, but I will forward to the Premier a copy of the 
document and to the journalists who may be interested about is 
so that the interpretations of the questions and answers can be 
put in proper perspective today. 
 
But my question to the Premier relates to another area; it relates 
particularly with your government’s Bill No. 2, the government 
response to the Supreme Court ruling on French language rights 
in Saskatchewan. And my question to you, Mr. Premier, is this: 
have you consulted with the Prime Minister of Canada, Mr. 
Mulroney, whether or not this legislation violates the spirit of 
Meech Lake accord, or in the alternative has Mr. Mulroney 
called you about the question of this Bill and Meech Lake 
accord, and if so, what was the Prime Minister’s response? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I have not talked to the 
Prime Minister this morning or yesterday. We have been in 
touch with federal officials, with other provinces, the Minister 
of Justice, the Attorney General — I have been in contact with 
the attorneys general in New Brunswick, in Quebec, and federal 
officials with respect to getting their assistance in providing 
translation, learning and putting 
  



 
April 5, 1988 

322 
 

together the mechanism whereby we can provide legislation and 
statutes in both official languages. So we’ve received very good 
co-operation from several governments, including the federal 
government. 
 
And with respect to Meech Lake, what Meech Lake wants, and 
what Meech Lake says, and in the spirit of Meech Lake, is to 
design a system across this country that allows us to have both 
languages used and both languages implemented in a fashion 
that we can manage and that we can handle and that we can 
administer, for a long, long time. And that’s what you see in 
this Bill, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why it’s the appropriate kind 
of legislation for this time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. 
I hear the Premier telling the House and the people of 
Saskatchewan, for that matter perhaps the people of Canada, 
that his department and his government has consulted with a 
variety of governments with respect to the French language Bill 
2, but that does not answer the question, which I again redirect 
to you, sir, for what I think can be a very simple answer and a 
straightforward answer. And my question to you is this: have 
you or your ministers discussed, directly, Bill 02 and the 
national implications of that legislation with the Prime Minister 
of Canada or the Minister of Justice of Canada, and if so, will 
you please tell the House what their response is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I can advise the Assembly 
that I’ve spoken both to the Minister of Justice, as well to 
Senator Lowell Murray, who is responsible for this particular 
issue at the national level. 
 
With regard to Meech Lake, it is the view of this government, 
Mr. Speaker, that under Meech Lake all provinces agreed to 
view the rights of French minorities outside of Quebec. And 
this legislation, for the first time in our province’s history, 
allows legislation, allows statutes and Acts to be introduced in 
this House in both official languages. That’s never been done 
before. Clearly that means an advantage to the francophone 
community of this province. 
 
This particular Bill allows, contrary to some of the opinions 
advanced by the media, allows an individual charged with a 
criminal offence in this province — can conduct and have his 
trial conducted totally in French, including a jury trial 
conducted totally in French, including a jury trial conducted 
totally in French, involving francophone members of the jury, a 
francophone prosecutor, a francophone judge. It also allows the 
rights, as found by the Supreme Court of Canada, for our 
individuals to have those particular rights in a civil case. 
 
We allow in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker — which is not the 
case in many assemblies across this country — we allow people 
to speak in English or in French in this particular Assembly. 
 
So yes, this is in fact consistent with Meech Lake, and yes, this 
does in fact give to the francophone people of Saskatchewan 
more rights than they had in the past. And 

this government with this Bill for the first time is in fact 
allowing — and you will see — statutes introduced in this 
House in both official languages. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I must direct this question to 
the Premier because while the Minister of Justice refers to the 
word “allow,” the reality is that, in the Mercure decision out of 
the Supreme Court, this was a recognition of existing rights, not 
an allowance of anything by the members opposite or by any 
government previous. 
 
But my question to you, sir, Mr. Premier, is as follows. At the 
time that Meech Lake was introduced for ratification to this 
Legislative Assembly, on the issue of language rights and the 
accord you said the following: 
 

It has the very important consequence of not making the 
province of Quebec the sole protector of the French 
language in Canada. This was introduced into the 
amendment in order to protect the interests of French 
language minorities living outside of Quebec. 

 
Those are your words, Mr. Premier. In the light of the response 
taken by all of the responsible leadership of the French 
Canadian community and what appears to be the response by 
the national community, how in the world do you square those 
words on Meech Lake and the spirit of Meech Lake with the 
particular legislation, so narrow and restrictive, that you 
introduced yesterday? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the legislation does 
precisely what we wanted it to do as a result of the Meech Lake 
accord. With the Mercure decision you had three alternatives. 
You could say no to everything; or you could say yes, it’s all 
going to be bilingual all at the same time, all today, and rewrite 
the past; or you can do something in the middle that will give us 
time to get it done. 
 
And that’s exactly what we’ve done. We’ve taken a reasoned 
approach that said that we can walk into the future with both 
official languages; we can have statutes and legislation in both 
official languages; we can speak in this legislature in both 
official languages; you can go to court in both official 
languages, and we can do so at the speed that will accommodate 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now you can’t have it all French, all at once, right now, 
because it’s virtually and physically impossible. We cannot do 
that. And we didn’t say we’re going to cut it off so it can never 
happen. so we said we are going to design it so that we can 
manage it and make sure that it happens in a fair and reasonable 
fashion. That’s precisely what we have, so that we can 
introduce legislation, as this Bill is introduced, in both official 
languages, and more Bills. And we can pass Bills that are in the 
past, and we can walk into that as we have the translation units, 
as we have the staff, as we have the money, as we have the 
co-operation, and as we have the expertise. 
 
It’s not cut off, but it’s managed in a fashion that is very 
responsible, and I believe it’s the only way we could do it 
  



 
April 5, 1988 

323 
 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. A question to the 
Premier, my final question in this area. I do not quarrel with the 
necessity, on this very sensitive and important issue for national 
unity, to make sure that it is, in the Premier’s words, managed 
in the best interests of the province and the country. 
 
But that’s a different issue. The issue that I wish to make to the 
Premier is this. You have here a situation in Bill 2 where French 
and English language rights can be designated at your whim by 
your cabinet. That’s what the legislation says. you have rights 
granted and rights taken away, notwithstanding the Supreme 
Court of Canada’s decision as to the historical status of those 
rights. 
 
My question to you is this, sir. Your minister of 
multiculturalism said just a few days ago in this debate in the 
Speech from the Throne: 
 

 (Saskatchewan) did in fact ratify the Meech Lake accord  
And we should not lose sight of that, because right in the 
Meech Lake accord it says Canada’s a bilingual country. 
And sir, (the minister from multiculturalism says) that 
includes us. 

 
Your minister. 
 
Now how in the world does those words — how do you 
straddle the fence and justify those words that this is a bilingual 
country and that includes us, that your minister says, with the 
legislation introduced yesterday that the francophone 
community rejects and many national organizations reject? 
We’ll see what the Prime Minister has to say about it. How in 
the world are those two positions reconciled? Surely 
somebody’s resignation is in order, either yours, sir, or the 
minister of multiculturalism, because the Bill falls short. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, just let me very briefly 
reiterate. This reaction and the Bill 2 that has been put forward 
by the Minister of Justice does exactly what is necessary to 
allow us to move towards both official languages being used in 
this legislature and in the statutes and in new legislation as we 
pass it here in this House. We can’t do it all at once; it takes 
time. 
 
Now who’s going to manage that? If it isn’t the government of 
the day that manages it in co-operation with the 
French-speaking community and this Legislative Assembly, I 
don’t know who it is. It’s Executive Council, and it’s this 
Assembly that will allow us to do that. Some day we’ll be able 
to speak in both languages and have automatic media 
translation in this Assembly as they do at the national level. 
 
This is a bilingual country. We accept that. But in 
Saskatchewan we have to walk into that. My children are 
bilingual. Many, many young people who are going to school 
are perfectly bilingual. We understand that, but 

we have to walk into the future one step at a time, Mr. Speaker. 
We can’t hit the floor running because we don’t have the 
physical capacity, let alone the financial capacity, to do all of 
that. 
 
Who else can manage except government? We have the 
responsibility now, and this legislation will allow us to manage. 
You will see laws introduced in this legislature that are in both 
languages and passed in both languages, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I will continue. The Deputy 
Premier wants me to  thought that I was finished last night. I’m 
happy to say that I’m back here again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a short 
overview in regards to the general impact of the budget again. 
I’d also then shift into the implications it has for northern 
Saskatchewan, but also in relation to Indian and Metis people. 
 
Yesterday I talked about the aspect of the budget and the fact 
that it really puts a strain on a lot of Saskatchewan families. It 
makes it tough, extremely tough for people to spend money on 
clothing, the basic necessities of life, basically because there’s 
such a high cost in relation to the question of paying higher 
taxes and having to pay for higher costs in terms of services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday I talked about the aspect of the budget 
and the fact that it really puts a strain on a lot of Saskatchewan 
families. It makes it tough, extremely tough for people to spend 
money on clothing, the basic necessities of life, basically 
because there’s such a high cost in relation to the question of 
paying higher taxes and having to pay for higher costs in terms 
of services. And, Mr. Speaker, as I start today, that’s an 
important point to remember. We know that these increased 
costs come because we give away to large-scale corporations. 
And that is the message of this government. They give away to 
large-scale corporations and we have to pay for them. 
 
When I look at the question of taxation, there is an inequality, 
as I mentioned. There is an inequality in a sense that while the 
families of big-scale corporations get away with a lower tax, 
ordinary people have to pay up to 2 per cent now on the flat tax, 
and this is $500 for a person making around 25,000. Now that’s 
a lot of money for people to be putting out, especially when the 
drug bills 
  



 
April 5, 1988 

324 
 

are higher now, especially when the drug costs are way high 
from what it used to be. 
 
So the real question is this: that because we have to pay more, a 
lot of people thought we will be getting better services, but we 
are not. We are getting less services in health, less services in 
education, and many other fields as well. 
 
Now I’ll get into the question of  the situation of northern 
Saskatchewan. One of the first things that hit me last year after 
the budget, that people hoped would be in this year’s budget, 
was the question of the drug prescription plan. As I said last 
night, a lot of people don’t have the up-front money, basically 
because this government doesn’t want to hire any more people 
in the mines. They don’t want to follow the laws to make sure 
that we are living up to our legal agreements there. They don’t 
want to make sure that Weyerhaeuser hires a lot of people in the 
North. They have a faulty clause in that sense, so a lot of people 
are not partaking in the development that takes place in the 
North the way they used to when the NDP government was 
around. 
 
So when you look at the issues of the North, the first thing 
therefore that people said, we’ve been promised this hospital in 
La Ronge since 1982. We knew that the NDP government had a 
plan of action all ready to put money into planning in 1982, and 
the plan had already started. Ever since that time since 1982 this 
PC government, Mr. Speaker, has put this on hold. 
 
When the election came around they said, oh, we’re going to 
have it for you. It’s going to be there — 1986 they were 
campaigning. And as I listened, a lot of people thought, my 
goodness, this time possibly we will have a hospital in La 
Ronge which services a high area for the betterment of health in 
northern Saskatchewan. But, lo and behold, 1987 came around. 
Nothing, no hospital. We wait in 1988, no hospital. 
 
The people of northern Saskatchewan and their children and the 
seniors are still waiting. Because in connection to the hospital 
we would not only perform basic services and right there in 
northern Saskatchewan  we wouldn’t have to go to P.A. (Prince 
Albert) or Saskatoon on basic services. We would be able to do 
them right there in La Ronge. 
 
And the other aspect to that is this, that not only could we 
include a new hospital, but a more comprehensive plan to take 
care of the seniors. Our seniors have to come out to a new 
environment in the South, and it’s very difficult when you’re in 
a second language situation. And I know that when a lot of the 
older people talk to me they say, Keith  
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
And what the people are saying was — I talked to the seniors 
— is this: they said, we want something right in the North. We 
want something where our people can come and visit us. They 
can talk to us in our own language and be able to deal with 
these issues of concern, and we can keep track of how our little 
grandchildren, what they’re talking about, what they’re saying 
at the schools; 

we can see them grow up. But this way we can’t do that, they 
said, we have to be shipped to the South. They say, we need 
something in northern Saskatchewan for the seniors, in not only 
the basic services of the seniors, but in the level 3 and 4 care, 
right there in the North. 
 
And as I look at the other aspects, we know that this year 
people were looking for the connection to the community. 
Health, in and of itself, is very important, but it needs to have a 
connecting mechanism at the community level. The community 
health workers that perform that function, last year of course 
they were cut back. This year we were looking at the fact that 
maybe this government will change its attitude, maybe this 
government will listen to the people, but again the record shows 
very clearly that this government will simply not listen. 
 
As I look to other issues, I mentioned yesterday the situation of 
the North. And just to put it into a proper perspective, a lot of 
the major development, the so-called uranium development that 
the Premier talks about, the forestry development, a lot of the 
roads up there are very important as a network that connects the 
different communities with each other and provides for 
intercommunity exchange and so on. 
 
But these roads have also been downgraded in the past six 
years. They’ve become unsafe; they’ve become dangerous. Not 
only has there been more an increasing number of people who 
die on our roads in northern Saskatchewan, but the fact remains 
that there is an increasing amount of dangerous chemicals that 
are being transported on these roads. And it’s very important  
(inaudible interjection)  one of the members from across laughs 
and makes a joke out of it, but I don’t think at all it is a joke. 
 
I think it is very important to recognize that the proper roads 
that we fought for in Saskatchewan, all over the place, are an 
important part of our communities. The people in the South say 
that, and the people in the North say that, and I wish that 
member from across would know that that is the basis and the 
reason why I’m saying that. 
 
I think it’s very important to recognize that in the case of the 
roads, the road directly north of La Ronge where we’re looking 
at the connection to tourism, the connection to the communities, 
the connection to the fact of working at the mines, that these 
roads need to be improved, and nothing is being done. The 
maintenance levels have gone down. 
 
The connecting roads from Cumberland to the mine — only 25 
miles of road — should be built so that people can work there. 
They want to work there. A lot of people don’t want to get into 
the welfare syndrome that this government promotes. I think 
it’s very important that people are  require these roads so that 
they can go and find those jobs that are readily available for 
other people. 
 
I think that it’s very important that this whole issue of roads has 
to be clearly re-examined by the Minister of Highways so that 
in the future that something indeed can be done. The roads are 
not only decrepit, they are dangerous, and they have to be 
improved. But nothing, 
  



 
April 5, 1988 

325 
 

Mr. Speaker, on this budget in relation to that. 
 
I looked at the other aspect of the question of power rates in 
northern Saskatchewan. I received a complaint from the 
Deschambault Lake area in relation to the tourist and cottages 
where they used to have their own power diesel units. Then 
there was a deal made with Saskatchewan Power to put in 
services there, but what they found out is that it was an 
exorbitant rate. 
 
But the thing is that there was an unequal treatment on the other 
side of the province. In northern Saskatchewan there was a 
friend of a Tory on Armyot Lake who built, who got connected 
to the electrical supply system, at a cost of approximately 
$20,000, and the information that I’ve got is that they only paid 
$5,000. But the same type of opportunity wasn’t provided for 
the people from the other side. Only the friends of the Tories 
are provided this opportunity. 
 
As I look at the question of the power rates, one has to look and 
make a jump in regards to the overall strategy of Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation in regards to the North. And one of course 
has to make that connection in regards to what is happening to 
the province as a whole, because this budget affects not only the 
North but into the South. 
 
Well what do we have in this budget? We have $1.2 billion 
Rafferty-Alameda project for the Premier’s own riding, and we 
look at that, and we look at northern Saskatchewan. This 
“shafferty” project, as a lot of people have referred to it, is 
providing a lot of political benefits for the Premier, but he does 
not care about what the people’s concerns are in relation to the 
effects of SaskPower projects in relation to northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There is an issue of Cumberland House, and I’ve raised it time 
and again in this legislature last year. There is nothing in this 
budget, Mr. Speaker, that in fact there is absolutely nothing in 
relation to the compensation issue of the dam 60 miles upstream 
from Cumberland; that in fact Cumberland has been trying to 
resolve this compensation question, but the government doesn’t 
want to move. They said they were going to move last fall. 
People are still waiting. People are also waiting on the 
compensation issue right at Sandy Bay in regards to the Island 
Falls dam. People are waiting at Southend in regards to the dam 
that was built there. People are knowing that compensation 
already occurred to the people just north of Carrot River area in 
regards to the Squaw Rapids dam; that people were 
compensated in regards to the Nipawin dam; people were 
compensated in regards to Diefenbaker dam, but no 
compensation for people in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
(1445) 
 
And I think it’s very important in regards to the fact that 
northern people are cut back in their municipal budgets, in the 
fact that they try and meet with this government to resolve the 
issue of the compensation question, that there is still no 
movement on it — or very little movement. 
 
I think it’s extremely important that when land is destroyed that 
the means of existence for a people becomes extremely tough. 
We know that. Everybody 

knows that. But when things are done there should be proper 
compensation, and people are still waiting. I’ll have to report 
back to them that there was nothing in this budget of special 
interest to them in relation to this question. 
 
As I look at the last issue that I want to deal with, it’s the issue 
of the Indian and Metis question in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Before I start, I would therefore like to say a few 
words with due respect to all the languages of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. I pay due respects to the English language, the French 
language, the Ukrainian language, the German language, and all 
the languages that are vitally a part of Saskatchewan history. 
And when I reply back and state certain things in my own 
language, Mr. Speaker, that’s in the context of the respect for 
the other languages in this province, and I want to make that 
clear. 
 
I also want to make it clear that it is with due respect that I 
received from the House in being able to speak my own 
language in the House. you know, as a Speaker, you will well 
recognize the importance, and as a former educator, in relation 
to the importance of language and what it plays in the role and 
everyday aspects of people’s lives. So I would like therefore to 
say a couple of words in my own language of Cree. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
I guess, Mr. Speaker, I was relating back on an extremely 
important aspect of language in people’s lives, that when you 
look at language, a person learns the basis of understanding, of 
knowledge, and the feelings that he has for their own people, 
and she also. 
 
It’s very important to remember that as one speaks their own 
language, that it’s a confirmation of that deep respect that a 
person has had about their cultural heritage. And it’s this 
cultural heritage that is very important, not only for us but for 
all peoples, that as we express ourselves in our own language, it 
shows that we respect ourselves. It’s only by respecting 
ourselves can you really truly lean to respect others. And it is in 
this context that I utilize and use my language with great 
respect. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — As I look at the question of the issues that are 
related to this budget, there is no mention, Mr. Speaker, in 
either the budget or the throne speech, as I talked about last 
week, there is no mention of treaty rights. There is no mention 
of Metis rights. There is no mention of any issue whatsoever in 
regards to Indian and Metis people in this province. 
 
And when you look at the historic tradition of Saskatchewan 
and the importance of Indian and Metis people in being part of 
the building process in Saskatchewan’s heritage, that as I stand 
here in the legislature, it strikes me as completely odd. It seems 
that this government wants to make the question, the whole 
question of Indian-Metis people, disappear. They want to wish 
it away. 
 
And in this regard, I looked at the question of the Indian and 
treaty rights. And as I looked at the new issue that has 
  



 
April 5, 1988 

326 
 

come up which was an integral aspect of cultural development 
in Canada, cultural and linguistic development in Canada, we 
had the question, Mr. Speaker, of Meech Lake last year, and 
also the French language question that was talked about this 
past week. And a lot of people were wondering at that time 
when Devine voted for Meech Lake  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I know why you’re standing up, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m not supposed to use the Premier’s name at all, so I 
apologize. 
 
In regards to the question of the Premier, the Premier dealt with 
this question and made eloquent speeches on the maturity of 
Canada and the maturity of the province of Saskatchewan and 
how he was so open to the question. But we know very quickly 
that vanished this week when a lot of the French community 
responded to the new Bill that was presented this week. It was 
not a very favourable response. 
 
All of a sudden the openness disappeared. One then has to look 
at it in historical context: why did that happen? We look back at 
the Meech Lake thing, the question last year, and also in 
conjunction right prior to that in April and right into March 26 
and 27, we have to look at the aboriginal constitution. And at 
that time, in the aboriginal constitution, probably the thing that 
impressed people the most on the constitution was the strong 
stand that James Sinclair presented in regards to aboriginal 
people. A lot of people were deeply impressed right across 
Saskatchewan and right across Canada in relation to the 
powerful message that was given by the leader of the 
Association of Metis and Non-Status Indians of Saskatchewan 
in fighting for Metis issues, Metis rights at the national level. 
 
I remember when Mr. Sinclair put the Premier in an extremely 
tough position, because the Premier’s position was really a 
watered down approach to the question. None of the 
organizations wanted any part of it, it was too watered down. 
And when Mr. Sinclair put the Premier down, a lot of the 
people looked at the Premier, and all you could see was the 
Premier looking down — like that — feeling  I don’t know 
whether it was guilt or whether it was shame at not doing 
anything, or I don’t know what it was for. 
 
But a lot of people said: oh, oh, the Premier is going to get back 
at them, at the people. We have to know in this budget whether 
or not that is true. And as I look at the record for Indian and 
Metis people in the past two years of budgets, the record shows 
very clearly that the people’s fears were true. And when we 
connected it back to the Meech Lake question, I will read to you 
what Jim  Mr. Sinclair said about Meech Lake because the 
Meech Lake question was going to be opened up. I will quote 
on the 1987 constitution. Mr. Sinclair said this in relation to 
Quebec when he was addressing the Quebec delegates. He said: 
 

We wish you the best of luck that you will acquire your 
rights and your place in the constitution of Canada. And I 
am sure you will, because this 

government and the provinces around here will 
accommodate you, because they cannot leave out their 
own. 

 
Mr. Sinclair sensed something in relation to that. He sensed that 
while they were being left out of the constitution, and no further 
development of self-government would take place, that the 
Meech Lake accord — and he understood the politics of Canada 
and the importance of the Quebec question to the Mulroney 
government — he understood that and he knew that indeed 
something would come out. 
 
He knew that the Prime Minister would have the determination 
to push through Meech Lake. He had picked that up. But he 
knew at the same time that the Prime Minister didn’t have the 
same determination in relation to the Saskatchewan accord at 
that time to really make a strong commitment because this 
province, themselves, were not strongly committed. 
 
And so we waited for these past two years to see if there was 
anything in relation to Indian and Metis rights — treaty rights 
and Metis rights. And what we see is what Devine actually said 
on  pardon me, the Premier said, Mr. Speaker, what the Premier 
said on March 27, 1987. This is what he said in relation to the 
aboriginal constitutional conference, when he said he would 
come back to Saskatchewan. The Premier said: 
 

We will go home, roll up our sleeves and sit down with the 
aboriginal people of our province and the federal 
government and communities, and solve real problems of 
aboriginal people. 

 
And this is what the Premier said. A lot of people who were 
leaving that conference said, we are afraid that the Premier 
really means he is going to roll up his sleeves and beat up on 
Indian and Metis people. 
 
And when you look at it in historical context, and one sensed 
the friction that was coming from that debate, and you made a 
connection then to Meech Lake, and all of a sudden the Premier 
expressed openness. And again the leader, Sinclair, made a 
straightforward statement that was historically accurate. The 
only reason, he said, why the Premier agreed to Meech Lake is 
because of the Prime Minister. He had to pay back a political 
debt. He had to pay back a political commitment. He had to pay 
back the Prime Minister because the Prime Minister had given 
him $1 billion to win an election in the fall of ’86. And that was 
very clear. 
 
(1500) 
 
So when I looked at the old question of the budget, I looked at it 
in historical context as to why Indian-Metis people are kept 
down in this province. Although the Premier, every time I raise 
a question that’s a little bit embarrassing for him, he will go 
back in his old statements and say: oh, economic 
diversification; oh, the uranium mines; oh, diversify this, 
diversify that. But nothing every really happens. What we 
know, what we know that’s very clear in relation to the budget, 
is that the budget is the same. 
  



 
April 5, 1988 

327 
 

But what was it before in relation to the Indian economic 
development program? We know, Mr. Speaker, that the Indian 
economic development program had $3 million in it two years 
ago. Last year I complained that it had dropped $1 million. 
When I raised the question in estimates last year, I found out 
that not only was there the big cut-back from 3 million to 1 
million, there was also a lack of proper expenditures on the 3 
million. I found out that there was only $1.7 million that was 
actually spent out of the 3 million. 
 
In other words, Indian economic development had paid $1.3 
million to pay for the deficit that this government had put us in. 
And that was last year; this year, they give Indian economic 
development $1 million again. Who knows, it may only be half 
a million dollars by the time the year rolls around. 
 
I look at the issue also on the question of land. Every time the 
issue of land is raised in this province, the right wing of the 
Tories just makes  just shake their head and don’t want to deal 
with the issue, because land claims, Indian land claims, is 
something they don’t want to deal with, so you don’t see 
anything in relation to the budget speech or the throne speech. 
They’re scared to tackle the issue because, Mr. Speaker, they 
feel it’s bad politics. 
 
But I think it’s important to recognize that when you’re dealing 
with important issues, such as land for people, land that is very 
important for the survival of a people, that the land issue in 
relation to Indian and Metis people is treated very differently 
from the land issue in relation to the powerful corporations, and 
also in relation to the development of saving our wildlife. 
 
When the report was done last year, which it included Tory 
members in this report — it was a federal report in relation to 
self-government in 1984 — one looks back at that land thing, 
and the point that was made that is not reflected on this budget 
is this: that while the question of parks, most Indian and Metis 
people agree with the issue of parks and the saving of our 
wildlife and the saving of our raspberries and strawberries out 
in the forests. 
 
These are important issues that we need to look at for future 
development, but I think one has to look at it in proper context. 
While we will save land for our wildlife, we will not look at 
land for people — for Indian people. I think that tells a lot about 
the type of system that we live in and the type of government 
that doesn’t want to deal with that issue. 
 
I think the importance of land in relation to parks is this, and the 
facts have come out clear; there are, in the past few years, in the 
more recent history since parks have been formed, there’s been 
five times more parks land given out than  five times more 
parks land were given out than all the amount of land that was 
given to Indian people across Canada since the signing of the 
treaties. 
 
That makes an important statement. It says that land for wildlife 
is more important than land for people. But Indian people 
recognize that land and the wildlife is also important for them 
too. And while they see the promotion of wildlife lands, they 
also want to see the promotion of land for their own people as 
well. And it’s not a difficult 

problem to deal with. All it needs is a bit of determination, a bit 
of taking a tough stand. The Premier comes up here and he 
says, I’ll take a tough stand, all the time. But he will not make a 
strong stand when it comes down to Indian people and land 
question in Saskatchewan. He whimpers away and you will 
never hear from him because he will not make a strong stand in 
relation to the land question. 
 
The land question is looked at more recently as you look at the 
Lucky Man Reserve and you look at the issue of La Ronge 
band. You look at the issue of Peter Ballantyne band. you look 
at Treaty 4 and Qu’Appelle and many other outstanding land 
entitlement and claims issues in Saskatchewan that have not 
been dealt with. 
 
And it just needs determination. And I hope that budgets can be 
shifted around after they’re brought in, that money can be put 
into the Indian claims department so that it is fitted in to deal 
with the question of the land claims with the fact of the federal 
claims commissioner question. I don’t want to deal with that 
question because it’s a federal issue, but I think that it’s 
important that because of the 1930 land transfers agreement that 
the question of land still remains in the province and the 
province has to be part and parcel of the agreement in regards to 
land claims and land entitlement issues. 
 
So that’s a question that has not been dealt with at all in this 
budget. It stays the same, and when it stays the same it means 
little or nothing gets done. 
 
When we look at the question of justice, Indian-Metis people 
and justice, I was hoping, and many people were hoping that 
there would be some sort of reinstatement, even in a modified 
form, of the native court workers program but we see nothing, 
Mr. Speaker, on this budget. 
 
The native court workers program was very important in this 
sense: it helped people out, deal with law when they got into 
situations. We know that high unemployment rates, we know 
the social problems that that causes. and a lot of people were 
going into jail at a higher rate per capita of Indian-Metis 
population than the rest of the province simply because they did 
not know how to deal effectively with the legal processes and 
procedures that were taking place. And many times it was 
because of a second language situation and many times, I think 
it’s important to know, that the regular citizen sometimes does 
not understand the legal process because it does not affect them 
on a daily basis. 
 
And this native court workers program provided not only a 
translation service for people in relation to understanding more 
about our legal system, it also had a  it was also providing a 
situation where it was a support service to the people so that 
they are not so overwhelmed by the legal system. And that was 
a good program. Many people hoped that something would be 
done in that regard. 
 
And when I hear the Premier talk about families, the importance 
to the people of families, I think to myself, well he must not 
mean Indian families or he must not mean Metis families; he 
must mean only the families of the big corporations and the 
friends of the Tories. Maybe that’s what he means by 
“families.” 
  



 
April 5, 1988 

328 
 

When I examine the record, the amount of damage that it has 
done to people, for not having the jobs that they got through 
that native court workers program, and the number of little 
children that were affected by that decision, shows a complete 
disregard for those families. But the Premier and many 
members across will talk about the importance of families. But 
we know one thing about this government, Mr. Speaker, that 
they put a lot of hardships, not only on Indian and Metis 
families, but they put a lot of hardships on ordinary people, a lot 
of workers, a lot of small-business families. These families 
suffer in the hands of this government. It makes it more difficult 
for them to fight and prepare themselves alongside the system 
and to be able to co-operate with the system for a better life like 
everybody else. 
 
Instead, people see that we see  instead of direct support to 
families we see more moneys, last year, put in for jails, more 
moneys for the justice system, but no real money improvement 
on economic development; no increase on education in this 
budget; no increase on those things that are important for the 
well-being of the family. 
 
And as I make my final statement, I will deal with this 
important issue of why it is that there is less money for Indian 
families on economic development, and Metis families for 
economic development. And the formula is not hard to figure 
out. We look at the budget, 2 per cent  you know that $500 
figure is tabbed on to us to pay for the expenditures of the 
system. 
 
But the corporations, well, it’s 2 per cent less. We know that for 
every $1 that is raised from our own pockets, only 16 cents is 
raised by the corporations. That’s a big difference. 
 
(1515) 
 
We know that we pay for the give-aways to Weyerhaeuser. 
That’s why we have less for Indian economic development and 
Metis economic development. We know that when we need 
roads in northern Saskatchewan to be built, Weyerhaeuser can 
build into the bush 32 kilometres of road every year, but also 
the fact that they got $8 million last year. I mean, if Indian 
bands got that money it would be an important part of their 
economic development and economic development system. But 
we don’t, we don’t get that money. 
 
As I look at the rhetoric of this government, they will say, well, 
we’re promoting private enterprise with Indian people; we’re 
promoting private enterprise this and diversify that. Well, what 
does that mean in practice? People have to judge by what has 
taken place. 
 
Well the only private entrepreneur that I know that got any 
amount of money in Saskatchewan this past year was Peter 
Pocklington. What does Peter Pocklington get? Well, he gets 
over $20 million from the Saskatchewan government and Peter 
Pocklington gets over $60 million from the Alberta 
government. So he gets about over $80 million to one corporate 
citizen and his family. But if people got just one-tenth of that 
that was given to this one 

person, they would be happy. 
 
So the Indian economic development question and the Metis 
economic development question is something that has to be 
re-examined by this government. It’s not only the rich, the big 
corporations, that should get free money from our system. 
These corporations will turn around when we want to raise 
money to educate our children, to improve our health, to 
improve all these things; they will say, oh, you can’t do that, 
that’s a form of welfare. When they take the money and run 
with $80 million they call it economic incentive. And to me, 
that’s a system of inequality that this government promotes. 
 
I would like to also say that it’s not that we don’t have enough 
money in the province, and I will give one good little example 
that came out this past week. I raised the issue last week of the 
ad with Sitting Bull, the ad where he was represented alongside 
crooks and criminals. I raised the point and I said, well my 
goodness, if Diefenbaker, a famous leader in Saskatchewan, 
was put in the same boat with an advertisement in 
Saskatchewan with criminals like Al Capone you’d have a 
public outcry. 
 
People would not say that’s acceptable to have a famous figure 
like Diefenbaker in with common everyday crooks like Al 
Capone. It just wouldn’t be accepted; it wouldn’t be bought. 
You wouldn’t be able to put it through. It would just not be 
acceptable. But when it comes to the question of Indian-Metis 
people it can pass. 
 
Sitting Bull was a famous fighter for his people, but not only 
that, he was a respected spiritual leader at the same time. A lot 
of his descendants live in this province, and they want to have a 
fair share like everybody else. But, Mr. Speaker, I do not see 
the fairness there. 
 
I checked out how much it costs to put the ad — and it was 
quoted in the paper — and the amount it cost was $400,000 to 
put that ad on. I find that absolutely astounding, that we can use 
taxpayers’ money in advertising at that level of $400,000, and 
yet at the same time you can cut back Indian economic 
development by $2 million, and leave only $l million. 
 
As a matter of fact the record very clearly states, Mr. Speaker, 
that if the Indian economic development budget is $1 million, 
and if the record of the PC government holds true, then only 
approximately $600,000 will by spent. And yet, at the same 
time, when I raise that question to the Premier, he will go on 
and on about uranium development and this and that. 
 
But the Premier has to recognize that he’s spending $400,000 
on what I call a racist ad. And that’s  My position still remains, 
Mr. Speaker, because to me racism is something that is wrong. 
It is wrong whether you do it in a light fashion or in a blatant 
fashion. Racism is something that has to be fought against. 
 
We knew that very clearly from the records of Fascism in the 
Second World War. People didn’t start by exterminating the 
Jews or exterminating a lot of other people. That racism didn’t 
start there. It started by subtle racism, subtle little racist jokes, 
subtle statements here and there. When that became allowed, 
then the tougher 
  



 
April 5, 1988 

329 
 

more blatant forms of racisms became acceptable. It became 
acceptable to a level that even lives were taken away. 
 
When I read a record of a report that was done by the federal 
level, called Equality Now, that’s what it says. I read on page 
65: 
 

I think you get the idea of what it was like day in and day 
out. If it wasn’t so hurtful and dangerous, you’d have to 
feel sorry for the weak minds that come up with thoughts 
and words like these, but you can’t let them get away with 
it, because that’s exactly how it got started in Germany. 
The Nazis didn’t start extermination of the Jews with gas 
chambers; they started with name-calling and hate letters. 
Once they got away with that, they felt bold enough to try 
nastier methods. 

 
Mr. Speaker, nobody likes to deal with the issue of racism. 
Nobody wants to be put in the light of racism. There are subtle 
forms of racism and there are blatant forms of racism, but in the 
end result you can’t allow even a little bit. You have to tackle it 
when it’s there. You can’t allow it to grow. You have to stop it 
when you see it. 
 
That’s what is learned from the history of the world. That is 
what we already know, that you cannot allow intolerance to 
develop. You have to fight against intolerance. You can’t even 
look and join in on the jokes that make a mockery out of 
people, because you are treating it as an acceptable form. And 
once you allow yourself to do a little, then you can do a little 
more and a little more. I do not agree with that type of strategy. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, that in most cases, as a student of the 
history of racism, I know that the majority of people who are 
indeed sometimes caught in a subtly racist position do not do it 
on purpose. I know that. I know that they don’t intend to do it 
on purpose. That is very clear. But the important thing to 
remember is that the result is one of promotion of intolerance. 
 
And that’s the problem that I have — is the effect of it. Because 
not only do you have to change the practice, you have to change 
the thinking. 
 
People a few years ago did not understand a lot of things about 
sexism and racism and handicap-ism and discrimination against 
the elderly. We know that; we understand that. We, now, in this 
day and age should learn to fight against it. When we see it and 
we make a mistake, it is better to acknowledge a mistake and to 
do away with that mistake than to continue to try and hide 
around it. 
 
I was utterly astounded, Mr. Speaker, I was utterly astounded 
when the minister came back on the next day and stated, well, 
they made lots of money out of it. And I said to myself, money 
is extremely important, money is extremely important to raise. 
And I think she threw around a figure of about 200,000. And I 
looked at it and I thought to myself, well, that can’t be true. If 
indeed you are doing something wrong and you make money 
out of it, then you should stop. I think it’s important to 
recognize that even in the advertisement. 

 
Nobody would agree, absolutely nobody would agree that you 
could spend money in the way Al Capone spent money. He 
spent money selling  He made lots of money selling booze. He 
made lots of money in regards to prostitution. Butch Cassidy 
made a lot of money robbing banks. But the making money — 
although they made lots of money — doesn’t make it right. Just 
because you make a lot of money out of a faulty ad does not 
make it right. 
 
I think the Premier and the minister should re-examine that ad 
and take it out of the market-place. I think that’s the only thing 
to do about that ad. You cannot allow something like that at this 
day and age. 
 
It is very clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I never said that it was 
blatant to a lot of people. I know clearly that it was a more 
subtle form for some people, but to me it was a little bit more 
blatant because I have had a chance to look at this history of 
racism and examine it a little bit more carefully. 
 
And that’s why when I speak here in relation to the budget and I 
see expenditures like that in the budget, I certainly hope that the 
1988 budget will not be used in the promotion of this type of 
advertisement. I certainly hope that when you have $400,000 to 
spend, that you will spend it on Indian economic development; 
that you will spend it in the areas of helping out in Indian 
alcohol and social work programs; that you will spend it on 
Indian science and technology; that you will spend it in many of 
the places right across Saskatchewan for Indian families and 
children. That’s the point that I would like to make today. 
 
This 1988 budget to me, when I look at it in history, is again a 
shameful budget. It’s a budget that does the same thing that it 
did last year with little or no improvements; in some cases it is 
worse. 
 
(1530) 
 
I certainly hope that — when I looked at the history of 
Saskatchewan I saw a sign of the people getting together again. 
I saw signs last year where there was 100,000 names in 
petitions. I saw 2,000 teachers just this year demonstrating to 
force the issue of a settlement of the teachers’ agreement. I saw 
positive signs, even across Canada. I saw the Lubicon 
demonstration which was here. Now they’ve got a land claim 
today, a positive development. 
 
I see people putting pressure on this government, and to me, I 
stand here in solid support of people who will be moving 
towards that direction. And it gives me, as an MLA in the 
province of Saskatchewan and in northern Saskatchewan, it 
gives me again a faith in the system, and it’s the people that I 
have faith in. I mean I have faith  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — And I would like to make that clear, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. It’s the people, the Saskatchewan people, that 
I have faith in and not the government, the PC government of 
Saskatchewan. 
  



 
April 5, 1988 

330 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased to have the opportunity today to get into this budget 
debate. This is the first opportunity that I’ve had during this 
current session to speak, and there are a number of things that I 
would like to get into. I’m very proud to participate in the 
budget debate and support the Minister of Finance and our 
Premier in the budget that was brought forward. 
 
I believe that this budget is a very important piece of legislation 
and information that’s brought forward in this legislature, and it 
has a big impact on the future of our province. The budget has 
clearly followed the trend that the Minister of Finance had laid 
down last year, and though we still have a deficit, it’s a much 
smaller deficit than we had before, and it’s tracking in the 
direction of a balanced budget in the near future. I’m pleased 
with that direction. 
 
Now I think we all realize that we’ve been through very tight 
economical times in the province of Saskatchewan. If a person 
wanted to zero in on a balanced budget as the most important 
thing that we had to do, then you could cut programs and cut 
opportunities for people and raise taxes and do all of those 
things. But I believe the direction that this government has gone 
is the direction that was needed at this time in history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this covers a lot of the areas that I feel you and I 
and our families will benefit from. There’s a strong 
commitment to health care and an increase in expenditure in 
that area, a strong commitment to education, and again, a major 
increase in expenditure. It looks at the items that would cover 
the needs of Saskatchewan families, and fiscal responsibility for 
us as a government, debt reduction and yet some economic 
development. All of these at a time when the province is 
experiencing economic difficulty, I think speaks well for the 
budget and for our Minster of Finance, and indeed for our 
Premier. 
 
The area of agriculture was mentioned today in question period, 
and the call came that the Premier would dismiss himself as 
Minister of Agriculture and put someone else in. I believe that 
that kind of call to this Minister of Agriculture is not a call that 
should be heard at any time. There’s been no minister of 
Agriculture in the history of our province who has done as 
much for the industry as this Minister of Agriculture, our 
Premier. 
 
This year the farmers will participate in a $1.1 billion 
deficiency payment. It’s true that comes from the federal 
government, but I don’t believe for a minute that it would have 
come had it not been for the Premier of this province and him, 
as Minister of Agriculture, laying his case before the federal 
government and getting that case accepted. 
 
As well, we see that the Farm Credit Corporation was 
convinced to move to put $330 million in to write down farm 
debt so that many of our young farmers would be able to stay 
on the farm. Now 330 million isn’t going to solve all the debt 
problems that farmers have in Saskatchewan, but for those who 
are in dire need at this 

time, it is a significant number of dollars and, if used wisely, 
will protect many who are in the agriculture community and 
keep them on the farm. 
 
The new initiative that was in this year’s budget was soil 
conservation. Our government is putting in a $15 million sum, 
the federal government 70 million. A combination of the two 
brings $90 million. This will give an opportunity for a 
considerable amount of research into the soil conservation area. 
Many people around the farming community will get a chance 
to be involved in doing a variety of studies to see what can be 
done to prevent further soil erosion. 
 
Another area that I believe has been extremely beneficial to our 
farmers is the livestock cash advance, the livestock tax credit, 
and the assistance through agriculture credit corporation for 
additional funding to build livestock facilities in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Each of these have a role to play. No one will solve all the 
problem, but as I go around an agricultural constituency like the 
one that I represent, and I talk to farmers, and I talk to many of 
them, the indications that I hear are that they are extremely 
pleased with the way this government has responded to the 
needs of that agricultural community. 
 
The health care budget this year has seen an increase up to $1.2 
billion, almost a third of the total provincial budget. This 
government is committed to a high quality of health care, and 
the proposal for a task force to review the whole health care 
position in this province, I think, is extremely important at this 
time. 
 
Health care has been in place since the early 1960s, and during 
that course of time there have been many changes in the way 
that health care is delivered and can be delivered. The costs of 
health care have risen astronomically over that period of time, 
and we are now able to do things in health care that were not 
even dreamed of at the time that the program came in in 1962. 
 
It was interesting to me last year to be around the Plains 
Hospital here for a number of days when my wife was not well, 
and to see the major operations that are being performed on a 
routine basis in Saskatchewan hospitals. When they told me 
first that they were able to do up to six heart bypass operations 
in a day at the Plains Hospital, I thought it was almost an 
impossibility. One doctor does the majority of that work. 
 
But what a tremendous cost to the health care system. Very 
important if you need it, and I’m thankful that we’re able to do 
it; but still, a tremendous cost to our health care system, and one 
that I’m not sure we can continue to absorb 100 per cent. But at 
this point, we’re able to. we have committed the money and I’m 
glad of that, and I look forward to what the task force review 
will bring forward that will give us guidance for the future. 
 
We are committed to quality hospitals and major renovations to 
many of the hospital facilities in our major centres. I think of 
Regina and the Pasqua Hospital and the major commitment of 
dollars that have gone into that hospital and have added to it 
and upgraded it until it’s 
  



 
April 5, 1988 

331 
 

going to be a first-class facility. 
 
The Wascana Rehabilitation Centre in Regina, a major 
undertaking of something over $50 million that will make this 
rehabilitation centre a centre of excellence, one that we can be 
proud of and one that will I’m sure assist many people to 
restore them to complete health. 
 
The Regina General, again, has had a considerable amount of 
upgrading, additions and upgrading, until it is now a very fine 
hospital, one that is serving our people well. 
 
In Saskatoon, on the 15th of this month, we will see the opening 
of the new wing of the University Hospital. Very soon the 
opening of the new wing of St. Paul’s Hospital will also come, 
and the sod-turning for a brand-new City Hospital in Saskatoon 
will also occur in April, I think showing a major indication of 
the commitment that this government has for health care and for 
the future of health care in our province. 
 
I’m very pleased with the number of things that have been done 
in my own constituency for health care, and I’d just like to 
mention a few of them. 
 
This year there’s been an approval for a major upgrading of the 
Milden Union Hospital. It will be a project of something like 
$640 million. 
 
In the village of Elrose, an approval for a 30-bed special care 
home. They’ve had a special care home but it’s outdated, can’t 
meet the needs of the people in that community, so this year 
they’ll be getting a replacement of those 30 beds and two 
additional. This will give Elrose the capability of dealing with 
the heavy level 3 and 4 care that is needed in our nursing 
homes. 
 
In Kyle we have a fine new hospital that was started last year. 
It’s not completed at this time, but it’s well under way in the 
construction process. That hospital is anticipated to be ready by 
next spring, and it will bring a combined facility, a new hospital 
with 12 nursing home beds attached, that will meet the needs of 
that community for a number of years into the future. 
 
There are a number of other things in health care that are 
happening, but I won’t touch on them all today. It’s important 
to see them happen, and I’m very pleased with the direction that 
is happening within our province for each of the constituencies 
that we represent. 
 
I was pleased this year to see a move to upgrade the 
Saskatchewan Landing Park. It will be a provincial park. It has 
been there now for a number of years but has seen little 
development up to this point in time. 
 
But the study that was done a number of years ago indicated 
that Elbow should be the first park to go forward, and then 
Saskatchewan Landing would be the second. We’re now at that 
stage where Saskatchewan Landing will be concentrated upon, 
and many of the needs of that area are going to begin to take 
place. 
 
There’s a commitment for a new marina. It’s a considerable 
cost but very much a part of a good park 

set-up. Also a commitment for a sewage lagoon and tennis 
courts, staff housing, irrigation for the trees and the grass. 
 
(1545) 
 
This park will serve the Swift Current, Kyle, Rosetown and area 
west. There are many visitors that come to that park, even 
though it was not developed very far, because it has a beautiful 
lake — tremendous opportunity for sailing and fishing and 
many of the recreational activities that we all look for when we 
go to a park. 
 
I’m pleased that we’re going to start to utilize that body of 
water to the benefit to the people of our province, but also to the 
benefit of those who are tourists and will travel through and 
take advantage of the parks as they go. 
 
I was also pleased, when the Minister of Highways tabled his 
project array last night, to see a considerable amount of 
highway work in my own constituency. I’m not going to list the 
different highways, but there’s something over $6.5 million of 
highway work that’s to be done in the Rosetown-Elrose riding. 
And as I look across the province at many of the constituencies, 
I see similar figures showing for almost every constituency in 
the province. 
 
The $100 million capital program that’s there for this year’s 
highway budget should put in place many of the needs that our 
highway system has today, and beyond that there’s a $30 
million enhancement program that will take place over the next 
three years, and again, this 30 million will assist to bring many 
of the highways into first-class condition. 
 
I’m confident that in our communities we can go ahead and 
develop businesses and be assured that the communities will 
have good highways and good roads to service them. The 
business can develop with confidence and know that the 
government is there with them, and the Highways department is 
looking after them to see that each community has the kind of 
roads and services that are so essential in today’s method of 
travel. 
 
I’d like now to touch on the Department of Environment and 
Public Safety and some of the areas that we will be working in 
in this year. I’d just like to mention a few of the highlights from 
our budget. 
 
Our government remains firmly committed to the protection of 
the environment and firmly committed to the protection of the 
people of our province and to the protection of wildlife. 
 
This year we have a new program to deal with a number of the 
abandoned mines that have been of concern to people, 
particularly in the coal mining area new Estevan and other 
centres in that area of the province. But we also have a number 
of mines in the northern part of the province that are of concern 
and will be looked at. We will be putting a staff member in 
place to begin this program in the very near future. 
 
This year we would like to address some of the mines close to 
the populated centres in the south-east corner of our province. 
This was brought on, I guess to some extent, 
  



 
April 5, 1988 

332 
 

by the tragic death last year of a youth in the Estevan area, and 
we have filled a couple of mines in that area now, but we’ll be 
continuing to work to make the communities safe for the 
residents over the next short while. 
 
A major study this year is going to begin in Regina studying the 
ground water quality for the city of Regina and area. This is a 
three-year comprehensive monitoring and study program that 
will go forward at a cost of something like $50,000, and it will 
involve people from other agencies, but the Department of 
Environment will be the lead agency. 
 
Beginning this year, we will obtain and compile and interpret 
the information on ground water, and I trust that in the near 
future we will be able to deal with any contamination that is 
occurring in the area to protect the residents of Regina from a 
lack of good water in the future. 
 
I wanted to also mention the planning that has been put in place 
in the department, looking ahead into the future, for a number 
of different areas. We are looking very seriously at the 
hazardous waste area. It’s a time of restraint and difficult to put 
a lot of money into hazardous waste, and yet I believe it’s 
something that we must address as a department. The staff in 
the department are recognizing the need, and even with limited 
dollars are willing to work hard to see that that need is 
addressed. 
 
Our government is also looking at the public safety side, and 
this year, in June, we will see the coming into force of the 
regulations that will give the building accessibility standards 
that have been so necessary for our handicapped people. It’s an 
area that had been worked on for a number of years and had 
been looked at by many groups in society, but each time it 
would get close to the finalization of the regulations, there 
would be someone concerned that they couldn’t afford to meet 
the requirements under those regulations. I’m glad that we have 
finally been able to resolve that. 
 
The regulations were passed back in the fall and gazetted, and 
they are to take effect on June 1. 
 
Last year the National Task Force on the Environment and the 
Economy completed a major study and issued its report, and 
this report deals with a wide variety of subject areas of 
environmental concern to the people across Canada. This year 
we would like to begin round-table discussions with groups in 
society on the details of that report. The report has now been 
widely circulated, and people are beginning to respond to the 
various areas that are in the report. I was extremely pleased that 
when this national task force’s report went forward to the first 
ministers’ conference last November, that it was unanimously 
agreed to by the first ministers of Canada. So that gives an 
indication of the work that went into that report and the high 
regard that is held for the quality work that was done. 
 
I trust that many of the members here will read the report and, 
as the round-table discussions begin, that they will take part and 
have input into the future of that, as major decisions will come 
forward from it. 
 
The government as well, through environmental impact 

studies has reviewed many major projects in the past year — I 
think 24 major projects. We have done a detailed study in all 
cases, and I believe that, as the approvals have been given for 
various projects, that the projects go forward in a manner that is 
going to protect our environment and yet accomplish economic 
development. It’s a very tight rope to walk sometimes to 
accomplish both ends, but I believe that we’ve been able to do 
that. 
 
I congratulate the staff in the Department of Environment, as 
they have reviewed these environmental impact studies. I think 
we can be proud of the quality of people that we have, and of 
the work that they have done. 
 
I want to just report that last fall we did a major clean-up of an 
arsenic trioxide storage site near Douglas Lake in the area near 
the town of Creighton. We cleaned up about 20 tons of arsenic 
trioxide that had been stored in a vault, a concrete vault, just a 
few yards from the edge of Douglas Lake. This had been talked 
about for something like about 30 years and nothing had been 
done. 
 
But when I went out to have a look at the storage vault with the 
department staff and we took ground samples, looked at the 
vault itself and then took water samples, you certainly could 
realize that this was a hazard to the people in the area, and it 
couldn’t be left any longer. 
 
So our government expended something like $175,000 to make 
this major clean-up and to move that product through. So our 
government expended something like $175,000 to make this 
major clean-up and to move that product through to 
Yellowknife where it was processed through with the gold 
mining process there, and the arsenic trioxide purified to the 
point where it is usable and sold to the companies who use that 
kind of product. 
 
I’m very pleased that the community of Creighton can now use 
the water from Douglas Lake for its drinking and home use and 
be confident that they have a safe and clean supply of water for 
their community. 
 
This last year we passed The Clean Air Act, which is a major 
change and an improvement in the direction that our department 
will use to be sure that industries in our province will not be 
polluting the air, but rather will be operating in a safe manner. 
We are working carefully to monitor the emissions from a 
variety of different businesses around the country. We’ve had 
good co-operation from many that we have been in touch with 
up to this point, and I’m confident that as we continue to work, 
that people in our province will have cleaner air, safer air over a 
long period of time. 
 
The pesticide container collection program which began five 
years ago has resulted in the collection of 3.2 million chemical 
containers, and over 420 barrels of residue have been recovered 
as these containers have been crushed and taken out of our 
society. I’m pleased that this program is going forward. It’s 
been a program highly valued by the farming community and, I 
believe, beneficial to every resident in our province. 
 
I listened last night to the member from Cumberland as he was 
speaking, and he made some statements and some accusations 
that I take exception to. 
  



 
April 5, 1988 

333 
 

First, he says that there was a chemical cyanide spill in northern 
Saskatchewan. There’s no recorded spill of any cyanide spill 
ever happening in northern Saskatchewan, so the member’s 
facts are wrong. And he goes on to say that a record number of 
accidents have occurred because of the highways and the 
spillage of chemicals. These statements are not true statements. 
And as I listened to the member I wondered whether I had 
missed something, so I went back to the department to check 
very carefully. I find that the member is off base in what he is 
saying. He’s trying to confuse and scare the public, and I 
believe that the member should withdraw those statements 
because they are not factual. 
 
Today, again, he made a statement about the Rafferty-Alameda 
project and he said that the government is spending $1.2 billion 
on Rafferty-Alameda. That’s absolute hog-wash. 
Rafferty-Alameda is budgeted at $126 million. That’s a long 
ways from 1.2 billion. And there’s to be $51 million of that, 
approximately, coming from the United States, so when you get 
it backed off to what it’s costing Saskatchewan, it’s a long, long 
ways from 1.2 billion. Even if you add the Shand project, it’s a 
long ways from 1.2 billion. 
 
So I think the member throws out figures and statistics without 
any background — a very dangerous practice at any time, and 
in this legislature, I think, extremely dangerous and one that’s 
almost unforgiveable because the facts and the figures are 
available to the member. He simply didn’t use his research, and 
he throws out whatever he feels comfortable to do. 
 
(1600) 
 
I’d like to touch briefly on the Sask Water Corporation that was 
established in 1984 and has an impact on the lives of almost 
every person in our province as they deal with water issues. 
They’ve had a major commitment to irrigation over the past few 
years under the Canada-Saskatchewan subsidiary agreement 
dealing with irrigation-based economic development. That $100 
million sounded like a very large figure when it came forward 
about two years ago, but as the people in the province who were 
interested in irrigation came forward and identified the projects 
that they would like to proceed with, that $100 million was used 
up very quickly. I’m not saying that it’s all spent yet, but it’s all 
committed. One of the major projects is in the area just south of 
Riverhurst. It’s called the Luck Lake project. It was designed to 
go forward in three stages, and the first stage was under 
construction last year and this year, and it’s intended that this 
project will be on stream for the spring of 1989. 
 
It was interesting to me to notice the response of the farming 
community there, even in these difficult financial times. At first 
it looked like the only acreage that would be irrigated from the 
beginning stages would be something between 4 and 5,000 
acres. Then as the project began to be developed and people 
could see the type of project and the type of delivery that would 
occur, immediately we have a demand that the second phase of 
that project go simultaneous with the first phase so that both 
will open in the spring of 1989. That will bring on stream 
something in the neighbourhood of 18,000 acres. It shows the 

demand that that community has. 
 
Along with that project, Ducks Unlimited came last year and, in 
negotiation with the Sask Water Corporation and the farming 
community near Luck Lake, have agreed to a major Ducks 
Unlimited project that will provide a wet marsh area for wild 
fowl. This project is going to cost about $5 million, the largest 
single project ever undertaken in Canada by Ducks Unlimited. 
And it will take place at Luck Lake itself. It’s an alkaline lake, 
but with the volume of water that they would put in it now, it 
would be very suitable for wild fowl. So I’m glad to see that 
happening. 
 
Last year we also had a request from the community near 
Riverhurst to begin another major irrigation project. The design 
work is pretty much completed now. The road into the pump 
station is about all of the groundwork that has been done. But 
this project will begin construction this year and will be timed 
to come on stream for 1990. 
 
When you get those two projects complete, along with some of 
the individual irrigation that’s taking place, it will bring about 
50,000 acres of land under irrigation from these projects since 
this $100 million Canada-Saskatchewan subsidiary agreement 
was first signed, a major accomplishment by the corporation 
and by the farm communities as it goes forward. 
 
The water corporation also was asked to take over the irrigation 
development centre at Outlook effective July 1 of 1987. That 
has been accomplished. The irrigation development centre is 
working very closely with the Sask Water Corporation and have 
been a real asset as we work with irrigation across the province. 
They bring much expertise to the water corporation. I believe 
that it was a wise decision for the two to be put together so that 
they could more effectively deal with the major projects. 
 
Sask Water has four programs for farmers in small rural 
communities, and they make a lot of effort to assist these small 
communities to locate and develop ground water supplies and to 
construct surface storage. This year we have been called many 
times by small towns in the south and south-west, advising us 
that indeed the ground water is going lower and lower all the 
time so that many of the wells are indeed drying up, and it puts 
a number of communities in very difficult circumstance. 
 
The staff from the water corporation have worked very 
carefully with many of those communities to develop alternate 
supplies, and to assist them with the technical expertise, but 
also with the financial need to make those supplies available to 
the citizens in their communities. 
 
Some time ago I asked the Saskatchewan Water Corporation 
staff to spend extra time reviewing all of the E-logs from wells 
that have been dug over the past number of years, whether by 
water well drillers or oil well drills or whoever has done the 
E-log work, to identify as many of the ground aquifers as 
possible on their maps, so that when there is a need we don’t 
have to spend weeks looking for the source but rather we have 
the source at our fingertips. 
 
It’s been an interesting time for the water corporation 
  



 
April 5, 1988 

334 
 

staff. It’s demanded a lot of work. They’ve done it willingly, 
and I believe that it will be a real advantage to the communities 
as they come forward and look for help. 
 
Over the last two years that I’ve had the opportunity to address 
the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, one of the areas that 
they’ve asked about in each of those two years was about fish 
mitigation in the Qu’Appelle area. A number of years ago as the 
Qu’Appelle conveyance channel work began, there was an 
agreement that the government would put in a fish mitigation 
process at a cost of something like $384,000. Now as the 
channel work proceeded, it seemed each year the demand for 
fish mitigation rose, and this year we have approval to go ahead 
with that fish mitigation at a cost of some $700,000. That is a 
major expenditure. 
 
I hope that the fish mitigation will be successful so that people 
who have cabins and who holiday in the Qu’Appelle area will 
have an opportunity indeed to go in their boats and catch a few 
fish and enjoy fishing. 
 
Altogether that Qu’Appelle river channelization has seen 
something like three and one-half million dollars expended, and 
with this $700,000 it gets to be in excess of $4 million. 
 
The member from Cumberland indicated that nobody was doing 
anything for the people of the North. I believe that either he 
doesn’t go to the North very often, or when he does, he doesn’t 
listen to the people, or he has his eyes shut. I’m not just sure 
what’s happening exactly, but I want to give an example of a 
few things that the member might take notice of, and maybe 
indeed he should be saying thanks once in a while. 
 
Last year the water corporation put in a brand-new water 
treatment plant at Cumberland, the member’s home town, at 
something in the neighbourhood of a million dollars of cost. 
Very valuable to the community, it guarantees them good water 
for their community for a long time into the future. 
 
Last year also, we went into Jans Bay and put in a sewer and 
water system at a cost of about $1 million. We have seven 
projects for sewer and water that have gone in in the North in 
the last very few years at a cost of something over 3.2 million. 
 
So people are doing things in northern Saskatchewan, doing a 
number of them. There are many other things that should be 
done, but I think for the member to stand and say we are doing 
nothing for the North is not quite fair. We are doing a lot, and I 
believe the developments that we have put forward in the North 
are better than what has happened under previous governments 
for the people of that region. 
 
In the budget there were many references to our government’s 
commitment to Saskatchewan families, and I commend the 
Premier of our province for his strong moral stand regarding 
families and family life. You know, I have a great deal of 
concern about families, and have a family of my own. I have 
four children, all married; 10 grandchildren. I do have a major 
concern for the future of families and what’s right for families. 

And I believe the stand that the Premier has taken on moral 
issues is very much a traditional Judeo-Christian stand that has 
been the basis for the development of Canada. I’m proud of that 
stand, and I hope that our Premier and others continue to take 
that kind of stand, a very firm stand, so that there is a right and 
a wrong, so that young people and some not so young can make 
choices and know that they’re on the right track. 
 
The basis of our laws have been the Christian belief and the 
absolutes, and I believe that’s important and that we should 
maintain some of that. More and more we’re seeing a greying 
of some of these issues, and as that greying occurs it leaves a 
confusion among the young people and the teenagers of our 
society. They lose direction, and I believe that loss of direction 
is very, very serious for the future of Canada as a nation and for 
the future of our province. 
 
I’m very pleased that through our concern for families we’ve 
been able to continue the mortgage protection plan that has 
meant so much to many of our home owners, in the cities in 
particular. People who carry a heavy mortgage can carry it and 
feel safe that yes, we can afford it, our interest rate is not going 
to go beyond a fixed level. With that kind of security they feel 
comfortable to buy a home and to be sure that they’re going to 
have a roof over their head for them and their families into the 
future. 
 
I’m pleased that we were able to exempt the sales tax form 
clothing and footwear for articles under $300. That covers most 
of the clothing that’s needed by the average individual and 
especially for children. People in our type of work may go and 
spend more than $300 when we buy a suit or a coat, but for the 
most part it covers the clothing of most people. 
 
And I’m very pleased with the support that we have given to the 
families as we deal with the growing problem of drugs and 
alcohol abuse. The assistance that’s been put in place for young 
people to get treatment when they do have a problem with drugs 
is very beneficial, and it will bring people back into our society 
cleansed of a serious problem that could have ruined their life 
for ever. 
 
(1615) 
 
I’m also pleased to see an enhancement of day care being 
provided for in this budget, and a new, safe shelter in Swift 
Current for victims of family violence. We hope that people 
don’t need that kind of facility, but when they do, I’m certainly 
;pleased that it’s there and that people have someone to turn to. 
 
The enhanced support for the foster parents, again a very strong 
move in family support. I’m pleased that we have people 
around our province who are willing to be foster parents and 
take children in and make a good home for them. This 
additional support will make it possible for them to continue to 
care for young people and to promote positive parenting 
through a new program that we have called “Families Matter.” 
This program, I think, is going to be very beneficial and should 
give many people an opportunity to learn from one another and 
from a very 
  



 
April 5, 1988 

335 
 

good and family-stressing program. 
 
On the issue of abortion, this has dropped on our lap this winter, 
and it has been a very major issue for governments across the 
nation. It’s an issue that I think you and I need to take seriously 
because it impacts on the future generations in our country. The 
stand that our Premier has taken, I think, is a strong stand and 
one that is supported by many, many people around our 
province. When we met with the major church groups as a 
cabinet recently, as the groups got up to speak, one after the 
other, we were hearing them say, thank you, to the Premier; we 
agree with you; we support you on the stand that you’ve taken. 
There was only one dissenting voice in the whole group. I’m 
not going to identify that voice, but there was only one 
dissenting voice in the whole group. 
 
And when that meeting was over and the press reports that 
came out after it, I couldn’t believe that that could be the result 
of the meeting that I’d been at. The press reports must have 
come from only the one person because they were not saying 
what all of those church leaders had been saying in the meeting 
when they met with cabinet. 
 
I had a letter from a doctor in my constituency, one who has 
been a medical doctor in practice for something over 20 years. 
And he spoke in that letter, or he wrote in that letter, of the 
abortion issue and how he saw it as a doctor. And what he said 
was that after 20 years as a medical professional dealing with 
people, he had not seen one medical indication for need of an 
abortion — not one in 20 years. 
 
Yet in our province in 1982 we were seeing that there were 
about 1,800 abortions being performed in a year. We made 
some changes, and that figure has dropped. But I’m still not 
very pleased with the figure; it’s still something in the 
neighbourhood of 900. It’s cut in half, but still not nearly cut far 
enough. 
 
I believe that as a nation, as a province, we need to ensure that 
there is something put in legislation that’s going to provide the 
rights for the unborn. If we don’t do that, I believe it’s the first 
step towards more serious issues in the future when we will see 
not only the very young being aborted, but we may also see 
euthanasia practised for seniors and perhaps for the 
handicapped or other undesirables in our society. 
 
As we open the door, we leave that danger there for other 
segments of society. I hope that as this issue comes forward 
many of you will take a strong stand to support the federal 
government in putting forward legislation that will be very 
specific and will take the stand to support the unborn. 
 
I’d like to speak briefly on the education issue, and as a parent 
and a former school trustee I have a real concern for the 
education system in our province. I’m pleased this year to see a 
major change in the course offerings that will be provided in 
our schools, so that we’re going to have a core curriculum that’s 
going to put quality back into many of the schools. And I think 
we lost some of that during the period when we looked at the 
idea of every child doing his own thing. Indeed, they did do 
their own thing, but their own thing was not necessarily great 
and 

the quality of education suffered. I’m glad to see a change 
coming in that area. 
 
Since 1982, spending on education in our province has 
increased by almost 50 per cent, and we see this year 5.2 per 
cent additional being put in the budget for education. It shows a 
very major commitment that our government has for the 
education and the future of our children. 
 
I’m pleased that there is 7 million increased in the school 
operating grants and 2.8 million increase in university operating 
assistance. Add to that the 14 and a half million for the 
educational development fund, and 31 million in capital 
assistance for renovation and construction of new schools, and 
you see the major commitment that this government has for 
education. 
 
I’m pleased, as well, to see a note in our papers that indicate 
that likely we have a settlement in the teachers’ salary contract. 
Now there’s no assurance that we have a settlement until it is 
ratified and the contract is signed, but the comments that I’m 
hearing are good. And the articles that are coming forward from 
people like Fred Herron, the general secretary of the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, and he said, we’re pleased 
that there has been an increase; we would certainly like more, 
but consideration, the type that we have this year, he says: but 
considering the other elements of the budget, it shows priority 
for education. So the general secretary of the teachers’ 
federation is pleased with what we’re doing for education. 
 
Ray Matheson, chairman of the Regina Board of Education, 
was also pleased and he said: considering the economic times 
we’re in, education has fared well. Of course you’d like more, 
but with the resource base the way it is you have to be grateful 
for what you’re getting — I think a comment that is probably 
speaking it as it is. Everybody would like more, but indeed 
pleased with the fact that there was more money put into 
education. 
 
Reid Robinson, at the University of Regina, academic 
vice-president was encouraged, and he said: we’re certainly 
encouraged that there are some indications that we’re going to 
have some increased capital funding. Through this and previous 
budgets, our government has taken important steps to ensure 
that the people in our province have access to high quality 
education, and I trust that we will continue to have that concern 
and that our people will, over the long haul, have a very strong 
education system that will put our people through the education 
system and stand them well as they go forward to become the 
leaders in our society. 
 
In a time of restraint, I think it’s a credit that our government 
has been able to increase spending this year by 127 million, 82 
per cent of which goes directly to health and education, and also 
that we’ve been able to cut back on the amount of deficit that 
we will experience. I was pleased when the Minister of Finance 
was able to come in below the predicted deficit that he had last 
year by some $9 million. I believe that to cut back on the deficit 
by 42 per cent from what it was in 1986 is a step in the right 
direction. I hope that very soon we can cut that — remaining 
amount — so that we are at balanced budget position. 
  



 
April 5, 1988 

336 
 

We’re committed to economic development diversification, and 
I’m very pleased to see the upgrader that’s under construction 
here in Regina. That upgrader should come on stream this fall, 
and as it begins to process our heavy oil at the rate of something 
like 50,000 barrels per day, that’s going to be a major economic 
benefit to our province and provide a number of jobs here in the 
city of Regina. 
 
We have 50 million seedlings in the reforestation program 
proposed, to be made available to replant our forests. That’s a 
major project. Something like 9,000 jobs should be created as 
we move forward with the economic development programs in 
the next short while. And as we’ve encouraged our businesses 
and our industries to “hire Saskatchewan,” I’m pleased to see 
that many of the businesses here have taken that serious, and 
have been able to hire many more Saskatchewan people than 
had normally been the case. 
 
Some areas we don’t have the expertise, but as we begin to 
recognize the need, and the need to develop that broader 
expertise, our universities and technical training schools are 
broadening their base and providing additional training, so that 
in the very near future I believe that when we have a major 
development, Saskatchewan will have the expertise, and that 
will stand our people in good stead. 
 
I’m pleased to see the unemployment rates continue to drop and 
to see that this province is the second lowest in Canada. That’s 
something that we’ve worked toward. I’d like to see a zero 
unemployment rate, as all people would. We haven’t arrived; 
we haven’t quit working. We’re going to continue to strive for 
that, but at least we’re moving in the right direction and the 
unemployment rate is dropping steadily. I’m encouraged by that 
and look forward to the day when anyone who wants a job will 
be able to get it. 
 
We have many other areas that I could speak to. I don’t want to 
monopolize the whole time of the House, but I would just close 
by saying that I’m very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to support the 
budget as it has been presented. I’m encouraged that over the 
next year we will likely see our economy continue to 
strengthen. The government will be providing the services that I 
believe Saskatchewan people need, and I’m looking forward to 
our province taking strides forward in the coming year as the 
economy turns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the main motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and as others have 
said before me, I too am pleased to enter this budget debate. I’m 
not pleased to enter it because of what is contained in this 
document, but pleased to stand and speak in this House, 
because I consider it an honour and a privilege, and indeed a 
responsibility, to have this opportunity. 
 
And I think all members present would be well advised to 
remember what a privilege and an honour it is every time that 
we have opportunity to speak in here, and to take that 

seriously. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I remain very grateful to 
the people of Moose Jaw South who have given me this 
privilege and this honour and this responsibility. 
 
But may I also say, Mr. Speaker, before I begin remarks on this 
budget, that I think all we who are elected would be well 
advised to remember that it is perhaps not the most important 
thing we do when we give speeches in this House. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the most important things we do are when 
we’re in our own constituencies and when we are with the 
people who have given us the privilege to sit in this place; when 
we’re helping that senior citizen with a grant application form; 
or when we’re steering someone through that maze of social 
services; or indeed when we’re bringing greetings to an 
anniversary; when we’re on the street talking to people and 
listening to people; when we’re with the people who gave us the 
honour and the privilege to sit in this House, that’s where some 
of our most important work is to be done. And indeed, Mr. 
Speaker, it would be my judgement and my opinion that when 
we speak in this House, if we are not reflecting the wishes and 
the desires and the concerns of the people of our home, then we 
are not doing our job, and the only way that we can speak 
effectively in this place is to be with those people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so what I hope to do in this budget debate is to 
reflect not only my own concerns, not just the concerns of my 
caucus, not just the concerns of my party, but to reflect the 
concerns of the people I represent and, hopefully, the concerns 
of the people of Saskatchewan whom we were all elected to 
serve. 
 
I want to do that, Mr. Speaker, by picking up on a little bit of 
poetry that entered this debate from that gentle, poetic member 
from Quill Lakes, the opposition Finance critic, in his 
introductory remarks in response to his budget, the member 
from Quill Lakes, the opposition Finance critic, quoted a line 
from that beautiful little poem by William Butler Yeats. He 
quoted this line, Mr. Speaker: 
 

(But), being poor, have only my dreams. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to pick up on that short quote and, if I 
may, quote a little bit more of William Butler Yeats and his 
poem, “The Heaven’s Embroidered Cloths.” He wrote this: 
 

Had I the heavens’ embroidered cloths,/ enwrought with 
golden and silver light,/ . . . I would spread those cloths 
(underneath) your feet:/ 
. . . But, I being poor have only my dreams;/ . . .  
Tread softly, because you tread (upon) my dreams. 

 
Mr. Speaker, when the people of Saskatchewan gave this 
Progressive Conservative Party the mandate to govern, in many 
ways the people of Saskatchewan laid their dreams at the feet of 
this government, entrusted their hopes and their dreams to this 
group of men and women. And what’s happened, Mr. Speaker? 
The people of Saskatchewan have seen their dreams trampled 
on, they have seen their dreams trampled on by this 
government. 
  



 
April 5, 1988 

337 
 

And this budget which, by it’s own admission, stays the course 
— stays the course — continues to trample on those dreams. 
The dreams of Saskatchewan people have been stepped on, 
they’ve been hurt. Saskatchewan people have seen their 
neighbours hurt and their families hurt. They’ve seen their 
hopes and their expectations and their optimism and their 
confidence in this great province trampled on. They were 
promised: there’s so much more that we can be. They’ve 
discovered how much less we can become in seven budgets — 
seven years of famine, Mr. Speaker. Seven long, lean years. 
 
Having laid their dreams at the feet of this government, 
Saskatchewan people and Moose Jaw people have seen many of 
those dreams betrayed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that a few moments ago the Premier 
of this province finally announced the dates of a by-election for 
Saskatoon Eastview and Regina Elphinstone. I understand that 
he’s finally, after 10 long months for the people of Saskatoon 
Eastview, finally found the courage to seek the opinion of 
Saskatchewan people on his government and on this budget. 
And, Mr. Speaker, if I may say, when that opinion is given, I 
would say to the Sergeant-at-Arms, he had better be sure there 
are two more desks on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatoon 
Eastview, the people of Regina Elphinstone will indicate their 
judgement, and in many ways they will express the opinion of 
all of Saskatchewan on Wednesday, May 4. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I turn to some of the specifics of this 
budget, I would like to address another issue that has been 
brought into this budget debate, an issue that does arise from 
this budget and the direction set out by this budget and has been 
introduced into this debate by the minister of privatization. And 
I refer, Mr. Speaker, to the sell-off of Saskatchewan Minerals, 
the sell-off of Saskatchewan Minerals. 
 
And I want to report to you, Mr. Speaker, and to all members of 
this House what is being said in the communities of Chaplin, 
Fox Valley, and Carrot River, and what’s being said far beyond 
those communities. The people of Saskatchewan are saying that 
this is privatization of the worst possible kind. The sell-off of 
Sask Minerals is privatization of the worst possible kind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here we had a Saskatchewan firm for over 40 
years which had regularly and dependably, year after year after 
year, returned a profit to the people of Saskatchewan; a 
Saskatchewan firm that has been the life-blood of several rural 
Saskatchewan communities; a Saskatchewan firm that 
competed effectively in the market place; a Saskatchewan firm 
that developed a Saskatchewan resource for the benefit of 
Saskatchewan people; a Saskatchewan firm that was in the 
leading edge, the state of the art technology, Mr. Speaker; a 
Saskatchewan firm that has paid millions in grants in lieu of 
taxes to the communities where it was located; a Saskatchewan 
firm that has paid its full share of royalties to the provincial 
government; and a Saskatchewan firm 

that has returned over $40 million — $40 million, Mr. Speaker 
— to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me tell you about those dividends, the 
dividends that came, that I received, that my family enjoyed, 
dividends of Saskatchewan Minerals. I had, we had, the best 
prescription drug plan in the world. We had the best children’s 
dental plan, school-based dental plan, in the world. That’s a 
dividend, Mr. Speaker. We had roads that we could drive on. 
That was a dividend, Mr. Speaker. There were tuition fees that I 
could afford to get a post-secondary education. That was a 
dividend that I enjoyed. 
 
Where are the dividends going now? Where are the dividends 
going now? Into the hands of the corporate friends of this 
government. What has this government done with Sask 
Minerals? In a secret deal negotiated behind closed doors, Mr. 
Speaker, in a secret deal where no tenders, no tenders were 
offered; this government chooses its own corporate friends and 
sells off Sask Minerals to central friends from central Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you may recall that in this House I inquired of the 
Premier his reasoning for selling Sask Minerals. I asked him in 
this House to justify the sale of this Saskatchewan asset. And he 
responded in this fashion, Mr. Speaker, and I quote from page 
26 of Hansard, March 23. In response to my question to the 
Premier, why did he sell off the Saskatchewan asset, he said the 
following: 
 

The public (he said) wants to participate. They want to see 
it grow, and they want to see profitable operations, and 
they want to see us in a prosperous situation. Now we 
inherited many, many, many public corporations that were 
not doing well, or that could do much better. 

 
The clear implication, Mr. Speaker, in the Premier’s response to 
my question, is that somehow or other Sask Minerals was not 
profitable, not prosperous, that it could somehow do so much 
better. Mr. Speaker, when the Premier stood in the House and 
said that, it was nothing but a direct slur on the workers and the 
management of Sask Minerals over all these years, those who 
have served on those boards. When he came into this House and 
said that this Sask Minerals wasn’t profitable, wasn’t 
prosperous  
 
An Hon. Member: — Calculated deceit. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Calculated deceit, my colleague says, Mr. 
Speaker, when the member from  where’s she from? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Maple Creek. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Maple Creek. On the rare occasion when that 
member from Maple Creek makes a speech in this House, I sit 
here quietly, I sit here quietly and listen, even endure, Mr. 
Speaker, I would ask you to ask her to extend the same 
courtesy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the record, the corporate record of Sask Minerals, 
the successful record of that corporation was due to the 
dedication of its workers and its management and its board 
members, and somehow for the Premier to 
  



 
April 5, 1988 

338 
 

imply that they were not doing their job was a slur on those 
people, and he ought to stand in this House and apologize to 
them. I thought his job was to protect Saskatchewan people. 
Rather, he attacks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the sale of Sask Minerals is privatization of the 
worst possible kind, and it was done, Mr. Speaker, it was done 
without consultation. Indeed, if anything it made a mockery of 
the process of consultation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on March 19, Saturday, March 19, we read in the 
Leader-Post a headline that said, “Public to get a say ahead of 
privatization.” The minister of privatization that day announced 
that the sale of Sask Minerals was being considered, and then in 
the article it reads, “But before any privatization is carried out,” 
Taylor said, “there must be clear benefits to the public.” 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I know the hon. member had a slip of the 
tongue, but I must remind him that members’ names are not to 
be used. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — I apologize to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the 
House. 
 
The minister of privatization is quoted in this article as saying: 
 

We want to see an adequate opportunity for consultation 
and discussion with those people affected. We don’t want 
there to be any surprises. As such (the minister of 
privatization said that, quote) no firm decisions have been 
made. 

 
And get this, Mr. Speaker: “The government might abandon 
plans if there is significant opposition to any particular 
privatization effort.” 
 
He said that on Saturday, March 19. On Thursday, March 24, 
the same minister of privatization flies out to Chaplin for a 
public meeting — a meeting with the workers, a meeting with 
the townspeople, and then a quick flight up to Carrot River for a 
meeting over there. I note that he did not have the courtesy to 
visit the community of Fox Valley. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me tell you about that meeting because yes, I 
was there. Yes, I was there and, contrary to the minister, I was 
invited to come. I was invited to be there. Mr. Speaker, let me 
tell you about the process of consultation that went on that day. 
The minister flies in at 11 o’clock, he meets with the workers 
for about three-quarters of an hour — three-quarters of an hour. 
Some of these men and women have given the best part of their 
lives to Sask Minerals. He extends them 45 minutes of his time. 
That’s consultation. 
 
With the townspeople he spends about — not quite — about an 
hour, an hour, and then, with his aides rushing him out the door, 
he’s off to Carrot River, and that’s consultation. And when he 
was there, Mr. Speaker, did this minister say to the community 
of Chaplin and to the workers, do you think that the sell-off of 
Sask Minerals is a good idea? Did he ask their opinion? No, no. 
He came and said, look out, we’ve just about signed the deal. 
We’ve just about signed the deal. 

Did he say to the workers at Sask Minerals, did he say to the 
people who’ve given so much of their lives to this corporation, 
did he say to them, would you like an opportunity to 
participate? Would you like to share in the ownership? No. 
When that question was put to him, he turned the request down 
flat. That’s consultation, Mr. Speaker. Could he provide to the 
people of Chaplin any firm commitment on the future of their 
jobs? No, he couldn’t. Could he provide to the people of 
Chaplin any firm commitment that the head office would 
remain in their community? No, he couldn’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have never, in one meeting, heard the words, “I 
hope,” “maybe,” “perhaps,” as I did that day from the lips of the 
minister of privatization. All that he could really assure the 
workers in the community of Chaplin, all that he could assure 
them was that they were about to be sold out to some friends of 
this government from eastern Canada. 
 
(1645) 
 
So let’s go through it again, Mr. Speaker. Saturday, March 19, 
the minister announced the sale of Sask Minerals as being 
considered. Thursday, March 24, he calls a public meeting that 
lasts about an hour and one-half, an hour and three-quarters, in 
the community of Chaplin. Monday, March 28, the sale is 
announced. Is that consultation, Mr. Speaker? All the while the 
minister’s promising consultation, the ink on the deal is drying. 
That’s a mockery of the process, Mr. Speaker. The minister has 
betrayed his own word. He’s betrayed his word to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and, Mr. Speaker, that’s privatization of the 
worst possible kind. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, what did we get? What did 
we get for Sask Minerals? What did we get for this company 
that’s on the leading edge in its field? What did we get for this 
company that has contributed over $61 million in wages to its 
workers, that has contributed over $2 million in grants in lieu of 
taxes to the communities where it’s located? What did we get 
for this company that’s contributed over $12 million in royalties 
to the province? What did we get for this Saskatchewan asset 
that has contributed over $40 million in dividends? 
 
Well many are saying we didn’t even get half of what it’s 
worth. But I’ll tell you what we did get, Mr. Speaker. We got 
enough money — enough money to pay the interest on the 
public debt for two and a half weeks — for two and a half 
weeks. We got enough money to pay the debt charges on this 
government’s debt for two and a half weeks. If we started 
applying that money that we got for Sask Minerals to the debt 
interest payments today, it would be gone by April 23. Forty 
years of building — 40 years of building — we’ve sold it off 
for two and a half weeks’ interest payments on this 
government’s debt. 
 
That’s PC privatization, Mr. Speaker. It’s privatization of the 
worst possible kind. And, Mr. Speaker, is there any wonder that 
across this province people are saying, will there be anything 
left, will there by anything left when this government is gone? 
  



 
April 5, 1988 

339 
 

Mr. Speaker, the sell-off of Sask Minerals is a clear illustration 
of PC privatization, and I define it this way: the rich get richer; 
the poor get poorer; the friends of the PCs prosper, and the 
people are asked to pay — and that’s PC privatization. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let me return now to the quote 
from William Butler Yeats, and my observation: then, when 
given the mandate to govern, the people of Saskatchewan laid 
many of their hopes and dreams at the feet of this government, 
and they’ve seen so many of those hopes and dreams trampled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the people of Saskatchewan gave the PC 
Party a mandate to govern their lives, I think they trusted that 
this government would govern with a certain level of common 
sense and a certain level of competence that they had come to 
expect over the years before. Mr. Speaker, that trust has been so 
completely betrayed. 
 
Perhaps one of the best illustrations, Mr. Speaker, is in this 
government’s gas tax rebate scheme. I would like to tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, about a drive that I had up into the Rosetown 
constituency not too long ago and, running short of gas, I 
stopped at a small service station, filled the tank, and then said 
to the owner of that small station just what he and his clientele 
thought of the government’s gas tax rebate scheme. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I need to remove some of the language that 
he used, because you wouldn’t allow it in this forum, and I 
wouldn’t use it in any event. But if I can summarize what that 
gentleman said to me, he said: if certain members of this 
cabinet were to come into his service station, he would take 
them and hang them on the wall somewhere near his fan belts. 
That’s what he said. That’s what he thinks of this government’s 
gas tax rebate scheme, this common sense, competent 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you remember, we remember, the province 
remembers, in 1982 it was this government that promised there 
would never again be a gas tax in Saskatchewan. You know, I 
think of that promise every time I fill the tank, every time I pay 
the bill, every time I tuck the receipt in the glove box I think of 
that promise. 
 
But even, Mr. Speaker, if they were going to go back on their 
promise, the people of Saskatchewan can’t believe, just can’t 
believe that any government would be so incompetent, so 
lacking in common sense as to institute the kind of rebate 
scheme that has been thrust upon the people of Saskatchewan. 
They simply can’t believe that a government would say it wants 
to tax out-of-province motorists by taxing all of us. They can’t 
believe a government would create this kind of bureaucratic, red 
tape nightmare that is today seeing literally millions of slips of 
paper coming into Regina. 
 
They can’t believe that a government that once they trusted 
would be taking their money, hold it for some and many 
months, interest free, and then count on the fact — count on the 
fact that some of us will not claim what is rightfully ours. The 
people of this province simply can’t 

believe that this government would do that to them. 
 
And then when this government says, well, the one good thing 
about this gas tax rebate scheme is that you see it’s a student 
employment opportunity. Well, Mr. Speaker, I can’t believe 
that any government, when there are senior citizens who need to 
be cared for when there are young people who need to be 
nurtured at summer camps and so on, when there are parks that 
need to be built, I can’t believe any government who would 
take the talents and the enthusiasm and the energy of 
Saskatchewan young people and lock them up in cubicles going 
through slips of paper for the summer-time. Is there any 
wonder, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan people are 
disillusioned and disgusted when they see the kind of 
mismanagement and incompetence and waste that has become 
the rule with this government, rather than the exception. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the government that spends over $8 million 
a year on empty office space while 15,000 people wait for 
hospital beds. Mr. Speaker, this is the government that spends 
well over $20 million in self-serving government advertising 
and propaganda, and yet it tells us there are people in the North 
who can’t afford to install that drinking water and that running 
water that the Minister of the Environment just talked about — 
communities in the North that can’t afford to install it to their 
homes. What’s the use of water treatment plant if you can’t 
afford to have it installed into your home. Meanwhile this 
government spends over $20 million on self-serving ads. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the government that this year will spend 
$330 million on the interest payments on the debt that it 
created. Over $330 million of our money to pay for the interest 
on the debt that it created. That’s almost a million dollars a day 
of our money — a million bucks a day — while forcing senior 
citizens in this province to choose between prescription drugs 
and their food. Is there any wonder, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
this province are disgusted and disillusioned. They trusted this 
group of men and women to be competent, to govern with some 
common sense, and they have been betrayed. Mr. Speaker, they 
have had that little dream trampled on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a group of people in our province who very 
particularly have laid their dreams at the feet of this government 
are the young people of Saskatchewan and the young families 
of this province, and I can only describe it as a tragedy what is 
happening to young people and young families in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I had the opportunity a couple of weeks ago to meet with a 
group of high school students. Mr. Speaker, as I met with them, 
I found among them the same that I have found among young 
people wherever I’ve met them. The young people of 
Saskatchewan are questioning their future; they’re questioning 
their future in this province; they’re questioning whether they 
will ever be able to receive a higher education in Saskatchewan. 
 
I mean, we continue to tell them that education is the key to the 
future. We continue to tell them that, and yet they see their 
provincial government cutting back in education, limiting 
access to university for the first time in the history of this 
province. They see what’s going on 
  



 
April 5, 1988 

340 
 

today at the campus in Saskatoon and they know whose fault it 
is. They know it’s the fault of the people opposite. They see the 
massive cut-backs to the training spaces that occurred in our 
technical institute. They see their own teachers, this past spring, 
having been treated like second-class citizens by this 
government. They see cuts to the bursary programs, and they 
just wonder, Mr. Speaker, they just wonder if there’s going to 
be any opportunity in this province for them, and I think that’s a 
disgrace. 
 
It won’t be long, Mr. Speaker, it won’t be long until it’s only 
the rich who can afford a higher education in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, I see that members opposite are quite uncomfortable 
with the things I’m saying  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: —  and I intend, Mr. Speaker, to continue that 
discomfort after supper, so it being near 5 o’clock I would beg 
leave to adjourn. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He adjourned debate. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He asked for leave to adjourn debate and 
we agreed. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. The hon. member 
did in fact beg leave to adjourn debate. I’m not sure if that was 
his true intention, and I’ll give him an opportunity to clarify his 
remarks. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize for the slip of the 
tongue. My intention is to return tonight and cause further 
discomfort for this government. Therefore I would call it, Mr. 
Speaker, 5 o’clock. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — On a point of order. I have a sense of 
what the rules are and have been for a long time and, as I 
understand it, a member having once asked for leave to adjourn 
debate, and that adjournment has been granted and he has taken 
his place, he is not allowed to get back in, and that order of 
business is finished for the day, except by leave of the House, 
of course. And of course since he has adjourned debate and it 
was granted, that ends the debate on this budget for this day. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. The point of order, I have considered 
carefully, and in fact the member did ask for leave to adjourn 
debate, and in fact leave was granted. Therefore the debate is 
adjourned, and this House now stands adjourned until tomorrow 
at 2 p.m. 
 
I’m sorry. Excuse me. Would everybody please sit down for a 
moment. I just got a little ahead of myself. The House isn’t 
adjourned, the debate is adjourned. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker  
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’m afraid the member for P.A. was on his 
feet first, so I’ll have to recognize him. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would ask  Mr. 
Speaker, you asked whether leave would be granted. 

Now I would believe, Mr. Speaker, that you need unanimous 
consent for leave to be granted at this stage. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We had it. We gave it. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — No, we did not have unanimous consent. 
And I believe that you would have to ask for unanimous 
consent. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member is on the right track. 
However, when I asked for leave, I did not hear any dissenting 
voices, and therefore  I did not hear any dissenting voices. 
Therefore, I had to assume that leave was granted unanimously. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, since leave has been 
granted to adjourn debate on special order, and since we have 
some difficulty in proceeding with  in the normal course, with 
all of the necessary notice requirements, etc., I would ask for 
leave to move to second readings on Bill No. 2, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in that event, since 
we don’t have work before us to deal with this evening, I move 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The division bells having rung from 5:07 p.m. until 7:15 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 28 
 
Devine Pickering 
Muller Martin 
Duncan Toth 
Andrew Johnson 
Berntson McLaren 
Taylor Hopfner 
Swan Petersen 
Muirhead Swenson 
Maxwell Martens 
Hodgins Baker 
Gerich Gleim 
Hepworth Gardner 
Hardy Kopelchuk 
Klein Saxinger 
 

Nays — 11 
 
Brockelbank Koenker 
Tchorzewski Atkinson 
Solomon Hagel 
Mitchell Calvert 
Simard Trew 
Kowalsky  
 
The Assembly adjourned at 7:17 p.m. 


