


















































May 30, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 May 27, 1988 
 

1619 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk: — I hereby report to the Assembly that I have examined 
the following petition under rule 11(7). I lay it on the Table for 
reading and receiving: 
 
Of certain residents of the province of Saskatchewan praying 
that the Legislative Assembly may be pleased to urge the 
Government of Saskatchewan to stop eroding post-secondary 
education in Saskatchewan. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
for me to introduce to you, and through you to members of the 
Assembly, a group of 24 grade 6 students from the town of Gull 
Lake, Mr. Speaker. They are seated in your gallery. 
 
They have travelled about three hours to be with us this 
morning and have had a tour of the Assembly. They are 
accompanied by their teachers Cam Lock, bus driver Ruth Kirk, 
and a number of chaperons. 
 
I hope the grade 6 students enjoy question period and their stay 
in the legislature. I would ask all members to welcome them 
and wish then a safe journey home. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you, and to all members of the Legislative 
Assembly, a couple of guests this morning in your gallery. 
 
I am pleased to introduce to you this morning Mr. Roy 
Jamieson, newly appointed executive director of Transport 
2000 Canada. Mr. Jamieson is in Regina to address delegates of 
the annual meeting of Transport 2000 tomorrow, which I will 
have the pleasure of meeting him at that time and joining him 
with that organization. Accompanying Mr. Jamieson is Mr. 
Keith Knox, president of Transport 2000, Saskatchewan branch 
of the national organization. 
 
I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming these 
two gentlemen to the legislature this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join the 
Minister of Highways in welcoming these two guests. I’d like to 
point out that one of these guests shares a rather famous home 
town, that of Bridgewater, Nova Scotia. And of course he 
shares that home town with the Hon. Allan Blakeney, ex-of the 
Legislative Assembly, I too will be joining the Minister of 
Highways at their Transport 2000 meeting tomorrow, and I very 
much look forward to that. So welcome to the two guests.

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome 30 
grade 4 students from Montmartre that are here with us this 
morning. They’re accompanied by their teachers Geraldine 
Kuzmicz and Sandi Brown, and the chaperons Carole Englot, 
Doug and Pauline Baumgartner, Dennis Hofer, Pat Chittenden, 
and Barry Lytle. 
 
I hope you enjoy the proceedings in the House, and I look 
forward to meeting you afterwards for treats and pictures and a 
discussion of what has taken place here. Welcome to Regina. 
I’d like everybody to join with me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a great 
deal of pleasure this morning that I’d like to introduce to you, 
and to the other members of the Assembly, 45 students from 
Lindale Elementary School in Moose Jaw. 
 
A word of explanation, Mr. Speaker. I don’t represent any of 
the city of Moose Jaw; however, these are all students from the 
rural unit around and they’re bused into the city. 
 
They have with them this morning their teachers Erna 
Adamache and Adele Kuhling, chaperons Mrs. Mews, Mrs. 
Anthony, Mrs. Kock, Mrs. Stirton, Mrs. McKenzie, and Mrs. 
Machmer, and their bus driver, Mrs. McLaren. 
 
It is my old Alma Mater, Mr. Speaker. Some 26 years ago when 
the door opened, I was one of the first in, and I’ve been back 
many times since, and shortly will have some family of my own 
attending that particular institution. So it’s always nice when 
the kids from Lindale come down, and I’ll be happy to meet 
with them and have drinks and pictures afterwards. I’d like all 
members of the Assembly to join me in giving them a warm 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the member from 
Thunder Creek has pointed out, the students from Lindale are 
all coming from within his riding. However, as the school is 
located within my riding, I want to join with him and other 
members of the Assembly in extending a special welcome to 
the students and the chaperons from Lindale, and I wish them a 
very interesting day here at the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Disbursements to Property Management Corporation 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to address a 
question to the Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, as you are 
aware, the auditors report attached to the 1986-87 Public 
Accounts questions your classification of disbursements to the 
Property Management Corporation as loans when they should 
have been properly classified as expenditures. In effect, the 
auditor indicates that that means that there should have been 
added to your massive 
  



 
May 27, 1988 

 

1620 
 

deficit of $1.2 billion yet another $182 million. And to put it 
another way, your total deficit during that election year was 1.4 
billion rather than 1.2 billion — an overrun of $1 billion in the 
election year. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, have you adjusted your consolidated 
deficit upwards to reflect this deception? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, having slaved over Public Accounts 
to get them before this Assembly, and having to wait now eight 
days before we finally get a question on Public Accounts and to 
find out, Mr. Speaker, that this is exactly the debate that we 
have had since 1986 when this government established the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Crown, is an absolute 
shock to me, Mr. Speaker, because this was supposed to be the 
big year on all the abuses and the corruption that they were 
alleging on Public Accounts and to find . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. We’re having a 
little problem hearing the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — . . . to find out that after all of this perusal 
and eight days later that they’ve had nothing to back up the 
allegations they’ve made for the last four months, I think 
indicates the management of this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is exactly the same debate that we’ve had since SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) was set up. 
We set up and made it abundantly clear at the time that Sask 
Property Management was to deal and handle many of the 
assets of the province of Saskatchewan. It is now funding many 
of the new capital construction. And if we had have done it the 
old way certainly we would have had different results, but, Mr. 
Speaker, several other provinces, including the province of 
Manitoba, have used this type of vehicle to manage government 
capital assets. The House has ample opportunity, has now done 
for two years, to debate in estimates the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Crown if they disagree with the concept. This is 
the same argument not we’ve had for the last two years. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A supplement, Mr. Speaker. I think, Mr. 
Minister, if it comes to the credibility between you and the 
auditor, the people of Saskatchewan will choose the auditor. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I just want to indicate to you, Mr. Minister, are 
you aware the this latest deception by you has added to the 
people of Saskatchewan, to every man, woman and child, 
another $182 to the provincial debt, and they didn’t even know 
about it. 
 
I want to ask you then as a supplement: when are you going to 
put an end to your cavalier attitude towards the fiscal 
management of this province? When can the people of 
Saskatchewan expect you to give some fiscal management to 
this province, and also some honesty and decency? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, last night I met with one of 
the rating agencies, and the message that they made clear is that 
they believe that the efforts of the government to reduce the 
deficit, control expenditures and get the books of the province 
in good order is outstanding, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, others across Canada, including the investment 
houses across Canada . . . Mr. Speaker, right now 
Saskatchewan’s ability to borrow is virtually on par with that of 
the national government, Mr. Speaker. That of itself, that of 
itself, Mr. Speaker, proves the management of this government. 
 
So you disagree with the property management Crown. Mr. 
Speaker, fundamentally, all that the property management 
Crown does is amortize the cost off a building over the length 
of the use of the building, Mr. Speaker. In the past it was all 
paid for in one lump payment when a building was built, even 
though the building may be used . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, order. 
 

Government Advertising 1986-87 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — My question, Mr. Speaker, is also to the 
Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, the Public Accounts for 
1986-87 show that the line departments, the regular government 
departments, spent some $14 million on advertising that year. 
Now you know that that particular figure does not include any 
advertising by Crown corporations, including the very massive 
advertising program your government had for the home 
program in the pre-election period in 1986. 
 
Could you give this House an estimate of how much, including 
all Crowns, was spent on advertising by your government 
during the fiscal year 1986-87? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows full 
well that he can ask the questions of the Crown corporations, 
but I have some interesting statistics and I ask the press to listen 
to the argument. If their argument is that we spent too much 
money, if their argument is that we spent too much money at, I 
believe, roughly $13 million, I have done a comparison, Mr. 
Speaker, which I’m prepared to give to the press, which shows 
that the advertising rates charged by weekly newspapers, radio 
and television stations, daily newspapers, what the rates were in 
1982 compared to what the rates were in 1986, Mr. Speaker. 
Okay? 
 
Part of the higher cost is the rates charged by the outlets. It 
turns out on a comparison, Mr. Speaker, of the rates charged 
legitimately by the outlets, we in fact spent less in 1986 in an 
election year than the NDP did in 1982, Mr. Speaker. And those 
facts, Mr. Speaker, I am sure are a real shock to the opposition, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the 
Minister of Finance who treats financial reporting like a 
  



 
May 27, 1988 

 

1621 
 

game of Clue — a clue here and a clue there. 
 
Mr. Minister, you know and I know and everyone knows that 
your government has only given out bits of information in the 
Crown Corporations Committee about government advertising. 
The full and accurate picture of government advertising is 
probably closer to $25 million as opposed to $14 million. 
 
Now the public expects complete and full disclosure of how 
you spent their tax dollars. And they’re tired, I might say, of 
your very silly games. For once will you listen to the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order! Order. I’m afraid I’ll 
have to ask you to repeat that question because your mike 
wasn’t on. But I was getting up because it sounded like you 
were making more of a speech than getting to the question. 
Order. Order. Order. Order. And we have had some of that this 
morning. I think we’ll all admit that maybe we should get back 
to question and answers as it is intended. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well I’m sorry if I seem to be making a 
speech, Mr. Speaker. I wouldn’t be the first one in question 
period that’s done that. 
 
Anyway, my question is: for once will you be open and honest 
with the people of Saskatchewan, give them a full and complete 
accounting of what your government spent on advertising 
dollars, and tell them what you spent in 1986-87? Is it closer to 
the $25 million figure as opposed to the $14 million figure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I want the public to know the 
reason that the NDP did not ask questions for nearly eight days 
on Public Accounts is because that they have been deliberately 
misleading the people of the province as to advertising, and got 
caught short, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when they get the exact information in Public Accounts, 
which it took them eight days in total, Mr. Speaker, and screw 
up their courage to ask a question, they find out that the amount 
spent on advertising in an election year, Mr. Speaker — in and 
election year — I less than they spent in an election year in 
1982; but secondly, far less than they have been putting out in 
their advertising, far less than they used in the by-election, Mr. 
Speaker, and far less than they have been telling their party 
members in The Commonwealth, Mr. Speaker. They got caught 
short, Mr. Speaker. That is why it took them eight days to screw 
up their courage and ask a question about . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. 
 

Cost of Air Travel 
 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Finance and it deals with the Public Accounts. 
Mr. Minister, we see from the Public Accounts that the 
ministers of your government spent almost $300,000 — 
$300,000 flying around in the last fiscal year. That’s bad 
enough, Mr. Minister, as a waste of 

taxpayers’ dollars. What’s worse is that you spent $1.2 million 
— 1 million, 200 thousand dollars over and above that, on Air 
Canada tickets. Mr. Minister, the rest of Canada has to wait to 
purchase shares in Air Canada, but it seems you’ve got the 
jump on them. What’s happened, what’s happened, Mr. 
Minister, to restraint, to belt tightening, to living within your 
means — or doesn’t that apply to your government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I don’t believe, Mr. Speaker, for a minute, 
that the people of this province expect their government to 
simply sit in the city of Regina, and that’s the argument being 
made. 
 
Yes, our Premier has gone around trying to promote the 
province of Saskatchewan to the rest of the world, and we 
believe that that’s what must be done for the economic 
development of this province, and that should be done, Mr. 
Speaker. And ministers do travel outside the province to deal 
and try to promote this province or promote the interests of this 
province, be it Ottawa, at meetings in Ottawa or Toronto and 
Vancouver, or wherever, Mr. Speaker. And I say that people 
believe that governments must do that. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, as well, that when we compare the travel 
of those front-benchers now in opposition whose idea of 
economic development was to have the then-premier of the 
province go to Moscow to promote economic development — 
that was his trip to Russia, his trip to China, and his trip to 
Cuba, Mr. Speaker — that’s where they travelled. We’re trying 
to get jobs and economic opportunity, and we’ll continue to do 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: I’d like to just remind the hon. minister that he, 
too, is tending to make a speech. And I think we should all try 
to adhere to the principles of question period. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the same 
minister. Mr. Minister, if you consider that a trip to New 
Zealand, by yourself, to study the Maoris has benefitted 
Saskatchewan, we’d sure like to know what the benefits are. 
 
Mr. Minister, $1.2 million works out to $4,800 you spent on Air 
Canada tickets every working day in the last fiscal year. That 
leaves very few places in this world unvisited, Mr. Minister. For 
$4,800 you could be staffing 12 new hospital beds each day 
around the clock. Mr. Minister, when the waiting lists for 
hospitals reaches 10,000 and more, your government is 
spending that kind of money on travelling. Where are your 
priorities? How do you justify these kinds of travelling costs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, they resurrect a trip back in 
1983 which I think further proves how weak they have in 
criticizing the Public Accounts that they have now waited for 
eight days to ask questions. 
  



 
May 27, 1988 

 

1622 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. I think 
we’re becoming somewhat perhaps enthusiastic this morning 
and perhaps we should allow the minister to give his answers 
without too much interruption. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. I just repeat that request. You 
have asked the question; now allow the minister to give the 
answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Public Accounts from 1983 wasn’t the 
question, but that’s how far back I guess we have to go because 
there’s nothing in this year’s Public Accounts, Mr. Speaker. So 
they’re going back now to 1983. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, our ministers have been to Geneva. For the 
first time provinces are involved in the General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade, and that happens to be in Geneva. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskTel has just signed a contract — $10 million 
for a new project in Tanzania. We are signing projects in China. 
We are signing projects around the world, Mr. Speaker, because 
of the initiative of this government to take the opportunities for 
Saskatchewan people beyond the borders of this province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We can’t draw barriers up and 
draw the great wall of Saskatchewan around this province 
anywhere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the world is changing, and Saskatchewan must be 
part of that, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan must sell its products 
around the world. And, Mr. Speaker, people must talk. 
Saskatchewan people must talk to Marubeni-Hitachi about 
opening a new manufacturing facility here in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. And Hoechst chemicals from Germany . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Lay-off Notices for PCS Workers 
 

Mr. Mitchell: — My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the minister 
responsible for the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, and it 
concerns the lay-offs at the Cory mine. 
 
First of all, Mr. Minister, I join the workers at the mine in 
demanding the resignation of Paul Schoenhals and Chuck 
Childers for their gross mismanagement of that corporation 
which had led to this lay-off decision. 
 
Mr. Minister, when your government introduced The Potash 
Resources Act, you told us time and again that the purpose of 
the Act was to protect jobs by spreading the risk throughout the 
industry. Why then hasn’t this Act been proclaimed so that it 
would have offered the Cory workers some measure of 
protection? And when do you intend to proclaim it, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well certainly the government will be 
proclaiming the legislation at the appropriate time. 
 
I do remind the hon. member that one of the effects of the 
legislation and the legislative initiatives and the initiatives of 
this government is that we have been successful in having the 
price of potash up nearly 100 per cent over what it was in April 
of 1987 in the last year. Prices are up, and up substantially. 
 
With regard to the spreading of the risk, I can tell the hon. 
member that we are advised that other mines will be having 
their inventory shut-down as the potash corporation has done. 
 
I did make it clear to a question from the Leader of the 
Opposition the other day, and I’m surprised that the NDP, 
particularly the member from Quill Lakes, is opposed to this. 
What we tried to do in this case with the indefinite lay-off is 
that in order to bring inventories in balance with sales we could 
have shut all mines so that they were operating at about nine 
months rather than 11. We chose to keep the other mines 
operating for the normal 11 months of the year, and it certainly 
impacted on one mine. I say that. 
 
But it is to the benefit of the other mines that they will be 
operating for 11 months of the year rather than nine months . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The member from Quill Lakes, Mr. 
Speaker — and I wish he would put it into the record, formally 
into the record, his opposition to this policy of the potash 
corporation which is a benefit to his riding, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I believe the . . . Order, 
order. Order. Order. Order. I think that hon. members . . . I 
know it’s Friday morning and sometimes things happen on 
Friday morning, but I’d just like to ask hon. members to try to 
adhere to the principles of question period, and I now 
recognize, I believe, the member for Fairview, if he has another 
question. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A new question to 
the same minister. Mr. Minister, you know perfectly well that 
the price increases in potash had nothing whatever to do with 
your legislation last fall — nothing at all. Nothing at all. 
 
Secondly, from your own answer and your own admission, 
what you’ve done has been drastically unfair to the people 
working at the Cory potash mine. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — The lay-offs coming in the other mines will 
be lay-offs for short . . . relatively short periods of time and 
won’t even resemble the kinds of lay-offs that you’ve 
accomplished at Cory. 
 
Now this just shows, Minister, that you were never interested in 
protecting the jobs of potash miners when you introduced that 
legislation. The only reason you introduced it was so that you 
could create the impression of doing something. 
  



 
May 27, 1988 

 

1623 
 

Now yesterday the Saskatoon city council members expressed 
their concern about the effects of this lay-offs, and they asked 
that your government introduces some mitigating measures. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you intend to introduce such mitigating 
measures, and what are they? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The day that Bev Dyck represents all 
Saskatoon city councillors, I think, is a surprising day for most 
Saskatoon city councillors — Bev Dyck, former NDP member, 
part of the potash nationalization group of the members 
opposite. 
 
I have said now on three occasions, Mr. Speaker, that yes, in 
order to bring inventories in balance with the sales, we could 
have shut all of the potash mines under PCS (Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) down for three months. We have 
had requests from Lanigan and towns that are affected, and 
they’re concerned about their long-term stability and what 
could the government do about it. We’ve had those requests. 
 
Yes, it impacts on Cory. But, Mr. Speaker, one of the objectives 
was to try and give the assurance in those other areas that they 
would be working for what is normally the 11 months of the 
year. We have communicated that with the employees. 
 
Yes, it impacts on Cory, but there are some choices that we had 
to make, and we did make them so that there would be longer 
work at the other mines, Mr. Speaker. I know that’s difficult; 
it’s not an easy decision, but I believe, Mr. Speaker, in the 
interest of the people of the province and to those communities, 
it’s a most fair decision. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to address the minister, take up his 
challenge, and address the question to him in respect to this 
unfair closure of the Cory potash mine. 
 
Mr. Minister, the question here is the lives and the welfare of 
200 families. That’s the issue. The fairness of your action is the 
issue, Mr. Minister. I ask you, Mr. Minister: when are you 
going to remove your ideological straight-jacket and start 
respecting the worker and their families at the Cory mine? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member’s question 
from a challenge from the minister responsible of the potash 
corporation can be interpreted in no way other than he objects 
to the new policy that we have announced. And yes, it impacts 
on Cory, but, Mr. Speaker, the impact is beneficial to the 
communities where the other mines are located. Yes, we could 
have brought them all down, said they’re all closed three 
months of the year, Mr. Speaker, or we could keep the other 
mines open when we try and balance the inventories with sales, 
Mr. Speaker. 

I am most pleased, Mr. Speaker, to take the member from Quill 
Lakes’ stated opposition to this policy, which will mean 
shut-downs for a long period of time in his community of 
Lanigan, and, Mr. Speaker, I am shocked that he would take 
that position. I have made it abundantly clear; yes, it was a 
difficult decision, Mr. Speaker, but I believe, in the interest of 
most of the potash workers in this province, it’s a fair one, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Supplement, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, are 
you aware that your government destroyed the careers of over 
400 health workers of this province, that you destroyed over 
hundreds of highway workers when you laid them off? 
 
I’m asking you, Mr. Minister, today: will you reverse this here 
cruel decision; will you in fact give some decency and some 
respect for the Cory workers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If there was ever a decision that cost 
Saskatchewan potash workers jobs, it was the nationalization of 
the industry which set up two new mines in New Brunswick, 
Canada, Mr. Speaker, two new mines with Saskatchewan 
taxpayers’ money to compete with Saskatchewan taxpayers’ 
jobs — Saskatchewan mining jobs, Saskatchewan potash jobs, 
Mr. Speaker, because of the political ideology of the New 
Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker, of which he was a member. 
 
You put them out of work, you created surpluses, you created 
over-supply and over-capacity which threatened the whole 
industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are taking the decisions to bring stability to the 
industry, stability to jobs in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Welfare Reform Projects 
 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce 
today two further welfare reform projects. First of all, there is 
community works projects have been announced, totalling 
$816,759 in 49 Saskatchewan communities. 
 
These communities will hire 179 welfare recipients to do 
community improvements on a total of 57 projects. The 
community projects will redirect welfare expenditures to create 
jobs and provide on-the-job training. All clients will earn more 
while working than they would have received on welfare. 
 
The second project extends welfare cheque pic’ up for single 
employables to Saskatchewan’s four largest cities. The plan 
requires all unemployed single employables under the age of 50 
to pick up their welfare cheques in Saskatoon, Regina, Moose 
Jaw, and Prince Albert, at our Social Services offices. 
 
In the month of May, 349 cases, or 18.3 per cent of clients 
  



 
May 27, 1988 

 

1624 
 

did not pick up their cheques. Where the cheque is not picked 
up, it is cancelled, and a follow-up done to attempt to locate the 
client. 
 
The city breakdown of unpicked-up cheques is as follows: 
Regina, 128 — 16.3 per cent of cheques not picked up; 
Saskatoon, 189 — 19.8 per cent of cheques not picked up; 
Moose Jaw, 16 — 15.2 per cent of cheques not picked up; 
Prince Albert, 16 — 24.2 per cent of cheques not picked up. 
 
I might say, Mr. Speaker, that this is the first month for welfare 
cheque pick-up in Saskatoon, which might explain the higher 
rate for that city, and that in the first month we usually have a 
higher rate of failure to pick up. As yet we do not have a reason 
for the 24.2 per cent default rate in Prince Albert, where most 
single employables are already working on work training 
projects such as Par Industries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am encouraged with the success of welfare 
reform, which has reduced the number of people on welfare by 
5 per cent in the last year. These reforms have permitted record 
high payments for families and disabled people, and at the same 
time have saved the taxpayers $13 million in the last tax year. 
 
I’m pleased to give you this report, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is true to 
the pattern that we’ve seen, unfortunately, in this Legislative 
Assembly that the minister comes to this Assembly today to 
express, unfortunately in a tone almost of glee, that the attack 
on the poor of the province of Saskatchewan continues by the 
Government of Saskatchewan and Department of Social 
Services. 
 
I don’t know when it will be, Mr. Speaker, that this government 
will realize that people, the poorest of the poor . . . There are 
approximately double — twice as many people receiving a 
living and families receiving social assistance in Saskatchewan 
today as there were when the PC government inherited the 
responsibility of governing this province. And ever since that 
time, under the guise of welfare reform, we’ve seen attack after 
attack. 
 
I don’t know when the government of the day will realize that 
the poorest of the poor in our province would prefer to be 
working for wages, not working for welfare, and not some 
half-baked scheme of people working for two weeks and then 
two weeks off, and doing that at minimum wage. It makes far 
greater sense to all the people of the province — and 
particularly those who are directly affected, those who are 
without work — to be working for wages, not working for 
welfare. 
 
It’s a sad statement, Mr. Speaker, that in Saskatchewan today 
we are condemned in the nation by having the second highest 
rate of poverty and that there are kids going hungry to our 
schools throughout the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I guess one of the more offensive comments that the minister 
makes today is to speak about the directive for 

welfare recipients to be required to come in and pick up their 
cheques on a regular basis, which is part of a continuing process 
of demeaning those who more than anything else, Mr. Speaker, 
would like to stand with pride and dignity, to stand with 
self-respect and the self-respect that comes with being 
self-supporting and self-sufficient. 
 
Yet what we have is the minister saying today that we’re going 
to single out those people in yet another way, and exacerbate 
the indignity, the indignity of being required to depend on 
social assistance in the province of Saskatchewan because this 
government has failed to stimulate the economy and to provide 
the environment where people in Saskatchewan can be working 
for wages instead of working for welfare. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that it is a shame that we have the 
Minister of Social Services standing in this Assembly today and 
stating as progress, that these are the kinds of initiatives that he 
sees as being appropriate to deal with a very, very serious 
problem in the province of Saskatchewan — a problem, as I 
said before, that has doubled in the term of this government’s 
office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, could I ask leave of the 
Assembly to introduce some guests who have just arrived in the 
galleries. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you 
and to members of the House 16 students from the Princess 
Alexandra Community School in Saskatoon. The school is in 
the constituency represented by our leader, the member from 
Riversdale, who unfortunately cannot be here today. 
 
These 16 students are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and 
they’re accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Donna Hrytzak, and 
by chaperons, Becky Hanson and Judy Thiesson. I’ll be meeting 
them after this introduction to have some pictures taken, and out 
on the lawn to have some drinks and to answer their questions. 
 
But I would like members of the Assembly to welcome this 
group of students to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 38 — An Act to amend The Residential Tenancies 
Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. 
member, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The Residential 
Tenancies Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
  



 
May 27, 1988 

 

1625 
 

Bill No. 39 — An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 
Sharing Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — On behalf of the hon. member, I move 
first reading of a Bill to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 19 — An Act to amend The Statute Law 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, by leave of the 
Assembly, seconded by the Minister of Health: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 19, An Act to 
amend The Statute Law, be discharged and the Bill 
referred to the Standing Committee on Non-Controversial 
Bills. 

 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill 
ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-Controversial Bills. 
 

Bill No. 24 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 
Agricultural Returns Stabilization Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to propose second 
reading of Bill No. 24, an Act respecting The Saskatchewan 
Agricultural Returns Stabilization Act. 
 
As a result of this amendment, the limit to loans and advances 
to stabilization under The Saskatchewan Agricultural Returns 
Stabilization Act, as specified under section 11, will be raised 
from $100 million to $200 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to help members understand the purpose of this 
amendment I would like briefly to provide some background on 
the actual legislation being amended. 
 
The Saskatchewan Agricultural Returns Stabilization Act is the 
enabling legislation for stabilization plans in the province of 
Saskatchewan. These plans include the cow-calf-to-finish 
market insurance plan, the feeder-to-finish market insurance 
plan, the Saskatchewan hog assured returns program, and the 
national tripartite stabilization for hogs and lambs. 
 
Under the provincially operated plans, loans are made under 
this legislation when pay-outs exceed levies. Section 11 of the 
Act provides that these loans cannot exceed $100 million. 
Current loans to provincial market insurance plans under the 
Act are at $89.7 million, Mr. Speaker. If further loans are 
required, the $100 million limit could soon be reached. While 
the requirements for loans may not exceed $100 million, the 
volatility of livestock prices could change loan requirements in 
the future. Therefore, the plans would cease to operate as 

currently structured when this limit is met. 
 
(1045) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this would mean that not only all stabilization 
plans now in existence would cease to operate, but that no new 
stabilization plans could be introduced. Our intent, therefore, is 
to remove any possibility of such an occurrence, and I believe 
the farmers of Saskatchewan will welcome this change which 
ensures that all stabilization plans will continue with the 
provision of the new $200 million limit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with new challenges and ever changing conditions 
in the agricultural industry, section 11, The Saskatchewan 
Agricultural Returns Stabilization Act which was introduced in 
1978, has become outdated and simply does not meet the needs 
of the farmers today. 
 
I believe our amendments to raise the limit from 100 to $200 
million, under The Saskatchewan Agricultural Returns 
Stabilization Act, 1988, will give Saskatchewan farmers 
confidence in knowing their stabilization plans will continue 
and not be jeopardized by limits set by a previous government 
in 1978. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 24, an Act to 
amend The Saskatchewan Agricultural Returns Stabilization 
Act. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we on this side of the House will certainly never stand 
in the way of any Bill that would extend moneys to farmers 
involved in the livestock industry. However, there are a few 
points that I’d like to bring out and there’s some questions I’ll 
be asking later on in committee. 
 
As the member said, the SHARP program, the 
cow-calf-to-finish, and the feeder-to-finish programs are 
affected by this Act, and the $100 million cap has been 
approached at the figure $81 million or thereabouts. 
 
We in Saskatchewan now have seen that the beef and pork 
prices have been relatively good. However, pork has come 
down the last little while, which is not so good. But we’ve seen 
the plans . . . the levies exceeding the pay-outs, whereby the 
SHARP program has come down to about a $16 million deficit. 
 
The cow-calf part of the beef stabilization is coming down. The 
only part that’s not coming down right now is the 
feeder-to-finish, and it only has slightly increased in the deficit. 
Deficit in the beef stabilization, I believe, is about $65 million 
and declining. And as I said, the SHARP is 16 million and 
declining. 
 
A few questions come to mind when you’re asking the House to 
double the limit. And I have two queries that I will be bringing 
up and questioning on. One is, I have to ask myself, is there a 
reason that the limit has to be doubled with regards to the 
federal tripartite program, that Saskatchewan is in the SHARP 
(Saskatchewan hog assured returns program) and may be going 
in the beef program? That question comes to mind. Is there 
something, some cost that we don’t know about right 
  



 
May 27, 1988 

 

1626 
 

now, because the levies are coming down? 
 
The other thing on the positive side, Mr, Deputy Speaker, is that 
I would like to think that another reason for doubling this cap 
on expenditures in these programs would be that we would not 
be going into the federal tripartite program on beef whereby we 
may at some point in time, need more money from the 
provincial program. Because I feel, as many livestock producers 
feel, that the federal program is a much inferior program, 
compared to the Saskatchewan beef stabilization program. 
 
So I, with a bit of optimism, I’m hoping — and I’ll be asking 
these questions in committee — I’m hoping that this is a good 
indication that we will not in fact be going into the federal 
tripartite plan. 
 
We know that the SHARP program is being phased out. It’s at 
the 70 percent level and will be phased out over the next four 
years now. And if we go into the tripartite program in beef, it 
will also be phased out. So there is some question whether the 
limit would have to be doubled, and if it was an arbitrary figure 
or what. But these questions I’m sure can be answered quite 
effectively in committee. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just would like to say now that I will 
be asking some of these questions, and a few more. And I hope 
that the government has seen fit to drop the tripartite plan and 
continue with the Saskatchewan proposals. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 9 — An Act to amend The Fire Prevention Act, 
1980 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, The Fire Prevention Act 
provides for, among other things, the making of regulations, 
setting standards for the installation of oil burners. 
 
Currently the inspection of oil burners is performed by gas 
inspectors of the department. You will be aware that gas 
inspection is being transferred to the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation. It is necessary, therefore, to amend the sections of 
The Fire Prevention Act dealing with appointment of inspectors 
so that those same gas inspectors can continue to inspect and 
regulate oil burner installations. 
 
We believe it to be in the interest of efficiency and 
cost-effectiveness to have gas inspectors perform this work. 
Qualifications of these inspectors include experience in the 
plumbing and heating field where they have also accumulated 
experience in the installation, repair, and maintenance of the oil 
burners. If they were not utilized, it would mean that other staff 
members would have to be trained, and for the few oil burners 
installed these days it would be extremely costly to do this. 
 
I therefore move, Mr. Speaker, the second reading of Bill No. 9, 
The Fire Prevention Amendment Act. 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is 
known to you and the House that this Bill originally was sent to 
the Non-Controversial Bills Committee, but in the process of 
study of the Bill in committee it was noted that the Bill is 
controversial because it goes beyond simply cosmetics or 
housekeeping. 
 
It allows now the chief fire inspector to hire inspectors outside 
of the regular public service. It is clearly, therefore, an attempt 
and another move to privatization of a very important public 
service, one in which it is important to have independence and 
to protect against any possible situation where there may be 
wheeling and dealing or unfair acts where deals might be made 
and inspections passed, simply because somebody knows 
somebody. That’s one of the reasons why certain functions of 
government are important and ought to be kept in the public 
domain. 
 
Those are serious concerns, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that is 
why the Bill has been sent back to this Assembly of 
consideration by the Assembly as a whole. The critic of this 
Bill, the member from Moose Jaw South, will want to say more 
on this and will study it further. And until he is able do that, I at 
this point would like to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

 
Bill No. 25 — An Act to amend The Occupational Health 

and Safety Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 
today to speak to second reading of what I consider to be a very 
important Bill for the safety of the workers and the general 
public in Saskatchewan and throughout all of Canada. 
 
In order to adopt the work place hazardous materials 
information system, which we’ll refer to as WHMIS, it is 
necessary to amend The Occupational Health and Safety Act. 
This has to be done to give the power to make appropriate 
regulations to implement WHMIS, that is the work place 
hazardous material information system. 
 
It is required to provide a mechanism to ensure confidentiality 
of trade secret information, even though this information under 
the new system will be available in case of emergency on a 
central computer which will be located, for the sake of 
convenience, in Ontario, because Saskatchewan only has about 
1.5 per cent of the production of hazardous goods in Canada. So 
Ontario is the logical location for the national computer that 
will store this information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Deputy Speaker, just to give a little 
background as to the necessity for this particular type of 
legislation, this has been studied for years and years, and the 
most recent data is 1984, where it’s estimated that the social 
costs due to hazardous materials in the work place amount to 
$600 million annually in Canada. 
 
The United States Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration has indicated that approximately one in four 
workers are exposed to one or more hazardous 
  



 
May 27, 1988 

 

1627 
 

chemicals. So therefore the provinces and the federal 
government have been meeting over the last few years, and I 
can say that I have personally been at these meetings and have 
tried to develop a system to deal with the problem of dangerous 
chemicals in the work place. The problem has been quite 
serious. In 1985 there were an estimated 575,000 different 
chemical products in North America. Hazardous materials may 
cause or contribute to heart ailments, kidney damage, lung 
damage, sterility, cancer, burns, rashes; and they may also cause 
fire, explosions, and asphyxia. 
 
Due to the serious nature of these health problems and hazards, 
and the ongoing lack of information and the inability of health 
and safety organizations and the medical community to keep up 
with the technical changes in the chemical industry, the 
province of Saskatchewan, together with other provinces and 
the Dominion of Canada, have agreed to this Canada-wide 
system. 
 
This system, the work place hazardous materials information 
system, establishes a uniform system of identification of 
hazardous chemicals. It requires labelling, in a uniform way, of 
hazardous chemicals in the work place and throughout society. 
And there is an agreement between employees, employers, and 
government regulators that this is necessary and this is the type 
of system that should be adopted. 
 
And what this system does is that it sets up a process where you 
have a central information computer, which will be established 
in Ontario, to which industry and workers will have access to 
ascertain the dangerous nature of chemicals, the chemical 
composition, and the medical treatment, should be necessary. 
 
Now one of the problems that arose was that in Saskatchewan 
we can’t deal with hazardous chemicals on our own because 
most of them are manufactured outside Saskatchewan; many of 
them come from outside Canada; they have chemical formulas 
which are trade secrets. And up until now it has not been 
possible in all cases to get the trade secrets and the nature of the 
danger and what should be done for treatment in this province 
and even in all of Canada. 
 
Under this system, all of that information will be stored in a 
central computer, and where the chemical is a trade secret, this 
system provides for the release of that information for medical 
purposes on an emergency basis so that there will be no such 
thing as hiding behind a trade secret when health is involved. 
 
On the other hand, the system also ensures that there is not a 
leak of information that competitors can use. This will lead to 
the co-operation of world-wide chemical manufactures and the 
requirement that they give this information on a confidential 
basis to the central information computer system so that it can 
be available in an emergency. The medical community, the 
emergency response teams, will have access to the central 
computer to get on a 24-hour basis the necessary information 
for all of these 575,000 different chemicals that are available in 
North America. 

(1100) 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, I would say that this has been a very 
fruitful and co-operative area of protection for workers and for 
society in general. And it is unusual, unfortunately too unusual, 
that we do not have the kind of co-operation that we had here 
where the employers, the manufacturers, the employees, labour 
organizers, and the governments have all agreed upon a system 
that will benefit everyone. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to have this Bill 
introduced and debated today, and I am sure that the members 
opposite and the public will welcome the introduction of this 
Bill. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
am pleased to have the opportunity to respond to Bill 25, An 
Act to amend The Occupational Health and Safety Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as the minister has already explained, the 
Bill essentially seeks to keep Saskatchewan in line with other 
jurisdictions across the nation regarding a relatively recent 
national program to monitor and provide information about 
hazardous material in the work place. And I certainly recognize 
and endorse the process that has taken place, where it has been 
truly a tripartite conclusion in the interest of all parties that’s 
been reached, that has involved labour and business and 
government working in co-operation. 
 
Occupational health and safety is a very important issue, and as 
the minister has said, one which we have had number of 
problems dealing with adequately over the years. All too often, 
when people consider work place injuries, we’re inclined to 
think of the more dramatic kinds of injuries — things such as 
the long fall or the broken bone or the extreme burn. And not to 
make light of those at all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we must also 
recognize that just in Saskatchewan alone over the last three 
years, as a matter of fact, injuries have taken the lives of 81 
workers within our province; 25 in 1985, 29 in 1986, and 
unfortunately another 27 last year. 
 
What we also must recognize, as has been said, that there are 
more and more risks that are being caused to workers in the 
work place who are required to handle dangerous chemicals and 
highly toxic substances, and all too often the workers are asked 
to handle or work with such substances that are not marked or 
not labelled, and whose hazardous properties are not widely 
known. And it is my view as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
that is a circumstance which cannot be allowed to continue. 
 
To put occupational health and safety into its context as well — 
and I’d like to do that in responding to the Bill — sometimes 
media or other will look at a dramatic, some of the more 
dramatic kinds of impacts affecting the work place, and all too 
often we’re led to believe, inaccurately, but led to believe that 
the major problem affecting, related to work loss is work 
stoppage. That is the kind of thing that will grab the headlines, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But when we look at the reality, it is clearly in the best interests 
of business people, of employees as well and, 
  



 
May 27, 1988 

 

1628 
 

maybe a little less directly, but of governments as well that we 
turn our attentions to good occupational health and safety 
approaches. 
 
Just to put this reality into a context in Saskatchewan terms over 
the past few years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me just briefly 
review the statistics related to work days lost through work 
stoppage, be that lock-out or strike, and the related . . . in each 
year the work days lost through injury. 
 
In 1983, for example, Mr. Speaker, there were some 29,000 
work days lost through work stoppage and some 599,000 work 
days in Saskatchewan lost through injury. And in that year we, 
in the province, lost 21 times as many days, work days, through 
injury as we did through work stoppage — clearly an indication 
of the importance of addressing occupational health and safety 
as related to the way it impacts and can negatively hurt both 
businesses and employees. 
 
In 1984, some 12,000 days lost by work stoppage in 
Saskatchewan, 622,000 through work injury — 50 times as 
many, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 1985, some 56,600 through work 
stoppage, 573,000 through injury — again, 10 times as many in 
that year. In 1986, 131,000 days lost through work stoppage, 
470,000 through injury — a multiple of four in that year. 
 
Interestingly enough as well, Mr. Speaker, while we’re putting 
these things into context, in 1986 in Saskatchewan we lost 9.5 
million days through unemployment work days in this province. 
And then last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 26,000 days lost 
through work stoppage, 411,000 through injury — a multiple of 
16 times as many days lost again last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
through injury as compared to work stoppage. 
 
Very clearly, tending to occupational health and safety is in the 
best interest of everyone — in the best interests of business 
people where one of the very high costs of operating businesses 
is impacted by those massive numbers of days lost through 
injury as compared to work stoppage. 
 
The questions that have to be asked related to the Bill that’s 
before us today relate to the commitment of the Saskatchewan 
government to make the legislation work. It’s not simply 
sufficient to have legislation come before this Assembly and be 
carried, and for all of us to then walk away and say we’ve done 
our job and that’s all there is to do. Clearly there has to be a 
commitment to make the legislation work. 
 
And so I give fair warning to the minister that when we move to 
committee of this, consideration of this Bill, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that I’ll be wanting to ask some questions related to 
the amount of resources that’ll be put into training, training not 
only employers but employees, and in a co-operative kind of 
way in bringing into practice this October, along with the rest of 
the country, the work place hazardous material information 
system. 
 
It will also be important as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
Government of Saskatchewan outline its plans to direct its 
resources towards the supervision or the policing of the 
legislation too. The legislation is only as good as 

it is enforced, and it will simply not be good enough, it will not 
be good enough if the explanation is that the occupational 
health and safety branch of the Department of Labour is going 
to simply reallocate presently existing resources. Clearly, this 
Bill is a new initiative which will require new resources both in 
training and in the supervising or the policing of the 
requirements of the Bill. 
 
And so accordingly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do look forward to 
hearing the minister’s plans in that regard. It is my view that 
this Bill is a step in the right direction, that it will contribute to 
increased safety and security in health of working people in the 
province of Saskatchewan, consistent with the initiative being 
taken across the nation. And consistent with that then, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I simply wish to indicate that this Bill does 
have my support, and I will be voting in support of the Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 10 — An Act respecting the Licensing of Persons 
who Perform Work of Electrical Installation or Sell 

Electrical Equipment 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce for second reading The Electrical Licensing Act. 
 
Members will be aware that we are currently administering the 
electrical licence and inspection of electrical installations under 
The Electrical Inspection and Licensing Act. 
 
It is the proposal of this government to repeal that Act and 
replace it with an Electrical Licensing Act and Electrical 
Inspection Act. This division of activity will allow us to move 
the inspection to SaskPower where they can be integrated with 
the corporation’s own field activities and with their own 
computerized accounting and control systems. 
 
The Bill I’m speaking to today is The Electrical Licensing Act 
which will be administered and enforced by the Department of 
Environment and Public Safety. 
 
The Electrical Licensing Act provides for the licensing of 
electrical installation, contractors, distributors, and supply 
houses who wholesale electrical equipment. This new Bill 
complements The Electrical Inspection Act in that definitions, 
issuance of orders, appeal procedures, penalties, and coming 
into force are very similar. 
 
The provisions of this Bill, with respect to appeals, licensing of 
contractors and tradesmen, search and seizure, the reverse onus 
clauses, penalties and limitations for prosecution are very 
similar to those in The Gas Licensing Act which was approved 
by the Non-Controversial Bills Committee. Mr. Speaker, I do 
not think it necessary to infringe upon your valuable time by 
listing them here again. 
 
This Bill is part of the package we have put together to improve 
efficiency in the inspection of electrical installation. Moreover, 
it provides for the improvement 
  



 
May 27, 1988 

 

1629 
 

of licensing procedures and remove some of the more 
repressive clauses of the old Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I therefore move second reading of a Bill, Bill No. 
10, An Act respecting The Licensing of Persons who Perform 
Work of Electrical Installation or Sell Electrical Equipment. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, I think I can clarify the position of the 
opposition on this Bill. The Electrical Inspection Act is quite 
controversial. This is The Electrical Licensing Act. We stand 
opposed to the transfer of the electrical inspection to SPC 
(Saskatchewan Power Corporation). We think that should 
continue a public function done by public officers. But that’s a 
different Bill; that’s Electrical Inspection Act. 
 
This legislation simply allows the licensing of electrical 
contractors to continue in the department as it always has. As 
such, it is non-controversial and in fact was at the 
Non-Controversial Bills Committee, would have gone through, 
except an amendment was needed. 
 
While I’m on my feet, I may say that we could save a lot of 
time in this House if we allowed the Non-Controversial Bills 
Committee to make minor amendments, rather than bringing 
them back because some printer forgot a dot or a title 
somewhere. We really need to change that committee so that 
minor amendments can be made. 
 
I therefore say, Mr. Speaker, that we’ll be voting in favour of it. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 33 — An Act respecting the Registration of 
Leafcutter Beekeepers 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, as members know, alfalfa 
seed has become a valuable cash crop in Saskatchewan. We 
have developed not only our alfalfa seed industry, Mr. Speaker, 
but also a secondary industry, leafcutter bee cocoons. 
 
The leafcutter bee is essential to the production of alfalfa seeds. 
This is an export market for leafcutter bee cocoons, provided 
that we can maintain a disease-free industry. We have consulted 
with those involved with the leafcutter bee industry on several 
occasions to determine how we can maintain our disease-free 
situation. At the request of Saskatchewan Alfalfa Seed 
Producers’ Association, we are pleased to introduce an Act that 
is specifically designed for the alfalfa leafcutter bee. 
 
The industry is concerned that no one has a current list of 
keepers of alfalfa leafcutter bees in our province. There are 
diseases and mites which can affect leafcutter bees that could 
spread to and within our province. Not knowing who is in 
control or who is in the business makes prevention programs, 
information, and control impossible at this time. 
 
For example, chalkbrood disease is a fungus of leafcutter bee 
larvae prevalent in Alberta and the U.S. in alfalfa 
seed-producing areas, but not yet present in 

Saskatchewan. It causes production of a mass of spores killing 
the larvae. 
 
(1115) 
 
The Act is designed to provide mandatory registration of 
leafcutter beekeepers in the province. The resultant list would 
be used basically for disseminating information, particularly 
concerning disease. Now inspection of producer premises is 
contemplated. The Department of Agriculture estimates that 
there are approximately 300 leafcutter beekeepers at present. 
 
This Act contains no provision for inspection, detention or 
destruction of bees. There will be negligible cost to the 
operation of the Act. The department presently employs a 
provincial apiculturist whose principle area — I think that’s 
supposed to be apiculturist, but I don’t know — whose principal 
area is honey bees, and an apiculture specialist whose principal 
area is leafcutter bees. There are no employees to hire. There 
would be a small cost to establish a computerized mailing list 
and mailing costs for information which can be handled within 
existing budget resources of the Department of Agriculture. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, this Act will assist leafcutter bee 
producers, their dissemination of information. Disease control 
can be facilitated. Extension information can be distributed to 
producers which can make the industry grow and be more 
productive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I therefore move second reading of Bill No. 33, 
An Act respecting the Registration of Leafcutter Beekeepers. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I am in support of the registration of leafcutter bees, 
the people who raise leafcutter bees. However, there will be 
some questions, and I would like to know in committee things 
like what will they be doing to prevent disease; it think this is 
very important matter. 
 
I know chalkbrood is coming into Alberta and the leafcutter bee 
keepers are afraid that without some proper testing and some 
controls . . . It’s fine to have the information disseminated; 
however, I think there probably should be . . . this should go 
further. And in fact I think that we should be looking at a 
comparison with the honey-bee Act, under which they have the 
testing procedures for materials and hives that come in from out 
of province. And I will be in contact . . . I have a number of 
people I’d like to contact — haven’t been able to yet — to 
discuss this question further with. 
 
And after that, I believe that the provincial apiarist has a role to 
play. And I also, like I say, will have a number of questions in 
committee. So until I have fully satisfied myself that this 
legislation is sufficient or not sufficient, I would like to now 
move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 34 — An Act to promote Regulatory Reform in 
Saskatchewan by repealing Certain Obsolete Statutes 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, by leave of 
  



 
May 27, 1988 

 

1630 
 

the Assembly, seconded by the Minister of Health: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 34, An Act to 
promote Regulatory Reform in Saskatchewan by repealing 
Certain Obsolete Statutes, be discharged, and the Bill 
referred to the Standing Committee on Non-Controversial 
Bills. 

 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill 
ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-Controversial Bills. 
 

Bill No. 36 — An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley 
Authority Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the Meewasin Valley 
Authority was established in 1979. The authority includes three 
participating parties: the Government of Saskatchewan, the city 
of Saskatoon and the University of Saskatchewan. After some 
years of experience, a number of adjustments to The Meewasin 
Valley Authority Act have been identified by MVA (Meewasin 
Valley Authority) as being desirable. 
 
Many of the changes included in the Bill reflect the authority’s 
request in this respect and most of the provisions as introduced 
last fall in Bill No. 84. This Bill includes a range of provisions. 
On the technical side, it corrects an error in specifying the 
boundary of Meewasin Valley and updates a number of 
references to various statutes. It also amends the legal 
description of an easement recently granted to MVA and the 
public. 
 
Subsection 3(1) and sections 5, 6, and 7 of the Bill consolidate 
and revise provisions pertaining to the process for adopting, 
amending, or repealing MVA’s development plan. New 
requirements for a public notice and public hearing is to . . . 
pardon me, in this process are introduced, modelled on the 
provision of The Planning and Development Act of 1983. An 
outline of what the development plan may contain is now 
offered as guidance. 
 
The legal relationship between MVA’s plan and any adopted 
pursuant to The Planning and Development Act of 1983 is 
clarified. Since MVA recently adopted a new plan, these 
amendments give the authority five years to bring it into line 
with the new requirements. This is consistent with a review of 
the plan every five years as is MVA’s practice in any event. 
 
Sections 8 and 11 of the Bill deal with the enforcement 
provisions. The provisions for enforcement of by-laws for urban 
municipalities are adopted for by-laws of the authority. Less 
severe penalties for failing to comply with MVA approvals or 
requirements respecting proposed improvements are introduced. 
These are fines and court orders to comply, rather than just 
demolition orders to cease incompatible uses. These offer the 
authority more reasonable ways to achieve its objective. 
 
Time limits for MVAs review of improvements proposed for 
public and private lands are both set at 60 days in section 10 of 
the Bill, rather than the more favourable treatment for public 
land which is currently the case. The 

latter’s limit of 30 days had proved impractical for the 
authority. The term of the Meewasin Valley appeal board is 
extended from two to three years. In practice, it has met only 
infrequently. 
 
A time limit of 28 days on road closures within Meewasin 
Valley by participating parties is replaced in section 14 by the 
words “for a temporary period.” As for urban municipalities, in 
practice, more flexibility has been required. 
 
In section 9 and 20 of the Bill, changes are made reflecting a 
request by MVA to more sharply focus its mandate and 
eliminate MVA approvals which duplicate approvals already 
exercised by the provincial government under 
environment-related legislation. The authority’s approval power 
over any improvements in the river channel or along the 
shoreline is maintained, however, by the amendment in section 
9 of this Bill. 
 
In section 18 of this Bill, a provision holding MVA funding 
from participating parties from the 1987-88 and ’88-89 fiscal 
years at the same levels as provided in ’86-87 is included. This 
is consistent with the amendments being introduced for other 
urban park authorities, and implements a provincial budget 
decision announced last year to hold the line. 
 
Finally, this Bill extends existing legal protection given by the 
Act to the authority’s participating parties and to its members 
and employees; to also cover the engineering, advisory and 
planning and development committees, plus other committees 
and positions provided for by the Act. Similar changes are 
being made for Wascana and Wakamow. 
 
This amendment will help to reassure the many volunteer 
members of the committees serving the authorities. Again, this 
change has been requested by Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I therefore move second reading of Bill No. 36, 
The Meewasin Valley Authority Act. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I will 
be adjourning the debate on this for the critic, but I would like 
to make a few brief comments on the Bill to amend The 
Meewasin Valley Authority Act. 
 
I want to first of all say that this Act, just like legislation which 
established the Wascana (Centre) Authority and Wakamow 
(Valley) Authority, I think is an example of society having very 
forward-looking approaches to preserving for the future, as well 
as for the present, a very important part of our world. I think it’s 
. . . nobody would argue that our society, as societies 
throughout the world, too often with their preoccupation with 
straight decisions based on economics, have allowed the 
environment and have allowed important areas of the world in 
our cities and in other places to be destroyed and to deteriorate, 
many of which will never ever able to be replaced. 
 
So the people who had the foresight to establish, first of all, the 
Wascana authority and then the Wakamow and Meewasin, I 
think, ought to be congratulated and commended. And those of 
us who are in this legislature now, and hopefully those who will 
come after us, will 
  



 
May 27, 1988 

 

1631 
 

continue to put a very high priority on these projects. 
 
I note in the Bill, besides the technical amendments and other 
amendments, that there is again an example as we saw in the 
Wascana authority, the freezing of the funding. And I raise that, 
fully aware of the fact that there is some amount of restraint on 
the part of the government, and that there are financial 
difficulties that face Saskatchewan today. But I wonder and I 
question some of these decisions because if one really considers 
carefully the implications, it is not hard to figure out that in the 
end, by doing this kind of a freeze on funding, it will actually 
result in a higher cost. 
 
And therefore I disagree with the judgement here. If we allow 
the existing infrastructure and other things in these parks to 
deteriorate, there’s going to be a greater cost, whether it’s two 
years from now, three years from now, or five years from now. 
 
The other thing is, things that are planned for development in 
1988 and 1989, as they were in 1987 or ’86, are going to cost a 
great deal more, because of inflation, to develop in 1990 or 
1991. I would hope that the government and the authorities, and 
other parties that are party to this agreement, would keep that in 
mind when they make these kinds of decisions. 
 
Sometimes a short-term decision is going to cost a great deal 
more in the immediate and the long run. And I submit to you, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that’s what’s going to happen with 
decision, as is happening with Wascana authority, which my 
colleague from Regina Centre spoke about so well the other 
day, where the beauty of that park has deteriorated because of 
the neglect, because of the lack of adequate funding and the 
lack of adequate personnel to keep it up. I think that’s 
regrettable, and in the long run will be much more costly 
sociologically and environmentally and in hard dollars. 
 
I know that the critic for this Bill, the member from Saskatoon 
Westmount wants, as a result of that, wants to be in the House 
to speak on it and bring his views to this debate. And so on his 
behalf, I, at this point, adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1130) 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McLeod that Bill No. 12 — An Act to 
amend The Medical Profession Act, 1981 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What this 
Bill pertains to is the appeal procedure for discipline hearings 
against doctors by the council of the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
In the present system, what happens when discipline proceeding 
are launched by the council of the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons is that a doctor goes to hearing 

in front of a discipline committee, a hearing in front of his 
peers. With respect to competency, the hearing is slightly 
different inasmuch as it’s done in a clinical setting. The 
discipline committee then makes a recommendation to the 
council of the College of Physicians and Surgeons, and the 
council makes a determination as to whether or not the doctor 
should be disciplined and what the sentence should be. 
 
The doctor then has the right to appeal, and the appeal is on the 
basis of a trial de novo. It’s a mandatory appeal by trial de novo. 
And by trial de novo, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we mean a new trial, 
hearing the evidence once again. The appeal on trial de novo is 
to a tribunal, and this tribunal consists of a judge of the Court of 
Queen’s Bench, and one member appointed by the University 
of Saskatchewan — which is usually a doctor, but not 
necessarily a doctor — and a lay person appointed by the 
Minister of Health. 
 
Subsequent to that, there’s been a further appeal to the Court of 
Appeal, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What the legislation intends to do, 
that is being put forward by the government, is to remove the 
appeal by trial de novo and to substitute it with an appeal to a 
Queen’s Bench judge, as opposed to a tribunal, on the transcript 
of evidence and the record of the proceedings only. So the new 
trial is eliminated and we would, by this amendment, have an 
appeal directly to a Queen’s Bench judge alone, as opposed to 
the tribunal, and it would be on the transcript only. 
 
The Minister has said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that a trial de novo 
to a tribunal, an appeal on trial de novo to a tribunal, runs 
counter to the basic principle of our health profession’s 
legislation — that basic principle being that the people best able 
to assess matters of professional competence and conduct are 
the members of the medical profession itself. 
 
It is true, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that peer review, which is review 
by others in one’s own profession, is a very valuable tool and a 
reliable one. And like other professions, the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons use peer review to maintain the quality 
of medicine practised in Saskatchewan. But I also want to point 
out that The Medical Profession Act also recognizes the need 
for consumer input into the peer review process. And in that 
regard it provides for the appointment of three lay, non-medical 
individuals to the council of the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons. And these lay, non-medical appointments have a 
right to vote on questions of discipline where doctors are 
disciplined, when the decision of the discipline committee or 
the recommendation goes to the council, or other 
recommendations of committees of doctors, these three 
non-medical people have a right to vote on the council of the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons. 
 
This concept of more consumer input, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
carried through in the tribunal because, as I pointed out earlier, 
the tribunal consists of a judge and a University of 
Saskatchewan appointment and then a lay appointment by the 
Minister of Health. And the University of Saskatchewan 
appointment could be a doctor or a non-medical person. 
  



 
May 27, 1988 

 

1632 
 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if society wants consumer input into 
the process of health care and governing the medical profession, 
then clearly an appeal tribunal of this nature is a step in the right 
direction. And the repeal of such a provision would amount to 
the removal of one area in which the non-medical people can 
have input into the medical profession. 
 
Surely, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s in the public interest and in the 
interest of the medical profession for lay people to know and 
understand what happens in the profession. Health care, and the 
practice of medicine in particular, are of concern to the people 
of Saskatchewan. It’s one of the most important areas in which 
the government is involved and for which it has responsibility 
and it is a matter of highest priority for Saskatchewan people. 
And so it should be because the taxpayers of this province pay 
some $1.2 billion a year for their health care. 
 
But it’s not simply a question of money, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
it’s not simply a question of money; it is their health care, it is 
the health care of every man, woman, and child in this province. 
And it’s for this reason that the government involves itself in 
this area, and it’s for this reason that we’ve recognized the need 
for consumer input. And this amendment purports to remove 
that consumer input. 
 
One of the arguments for the amendment against the present 
process is that the appeal by trial de novo to an appeal tribunal 
causes delays, and no doubt there are delays, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And I share the concern expressed over these delays. 
But it’s not just setting up the tribunal that causes the delays. 
The whole process has to be reviewed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and I have been advised that it is going to be reviewed, or it is 
being reviewed, or at least review is being discussed. 
 
So I think it’s unfortunate that these amendments would come 
forward before the entire review has taken place, before the 
entire discipline process has been reviewed. For example, 
someone has suggested to me that competency hearings should 
be treated differently than discipline hearings. And I have no 
idea whether the medical profession will be looking at that, but 
it was suggested to me by a member of the medical profession 
that it should be looked at. And, indeed, if this is going to be 
looked at and changed, it may very well mean a subsequent 
change to the very amendments that we have before us today. 
And so I feel that he whole package should have been looked at 
all together. 
 
I’m aware that the legal community and the medical 
community, the legal community because they invariably get 
involved in these hearings from the legal point of view, are 
divided as to the usefulness of the trial de novo. I don’t wish to 
leave the impression that the medical community is opposed to 
it because it’s my understanding that the SMA (Saskatchewan 
Medical Association) has approved these amendments; 
however, there are individuals in the medical community who 
have expressed concern to us. 
 
The fact of the matter is, is that the existing law does give the 
physician a right to appeal in front of a tribunal by trial de novo. 
And that right has been there for decades, 

Mr. Deputy Premier. It was repealed in 1965. It had been there 
for several years before in a slightly different form. Repealed in 
1965 to ’81, and then reintroduced in its present form. And the 
old provision with respect to trial de novo reads something like 
this, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

The judge may on application of either party proceed by 
way of a trial de novo, in whole or in part. 

 
So the right to a trial de novo has been a long-standing right, but 
was repealed during the Thatcher years for a brief period of 
some 15 or 16 years. In the old legislation prior to 1965, 
however, it was an option. It was not a mandatory appeal by 
trial de novo, it was an option. One could go on the trial de novo 
or one could go on the transcript. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that one of the reasons why 
we have had an appeal of this nature in The Medical Profession 
Act for so many years in Saskatchewan is because the medical 
profession is not the same as other profession in the province 
for many of the reasons I stated earlier: that is, because health 
care is so important to the men and women and children of this 
province, and because government gives it a special priority or 
should be giving it a special priority. 
 
And it’s not just that I’m opposition Health critic, but I receive 
hundreds and hundreds of letters on a regular basis with respect 
to the health care in this province. I don’t receive those same 
numbers of letters, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the 
engineering profession or the architectural profession or the 
legal profession, even though I’m sure many lawyers would like 
to think the legal profession is of the same priority. The . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — But we know better. 
 
Ms. Simard: — But we know better, one of my colleagues say. 
The fact of the matter is, is health care is important and I 
believe this is one reason why it has been treated in this fashion. 
 
One of the criticisms of the present provision, the present 
provision in the Act, is that the trial de novo is mandatory as 
opposed to being an option. And some doctors and some 
lawyers have suggested that they would prefer to go on the 
transcript, an appeal on the transcript, and would prefer an 
option. However, others are of the opinion that the trial de novo 
procedure is definitely absolutely required. 
 
Meanwhile, the government hopes to streamline the process and 
reduce the cost of legal proceedings against doctors — costs 
that are paid by the College of Physicians and Surgeons in 
prosecuting the cases and costs that are paid by the doctors 
charged. 
 
However, in order to meet the government’s objectives, it 
means that we are repealing a right doctors have had for many 
years in this province and some doctors have expressed to us 
grave concern about their removal of a right to a trial de novo. 
They want to be sure that the disciplinary process is as fair as 
possible and they feel that a trial de novo is extra insurance in 
this regard. And we 
  



 
May 27, 1988 

 

1633 
 

respect those concerns in the same way that we respect the 
concerns that the medical profession, the concerns of the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons that the medical profession 
be governed fairly, but also effectively and efficiently. 
 
I have spoken to people across this province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and after weighing all the arguments very carefully — 
and in particular, the College of Physicians and Surgeons’ 
concerns about costs and delays and their desire to fulfil their 
responsibility as best possible — our caucus has come to the 
conclusion that had the government come forward with an 
amendment that removed the trial de novo and substituted it 
with a trial de novo as an option on appeal, the other option 
being an appeal on the transcript, we would have been able to 
support the proposal. 
 
But this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, goes much further than that. 
It wipes out the right to a trial de novo that is long-standing, and 
has been relied upon by doctors for decades; and it totally 
removes input from the public at large, non-medical people, in 
the appeal process, with the exception of course that the appeal 
goes to a judge of the Court of Queen’s Bench who is 
non-medical, but I don’t consider the judge a member of the 
public at large. 
 
It’s our feeling, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we need input from 
the public in all areas of health care, and our caucus has 
recently toured the province on regional meetings, right across 
the province, and one of the topics of discussion and debate was 
health care in the province of Saskatchewan. And if there was 
anything that came out loud and clear in those meetings — that 
were very well attended and in which there was excellent debate 
on the issue of health care — if there was anything that came 
out loud and clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was the desire of 
men and women in Saskatchewan to have more involvement 
and more input into the process of government and into the 
process of administering health care in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And so we will, Mr. Deputy Speaker, be proposing amendments 
to the Bill which will preserve the trial de novo as an option, 
and we’ll be doing that in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McLeod that Bill No. 11 — An Act to 
amend The Ophthalmic Dispensers Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This Bill is 
basically consequential upon The Medical Profession Act 
amendments. I believe that there may be some other 
housekeeping amendments primarily in it. I would . . . I will 
have some questions to ask on this legislation in Committee of 
the Whole, but it could move to the committee at this time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

(1145) 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McLeod that Bill No. 13 — An Act to 
amend The Denturists Act be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, this could move to 
committee as well, at this time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McLeod that Bill No. 14 — An Act to 
amend The Dental Profession Act, 1978 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This Bill 
could move to committee at this point as well. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McLeod that Bill No. 15 — An Act to 
amend the Optometry Act, 1985 be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Simard: — This could move to Committee of the Whole 
now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn that Bill No. 21 — An Act 
to amend The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I first want to say that I believe that this legislation is 
simply not good enough to effect full and adequate disclosure 
of the cost of credit to protect Saskatchewan consumers. I think 
this legislation needs to go back to the workshop and be honed 
and polished so that in fact it serves not simply the interests of 
the financial institutions but the interests of Saskatchewan 
people who frequent these institutions, and I intend to explain a 
little bit of this concern this morning. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this legislation purports to deal with the 
cost of credit disclosure. That’s what its name suggests, and it 
comes from the Minister of Consumer Affairs, but in reality this 
legislation serves the interests of lending institutions and large 
businesses such as Canadian Tire Stores. But, Mr. Speaker, my 
principal objection to this legislation revolves around Section 
3.2, that has to do with notification of changes in variable 
interest rates. Variable interest rates are the real concern of this 
entire piece of legislation; that’s why we have it introduced. 
 
My concern is that provision be made in this legislation itself 
for the adequate disclosure of the cost of credit with respect to 
these variable interest rates in the legislation 
  



 
May 27, 1988 

 

1634 
 

itself, and not simply by regulation as the minister suggests. 
And I say this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in light of some of the 
concern that has been expressed federally in the House of 
Commons Standing Committee on Finance and Economic 
Affairs, which has been holding hearings this last year, and 
more recently this spring, into charges for personal financial 
services. 
 
And I’d like to quote into the record the mandate of this 
particular Standing Committee on Finance and Economic 
Affairs in the House of Commons, and I quote: 
 

Witnesses will be called at the discretion of the Chair, and 
the Committee will review representations concerning the 
adequacy of section 201 of the Bank Act and regulations 
thereunder, to determine whether: 
 
(a) present regulations ensure that the customer has 
sufficient knowledge of charges for the keeping of an 
account; 
 
(b) posting a notice in a readily accessible place in the 
branches of a bank is a fair and reasonable way of 
notifying customers of changes in charges for the keeping 
of an account; 
 
(c) any new charges for the keeping of an account can be 
effected without prior consent of the customer in whose 
name the account is kept; 
 
(d) a right to written notification of changes in charges and 
a right to advanced authorization of new charges can be 
waived by the customer; 
 
(e) current charges and recent changes in charges for the 
keeping of an account are reasonable and fair. 
 
The purpose of this review is to determine whether Section 
201 of the Bank Act and the regulations pursuant thereto 
are in need of revision. The increasing role of non-bank 
financial institutions in the provision of retail banking 
services, and the intended future application of Section 
210 to these institutions is recognized. 

 
Now this is of the essence, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because it’s 
precisely some of the provisions of section 21 of the federal 
Bank Act that are noted in this legislation, or by the minister, as 
pertaining to this legislation affecting the cost of credit 
disclosure. 
 
But as we’ve just seen in looking at the standing committee’s 
mandate to review the whole question of personal financial 
service charges, the issues are precisely whether the regulations 
are adequate. And the minister, with this legislation, wants to 
refer regulation of the service charges to regulations. 
 
Secondly, the House of Common committee wants to know 
whether posting of notice in a readily accessible place is a fair 
and reasonable way of notifying consumers of financial 
services. And indeed that, modelled after section 21 of the Bank 
Act, is right here in the legislation 

proposed by the minister. The question is: is that good enough 
to post written notice in a readily accessible place in the branch 
of a financial institution? 
 
But also, you will note, the questions concerning the standing 
committee in Ottawa concern whether charges are reasonable 
and fair. And I want to just take a moment to show how 
important this issue is for consumers. Because according to the 
annual reports of the big five chartered banks in Canada, 
services charges for 1987 were as follows: for the Toronto 
Dominion Bank, $138 million worth of service charges; for the 
Canadian Imperial Bank, $235 million in service charges; for 
the Scotia Bank, $113 million in service charges; the Bank of 
Montreal, $283 million in service charges; and for the Royal 
Bank, 365 million — for a grand total of $1.134 million worth 
of service charges by the five chartered bank in Canada. 
 
And this represents, Mr. Deputy Speaker, an increase in service 
charges of almost 20 per cent over 1986 rates. And these 
charges relate, these service charges relate only to deposit 
accounts, safe keeping and payroll processing measures by the 
financial institutions. Excluded are any of the other fees charged 
by the banks such as foreign exchange fees, credit card fees, 
loan fees, securities’ commissions, bankers acceptances, letters 
of credit, guarantee fees, and other items. 
 
And if you consider the whole package of all of these fees for 
service offered by the five chartered banks, they amount to 
some $4 billion — $4 billion that Canadian consumers are 
paying in fees just to the five chartered banks, and this isn’t to 
other financial institutions such as trust companies, credit 
unions, or other lending institutions or credit corporations. 
 
Now I think this points then to the need for a very strict concern 
for cost of credit disclosure, an adequate disclosure in that 
regard, when it comes to this particular legislation proposed by 
the Minister of Consumer and corporate affairs. 
 
The research branch of the library of parliament has issued, in 
March of this year, a background paper on financial service 
charges in Canada and notes, I quote: 
 

It is relatively easy for a bank to meet notification 
requirements, although this does not mean that consumers 
are well informed about bank charges. With the growing 
use of automatic teller machines, moreover, some bank 
customers make less frequent trips to their branches so it is 
more difficult for them to be informed of changes in 
financial service charges. Increases in the direct deposit of 
pay cheques and the use of shared ATMs (automatic teller 
machines) also mean consumers may go into their bank 
branches less often. 

 
Now what we find in this legislation, in section 3.2, is provision 
that when a change occurs in the annual rate of the cost of 
borrowing with respect to a variable interest rate loan — and a 
variable interest rate loan is exactly what it suggests, a loan that 
the rate of interest floats regularly — my understanding is that 
this can float 
  



 
May 27, 1988 

 

1635 
 

weekly, or potentially even daily according to the prime rate, 
the Bank of Canada prime, the treasury board prime rate or the 
institutional prime rate. 
 
There is a wide range of discretion for how that rate fluctuates, 
but it’s a variable interest rate loan. And this legislation 
suggests that when the change occurs in that, that the borrower 
under the agreement shall be notified in writing or by posting 
him a notice in a readily accessible place in each place where 
the lender carries on business. 
 
Well first of all, it’s not practicable or practical for a lending 
institution to notify all of their borrowers in writing if you have 
an interest rate that is fluctuating weekly, or perhaps even more 
frequently. It’s just not realistic to expect that of financial 
institutions, to so that in writing. Certainly the costs would be 
passed on to the consumers. 
 
But my point is, nor is it adequate for consumers to have notice 
placed in a readily accessible place because, as we just heard 
from the material presented by the Library of Congress to the 
Standing Committee, that’s an open question, given the use of 
ATMs (automated teller machines) and the less frequent use of 
borrowers of financial institutions themselves. So to post a 
notice in a readily accessible place does not really serve 
consumers. 
 
I had also note as a foot-note, that in this . . . as an inadequacy 
to this legislation, that simply to require the posting of a notice 
in a readily accessible place in the bank or financial institution 
doesn’t really ensure that place is readily accessible to the 
borrower. A minor point, but an important one if we’re talking 
about the cost of credit disclosure for consumers of financial 
services. 
 
The borrower, in my view, Mr. Deputy Speaker, should be able 
to point to something in this legislation itself that speaks to full 
and adequate disclosure of the cost of credit. And as this 
legislation stands now, the borrower cannot do that. This 
legislation serves the interests of the financial institutions 
regulated by the province, namely credit unions, trust 
companies, and companies such as Canadian Tire Acceptance 
corporation. 
 
I believe that section 3.2 should itself ensure that the borrower 
is definitely going to be informed of changes in the cost of 
credit. Other provinces have made provision for this disclosure. 
My understanding is that it varies from province to province, 
that in Nova Scotia notice must be given in writing every 
month; that in Prince Edward Island notice must be given in 
writing every five weeks; and that in Manitoba the lending 
institution must give a client a statement as well. I’m not sure of 
the precise time period, but there must be notification in 
writing. 
 
(1200) 
 
I think that points to the inadequacy of this present legislation, 
that we don’t have that kind of provision with some parameters 
to ensure that there is written disclosure, and it’s not just left to 
the happenstance of a borrower entering a financial institution. 
 
So this problem becomes a little bit more pointed when we 
consider, not just the credit union system or the trust 

company system regulated by the province, but Canadian Tire 
Acceptance corporation, which is also provincially regulated 
and would fall under this cost of credit disclosure legislation. 
 
I want to begin by noting what was made public on Saturday, 
May 7 of this year in The Globe and Mail business section, that 
the profit at Canadian Tire Corporation was up a whopping 27 
per cent in the first quarter of this year, but that most of the 
gains in this profit picture did not come from the Canadian Tire 
selling of tires, lawn-mowers, hammers, or spark-plugs; they 
came from Canadian Tire’s credit card operations, from 
Canadian Tire Acceptance corporation. Canadian Tire 
Acceptance corporation accounted for the lion’s share of 
Canadian Tire’s 27 per cent profit in the first quarter of this past 
year. 
 
For the first time, last year, that division passed the $1 billion 
mark in credit sales for its own and other credit cards. This 
accounted for approaching half of Canadian Tire’s total sales. 
The credit card division recorded a 29 per cent profit gain . . . 
Canadian Tire Acceptance corporation recorded a 29 per cent 
profit gain, far surpassing its revenue increase of only 13 per 
cent. 
 
Incidentally, I think it’s important to note that the annual rate of 
interest for Canadian Tire Acceptance corporation is 28.8 per 
cent on the balance outstanding. This is similar to that of most 
major retailers in Canada with respect to credit cards. 
 
But I think that it points very clearly to the problem that we’re 
talking about when it comes to the cost of credit disclosure and 
the minister bringing an Act that purports to effect that here, 
that Canadian consumers and Saskatchewan people are paying 
handsomely for the privileges of using credit and ought to be 
entitled to adequate disclosure which this legislation simply 
does not effect. 
 
I want to continue by saying that other sections of this 
legislation are very, very inadequate when it comes to 
addressing the cost of credit disclosure — and I refer to sections 
3.1 and sections 3.3, where reference is made to the lender 
charging a reasonable fee with respect to prepayment on a 
variable interest rate loan; or again in section 3.3, reference is 
made to the lender issuing to the borrower, with a reasonable 
period of time, a statement showing the amount of credit 
extended and the remaining number of payments, and so forth. 
 
And my concern here is with respect to the use of the word 
“reasonable.” I just don’t think it’s at all reasonable that this 
legislation should use the word “reasonable” if it wants to effect 
the cost of credit disclosure. You could simply insert or 
substitute — either one — the word “pre-agreed fee” in section 
3.1. So that in other words, when people go to take out a 
variable interest rate loan they would sign on the dotted line 
agreeing up front to a pre-agreed, reasonable fee that affects 
their prepayment of their variable interest rate loan. 
 
But this legislation doesn’t do that. This legislation leaves the 
issue of disclosure of that cost of credit, and whatever is going 
to be regarded as a reasonable fee, to the back 
  



 
May 27, 1988 

 

1636 
 

end of the process when the consumer comes and wants to pay 
off the loan, prepay it, and is told that, maybe on a $500 loan 
shall we say, that the reasonable fee in the eyes of the financial 
institution is $50 — 10 per cent. And what may be reasonable 
to the financial institution is not necessarily reasonable to the 
borrower. 
 
Why not tighten up this legislation and substitute pre-agreed for 
reasonable, to effect cost of credit disclosure up front and not in 
the end? What this really does, if there’s disagreement over the 
interpretation of what is reasonable, is to put the consumer at 
the mercy of the legal system and lawyer’s fees to argue if a 
particular prepayment fee is in fact reasonable or not. They 
should know that up front and this legislation is inadequate in 
that regard. 
 
Similarly with respect to 3.3 in the legislation and the use of 
reference to a reasonable period of following the request of a 
borrower for a statement showing the amount of payment 
outstanding: why not simply state up front, when the consumer 
takes out a variable interest rate loan, that there is a pre-agreed 
fee of such and such, whether that be . . . a pre-agreed 
reasonable period of time for securing a statement? So that the 
borrower knows up front that the reasonable period, let’s say, in 
one week’s time or two weeks’ time or one month’s time, but 
they know up front what is understood to be a reasonable time 
for securing a statement showing what payments remain. As it 
stands now, a financial institution in theory can make 
unreasonable delays in effecting disclosure of a statement to an 
individual. 
 
So I think that again we’re left . . . consumers are left at the 
mercy of lawyers, and it shouldn’t be so. We have lawyers in 
the government who ought to have drafted this legislation more 
adequately than has been done or else the minister and his 
department have not been doing their job in reviewing the 
legislation and effecting an adequate disclosure. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that this whole piece of 
legislation is really ill-conceived, that it simply does not effect 
what it purports to do, namely, effect the disclosure of the cost 
of credit. I’ve suggested how the legislation could be tightened 
up. I’ve pointed out the problems with the cost of credit and 
lending and borrowing and all sorts of financial transactions 
that are being reviewed in Ottawa by the Standing Committee 
of Finance to the House of Commons. 
 
My understanding is that this legislation has been a long time 
coming from the department and it should be prolonged even 
more. It should be reviewed by the department. It should be 
withdrawn, so that it can effect protection and adequate 
disclosure of the cost of credit for consumers. The way it 
stands, this legislation serves the interests of the lending 
institutions. It does not effect cost of credit disclosure. It does 
not serve Saskatchewan consumers. 
 
So I would like to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we will not be 
supporting this legislation, that it ill serves the interests of 
Saskatchewan consumers to pass what is shoddy legislation and 
to leave the finer details, as the government would suggest, to 
the regulations. Those 

details should be dealt with in the legislation itself. 
 
The minister has said that this legislation will make The Cost of 
Credit (Disclosure) Act easier to administer and to change in 
the future. Huh! Yes, very much so — for the financial 
institutions, but not for Saskatchewan consumers. 
 
The minister has also said, in his earlier remarks on May 17, 
that consumer demand for financial products with variable 
interest rate loans is “substantial.” by his own 
acknowledgement, there is increased demand for this kind of 
service. But if that’s the case, why doesn’t he effect protection 
for Saskatchewan consumers? 
 
The only thing I can say is that he’s out of touch with what 
consumers are really concerned about. I think he needs to take 
this legislation back to the drafting table. I think he needs to roll 
up his sleeves and get involved with his federal counterparts 
and be . . . smarten up to what they’re doing in reviewing 
financial service charges, and bring this legislation into 
conformity with what’s happening federally, and not do such a 
disservice to Saskatchewan consumers as to pass it the way it 
stands. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. I want to add my 
voice, and I’ll be very brief. I want to add my voice to that of 
the member who just spoke with respect to this legislation. It is 
extremely difficult, Mr. Speaker, for the ordinary consumer to 
calculate the cost of financial services. Most of us know what a 
car costs us, most of us know what groceries cost, but financial 
services are very difficult for most people to know what they’re 
paying. 
 
You regularly see people borrowing money on a credit card 
which could be borrowed at the local credit union usually at a 
half to a third as much interest. And these are, Mr. Speaker, 
very substantial sums. As the work of the finance committee in 
the House of Commons shows, there’s a need for far better 
disclosure, not far less. 
 
Consumers are . . . banks and financial institutions are doing 
just about whatever they like with respect to charges and fees 
achieving enormous profits, and I think it’s fair to say, Mr. 
Speaker, recovering some bad and ill-advised loans to 
third-world countries at the expense of consumers. I think that 
is pretty much the process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if one accepts the philosophical approach of 
members opposite, that these decisions ought to be left to the 
market price — let’s assume that for the moment. I think 
everyone will admit that the market price won’t operate unless 
there’s sufficient information, and consumers just don’t have it. 
Very few of them have the mathematic skills to calculate the 
cost of financial services. 
 
When this was brought in I may say, it was . . . I suppose, in 
fairness to the Liberal government of the day, it was a 
far-reaching and I think effective form of legislation. When it 
was brought in most, almost all loans, had a fixed percentage 
for the life of the loan. That was in another era, an era when 
inflation — a 5 or 6 per cent inflation rate — 
  



 
May 27, 1988 

 

1637 
 

was thought to be intolerable; when the dollar and the interest 
rate enjoyed a great deal of stability. 
 
(1215) 
 
When that changed and when financial institutions introduced 
variable rates, as they did in the instability of the ’70s, the 
legislation became unworkable. And this legislation has not 
been enforced for a long period of time. It has been many years 
since this legislation was actually enforced — it couldn’t be. 
There is no way that your local credit union or your local 
branch of the bank could comply with this piece of legislation. 
It was practically impossible to do. 
 
There’s no question but what amendments are needed. But I 
join my colleague in lamenting the fact that it’s really been 
replaced with nothing at all. Consumers now have no 
protection; I think no effective means of finding out what 
they’re paying, except to rely on the tender mercies of the 
finance institution to provide it in an honest way. 
 
So I say, Mr. Speaker, that if you accept the philosophy of 
members opposite, if you believe that the market ought to 
dictate this, you must admit that it’ll only work if everybody 
has sufficient information to make intelligent decisions. It is 
clear that consumers do not in this instance. 
 
This government has removed, admittedly, an unworkable piece 
of legislation but replaced it at nothing, at a time when it’s 
apparent from the operation of the finance committee of the 
House of Commons that a good deal more protection is needed. 
And this really is a shame, Mr. Minister, that this government 
has bowed to the wishes of the financial institutions and has 
failed to hear and appreciate the needs of the consumers and the 
public who elected them. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, wish to join my 
colleagues from Regina Centre and Saskatoon Sutherland in 
speaking to this Cost of Credit Disclosure Bill before the House 
today. 
 
There’s four concerns that I have, one being with regard to 
section 3(1) where we’re talking about the terms or conditions 
of a variable interest agreement. And it states that: 
 

“. . . a borrower under the agreement is entitled to make a 
prepayment and the lender shall not charge the borrower 
any penalty or (other) fee, (this is where it’s interesting) 
other than a reasonable fee with respect to administration 
of the agreement, with respect to the prepayment. 

 
Mr. Speaker, my concern is: why not name that reasonable fee, 
or state that the reasonable fee should be included in the 
agreement that is signed at the time that the loan is taken out? 
 
The second concern that I have with this particular legislation 
deals with the changing of a variable interest rate. And prior to 
this legislation, those changes had to be . . . the borrower had to 
be notified in writing. Now it is saying, 

“in writing; or by posting a notice in a readily accessible place.” 
 
Well what is readily accessible, and particularly in 1988 when 
more and more of us are increasingly using automated teller 
machines, remote banking services, and are not going into 
banks or credit unions with the frequency that just a few short 
years ago we had to do so? So the notice of change is totally 
inadequate in this Cost of Credit Disclosure Bill. 
 
The third concern I have, Mr. Speaker, deals with: 
 

A lender who: 
 
(a) extends credit, other than variable credit; and 
 
(b) alters the interest rate with respect to which the credit 
is extended; 
 
shall provide to the borrower, (again) within a reasonable 
period following the request by the borrower, a clear 
statement in writing showing the number and amounts of 
payments remaining, including the projected final 
payment. 

 
My concern there, Mr. Speaker, is again, what is a reasonable 
period? What is reasonable to you, I can assure you, is not what 
is reasonable to me on just about any given item. And I suspect 
that this Act is going to allow for a great deal of discrepancy 
and a great deal of hard feelings in terms of what is reasonable. 
Is reasonable one minute? Is reasonable one hour, one day, one 
month, or one year? And as I pointed out, what’s reasonable to 
you is very seldom what’s reasonable to me, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
This Cost of Credit Disclosure Act typifies the deregulation and 
total abrogation of consumer protection by this government. 
They’re backing away from the consumers, the people of 
Saskatchewan, many of whom have elected members not only 
on the government side but on our side. The difference is, I 
think, we are standing up for the people of Saskatchewan and 
saying let’s have cost of credit being up front; let’s do some 
things with protecting consumers. That’s what I would have 
thought the Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs 
was all about, is protecting people. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It used to be; not any more. 
 
Mr. Trew: — No more, as my colleague from Regina North 
West points out. My fourth concern, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
that of Money Mart. Your government has done absolutely 
nothing to regulate cheque discounters such as Money Mart, 
and the case I’m speaking to right now is Money Mart. 
 
I stopped by their newest operation last night on my way home, 
to check out what kind of an operation they have. Part of my 
interest, it’s a long-standing interest, but part of my interest is I 
know that they charge very usurious rates for cheque cashing. 
 
The second part of my interest is, the latest Money Mart that 
has opened is opened in my constituency, and quite 
  



 
May 27, 1988 

 

1638 
 

frankly, that is one business that I would dearly love to see 
change their method of operation or close down. Either one 
would be acceptable to me, but clearly . . . 
 
Just to make it clear for members opposite what I’m talking 
about, I want to use the example of cashing a $400 cheque. It’s 
not a huge cheque, but on the other hand, it’s not a real . . . it’s 
not a family allowance cheque either — $400. And what does 
Money Mart charge? Well, up front they have a 2.9 per cent 
charge on cheque cashing: 2.9 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on 
a $400 cheque amounts to an $11.60 grab. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much? 
 
Mr. Trew: — It’s $11.60. Plus they charge 75 cents per item; 
plus they charge a $3 membership fee; plus there’s an 
additional surcharge on some items depending on the cheque 
and depending on the identification that is presented. An 
additional 2 per cent amounts to $8 in my $400 cheque. 
 
To make a long story a little bit shorter, for me to cash a $400 
cheque at Money Mart could cost me $23.35. And what has the 
government members opposite done about it? Absolutely 
nothing. They have not even wrung their hands or gnashed their 
teeth. They’re allowing operations, cheque discounters like 
Money Mart to operate, and it is really, really horrendous. 
 
When we’re talking about cost of credit . . . I remind the 
member for Meadow Lake that cashing a cheque — if you were 
to take this, if you cash a cheque a day early and then transpose 
this interest rate, then what you would wind up with is an 
effective interest rate of something about 15,000 per cent. 
 
Money Mart and other operations like that, cheque discounters, 
need to be regulated. The need is ever so clear when you look at 
them potentially taking $23.35 out of a $400 cheque. 
 
There is, fortunately, no chance of me ever cashing a cheque at 
Money Mart, because I simply would not pay their users’ fees, 
just simply would not. But the real tragedy, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is that we have many, many people — unfortunately 
many of them are my constituents, or else Money Mart would 
not have opened up in Regina North — we have many people 
who do pay that users’ fee, many people that use it. Because as 
I understand it, Money Mart will cash, for instance, a Social 
Service’s cheque a day early. Big deal. By the time they’ve 
processed it, it’s the day that it was cashed anyway. 
 
They cash cheques for people who have no bank accounts. And 
there’s a real tragedy there. But that’s a little different story 
where the Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs 
should be getting into the consumer education of people, to 
point out that they could get cheques cashed at a nominal 
charge of perhaps 50 cent at a bank or a credit union — not 
$23.35, but 50 cents. 
 
Many, many people would be far better off, if they don’t have a 
bank account or credit union account, they would 

be better off to open an account; pay a $5 one-time opening 
charge; develop an account there; and then thereafter, cash their 
cheques there. 
 
But Consumer and Commercial Affairs is doing nothing in 
terms of protecting the consumers of Saskatchewan. And that is 
a shame; that is a tragedy; it borders on a crime. The people 
who can least afford the services of Money Mart, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, are the people that repeatedly go back and back and 
back. And this government is doing nothing about it. 
 
Those are but four of the concerns that I have with this cost of 
credit disclosure. I feel very bad for the people of Saskatchewan 
that under your deregulation and your abrogation of consumer 
protection, the people of Saskatchewan are suffering, and 
unfortunately, it’s the poorest people, the people you care the 
very least about, that are suffering the most. 
 
So I have obviously got some concerns with this Bill, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but for now, that suffices for my comments for 
now. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 
referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Klein that Bill No. 23 — An Act to 
amend The Wascana Centre Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I just 
have a few brief comments to make on this Bill. And I want to 
reiterate some of the things that were said by the member from 
Regina Centre when the Bill was introduced. 
 
And I want to put on the record my opposition to the Bill and 
my concern about the neglect that has resulted in the Wascana 
authority because of the freeze in the funding . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well I know the Minister of Health opposite 
frowns and wonders why I say that, except if he were to take a 
few walks through the park he’d know why I say that. 
 
There may be trees being planted to replace trees which are 
dying in other cases, but there are certain areas of the Wascana 
authority which, if you go through it and have been through it 
for the last number of years, you will find where the weeds have 
taken over, the grass is dead, and now they have to rework it 
and dig it up and replant. 
 
Now if that is a saving of money by freezing the funding, it is 
beyond my comprehension of how that makes any sense. 
 
As a member in Regina, I want to say that I think that this 
short-sighted freezing of the funding, which started in 1986, is 
going to cost more money in the end. Because when you let 
something like this park deteriorate to the extent that this 
government is allowing it to deteriorate, it’s going to cost you 
more when you have to redo it or when you have to do some 
work later when inflation has increased your costs by 10 or 15 
or 18 per cent, or 
  



 
May 27, 1988 

 

1639 
 

whatever the inflation may be. 
 
And so I think it is a bad decision and therefore I oppose the 
Bill. And it’s not just a case of the Wascana Park being 
something for the people of the city of Regina. I used to be a 
member for the rural constituency of Humboldt for some 11 
years, I remember very distinctly . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — And what happened then? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well there was some misfortune in 1982, 
but I can tell you that there are some of the things that I 
remember very vividly about some of the experiences, as that 
member. And I can remember people from my constituency, 
including many, many students, who used to always include on 
their tour agenda and their visit to Regina, a visit to Wascana 
Park, and they still do. And it was a beautiful place and they 
went away impressed. And it’s still a beautiful place. But if the 
present trend continues, it’s going to be less so. And I want to 
say that that concerns me, as I know it concerns many other 
people. 
 
(1230) 
 
It’s a marvellous thing that’s happened here because of the 
foresight of some people in the past. I’m not saying that 
foresight does not exist today; I think it exists today. But you 
have to, even during times of restraint, make an adequate 
financial commitment. And now what I’m saying to the 
minister and to the government opposite — please reconsider; 
make that financial commitment. Not only will it do some good 
today, but it’s going to save money tomorrow and later on. 
 
And so I will be opposing this Bill, as so will my colleagues on 
this side of the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have to 
get into the closure of this debate for a couple of reasons. And 
obviously the member from Regina North East, who just 
admitted that he moved in here from Humboldt, isn’t familiar 
with the working of the urban Act yet. So this will be explained 
to him in committee. They are totally off base. 
 
I’m rather surprised that the member from Regina Centre, who 
should be aware of the functions and how the Wascana Centre 
Authority operates, and the member from Regina Centre didn’t 
study the Bill very closely. 
 
I’ll speak first on one matter. Our volunteers at these urban 
parks need protection — and they’re going to oppose the Bill — 
but members, officers and employees of the authority currently 
have the protection, and this is simply being extended, similar 
to the amendments that Meewasin will have, for committee 
members and advisers. 
 
This protection to members and employees is a standard feature 
of departmental Acts, and I can’t for the life of me understand 
why he would object to applying a fundamental basic protection 
to volunteers. It’s beyond me, and I’m anxious to get into 
debate in committee with it. But I think that it’s because they 
lack the understanding of the legislative authority for the Act. 

Speaking for a moment about the current standards, I have to 
say this to everybody that’s watching, about our beautiful 
Wascana Centre. The current landscape maintenance standards 
have not changed since the centre began — have not changed 
since the centre began. And obviously again the members 
opposite have totally no understanding with the funding or how 
the funding operates or where indeed the funding is spent. 
 
Now this year, for example, there have been some changes. And 
we have now put lights on this beautiful, magnificent building, 
the legislature. Now as this work is going on, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, certainly it has short-term effect on the irrigation of 
the lawns in front of the Legislative Building because that 
system is not operable when these lights are being installed, so 
that you will notice a difference. But it has nothing to do with 
funding; it has to do with operation. And so the members 
opposite are totally off base when they speak in that regard. 
And I do encourage all the citizens of Regina, and indeed the 
province, and certainly our school children as they come in and 
visit the beautiful legislature, to walk around our lawns and our 
centre. 
 
Turf renovations along . . . some of the recent improvements 
have been turf renovations along Lakeshore Drive last year. 
Trafalgar fountain, just east of us, 4,200 square yards of turf 
that was replaced at substantial cost- replaced because it’s 
common, with the usage that it gets, for grass to die. That’s all 
being replaced. Four hundred and eleven trees were planted in 
the legislative area last summer at a significant cost — and are 
you saying that all these trees die? No, those are improvements 
— Mr. Deputy Speaker, perennial flower-beds replaced on the 
east side of the building last year — a total area of over 3,300 
square feet. 
 
By making such outrageous and unwarranted comments, those 
members may be adversely impacting the tourism industry that 
the city is trying to accomplish. And certainly, indeed, the 
member from Regina Centre is hurting his own constituents, 
and I’m awful, awful surprised to see him speak that way. 
 
You know, it’s just ludicrous to say that the maintenance 
standards . . . they obviously don’t know how the funding 
works, and the maintenance standards have not changed. So 
they’re really not aware of how it functions. Unfortunately he 
says that it deteriorates. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Wascana is an independent — 
Wascana Centre Authority is an independent third-party 
contractor to the government. They act as an independent. They 
have unionized staff. So when you’re talking deterioration, and 
it’s the same situation that has been maintained for the last 25 
years, you’re indeed condemning each one of those 
hard-working people and all the students that are hired every 
summer. And what they’re saying is that these people are not 
doing their job properly, because it doesn’t relate to funding one 
bit. Funding has nothing to do with it. There has been 
absolutely no cut-back in the area that the members opposite are 
talking about. 
 
So I’m really anxious to debate this and the other urban 
  



 
May 27, 1988 

 

1640 
 

park Bills in committee, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we’ll get into 
it in more detail. I could talk on and on about it. 
 
But I would ask, I would ask that the critics opposite sit down, 
review the legislation, understand how the Wascana Centre 
Authority works, perhaps make a phone call to the former 
member of Regina Elphinstone who absolutely understood it, 
who understands how the financing works, who understands 
that when the three parties agree to a freeze on funding, it has 
nothing to do with the maintenance. It has to do with capital 
projects. 
 
And I’m pleased to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
Wascana Centre Authority again, for the second year in row, 
has ended with a surplus of funds. So we’re in good shape, and 
everything is progressing. 
 
And we will debate this more fully. At this time, I’ll close 
debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 
referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mrs. Smith that Bill No 26 — An Act to 
amend The Oil and Gas Conservation Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
would like to pick up on the comments of the minister last, with 
respect to Bill 26, The Oil and Gas Conservation Act. Just to 
inform members, I’ve had a look at the Bill and I’ve basically 
divided the Bill into three areas. 
 
One aspect of the Bill is related to conservation and matters that 
relate to the environment, which I think are fairly well covered 
in the Bill. 
 
The second area of the Bill that I’ve found of interest is the 
amendments which were consequential to the deregulation of 
natural gas, and there’ll be a number of questions in committee 
with respect to that area. 
 
And finally, some housekeeping amendments which were pretty 
general in nature, except for one or two areas that I think should 
have been cleaned up in terms of housekeeping and were not 
included in the Bill — and they relate to the penalty areas 
which last amended were in 1965, which is 23 years ago. And 
perhaps those penalties in 1988 are not sufficient in the event 
that the individuals or companies involved with breaking the 
law do so and are found guilty. 
 
We see in the . . . I’ll deal with the first section first, Mr. 
Speaker, with regard to conservation. The Bill clearly defines 
waste in the Bill with respect to waste-water disposal wells, and 
other areas. The practice has been indicated . . . has existed for a 
number of years, but there’s never really been a clear 
delineation of that in the existing legislation, and the 
amendment clarifies that. I think that’s a good amendment. 
 
There’s the environmental protection aspect of the Bill. One of 
the major purposes is to make The Oil and Gas 

Conservation Act more environmentally inclined, focused more 
on protecting the environment with respect to oil wells that 
either have been drilled or have been abandoned and the leases 
surrounding them. And I think that that is a move in the right 
direction for the government. It’s something which has not 
really been a major problem, but it has been a problem for some 
of the lessors. 
 
The other aspect of the Bill which I found of interest relating to 
conservation was the attempt through this Bill to provide the 
power to the minister to make regulations with respect to the 
construction and operation of the waste oil processing facilities, 
and the providing of that information to the department from 
the principals involved in relation to these facilities. 
 
There’s no legislative authority at the moment, and the 
amendments in this Bill clearly provides that the department 
can regulate same. So the department will in essence have the 
authority to regulate these practices in a clearer fashion, in a 
more monitored fashion than has been the case to date, and I 
think that aspect of the Bill clearly has some positive 
connotations to it. 
 
The other aspect, I guess, relates to the natural gas deregulation 
sections of the Bill. The government has basically deregulated 
the natural gas industry in Saskatchewan. This was done a little 
over . . . almost a year ago, I believe, and the amendments in 
this Act are really consequential to their policy of deregulating 
the gas industry. But I want to just mention, Mr. Speaker, that 
with regard to deregulation of natural gas and the ideology of 
deregulation that the Conservative Party has promoted in 
Canada and in Saskatchewan, coupled with their blind ideology 
with respect to privatization, we’ve seen two independent 
thrusts in the Conservative philosophy, in the Conservative 
ideology, to in essence take a look at our resources, give our 
resources at discounted prices to friends of the government and 
friends of the Conservative Party, for purposes which are quite 
puzzling to the opposition. 
 
With regard to natural gas deregulation, the government of the 
day has deregulated the natural gas industry, they are now 
providing the authority to producers to sell directly to 
consumers in Saskatchewan and to consumers outside of the 
province. 
 
Following that decision, which has been widely accepted by the 
industry, they have sold off a significant portion of resource 
assets that belong to all the people of this province. They have 
sold off significant pools of natural gas and reserves of natural 
gas that have been owned, through the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation, by all of the citizens of this province equally. 
 
They have sold those reserves, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I maintain, 
at discounted prices to Saskoil, which they are bragging has 
now been privatized and is now in the private sector. The 
majority of the dividends from Saskoil now go to shareholders 
living outside this province, and we see that the effects of 
deregulation go hand in hand with the thrusts and the effects of 
privatization of this government. 
  



 
May 27, 1988 

 

1641 
 

So the amendments in this Bill really deal with that aspect and 
clean up some of the moves that they’ve made over the past 12 
months in that area. 
 
The interesting item about the Bill that I prefer to comment on 
today with regard to deregulation, is that the producers, even 
though they can now sell directly to purchasers outside the 
province and within the province, now through the amendments 
have to provide information to the government, to the 
Department of Energy and Mines, pertaining to the contracts 
that they signed. And I think that’s important information to 
have, in particular when there are royalties to be paid and a 
monitoring of the resources is crucial by the government on 
behalf of the citizens who really own the resource, and that is 
the taxpayers of this province. 
 
Another article, section 18.4, provides the authority to establish 
and set up the oil and gas environmental fund. And the fund, 
according to the minister, will provide a means of last resort to 
ensure the proper down-hole abandonment of wells and the 
surface restoration of well site areas when operators default on 
their normal responsibilities due to financial failure. 
 
I think this is a fund which is an important fund. We in the 
opposition generally agree with setting up a fund in particular 
that is not paid for by the taxpayers, but the fund will be created 
by the producers in the province through a system that is 
outlined in the Bill. And according to the information, there will 
be about $1 million in the fund that will provide for some 
reserve to go, some last resort fund to go to by the lessors with 
respect to cleaning up their property and the abandoned wells in 
the event a company does go bankrupt and can’t fulfil its 
obligations under the lease. 
 
(1245) 
 
The question that I have, and we’ll be pursuing this in 
committee, is the retroactivity nature of the amendment. 
Whenever there’s a fund set up or a piece of legislation that’s 
introduced that has retroactivity in it, it’s really important to 
look very closely at all of the aspects of that. And in particular 
with this fund, I will be asking some questions in committee, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, relating to the fund being set up 
separately, apart from the Consolidated Fund, and I’d be 
pursuing questions with the minister on that aspect as well. 
 
Another aspect of the Bill which I’ve flagged for further 
questions and discussions is the area concerning the option of 
the minister to order pooling upon the recommendation of either 
the oil and gas conservation board or the department. The 
legislation currently allows the minister to order pooling only 
after a meeting of he board, and the board has not apparently 
met for over ten years; we will be looking at some questions 
concerning this in committee. 
 
Section 55 will allow the department to require gas use permits 
for all gas contracted and consumed in the province, regardless 
of the source. 
 
And in my view it’s really a codicil to deregulation so the 
government can monitor the program of deregulation and 

program of sale of natural gas by producers directly to 
purchasers, and that is an area that we will be asking some 
questions on as well. 
 
An interesting aspect of the Bill, with relation to the 
deregulation of natural gas, is the authority of the minister to 
now, through the department, make decisions regarding 
reserves of natural gas for the purposes of consumption by 
Saskatchewan people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The minister, under the amendments in the Act, can look at the 
reserves, make a decision with respect to whether or not there 
are sufficient reserves for local consumption for purposes of 
emergency nature as well. And that, in my view, provides some 
flexibility in the event that there is a shortage, or a shortage that 
may be coming in the near future. And with that, the minister 
can then restrict the export and sale of natural gas outside this 
province. I think that’s a good amendment, as well. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will just terminate my comments 
here by saying that we’ll let the Bill go into committee, and we 
will be asking the minister and her officials some questions 
relating the areas that I’ve highlighted for her in advance, and I 
look forward to getting some answers to those questions. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
rather pleased to see that the opposition critic has agreed with 
so many parts of the Bill. And he has raised some questions, not 
unexpected on my part, in areas that I would think would be 
questions such as pooling. Simply the complexity of the issue 
would raise some questions with it. The environmental fund, as 
to where it will be run, was another one that we had expected to 
come up on Committee of the Whole. 
 
Brief remarks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, particularly as it relates to 
deregulation and natural gas. 
 
I think the hon. member has taken some liberties in 
interpretation of what he sees within this Bill as it relates to 
deregulation and natural gas. It’s not selling anything off. In 
fact, if you take a look at the record and the benefits that have 
accrued to this province since deregulation was in fact put into 
place, nothing could be further from the truth than what the 
member has suggested. And I would ask that he take a good, 
hard look in fact of what is happening in Saskatchewan and 
what happens with the consumers on deregulation. Quite 
frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it has nothing . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . and if the member from Regina Centre would 
like to get into the debate, he obviously had his chance — 
missed it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the deregulation has nothing to do with 
philosophy, as the member from Regina North West has 
indicated — absolutely nothing to do with philosophy. It has 
everything to do with a changing economy and changing 
markets within the world, and Saskatchewan is not in isolation 
of changing conditions as it relates to economic conditions, and 
I would ask that he take a look at that when he is considering 
that part of the Bill. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of the retroactivity, I will 
  



 
May 27, 1988 

 

1642 
 

look forward to some questions from the member on the 
retroactivity. I think those are fair questions to be raised. And 
we will also look forward to his questions on the environmental 
fund and perhaps a pursuing debate at it relates to deregulation 
on natural gas as contained in the Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:51 p.m. 


