


















































June 20, 1988 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 20, 1988 
 

2255 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Health 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I pointed out when 
we went into these estimates last week, I believe it was, Mr. 
Chairman, the PC government has been slowly dismantling 
medicare as we know it in Saskatchewan and attacking the very 
basic foundation of medicare, and that is its universality, its 
accessibility, its comprehensiveness, and the fact that it’s publicly 
administered. We illustrated last week, point by point, how it has 
gone about attacking each of those individual corner-stones in 
health care. 
 
A further review of the health care system will show that one of 
the ways the government has been attacking health care in 
Saskatchewan is through underfunding to the Saskatchewan 
Health Research Board, through underfunding to cancer clinics, 
through failing to establish an occupational therapist program in 
Saskatchewan, through underfunding to the university so that the 
Plains hospital education system, which carried with it a number 
of specialists in the province of Saskatchewan, was severely 
damaged as a result of government underfunding. And all of these 
items that I’ve just referred to, Mr. Chairman, which have the 
possibility and the potential of creating a very positive atmosphere 
for specialists and for doctors and health care professionals who 
wish to come to Saskatchewan, the government has slowly been 
attacking these areas, and through its attack on health care, 
establishing a climate of health care in Saskatchewan where 
specialists are reluctant to come and set up their practice. 
 
Let’s just take a look at the cancer clinic, for example. Through 
underfunding of the cancer clinic, we have seen long waiting lists 
for people to obtain cancer treatment. I raised the case of one 
individual, in this legislature, who waited for three months, I 
believe it was, from the time she obtained surgery or biopsy to the 
time she actually received treatment. I understood she was to go in 
on June 20, and I’m assuming that she is now obtaining this 
treatment, Mr. Chairman. And I wrote to the minister about it, and 
we brought it up in the House, and the minister replied to me with 
a response that I found quite shocking — a response to the effect, 
Mr. Chairman, that a four-to six-week wait was acceptable. But 
actually, this woman waited three months from the time she had 
received a biopsy. So her situation was not being taken seriously. 
 
I understand that at the cancer clinic we have had a couple 
radiation therapists leave. I understand that radiation therapy 
technologists are earning something like 40 per cent more in B.C., 
for example, which is why our radiation therapists are leaving the 
province, Mr. Chairman. That’s why. They can earn more other 
places because the government refuses to adequately fund health 
care in Saskatchewan. 

We have a climate being created whereby specialists such as that 
become dissatisfied and are not appreciated for their hard work 
and their commitment to the health care system. They are not 
appreciated for their dedication to the health care system, and as a 
result these specialists move on to better climates, to other 
provinces, where they will be appreciated for their hard work and 
their dedication. 
 
And so what happens in a situation like that at the cancer clinic, 
for example, and the radiation therapists find they can get 
something, like, as I have been informed 40 per cent more in B.C. 
And what happens then with the doctors, the oncologists, whose 
responsibility it is to determine what treatment and the amount of 
it that these patients receive? Are they going to be willing, Mr. 
Chairman, to work in an environment where their therapists are 
dissatisfied as well? 
 
And so we see the case building for a serious lack of 
underfunding, and the serious lack of consideration being given to 
the health care system by the department. And the cancer clinic is 
only one example, only one example, Mr. Chairman. 
 
We look at occupational therapists and the need, for example, that 
we’re going to have for occupational therapists. I think we have 
one occupational therapist to every 17,000 people in the province, 
whereas the studies have indicated it should be closer to one in 
every 7,000, not to mention the fact, Mr. Chairman, that there will 
be an escalation in the usage of occupational therapists in 
Saskatchewan. Some people have said over the next few years, 
it’ll increase as much as 60 per cent. 
 
And what are we doing with respect to occupational therapists? 
We’re sending our potential occupational therapists out of the 
province instead of developing a program here. And as a result, we 
have an attrition rate in the vicinity of 50 per cent. And this 
government has refused to establish a program here in spite of the 
fact it has been brought to their attention what the future needs for 
occupational therapists will be. And so you have people leaving 
the province, spending their money outside the province to get 
themselves educated in this area, and an attrition rate of 
approximately 50 per cent — so I’ve been advised. 
 
And then we see the government reorganizing the laboratory and 
radiological technology program in Saskatchewan, reorganizing it 
notwithstanding that the CMA (Canadian Medical Association) 
gave it their stamp of approval, the government moving to 
reorganize this other education program, cause more problems in 
the health care field. Once again, Mr. Chairman, change for the 
sake of change only, not change because it is good and the best 
thing for the system. 
 
And then we look at, as I indicated earlier, the Saskatchewan 
Health Research Board and what has happened in there in the fact 
that they have had to dip into savings in order to keep themselves 
going, and now that most of that has been depleted, they find 
themselves short of funding. 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2256 
 

And who is educated through this Saskatchewan . . . Who benefits 
from the Saskatchewan Health Research Board? Well everybody 
in the province benefits. Every man, woman and child in this 
province benefits from the research there because the money that’s 
available for research attracts specialists, it attracts people who 
may be specialists in the future, and it brings them to the province, 
and it creates an environment where we’re open and we’re willing 
to look into research and where we want new people, we want 
people to work in their specialities. But no, this government 
instead told the research board that they had to dip into savings 
that they had until we get to the point where they’re strapped for 
funding, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And that’s the sort of scenario that has been building in 
Saskatchewan over the last few years. That’s why we’re in a 
health care crisis in Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman. It’s misplaced, 
misinformed, PC policy and lack of commitment to medicare in 
Saskatchewan that has caused this crisis. 
 
Now with respect to the cancer clinic, I would like to ask the 
minister whether . . . I understand there has been an agreement 
negotiated with the union at the cancer clinic, and I would like the 
minister to advise us what the terms of the agreement are and also 
whether it will close the gap between salaries that these 
individuals can obtain in other places in Canada as opposed to 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Well, yes, Mr. Chairman, several 
comments in response to the several points that were raised by the 
member opposite. First of all I’ll get, at the end of my comments, 
to the specifics of your question, at least, about the agreement. I 
won’t speak about the specifics of the agreement because as the 
member well knows, the agreement has not been ratified, at least 
at the last I’ve heard it hasn’t been, and it may be very close to 
being ratified — both parties are in agreement and then both 
parties are recommending the deal. 
 
Two or three things: the member mentions, Mr. Chairman, this is 
the Health Research Board, Saskatchewan Health Research Board. 
There was a question raised in the House, I’m not sure, some 
weeks ago now. I gave the assurance at that time that there would 
be a million dollars for the Health Research Board to spend this 
year and there will be, that will be available to the Health Research 
Board to spend in this year. The Health Research Board, the 
members of the board, and the chairman of that, Dr. Robertson, 
knows that. We’ve had a good understanding with that board — 
there’s no question — and they are well assured that that’s the 
case. 
 
So, you know, the member can raise all the points she wants and 
talk about the fact that there’s no commitment to any of those 
kinds of things and raise whatever political rhetoric she would 
like. The facts remain as they are, as I’ve stated them, and as I 
stated them on that other occasion, and as I state them here again. 
 
As it relates to occupational therapy, I’m somewhat sympathetic to 
that, to the idea or the concept of having an occupational therapy 
school here. I think its time is really rapidly approaching when we 
can use that kind of school in the province. I know that’s a thing 
that I will, as 

Minister of Health, be talking both to the Minister of Education, 
and obviously it’s not his direct responsibility to determine 
whether that school is there. But I have been in some discussions 
with people at the university just to say to them, I believe that it is 
a reasonable thing, but it’s obviously up to the university as they 
look at themselves and to determine which colleges and which 
schools may well serve our populace and our needs here in the 
province on into the future that they look at. And that’s all I will 
say about it, is that they look at the possibility of occupational 
therapy being included in those long-term plans. 
 
Just on a similar topic, Mr. Chairman, the member will know as 
well that the physiotherapy school received last year 10 new 
spaces to add to the training that goes on, within the province, of 
physiotherapists. And that’s important; it’s been well received by 
that community as well. And I just lump those two together to this 
extent: that physiotherapy and occupational therapy are very 
important professions as it relates to the health care of the future 
and as it relates to that ageing population that we talked about here 
in the committee before, and which always will come up as we 
talk about the challenges that face health care administrators and 
people delivering health care across the country, and beyond our 
own province, certainly. But those two areas are going to be 
important, and they will be important as we try to keep our people 
mobile and active and so on for longer periods of time, which is 
obviously . . . From a financial point of view, it’s better for the 
health care system, and certainly from a human point of view, in 
terms of the people being active, it makes eminent sense. So I 
agree with that. 
 
(1915) 
 
The member made some reference to the cancer clinics and makes 
wild-eyed statements, frankly, Mr. Chairman, about the provincial 
government not funding the cancer clinics and the provincial 
government not being there in terms of the cancer clinics and all of 
those kinds of things. The member will know, as well, and all 
members of this committee will know, that the new cancer clinic 
is opening soon, was to be opened in . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
I just say to the former critic, she should go back to reading 
something about public participation, which she knows little 
about, but she should really read about that so that when her times 
comes, that she’ll have something reasonable to say at that point. 
So I’ll speak to the now critic of health care. I’ll have something to 
say to the now critic of health care, Mr. Chairman. I think we’ll 
get on with these estimates in a very reasonable way without 
interruptions from . . . I forget what I might want to call her there. 
 
But in any case, Mr. Chairman, cancer clinic — the new cancer 
clinic in Saskatoon. And when I say soon, it was to be open in this 
month of June. Because of the delays caused by the union 
problems and so on within the cancer clinic, and because of some 
waiting lists which were caused by the lack of overtime and the 
ban of overtime associated with all of that, that problem is now by 
and large solved because the ban on overtime has been lifted. The 
time of waiting for individual patients, which is the key here, is 
dropping and is continuing to drop. And the plans are presently for 
them to be moving 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2257 
 

into the new cancer clinic, with its state-of-the-art equipment and 
so on, in the month of August. So that’s the case there. 
 
As it relates to radiation therapists, the member makes some 
statements about how we have radiation therapists leaving 
Saskatchewan and all of the rest of it. It is not the case, and it is 
not the traditional thing here without that waiting list that was 
caused by the union difficulty, and the management union 
difficulty that went on in it for a number of months. Without that it 
has not been the practice and it has not been the history here for 
there to be waiting lists in terms of a lengthy wait at the cancer 
clinics, and that’s returning to that more normalized circumstance 
now. So that’s an important thing to note, and one would not get 
that from the comments that the member made earlier. 
 
And, secondly, radiation therapists are in a shortage right across 
this country. There’s no question that they are in a shortage. And 
as it relates to the agreement that is now out there for ratification 
from the union membership, the gap that has been referred to in 
terms of where they stand in this province compared to some 
others and so on, all I will say about the agreement is that that 
circumstance was addressed to some extent and the union agreed 
with it. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, you know I think it is very poor 
on the part of the minister to be blaming the union for the 
problems at the cancer clinic, who were dedicated, who were 
committed to the provision of health care in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and worked overtime, Mr. Chairman, are now 
being blamed because they finally got burnt out and tired of the 
demands that were being made on them and felt that people’s 
health care was in jeopardy, and they had to take some action. And 
the minister thanks them, he thanks these hard workers by blaming 
them for the crisis at the cancer clinic which is caused by 
government underfunding, Mr. Chairman, and that’s the truth of 
the fact. It’s caused by government underfunding inasmuch as 
these people are not being paid salaries commensurate with some 
other places in North America, and the minister knows that. 
 
And my question to him was: does the agreement close the gap, 
and he did not answer that question, Mr. Chairman. And I suggest 
that he doesn’t answer it because the gap probably isn’t being 
closed as much as it should be in order to keep our specialists and 
our therapists in Saskatchewan because that’s what we have to do, 
at least one of the things that we have to do in order to keep our 
people here. 
 
Now the minister said that we made some wild statements. I have 
a question for the minister. Did one or more radio-therapists leave 
Saskatchewan and move to Halifax? Did one or more do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Just to . . . (inaudible) . . . what I said to the 
member as it relates to the gap referred to as it relates to radiation 
therapists and their salary level . . . All I will say about it is that in 
the agreement that is now out for 

ratification, that gap has been addressed and I said that in my 
earlier comments. The gap has been addressed, you know, to the 
extent that it’s all accomplished in one year or whatever — I’m 
not sure of that — but I will just say to you that we were 
recognizing and the cancer foundation was recognizing that 
circumstance, and they were addressing it. And obviously that was 
one of the things that they discussed in the negotiations which 
went on — so just to make it clear. 
 
As it relates to whether a particular radiation therapist or two or 
whatever have gone to — where did you say, Halifax? — I don’t 
know that. I don’t know if anybody has gone to Halifax, but it may 
well be the case. No one is going to, in the Department of Health, 
keep track of, did this employee go to Halifax, did this one go to 
St. John, New Brunswick. I know the last two that we’ve 
recruited, one came from Montreal, I believe, and the other one 
came from Great Britain. I know that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s not the point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — No, but the point is that they come from 
various places, and they will go to various places. And the point 
that the member will make is that somebody went to Halifax. Well 
fine, if they went to Halifax. 
 
But I just will say to the member, what we need here is the And 
those positions are there; the positions are approved. The 
recruitment is active, and the recruitment is being somewhat 
successful. And we will have the people there to be sure that the 
people who are in need of this obviously much needed service 
have the service at their disposal. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, I’m not concerned about whether 
they went to Halifax or Montreal, and you know that’s not the 
point. The point is, as I’ve been advised, one person has left. At 
least one — I have it in plural here, but I’m not sure it’s in plural 
— left for Halifax. It may have been some other place; that’s 
irrelevant. The point is, is you have radiation therapists leaving the 
province of Saskatchewan because of underfunding of the cancer 
clinic. 
 
Will the minister admit that we have a shortage of staff at the 
cancer clinic? Will he admit that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — I will say that there’s active recruiting 
going on, and the recruiting is going on to recruit people into 
positions which are funded and approved and so on. And when the 
people can be recruited to come to the positions, they will be 
hired. 
 
And once that is very clear, then it makes no sense whatever, Mr. 
Chairman, for the member to say the reason that they’re not here is 
because of underfunding and because there’s no positions for 
them. The fact is there are positions, as there are positions in 
almost every jurisdiction in this country in this particular speciality 
area, and there’s a shortage. So we’re out there recruiting, we, 
being the — in this province’s case — the cancer foundation. And 
the people are out there recruiting and they are doing an excellent 
job. 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2258 
 

What I said before, and I don’t think you heard me, was I said, I’m 
not sure if anyone has left and where they’ve gone. What I said is, 
the last two we have recruited — which is the key for us, the key 
for the province — one came from Great Britain and one came 
from Montreal, came from those places to Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, you have admitted that there is a 
shortage and that’s why you’re attempting to recruit. The fact of 
the matter is, you’re not going to be able to recruit specialists in 
Saskatchewan if you underpay them, and if you create a climate of 
negativism with respect to the provision of health care in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now you talk about a new cancer clinic, Mr. Minister, but the 
present cancer clinic is understaffed and has difficulty manning 
the equipment that is there now. What are you going to do, Mr. 
Minister, when you move into a new cancer clinic? Will you have 
additional staff at that time to manage the equipment that’s there in 
the new clinic? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — I say yes, and the reason I say that there 
will be adequate funding and physicians and equipment and so on, 
is because the cancer foundation board has said yes, we have this 
funding as approved for the new cancer clinic which has an 
increase in position and so on. And the cancer foundation board 
has said yes, that will fulfil our needs. And I am very confident 
that they will be able to, once moved in to the new facility . . . And 
there will be some growing pains in that transitional period, I 
think, in the month of August. And that’s one of the reasons for 
the delay from June to August, as I outlined before, is because 
they want to get the time of some of those waiting periods down, 
now that the union and management problems are over. 
 
And I just want to make another point on that. The member got up 
very quickly after my last comments, or after my comments a few 
moments ago, and said that I am here blaming the union people — 
the very people, to use her words, that have been working this 
overtime, and so on. 
 
I made it very clear at the time, and I’ll make it very clear again: 
all I was doing was outlining the circumstance, the reality of the 
circumstance that was surrounding the problem of some 
lengthening periods of time for people to wait for radio-therapy 
treatment. That’s all I was doing. I wasn’t blaming the union or the 
management. 
 
I said to both sides and, as all of us in this House were, wished 
very much that both sides would get on with it and get on with the 
negotiations. And it happened very well, and as it turns out they 
have come to an agreement, an amicable one that both sides have 
agreed to. That’s as it should be, and that’s great. 
 
But I wasn’t blaming anyone. All I was saying, outlining to you 
and to the House, the circumstances as it related to the cancer 
clinic and some of the waiting times that were associated with it. 
 
Ms. Simard: — How many positions are there for radiation 
therapists at the cancer clinic, Mr. Minister, and 

how many of these positions are filled? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — As it relates to radio-therapy technicians, 
there are, in this budget that we are considering, there are 12 
positions there. There were presently, prior to that, there were 10. 
So there are two new positions approved, and there are four 
vacancies. And those four vacancies, recruitment is actively going 
on for those four vacancies now. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, will you please tell us how many 
vacancies will be there in August of this year when the new cancer 
clinic is supposed to come on stream. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Mr. Chairman, I would hope none, but I 
don’t know that. We are actively recruiting, we are actively 
recruiting for the four vacancies that are there, and when I say 
actively, I mean it’s widely known across the profession and so on 
that we’re recruiting these people. I’m hoping that there would be 
none. It’s very hard to know; I don’t know that. There are four 
vacancies now, and we’re hoping that we have those filled or at 
least some of those filled or whatever, but that’s not something 
that I can control from here, how successful the recruitment 
policies are. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Well, Mr. Minister, hoping is not enough. We 
have to do much more than hope. Do you agree with me, Mr. 
Minister, that a three-month wait for radiation therapy, after a 
biopsy has been done with respect to breast cancer, is 
unacceptable? Do you agree, Mr. Minister? 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — I can’t say what’s a particular time for a 
particular case. But I would just say to the member, as I’ve said 
before, some of the waiting times that have been referred to for 
some time prior to that circumstance that I’ve outlined, as it relates 
to the ban on overtime and so on, that’s thankfully behind us all. I 
would say that those waiting times are dropping rapidly and 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . No, and the question is . . . And the 
answer to the member’s question is, unless you have a specific 
case or whatever, I’ll just say that all throughout that time when 
some of those waiting times were increasing a little, the 
oncologists at the cancer clinic had the option of looking for an 
alternate place for treatment and whatever — and they did that on 
several occasions, let me say. They always have that option. But 
they did not tell us, and we asked on several occasions if there 
were problems arising from this and they said if it was to continue 
for a very extended time there may have been, but there weren’t 
during the period of time that that circumstance was in place. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, you said the ban on overtime was 
behind all this. Once again you’re trying to put the responsibility 
on the shoulder of the workers. The ban on overtime was behind 
all this; they’re responsible for the waiting list, is the conclusion. 
He said the ban on overtime was behind all this. The conclusion is 
that they are responsible. Mr. Minister, when are you going to 
accept responsibility for your ill-advised policies of underfunding 
the cancer clinic? When are you going to accept responsibility for 
that? 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2259 
 

Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — We should be very clear here, Mr. 
Chairman. I think you heard me, and everyone else in the House 
except that one member heard me say, the ban on overtime, that 
circumstance that we talked about a little bit, is behind us now, is 
what I said. The record will show that. I said it’s behind us now, 
thankfully, I believe were my exact words. And I say that again. 
Thankfully that circumstance of a labour-management dispute, 
which had an effect upon the waiting times of individuals in the 
cancer clinic — which was a serious circumstance — is behind us. 
And I said, it’s behind us now. I didn’t say it’s behind this or 
anything else, so you can interpret whatever you like. It doesn’t 
make any sense. 
 
So all I would ask the member, listen very carefully. And while I 
wouldn’t ask her to hang on every word I say — as I certainly 
won’t hang on every word she says — I would say, get at least the 
gist of what is meant in the statements that are made. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, it doesn’t take a great mind to 
decipher that when you talk about the ban on overtime being 
behind us, which affects waiting lists, that you’re not . . . Are you 
suggesting, Mr. Minister, that you’re not blaming the workers for 
the waiting list? Is that what you’re saying now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — I said I’m not blaming anyone. I said I 
blamed a circumstance of a labour-management dispute and I 
blame that circumstance. And a lot of people blamed the 
circumstance; a lot of people wished that the dispute could have 
been resolved in another way without lifting, without imposing a 
ban on overtime which affected patients throughout. And that’s all 
I’m saying. 
 
And I’m saying it was a circumstance that was unfortunate. 
Thankfully it’s behind us now. Once again, note that, please. And 
that’s all I can say. So I’m not blaming anyone; I’m just outlining 
the circumstance as I believe it is my responsibility here to do. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Well, Mr. Minister, that ban on overtime would 
not have been there had you properly and your government 
properly funded the cancer clinics. And that’s the reality and the 
fact. And for you to try to use that — as we saw in this House in 
question period when we ask questions, as we saw earlier — for 
you to attempt to use that as an excuse for these waiting lists is 
pathetic, Mr. Minister, because the real responsibility lies with 
your government. 
 
Mr. Minister, you said that there would be $1 million for the 
health research budget in Saskatchewan. You said $1 million. The 
fact of the matter is in this budget, which we’re now talking about, 
you have only budgeted 750,000 for the Health Research Board. 
How are you going to get the other $250 million, Mr. Minister? 
Where are you going to get it? Mr. Chairman, I just want to 
correct that. That’s 750,000. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — As I said to the member, I’m not sure 
which member asked me the question in the House the day that I 
gave the assurance that there would be $1 million, but let me just 
clarify. In the initial discussions 

leading up to the budget time and leading up to what will the 
number be in the blue book and in our estimates of expenditure, 
we always operated from the premiss — both sides — I don’t 
want to say both sides in the sense of any adversarial relationship 
because it certainly is not that, but both the Health Research Board 
and ourselves in the Department of Health operated from the 
premiss, initially, that there would be $1 million to spend, or for 
them to spend on the various research projects some of which they 
have been committed to and others which they may be 
contemplating at this time. 
 
So when it came down that we put the 750,000 in on the 
understanding that they would have something in the order of 
200,000 or more in reserve, that they would be able to draw upon 
. . . And I heard the member’s comments as it relates to that 
earlier, and I won’t comment on that. But that was the 
understanding that we had. 
 
As it turns out, the amount of money that our people in the Health 
department believe that they have in reserve, or at least in reserve 
that would be available for a draw-down like this, was somewhat 
less that that. And I would just say to the make-up and the 
assurance that I have given to the Health Research Board, and that 
the cabinet has agreed with me on, is that we will be sure they 
have their million dollars and if we need a special warrant to do 
that, they will have it. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, is it true that in 1980-81 and ’81-
82, the legislature appropriated a total of $600,000 for low-level 
radiation research grants under a letter of agreement between the 
Minister of Health and the Saskatchewan Health Research Board; 
that this was approved by treasury board to be administered for 
radiation research purposes, and that that was given to the Health 
Research Board? Is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, there was such an 
appropriation to the Health Research Board and there was no 
demand. Now the appropriation went out to the Health Research 
Board on the basis of research and studies done in low-level 
radiation. As I understand it the research board did not receive 
from the research community, like in a wider sense, the research 
community did not come forward with acceptable research 
proposals, or projects in this area, and so the money was not spent 
in that area because of the lack of demand from the research 
community. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Then in May, 1986, Mr. Minister, is it correct 
that your government directed the board to begin drawing on its 
radiation fund to partially support general health research and 
administration? Is that true, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. The answer to the 
question is yes. I’m not sure of the date, but they were . . . it was 
communicated to the, I understand, at the . . . and I don’t 
remember the circumstance, if I signed it or if it come from me or 
if it came from my predecessor, Mr. Taylor, or maybe from the 
deputy of Health or whatever. In any event, the decision was made 
for the reasons that I outlined earlier because this money was there 
and the demand from the research community was not there in 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2260 
 

this area, that they should use this money for research projects 
which the Health Research Board found to be appropriate, and that 
was done. 
 
Ms. Simard: — And, Mr. Minister, as a result of your directive, I 
understand that the board approved the termination of the radiation 
fund and transferred the remaining fund balance to the general 
fund. Is that correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — I assume that that’s the case. I assume that 
that’s the case, but I would just say to the . . . I assume that that’s 
right, but I just say to the member, and it’s some of the money that 
I referred to earlier in terms of what might have been in reserve by 
the research board of whatever, okay? 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, my understanding is that a transfer 
was made to the general fund according to your instructions, and 
that according to the Provincial Auditor’s report of ’86-87, this 
was an appropriation for a purpose not authorized by the 
legislature. Is that correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Mr. Chairman, I’m aware that the . . . and 
the officials tell me that, yes, the auditor has, you know, declared 
that indication to us. 
 
(1945) 
 
Ms. Simard: — So, Mr. Minister, you, in effect, directed the 
board to do something that the board had no authority to do with 
respect to the permission and the powers granted by the 
legislature. Is that not correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — In effect I suppose, you know, the way in 
which the auditor has characterized this thing that would be true. 
Let me just go through this because this is what would have had to 
be done, as I understand it now, after hearing and after our 
department having heard from the Provincial Auditor. We 
probably should have said to the research board: send us back that 
money — send all that money back from the research community, 
and then by raising a special warrant or some other means here in 
the legislature, sent them a cheque for a like amount. That would 
have, from the point of view that you’re raising these questions, 
that would have satisfied the Provincial Auditor perhaps, and that 
may well have been the appropriate thing to do, but it wasn’t done. 
But I would say the like amount — that amount of money is in 
good hands and is being spent by the Health Research Board. 
 
And if I am, or the Department of Health officials, or whoever, 
and I guess ultimately it’s who’s the minister, so I’ll take that, if I 
am to have my fingers rapped for saying, for using what I would 
call the common-sense approach, well then so be it. But the same 
amount of money went there, and we said to go ahead and use it 
for other research projects. They had several that they wanted to 
work on, and we said go ahead and do that. 
 
Ms. Simard: — And so they’ve been drawing on that fund, as I 
understand, Mr. Minister, and you have been funding the Health 
Research Board at a lesser rate through the years in order for them 
to draw on those funds. 

As I mentioned to you earlier, Mr. Minister, the Health Research 
Board is critical to the vitality of Saskatchewan’s health research 
and the attraction of specialists to the province of Saskatchewan, 
and the development of specialists in the province of 
Saskatchewan. It’s a real opportunity for new scientists to get their 
careers off the ground. 
 
But what we have seen is a basic underfunding by this government 
over a period of years. A $750,000 allocation this year, when the 
government wasn’t even aware that the additional $250,000 
wasn’t there, was a lack of awareness on your part, Mr. Minister, 
and the part of your department. You didn’t become aware of this 
until after this budget was drawn up. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just want to point out to you, for example, some of 
the casualties as a result of your lack of funding to the 
Saskatchewan Health Research Board. The training fellowship 
program, for example, which provided scholarships for full-time 
graduate students in health sciences was offered for the last time, 
as I understand, in ’85-86. 
 
I also have here a letter from the Merici Centre for infant 
development in Regina, Saskatchewan, addressed to the Deputy 
Premier, which states that the research initiative, which is very 
valuable to the Regina community and very valuable in the area of 
infant development, is being discouraged by the provincial 
government through allocation of limited funding to a community 
eager to keep Saskatchewan in the forefront of discovery and 
participation in matters of national and international importance. 
And that, Mr. Minister, is where the problem is. That’s the crux of 
the problem, Mr. Minister. 
 
This government is not prepared to keep Saskatchewan in the 
forefront of discovery and participation in matters of national and 
international importance. 
 
Now I know, Mr. Minister, that you received a copy of this letter, 
and what I would like to know this evening — and you received it 
some time ago, so you’ve had an opportunity to respond and do 
something about the concerns of the Merici Centre — can the 
minister assure us tonight that the Merici Centre will receive its 
funding and continue to be a viable centre in Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — My officials tell me that they’re aware that 
the Merici Centre has made application to several sources for the 
potential research project that the member refers to. Now I’m not 
sure if that has included the Health Research Board. So be it. 
 
The Health Research Board is independent and the decisions that 
they make as it relates to which research projects which will go 
forward and which ones they deem to be appropriate . . . But I 
want to give you the assurance because I don’t want to leave the 
impression that the continued operation of the Merici Centre is in 
jeopardy in any way whether or not this research project goes 
forward. 
 
And I have no reason to doubt or, at this stage, to confirm that the 
research project you refer to is a good one or a 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2261 
 

bad one, but all I’ll say is the continued operation won’t be 
affected one way or the other and will continue it to the good work 
that they do. And if the research board, as one of the agencies 
approached by the Merici Centre, believes that they can provide 
some funding for such research, well fine, but that’s certainly up to 
the members of the board of the Saskatchewan Health Research 
Board. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, the fact of the matter is concern 
was being expressed to your government and to us by people from 
the Merici development centre indicating that that funding was not 
going to be available because of the fact you were underfunding 
the Saskatchewan Health Research Board. 
 
But this is the sort of problem that is developing in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Minister, and although it’s taken a lot of time and 
determination on our part and the part of the members of this 
House, I believe that you have finally come to the conclusion, and 
your government has finally come to the conclusion, that we have 
an acute shortage of medical specialists in Saskatchewan. 
 
Can you tell us, Mr. Minister, what plans you have to rectify this 
problem of an acute shortage of medical specialists in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — I want to make several comments as it 
relates to the specialists in the province, and the shortage in some 
speciality areas, certainly. And I want to put it into some 
perspective here and put it into context, because the circumstances 
in this province in some areas is not unlike the rest of the country, 
and that is that there are some areas — examples are pathology, 
anesthesia, psychiatry, some of those areas — where we have 
shortages here. There are shortages right across the country in 
those areas, and it’s a very difficult circumstance for us and for all 
provinces to be recruiting, outside of basically the three largest 
cities in the country. And those are some difficulties. 
 
As it relates to the history here, we’ve had our ups and down’s in 
terms of some specialist areas, and we have always been. And 
when I speak to the people at the various large base hospitals who 
are very involved in the recruitment of some of these people, that’s 
been an ongoing process as long as any of them can remember, in 
terms of recruitment of specialists. And it certainly does go on 
now and I certainly don’t suggest to you that there aren’t some 
shortages, because there are. Those three that I mentioned: 
pathology, anesthesia, and psychiatry, certainly. We have some 
problems in some subspecialties of endocrinology and 
rheumatology. We have some problems there as well. 
 
But I’ll just say to the member, recruitment goes on. I’ll give you 
an example. In Regina, I’m not sure of the numbers right now, but 
I think we were down to three or four ophthalmologists. I think 
we’ll be at — what is it, seven? — soon. I’ll get the exact numbers 
here just so I don’t give you numbers that are not accurate. 
 
But we’re coming very soon with having for southern 
Saskatchewan, located here in Regina, ophthalmologists which 
will very well serve this area of southern Saskatchewan in terms of 
. . . And as you know, in terms 

of waiting lists at our hospitals, ophthalmology is one of those 
specialities which are causing backlogs because of the number of 
people, especially in our elderly population, who are requiring 
cataract surgery. 
 
So those are some of the challenges, but we’ve had some 
successes, and I use the ophthalmology for an example. And we 
have some areas where things aren’t moving as quickly as I would 
like them to or you would like them to or anybody here who’s 
thinking about this responsibly would like to see them go. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Well, Mr. Minister, obviously you have been 
unable to outline any sort of plan with respect to recruiting 
specialists in the province. I have been told by one person in the 
medical profession that we are running at something like one-half 
of the national average, Mr. Minister — one-half the national 
average for specialists. Dr. Ian McDonald estimated that over the 
course of the next decade, Saskatchewan will need something like 
450 additional specialists to meet the requirements of 
Saskatchewan health care needs — 450 additional specialists, Mr. 
Minister, and you should have a plan that you can outline to this 
legislature today as to how you’re going to attract those specialists 
in Saskatchewan. And obviously you don’t have, because you’ve 
been unable to provide that with respect to my question. 
 
In fact, Mr. Minister, the policies of your government have 
aggravated your attracting specialists to this province. Your 
underfunding of hospitals, creating long hospital waiting lists, is 
not attractive for specialists who want to come to Saskatchewan 
when they look at how doctors are being overworked and 
unappreciated in this province by your government. 
 
And rather than attempting to train and attract specialists, you’ve 
been showing the, through your cut-backs to things like the 
Saskatchewan Health Research Board — which is what you did in 
the past few years — and by your cut-backs to university funding 
so that the training at the Plains hospital in Regina was severely 
damaged by your cut-backs, was cut back . . . We lost a number of 
specialists from the province of Saskatchewan as a result of those 
very cut-backs, Mr. Minister. So you’ve been doing anything but 
attracting specialists to this province, and that’s clear from your 
answer. 
 
(2000) 
 
In fact, last year we experienced a net loss of two specialists, three 
public health positions, and four administrative positions, 
according to a medical manpower study by the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons, Mr. Minister. But that doesn’t show the 
extent of the problem that we’re facing in Saskatchewan. It’s only 
the tip of the iceberg, and it doesn’t reveal the true extent of the 
damage that is being caused by your government. 
 
In at least 20 speciality areas, there’s deficiencies in the supply of 
medical personnel, and these deficiencies were identified as early 
as 1985, Mr. Minister. For example, in internal medicine, 
Canadian standards indicate that we should have in excess of 150 
in Saskatchewan. We need at least 50 more than we have. And last 
year, Mr. Minister, 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2262 
 

according to my information, we saw the stock of specialists in 
this field fall by three. Is that not correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — As I said in my earlier response, I wanted 
to put this into some perspective and to characterize this as it 
should be characterized by all of us, is that it’s a . . . There is a 
historic problem with some speciality areas in terms of recruiting. 
 
As I said last year in the estimates, and I know it’s the case, we 
have some areas where it’s . . . Especially when there’s a chronic 
shortage in the country, it’s a hard thing. People, after a good deal 
of training . . . And I don’t know why they don’t do this, but I 
know for sure, and doctors have told me, that when they wake up 
in the morning after their final year of training at McGill and so 
on, they don’t just wake up and say, I can’t wait to get to Regina. 
Now that’s just . . . That’s the fact. I don’t understand why they 
don’t all want to be in Saskatchewan on the earliest possible plane, 
but they don’t seem to. 
 
So it’s one of the circumstances that we have, is that we must 
recruit and we must . . . And one of the things that we do have as a 
success story in this province is that we have some excellent 
equipment, the kinds of things that will draw people to the 
province, and we have some of that. 
 
Now let me just give you some numbers. As I say, I believe that 
there’s some distance to go in some of these areas, but I also 
believe that we’re on the right track. You said we have no money 
and no plan and so on, and I just want to outline a couple of things 
for you. 
 
We have, in this year’s budget, $300,000 as it relates to Regina 
alone in terms of just recruiting, just strategies, and the recruitment 
that we’ve undertaken with the hospitals and in conjunction with 
those hospitals. It’s to assist in the . . . And we have another 
300,000 which is set aside to assist in the development of the 
regional hospitals and in their recruiting of people in some of the 
regional hospitals, which means in the more rural areas than just 
these two base hospital centres. The regional hospital thing is 
something that was not done before us coming to government, and 
it’s something that has been widely received out there. 
 
Now the 300,000 that I mentioned, as it relates to Regina, is a 
number that I suppose you and I can dispute. You can dispute that 
and say, well it should have been four or five, or whatever. I’m 
saying that it’s three and it would be nice if it could be more and 
we could do even more active recruiting than we are, but I believe 
we are doing active recruiting and with some success. 
 
Let me just give some numbers to put this in perspective, Mr. 
Chairman. We’ve witnessed in this province a marked 
improvement in specialist supply in the 1980s. And I think it’s 
important to measure some of this in terms of the decade of the 
’80s versus the ’70s or whatever it is, but we’ve had marked 
improvement. And as I said before, I preface all of that by saying 
we have still some difficulty. 
 
We have 80 more specialists overall in the province — a 20 per 
cent increase. We’ve got marked improvement of supply in the 
following areas: internal medicine, up 30 

per cent; psychiatry — despite the shortages that I talked about 
earlier in terms of the national shortages — up 38 per cent; 
dermatology, up 50 per cent; anesthesia, up 48 per cent; plastic 
surgery, 50 per cent increase; and obstetrics/gynecology, up 25 per 
cent. All of those areas, Mr. Chairman, and to the hon. member, 
have had increases through the ’80s in terms of the number of 
specialists available to the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we went through in the earliest hours of these estimates, a 
number of days ago, a week or two ago now, some of the 
challenges that face us as we attempt to deliver specialty services. 
And one of those challenges is a rapidly increasing demand for 
many of these services that I am outlining. 
 
So I’m not saying this, in terms of these increases, in any way to 
say, because internal medicine and a number of specialists is up 30 
per cent that we can rest on any laurels there, because we certainly 
cannot. We must have more. And that’s a challenge that we face. 
So you’ve identified a challenge that we have; we recognize it. But 
for you to portray our actions as inaction is not true. And all I’m 
saying to the member, I just want this to be put into perspective. 
And I will give the assurance to the committee and to the member 
opposite and everyone here and across the province that the efforts 
to recruit more specialists will continue. The Department of Health 
people and the people in the hospitals, especially those base 
hospitals, but as well the regional hospitals, are very dedicated to 
trying to bring more and more of these specialists to the service of 
our people. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, any recruitment of specialists on 
your part is good, but the fact of the matter is, Mr. Minister, is 
that’s not adequate. And your attack on the medicare system, your 
cut-backs of 18.5 million last year, the fact that you are 
underfunding hospitals, is a direct cause of the fact that we are not 
attracting the number of specialists we should in this province. 
And it may be up a certain percentage from the ’70s, but the fact 
of the matter is, Mr. Minister, it’s only about half the national 
average on a per capita basis, and we have an inadequate supply of 
specialists in Saskatchewan. 
 
You talk about ophthalmology, Mr. Minister. You talked about 
ophthalmology earlier in your comments. We should have, 
according to the studies done on this, at least 30 ophthalmologists, 
and that’s a low estimate. And apparently we have only 13 in the 
province, Mr. Minister — less than half the appropriate number. Is 
that no correct, Mr. Minister, that we only have 13 in the 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Yes, I believe there are now 13 now in the 
province. You use a number that . . . I’m not sure what your 
number was now . . . Certainly 13 is not enough, and that’s why 
we are recruiting and actively recruiting. We believe there will be 
two or three more here in Regina by the end of next year. And that 
recruitment, some of it has gone on. 
 
We have some excellent recruits coming in from South Africa, 
and I know that . . . and who are extremely well trained according 
to what I’ve been hearing from some of the folks in that area. And 
I just say that while 13 may not 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2263 
 

be enough . . . I agree with you; 13 is not enough, and we are 
recruiting more for these two base hospital centres. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Well 13 is certainly not enough when the 
estimate is that it should be 30, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you please advise how many specialists in 
both ophthalmology and otolaryngology do we have in the 
province of Saskatchewan. How many of those specialists in both 
those areas — eyes and ears, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Mr. Chairman, just for a point of 
clarification: does the member . . . Just for us to have our 
discussion back and forth, if we’re both referring to the same page, 
are you referring to the annual report of ’86-87, page 39? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Okay. Do you have it there right now? 
Okay. Anyway, all I would say, I will just refer the member to that 
page 39 of the annual report because the numbers of the various 
specialities are right there and it’s just a matter that, if we’re to 
have this discussion, if we had it back and forth as it relates to that 
page and both referring to the same one, we could probably 
expedite this. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, I want an update. I want to know 
today how many eyes and ears and nose specialists there are in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Can you tell me that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Twelve. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Twelve. Well, Mr. Minister, I have a report here 
from the College of Physicians and Surgeons that indicates that 
there are none in the province of Saskatchewan and that we had, 
actually, last year, we had two of those and that those two 
specialists have left. Is that correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — No, it’s not correct. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Well, what is the correct response, then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Twelve. 
 
Ms. Simard: — And where are these 12 specialists situated, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Seven in Regina, five in Saskatoon. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, in the area of urology, it’s my 
understanding that we should have almost 20 specialists and today 
we have only 13. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Well, you know, to get into how many we 
should have in terms of what the ideal world would bring about as 
. . . I’m not sure. You know, you used the number 30 as it related 
to the other specialists, speciality area, a while ago. You use 20 
now. What I can give you is what we have and, as well, some of 
the areas, as I’ve done — some of the areas that have been 
identified to me and to the department officials as relates to areas 

where there are some shortages that are identified and that are 
recognized by everyone. As it relates to urology, we have 14 — 
nine in Saskatoon, five in Regina. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, in the area of radiology, we need, I 
understand, almost 70 specialists to serve the people of this 
province, and I understand we now have only 45 after a loss of 
four last year. Is that correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Just so we put this into context as well and 
to portray this in a way it should be, just for anyone who is 
following this in a major way, you say your information is that 
there should be, I believe you said 70 diagnostic radiology 
specialists. That information will vary. The College of Physicians 
and Surgeons will give you a number, the chapter of radiologists 
will give you another number, the national body will give you 
another number in terms of population and what would be the 
requirements and so on. I mean, those numbers that you will stand 
and say, it’s my information that, and just sort of leave it there, 
that some specialist said, this is how many there should be, I can’t 
accept and I won’t accept . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
 
The college is one of those areas that will raise that, Mr. Leader of 
the Opposition. But the fact is, Mr. Chairman, we have 42. We 
have 42 diagnostic radiologists in the province — 23 in Saskatoon, 
17 in Regina. 
 
Ms. Simard: — How many did we lose last year, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — I’m sorry, I should say just for clarification, 
if you don’t mind. I should clarify that, as well. There’s one, also, 
in Prince Albert and one in Nipawin for a total of 42. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, how many did we lose last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Okay. I don’t have an exact number on 
that. I can find out exactly, but as you will know, the annual report 
page that I referred you to has, for ’86-87, 33 of these people in 
the province. But that does not include some salaried folk that are 
in the hospitals and whatever. So that’s not an accurate 
comparison with the 42 that I gave you here. 
 
Our people will undertake to find the exact number that was, say, 
at this date last year compared to what I’ve given you for the date 
that I’m giving you these numbers this year, so you have an 
accurate number. But we have no reason to believe that there’s 
any change either up or down in a significant way — maybe one 
or two here or there. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, my information indicates that last 
year we lost approximately four radiologists, and that we now 
have 45. Now you’re telling me we have 42, so that would mean 
that we lost seven, because that’s three less than the figure that I 
have here. So I would appreciate the minister providing me with 
the information as to how many of these people have left the 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2264 
 

province in the last year. 
 
I would also like from the minister a list of names, if he would 
undertake to give me a list of names of the eyes and ear specialists 
in the province. He indicated there were 12 — and I’m wondering 
if he could provide me with that list of names? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Just a point of clarification here just so that 
we . . . I’m informed that we’re maybe talking about apples and 
orange to some extent, and I want to clear it up. 
 
When you say . . . Just a minute now. When you say, and I believe 
you did, eye, ear, nose, and throat folks, is that the one that you’re 
talking about? Eyes and ears, you said? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ophthalmology and otolaryngology. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Okay, that’s the point I want to clear up 
here. I’m told that that combined speciality, that combined 
speciality of eyes, and ear, nose, and throat, that combined 
speciality has not been trained in that combined way for a good 
number of years. So the people who have been practising that in a 
combined way are coming to the stage of retirement, and in fact, I 
think we had two that retired at the end of last year or during the 
last year — two that have retired. 
 
So what we’re talking about here now in what I . . . the numbers I 
have been giving you have been related to ophthalmology — 
strictly dealing with the eyes — and I’ve been giving you the 
otolaryngology, which is a long mouthful for a boy from Meadow 
Lake. I don’t know what it is for a girl from Meadow Lake, but 
anyway, it certainly is a big mouthful for me. But that’s the ear, 
nose, and throat folks, and the numbers I gave you in that area are 
12, and that stands at that. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Yes, Mr. Minister, and my understanding with 
respect to the combined speciality was that there was a loss of two 
in this province. Are you telling me that that was as a result of 
retirement, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — That’s right, and I’m informed that they 
won’t be replaced in that same configuration of specialization, if 
you will, because they are not trained in that same way any more. 
So we lost those two through retirement, and now we are 
recruiting, as is the case across the country, in ophthalmology and 
in the ear, nose, and throat area — separately. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, I understand that we lost one 
thoracic surgeon. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Well the number I have here at present is 
seven. The number in the annual report that I referred you to 
earlier was seven as well, for ’86-87. So from that, I believe it’s 
the same. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, according to the College of 
Physicians study, which I have in front of me, we’ve lost one 
thoracic surgeon, one neurosurgeon, one dermatologist, and we 
now have only six specialists in each of the surgery subspecialties, 
Mr. Minister, 

according to their information. Now are you disputing that, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Well I’m just outlining the facts as I have 
them here; so I’m not disputing anything. I don’t know what their 
figures are. You say that they’ve lost one, and maybe when they 
wrote their . . . I don’t know when their report was done. Maybe 
we had lost one, maybe we recruited another one in the subsequent 
period. All I’m saying is that the report before showed we had 
seven. The report that I’m referring to here, that I’m giving you 
the numbers from, says we have seven. And that means that it’s a 
. . . in a net way that means it’s exactly the same as it was last 
year. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, do you not have a copy of this 
report? Do you not have copy of this report — a provincial 
medical manpower report prepared by the College of Physicians 
and Surgeons? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Can you give me a date on the report? Is it 
about a month or two old, just to clarify? 
 
Ms. Simard: — As far as I am aware, it was released in April of 
’88 or thereabouts. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Yes, we have a copy of it but we don’t have 
it here with us. I’m informed that our people in the department 
have a copy from Dr. Kendall, but we don’t have it here with us 
right now. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, have you looked at the report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — I can honestly tell you I haven’t had a look 
at the report. The people in the department have. 
 
Ms. Simard: — No wonder, Mr. Minister, you’re not aware of the 
facts that we’re bringing forth as a result of this report. This report 
clearly establishes the need for many more specialists in the 
province of Saskatchewan and the fact that specialists have been 
leaving the province of Saskatchewan. In this report there’s an 
indication that out of 19 identified medical specialities, 
Saskatchewan has made a gain in only four — only four out of 19, 
Mr. Minister. It also indicates that in North Battleford-
Lloydminster area, for example, the ratio of specialists to 
population shows a dramatic deterioration. In 1982 this area had a 
ratio of specialists per 8,984 people, and in 1986, this ratio was 
down to 1:12,286. In the Yorkton-Melville area, the total number 
of specialists dropped from eight in 1982 to five in 1986 and this 
area lost specialists in internal medicine, in general surgery, and in 
ophthalmology, Mr. Minister. And the evidence goes on and on. 
 
And I’d suggest, Mr. Minister, that you take a very close look at 
this report because obviously the fact that you’re not reading the 
information that comes to you is the reason why you haven’t . . . 
that all you’re talking about is $300,000 for active recruiting of 
specialists. You just don’t appreciate the depth and the seriousness 
of the problem that’s facing Saskatchewan people with respect to 
the shortage of specialists, Mr. Minister — that’s obvious. 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2265 
 

 
Now with respect to the Plains hospital, the Plains hospital and 
your cut-backs, Mr. Minister, to university funding that resulted in 
something like the elimination of 33 full-time teaching positions at 
the Plains hospital and 24 support staff jobs at the college’s Regina 
program — at the College of Medicine’s Regina program, Mr. 
Minister. As a direct result of your funding cuts, southern 
Saskatchewan lost the following medical specialists, Mr. Minister: 
an endocrinologist, the only one in Regina; an infectious disease 
specialist, one of four AIDS (acquired immune deficiency 
syndrome) specialists in the entire province, Mr. Minister; a 
specialist in intensive care medicine, a cardiologist, a 
rheumatologist, a pediatrician, two microbiologists, a 
hematologist. And that’s a total of nine medical specialists, Mr. 
Minister, who have left this province to find positions elsewhere in 
provinces where they’ll be better appreciated. 
 
Have you given that consideration, Mr. Minister, and what are you 
going to do about rectifying that situation with respect to the 
Plains hospital? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, let’s portray these 
things in the context with which the . . . In fact, the report that the 
member refers to, the one that she’s been referring to for some 
time from Dr. Kendall, and that’s why I asked for clarification if it 
was about two months old. The report prepared by Dr. Kendall on 
behalf of the College of Physicians and Surgeons was prepared at 
the request of the University of Saskatchewan. The university, 
being involved with the College of Medicine, with the Department 
of Education within our government, Department of Health, in a 
review of the College of Medicine at the university, — very 
extensive review in terms of the needs of this very specialists’ 
areas and so on — the university asked the College of Physicians 
and Surgeons to make us . . . give a substantive report and they did 
that. 
 
And the report that the member is quoting from and is chastising 
me because I haven’t read it as, you know, the absolute gospel and 
so on at this stage along the development of that review, is that it 
was done at the request of the university for this review. It will be 
put into the hopper, so to speak, with all of the other requests for 
information which have come forward to the college and for that 
review. 
 
(2030) 
 
And when that is completed, Mr. Chairman, I can tell you that I’m 
sure the university will have the backing of both departments of 
government and others to come up with solutions to some of those 
problems. 
 
So that’s just by way of clarifying and putting into some 
perspective the kinds of somewhat wild accusations that are 
coming across the floor here. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Chairman, I just want to make it clear to you that 
while we have some problems with recruitment and we’ve talked 
about that, and she says, what are you going to do about it. I have 
outlined earlier the things that we are attempting to do and the 
amount of money that we have put up in conjunction with the base 
hospital centres. 

 
In the case of a $300,000 amount that’s in this budget, we’ve put 
up for regional hospitals and the recruitment that needs to go on 
there in terms of some speciality areas to those regional hospitals. 
And I just say, Mr. Chairman, I’m sure that will be disputed from 
across there to say, well 300,000, not enough. It should be another 
number, and that’s fine. We’ll have to agree to disagree on that. 
 
I may even say on many occasions that I wish there was more for 
certain areas, but I will say that it is simply not accurate for her to 
portray the circumstances of recruitment and of specialist 
shortages in some of these areas as a subject or as a circumstance 
that we are not addressing because we are addressing it. We are 
addressing it aggressively; we are addressing it more aggressively, 
frankly, than has been done for some time, and it’s because of 
some of these shortages that have been outlined. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, this report by the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons is a searing indictment of your health 
care policies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — And how did you pass it off? You said you were 
going to put into the hopper, I believe, put it into the hopper. 
Another study, just another study, is the implication that that 
statement makes, Mr. Minister. 
 
You were talking about wild accusations. The fact of the matter is, 
this is information gleaned from a very responsible report, Mr. 
Minister. I don’t think there are any wild accusations in there. It’s 
facts, Mr. Minister, it’s independent facts and evidence and a 
searing indictment of your health care policies. 
 
And so what are you going to do? You’re going to put it in the 
hopper, and somebody will look at and make some decision about 
it later on. He’s passing the buck once again because he doesn’t 
want to take responsibility for the problems that are facing 
Saskatchewan people. He doesn’t want to take immediate action 
and responsibility for the health care cut-backs that have created 
this problem in Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. 
 
And this problem was identified in 1985 as I indicated earlier that 
we would need many more specialists in Saskatchewan, and what 
was your government’s response to the identification of that 
problem? An $18.5 million cut-back in the health budget last year 
— that was your government’s response. Long hospital waiting 
lists, the decimation of the prescription drug plan, the decimation 
of the school-based children’s dental plan — that was your 
government’s response to the fact that these problems in health 
care were identified back in 1985, thereby creating an 
environment in Saskatchewan whereby health care professionals 
would be reluctant to come to the province, Mr. Minister. You’re 
directly responsible for that problem, Mr. Minister. Now all you’re 
going to do is let someone else make the decision down the line 
somewhere. And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that you should be 
taking immediate action on this matter. 
 
Now with respect to occupational therapists, you had 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2266 
 

suggested earlier, Mr. Minister, that you would be in favour of 
setting up a program in Saskatchewan to train occupational 
therapists. Mr. Minister, my understanding is that such a program 
would cost perhaps an immediate outlay of $400,000 to set up the 
program, but that the ongoing costs would not be substantially 
more than what you now spend to Albert and Manitoba to have 
our occupational therapists, of which only 50 per cent return. It 
would not be in excess of the amount that you are now spending. 
 
Is that correct, Mr. Minister, and when can we see your 
government put forward the needed funds to set up an 
occupational therapists school in Saskatchewan in order to train 
needed occupational therapists? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Couple of things, Mr. Chairman. Just to go 
back a little bit to the report that the member was talking about 
earlier, and for her to say that I had said . . . when I use the term 
“wild accusations,” I was using the term “wild accusations” based 
on the portrayal by that member of my response to the report that 
was done for the university by the College of Physicians, and 
those were wild accusations as it relates to her inability to 
understand what the real series of events here were. 
 
That report by the college was one of about 20 reports which is 
going to the university, requested by the university, and they said 
the university would . . . or I mean that the university and the 
college, the Department of Health, whatever it is, the study of the 
roles of the College of Medicine, a review there, and a very 
welcomed one by all concerned. 
 
So when I said “wild accusations,” that’s what I was talking about 
is the portrayal by that member of my lack of response. In fact, it 
wouldn’t have been appropriate at all for me to respond to that 
particular report because it was done for the university. 
 
And she also portrayed in one of those statements a few minutes 
ago that the reason that we’re having trouble recruiting, even 
though we have more money into some of these . . . and 
significantly more money into the recruitment of specialists from 
all across the country, and in some cases, into South Africa and 
other places, we have more money into that recruitment than has 
been there of some significant time. And for her to say, and as you 
will hear in the line-up of rhetoric about the . . . oh, they’ll go 
through a whole series of things about how this minister has 
totally wrecked the health care system and all of that sort of thing. 
And if you take that portrayal, Mr. Chairman, one could only 
conclude from that that before this minister was here, they were 
beating the doors down, specialists that is now, were beating the 
doors down in Saskatchewan to get here. I suppose, somewhere 
like I portrayed it before that once they’d finished their speciality 
areas at whatever hospitals in the very large universities across the 
country, they said I can’t wait to get to Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s not the case. They haven’t been saying it for some time. We 
must actively and aggressively recruit. We are actively and 
aggressively recruiting, and as I outlined earlier, we are having 
some success albeit not the success that I would like to see or that 
any of us who are in our 

more responsible moments would like us to have. So that’s the 
case. 
 
As it relates to your last question about occupational therapists, I 
said to you before that I believe that the time is very near when we 
should, at our University of Saskatchewan, have a school for 
occupational therapists. I say that as Minister of Health and as one 
who looks at this wider health enterprise and realizes that 
physiotherapy — and we’ve been through this a few moments 
even tonight — that physiotherapy and occupational therapy are 
areas that should be looked at and who should be trained here in 
the province. As it relates to physiotherapy, we added some 
positions, as I said. 
 
So obviously that decision rests with the University of 
Saskatchewan. I, you know, have been in some very informal 
discussions with some people at the university to say that I believe 
that, as Minister of Health, that occupational therapists school is 
an appropriate area, but obviously the university must make some 
of those decisions, and they will. I can’t give you a time frame. I 
can’t give you a budget or any of that sort of thing, nor will I be in 
a position to at any time during these estimates. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, it’s not simply a question of 
having difficulty recruiting specialists, although that’s a serious 
problem. The fact of the matter is, specialists are leaving the 
province, and this minister and his government, Mr. Chairman, 
have contributed to that. 
 
Now with respect to occupational therapists, Mr. Minister, the 
predictions are that we will need something like, by 1992, one for 
every 7,000 people in the province of Saskatchewan. Do you agree 
with those predictions, and what are you doing today in order to 
meet that need? Because right now, as I understand in the province 
of Saskatchewan, we only have one to every 17,000 people in the 
province of Saskatchewan. By 1992, just four years from now, 
we’re going to need one in 7,000. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, you may say you can’t say anything about it 
today, but I want to know what are you planning to do today, and 
what is your department planning to do to meet the crisis we’re 
going to be facing in Saskatchewan with respect to occupational 
therapists in the year 1992? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Well I’m told that we’re making major 
strides in this area now, and I preface my comments with what I 
said earlier that, I recognize, and all of us who look at the 
population and some of the demographics out there, and the need 
for some of people that work in these areas it’s going to be great 
and that’s why we’re trying to deal with it now. 
 
Last year in this province we had 70 practising occupational 
therapists. We have 19 that are graduating this year from the two 
schools in our two neighbouring provinces, 14 of whom were on 
bursary, funded to an extent, certainly, from the Government of 
Saskatchewan. I believe almost all of those 19 will be coming 
back, so we will have, all being equal, we will have approaching 
90 practising here in the province next year. 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2267 
 

So we are making some major strides in this area, but that does not 
diminish the facts, as I outlined them to you before, and that I 
think you and I will agree on, is that we will need more, and that’s 
the basis for my comments earlier, that I believe, as Minister of 
Health, that there will be a need for an occupational therapists 
school. And it’s probably in an area like this, where the demand is 
greater for the number of people to graduate from the school, it’s 
probably more cost effective to deal with them here in the 
province, but that’s a decision certainly that’s not mine in the 
Department of Health. But I will do what I can to promote that 
idea at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, what it takes on your part is 
commitment and funding. It’s not . . . And don’t attempt to just 
pass the buck once again to another body in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, according to the information that I have, we will 
need about 236 occupational therapists by 1992. At your rate of 20 
graduating . . . And you said most of them are coming to 
Saskatchewan. I have been advised the attrition rate is about 50 
per cent — 50 per cent is what I’ve been advised. But even if 
every single one of these people came to Saskatchewan, 20 a year 
for the next four years, that would give us about 150 occupational 
therapists, as opposed to the 236 that we’re going to be needing by 
1992. 
 
I know that the minister appreciates that there’s a problem there, 
but obviously he doesn’t have commitment to solving the problem 
or he’s not prepared to put his money where his mouth is. 
 
With respect to laboratory technicians, Mr. Minister, will you 
confirm that it is your intention, or the intention of your 
department, to radically change the existing training program for 
laboratory and radiological technicians? Will you confirm that, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — I am informed that there are three areas. I 
believe you’ve mentioned laboratory technology, but there are 
three areas in the health sciences, related health sciences: medical 
laboratory technology, medical radiation technology, and certified 
combined technician — those three areas where health and 
education, the two departments, have been in some discussion 
about reviewing the curriculum. 
 
Now I just wanted to make it clear that . . . because I believe in 
your question you said, is the curriculum being changed? And my 
answer to that is that it may well be, but the curriculum will not be 
changed until everyone involved in it has come to an agreement. 
 
(2045) 
 
And just to give you the status of this, a committee is meeting to 
study the entire question now and the membership on that in all 
related areas — members from the Department of Educations and 
our own Department of Health, the Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology, the hospitals, as well as the 
program advisory committees. And there are advisory committees 
in each one of those, by and large made up of professionals in the 
field in those areas, in each one of 

those areas. 
 
So I’m not sure what the base of your question except that, if I 
understood you properly, you were asking if the curriculum has 
been changed or are we proposing a specific change. If that’s the 
case the answer to that is, no. There’s a committee looking at the 
program, and it may well be that it changes, but it will only change 
if there’s substantial agreement. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, I’m pleased to see that you’re 
finally consulting with the people involved in this program 
because it’s my information that originally a letter came out of 
your department indicating that these programs were going to be 
substantially altered and giving as a reason for that, that it was an 
obsolete apprenticeship model and that the curriculum was 
outdated. 
 
This was coming out of your department, Mr. Minister, and I have 
a copy of that letter in my possession. And this letter came out of 
your department at the same time that the Canadian Medical 
Association in Saskatchewan reviewed the course and gave it its 
stamp of approval and in fact indicated that it was one of the best 
of its kind across Canada, according to my understanding, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Needless to say, it shocked many people — students and 
employees involved in this program — that the government would 
be looking at disbanding a program because it is obsolete, when 
the Canadian Medical Association was saying that it was 
excellent, and there was virtually no criticism with respect to the 
program. 
 
And one of the suggestions that was brought forward was that — 
and in the letter from the Department of Health, Mr. Minister — 
that as a consequence of the proposed changes, the students would 
lose their status of employees within the meaning of The Trade 
Union Act. Mr. Minister, is that the main reason for you 
attempting to change this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Well absolutely . . . The last statement is 
absolutely erroneous. So that’s not the case. I mean, I . . . You 
know, if that’s the belief of some, then I would just say clearly 
here that it’s not the case. 
 
Let’s just be clear in what’s happening here. I’m aware that there 
was some concern raised by some people who misinterpreted the 
letter that came out from the Department of Health to the various 
hospitals and others who have these practitioners in their employ. 
It had been brought to our attention by some that there needed to 
be a review of the curriculum and of the apprenticeship model and 
some of the things that were under way. And we asked for some 
feedback whether that was the case or not. And we certainly got 
some of that, and that’s where it stands. 
 
So for anyone to portray this as any kind of attempt to change 
something in a unilateral way, it’s not the case — never was 
intended and never would be the case. So I just leave it at that and 
give you the assurance that that was not the intention. And if 
there’s . . . You know, I’m not sure what it serve to go around and 
around on this thing, but 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2268 
 

we can if you like. 
 
And I just say that the committee now involves all of Education, 
Department of Health, the institute of applied science and 
technology, and the hospitals who employ these practitioners. So 
all the bases are covered and I think it’s . . . Well, whatever comes 
out of the committee study will certainly be without question the 
best curriculum and the best training model that can be there for 
these areas of study. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, the letter that I’m referring to, dated 
March 10, 1988, indicates the timing for the change program 
would be effective on September 1, 1988, and there would be no 
student intake in any of the programs in September of 1988. The 
letter goes on to say things like, the basic elements of the new 
direction are clear, Mr. Minister. That’s what the letter says. I 
think it’s perfectly clear from this letter that it was intended that 
these changes would go forward, until there was a hue and cry 
from people involved and only then did your government sit back 
and listen. But it was another instance of where your government 
was going to move without adequate consultation with the people 
involved. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, can you assure us tonight that these students 
will not lose their status under The Trade Union Act. Will you 
ensure us of that tonight, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Mr. Chairman, let me just be clear of how 
this thing works. Presently we have part of the program that we’re 
referring to here, in the training program, involves practical 
training in the hospital lab. We pay a stipend to these students at a 
cost of about $3 million annually. That’s the case. And I believe 
the $3 million comes from part of an collective bargaining 
agreement, if I’m to understand it properly here. So for the 
member to say . . . For me to say they will always be, and to 
predict the future, I don’t know that. 
 
If this study says — and this is fine — if the study says that . . . 
The study that I’m talking about says that these people, through 
their training program, will be something other than members of 
the union or whatever during the time of their training. We will be 
willing to look at that. But I would tell you, as I said earlier, it was 
not the intention in the initial stages of looking at curriculum to 
say to them, here we are, and we’re going to change this on the 
basis of whether or not you’re in the union. We would change it 
on the basis of whether or not the apprenticeship model that they 
now operate in is the appropriate one, and we will continue to look 
at that from the best educational model, and that’s the way it 
should be. 
 
So the hospitals, the institute, the advisory committees which are 
made up of practitioners in the area, or the various areas, and these 
three that I’ve outlined, they’re all involved, and whatever comes 
out of that in terms of the training model that’s the most 
appropriate for these three areas of medical lab techs, medical 
radiation techs, and certified combined technicians. So I can’t 
predict the future, but I can say to you that I won’t give an 
unequivocal statement here because it wouldn’t be appropriate to, 
to say that they will for ever and ever, amen, be a part of the 
union. I can’t say that because if that’s not the model that’s 
adopted by the committee, it 

wouldn’t be appropriate for me to have said that at this stage. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, my question is not for ever and 
ever, amen. My question is as a result of the restructuring — 
which many people maintain is totally unnecessary because the 
CMA said this was a good program — as a result of this 
restructuring on your part, will these employees, will these 
students lose their status under The Trade Union Act? It’s a simple 
question, and we’re talking about a specific period of time, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as I have said, there is 
no restructuring, there has been no restructuring. And what I said 
to you before is that if there is a restructuring, it may well be that 
they are not part of the union. But there is no restructuring as of 
now, and I don’t know if I can predict that there will be. In fact, I 
can’t predict that there will be a restructuring or whether the status 
quo will remain, as some believe it should. And certainly there is a 
variance of opinion and I believe inside the committee or in the 
various agencies that are a party to the committee. So we’ll see 
what comes from that. I’m in no position to predict what the 
outcome will be, nor should I be, frankly. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, why would your government 
propose to change a program, which is what you did — I know 
you’re having second thoughts, but that’s what you did — to alter 
a program which has just been passed by the CMA as passing with 
flying colours? Why would you propose to do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — I can’t deal in the hypothetical, Mr. 
Chairman. I said there’s no restructuring; the status quo remains. 
The status quo may well remain for the foreseeable future or it 
may change and there may be some restructuring of the way in 
which these programs are offered and which educational model 
they use. 
 
Other than that, I don’t know what else to say. There’s nothing I 
can say at this juncture, and so I don’t think it would serve the 
committee well to go on to any more. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, I have been advised that the 
teaching technologists presently in the hospitals will probably not 
welcome transfer to SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology), particularly in view of staff upheavals 
in 1987. It has been suggested to me that teaching technologists 
may very well decide to leave the teaching field or the province, 
Mr. Minister, as a result of this proposed restructuring that came 
out of your department, Mr. Minister. 
 
And this is another example, Mr. Minister, of how your 
department goes off on a tangent, wanting to change something 
for the sake of change, not because you see anything good in it — 
without consulting people, causing people to be upset, causing 
concerns in the field — another example of why health care 
professionals are not remaining in the province, Mr. Minister, 
because you’re chasing them out by your wrong-headed policies 
and by moving in areas where you don’t know what you’re doing. 
You have no idea of what’s going on and you just decide that for 
some reason or another you want to 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2269 
 

change something with no real foundation or good reason for 
doing it. 
 
Mr. Minister, when we take a look at the situation and see why 
you wanted to change it, the only reason people could come up 
with was to save the government the 2 or $3 million that you 
spend as a stipend for these students; to save that money by 
restructuring the program so that the students are no longer 
protected by The Trade Union Act. That’s the only reason that 
people could come up, because none of the other reasons given by 
your department had any validity whatsoever, Mr. Minister. 
 
And this is another example of how you go about looking after the 
affairs of health in the province of Saskatchewan, and why we’re 
in such a situation and such a crisis today with specialists and 
health care professionals trained in Saskatchewan leaving the 
province, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — The circumstance, as the member portrays 
it as it relates to the . . . She says, I have my information is that the 
teaching technologists are going to all catch the first bus out of the 
province as soon as something changes, whatever. I don’t know 
exactly what she was saying, but it’s somewhere along that line. 
And I just . . . Our information is that I don’t believe that’s the 
case, and while I’ve said it before, the status quo may remain; 
there may well be a restructuring of the educational model. I don’t 
know that. I don’t know what else I can say, Mr. Chairman, except 
to say that all of the deep and dark sort of motivation that is 
attributed to me by the member opposite and the health critic is 
unwarranted. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. My 
interest this evening for the moment concerns itself with the 
recently announced task force on new directions for health care — 
the Saskatchewan Commission on Directions in Health Care. I 
have the material in front of me which the government used in the 
announcement of the task force, and I notice that the Hon. 
Premier, in describing the task force on page 2 of a copy of the 
written statement that I have that he made, described this as an 
independent, comprehensive review of the health care system. I 
note the words “independent” and “comprehensive” review. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is: why would the Department of 
Health not include in the terms of reference or in the mandate 
statement a specific commitment to the four principles which have 
served as the basic foundation of our medicare and hospitalization 
system from the Thompson commission through the Hall 
commission studies, Lloyd, Douglas governments — universality, 
accessibility, comprehensiveness, and public administration? Is it 
not correct that the comprehensive review that the Premier 
promises that this task force will undertake in fact means just that 
— it means a review of those very four basic principles which 
serve as the corner-stone for our present system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Well a couple of things just to put the 
members mind at ease here. The four principles that the member 
refers to — universality, accessibility, 

comprehensive nature, and the public administrative nature — all 
those four are enshrined in the Canada Health Act presently. I 
mean those are taken as given, and they’re in the Canada Health 
Act, and they’re enshrined there, and for us to reiterate the 
principles of the Canada Health Act or other health Acts on the 
national scene would, I don’t think, serve anything in terms of the 
nature of this review. I’ve said that we will conduct and that the 
commission . . . and give them their mandate to conduct a 
comprehensive review of the Canada Health . . . not the Canada 
Health Act, but of the health system in its widest possible terms 
here in the province, we mean just that, very clearly. 
 
And I think the member in looking at the membership of the 
commission, in looking at the people that are there and the 
unquestionable sort of qualifications of those folks and their 
acceptance by the people of the province, I think that they will do 
an excellent job, and I know your question was not related to the 
job that they will do or their qualifications. 
 
So I just want to make it very clear that those things which you 
mentioned, and I have said on other occasions and say again, and 
the Premier said in his announcement of the members of the task 
force and of its mandate and so on, that what we are recognizing 
here is that there’s need for a very comprehensive study which is 
the composite of this total health care enterprise. There’s only 
been one other in the history of this province — one that was done 
in the Sigerist report of 1944 — there’s only been one other 
comprehensive study done in the history of this province in 1944 
in the Sigerist review, the Sigerist commission. 
 
And while there have been many studies, and we’ve always heard 
the rhetoric surrounding that — another study and this study is 
done and this one’s got dust on it and this one is on the shelf and 
all the rest of those things that go on, that the people talk about in 
what tends to become very much a politicized war of words, back 
and forth in terms of politics of this whole area. But each one of 
those other studies will have been on a particular aspect of health 
care, whether it be regional hospitals or rural hospitals or the role 
of the medical college or the association of the medical college 
with the needs of the province or whatever. I mean there are just 
many, many of them. 
 
But what this study is out to do is to look at the whole picture and 
to come with a blueprint, to use the term that’s used in the 
mandate statement. I just want to give the member assurance, as I 
have done, I believe, before, that those things are in the Canada 
Health Act and we have no intention of suggesting that it be 
changed. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I thank the minister for 
that assurance, but I take a look, for example, at the terms of 
reference, the specific terms of reference, and it seems to me the 
government is building into its argument a basic contradiction of 
what it says. It says that the study is to be comprehensive. Indeed 
the terms of reference are very comprehensive. 
 
Is the minister telling me that under item 2, for example, or let’s 
take item 11, the utilization of health care services, 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2270 
 

all of those things which the Canada Health Act prohibits are 
beyond the study of this commission? The question of utilization 
fees or the question of the utilization fees either at doctors or at the 
hospitals, those are out of order now, is that what you’re telling me 
because the Canada Health Act prohibits them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Well they are, as I’ve said. It’s a very 
comprehensive study of health care in the province, okay? I’ve 
said that. You asked me before, in terms of these very basic 
principles — sort of building blocks or whatever — principles of 
the system that we know in this country, a good deal of the credit 
for which rests in this province, and there’s no question about that. 
It rests with . . . come out of the souls of the people in this 
province. And it was though the political process and so on, and 
that’s fine and that’s good and some excellent pioneers here, some 
of whom the hon. member asking the questions knew very well or 
knows well. And there’s no question and no denying that and no 
willingness to deny any of that because that’s the history of our 
province, one that all of us as citizens should be proud of. So those 
are there and those are taken as given and that’s . . . you can have 
that assurance now. So it’s not a question of that. 
 
As it relates to the Canada Health Act, what the Canada Health 
Act says in basic terms is that any time there’s a reference to, you 
know, costs or fees or charges, all those kinds of things, there’s a 
major cost to implementing anything like that. That’s what the 
Canada Health Act says and we adhere to that in this province. 
There’s a financial cost to any kind of implementation of some of 
those things. 
 
So I mean, if you . . . I think, by and large, you and I are in 
agreement with that, but the problem with that is that you don’t 
want us to be in agreement because you’re looking for your little 
chink in there and so on where you’re going to have some great 
political horse that you can charge around the province on. And 
I’m sorry, no white charger’s going to be let in here by me for you 
to hop on and ride out on. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — There’s so many white charges or chargers 
that this government and this minister have released that we’re all 
riding them actually, if you want to look t them, so don’t worry 
about another one. 
 
But I say to the minister — now think this out carefully — and 
I’m trying to park my obvious commitment to medicare and 
hospitalization the way I see it. I’m trying to park that for the 
moment. I’m trying to get you to give this House and the people of 
Saskatchewan a straight answer as to the scope of the study of this 
task force. 
 
I put this specific question to you: are you telling me that, for 
example, the terms and the conditions of the Canada Health Act, 
because they are adhered to by this provincial government, those 
four principles are beyond the scope of the study of this task 
force? Yes or no? Or is everything understudied? You can’t have 
it both ways. It’s either comprehensive, in which case the Canada 
Health Act and the provisions are understudied, too. Or in the 
alternative, it isn’t comprehensive and those provisions aren’t 
understudied. Now, which is it? 

Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to be very clear 
here with the member because he asked a specific question, 
initially, in his first question about why . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, what. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — No, no, no, just let me come to that. About 
why, for example, were these four principles — universality, 
accessibility, comprehensiveness, and the public administration of 
health care — why those four principles were not specifically laid 
out in the terms of reference. That was the question that you asked, 
and I said because they are understood to be the principles of the 
system in this country, and they are. So there’s no need to lay 
them out directly here. 
 
Now I said to you that the commission has been asked to look at 
the health care system in our province, all of the delivery and 
whatever, of the health care system, and they will do that. And 
what I will say as well, because the next logical question would 
be, what have you, you know, what have you said to them that we 
will not entertain, and is there anything that you might 
recommend. And the facts are that I have not said to them things 
which we will entertain as recommendations, and I have not given 
them guide-lines to things which we will not entertain. I have said 
to this very astute and eminent group of Saskatchewan citizens, 
look at this system; come with recommendations that will develop 
a blueprint for the delivery of health care in the province on into 
the next century and over some period of time. 
 
And within that context I believe, and I believe strongly, that these 
principles, universality and so on, are there and understood by all 
of the members of the task force, by all the members on this side 
of the House, by all the members on that side of the House. 
They’re understood clearly and they’re there. And this provincial 
government will be adhering to those, and I believe that the 
members of the task force know that well, and they don’t need that 
spelled out to them by me or by the Premier. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t know how much 
I should pursue this, but I find the answers of the minister, to be 
quite frank, a little bit confusing. I won’t say quite confusing, but a 
little bit confusing. let me repeat the history of the questioning and 
the answers as I see them on this issue that I raise tonight. 
 
I asked, in essence, how comprehensive is the study, and then I 
suggested that perhaps it shouldn’t be so comprehensive as to 
permit the task force to re-examine again the four basic principles 
under which our health care system is based: comprehensiveness, 
accessibility, universality, and public administration. And perhaps 
I didn’t state it this way, but I suggested that those four principles 
should have been excluded specifically in the scope of the task 
force terms of reference. 
 
Now the minister’s answer to me is, they’re not in the terms of 
reference because they’re covered in the Canada Health Act, and 
they are “generally understood” by the members, including, he 
says his own government. 
 
(2115) 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2271 
 

Permit me to be political for a moment. Leaving the members of 
the task force aside, I’m not so sure how much those principles, 
four principles, are understood by you, sir, and your government, 
but that’s another issue. 
 
Now coming back to the history, you’re trying to tell me that those 
four basic principles are not included in the terms of reference 
because they’re covered by the law of Canada called the Canada 
Health Act and other provisions. My question therefore to you is 
simple: if that is so, will you define — if I may put it that way — 
tonight, that the terms of reference of this task force do not permit 
the task force to study the four corner-stones of the medicare, 
hospitalization system? In other words, you’re limiting the scope 
of the inquiry. That’s what I’m asking. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Now what I’ll say to the member is that I 
will not restrict what the commission can or should look at. What I 
could do and what we could do in the government is to say to the 
commission: here you are; look around the room; this is the 
commission; these are the members of the commission; you have 
a very broad mandate, and the terms of reference, and the reason 
. . . And I go back to that. From what I could do as Minister of 
Health, and the Premier in appointing these, what we could do is 
to set out the terms of reference, and we could say to the 
commission, go and do this in the broadest possible context. And 
that’s what we have done. 
 
The reason that I did not, or we in the government did not include 
in the terms of reference the basic corner-stone that you talked 
bout in terms of saying “here they are” and so on is because they 
are in the Canada Health Act. I believe that they are understood. I 
believe they’re understood clearly by our citizenry, by the people 
in this legislature; I believe they’re understood by the members of 
the commission, frankly. 
 
But I have no intention beyond that — what you see here — to say 
to that commission, and I will respectfully ask that we allow this 
commission now to go out there and do their very independent 
study. And I give you the assurance here and on the record as I’ve 
done before, but I give you the assurance — and the member will 
laugh — but I give him the . . .(inaudible interjection). . . No, well, 
just a smile, but a smile from that member is a hardy laugh. I tell 
you that. He hasn’t been smiling much recently for obvious 
reasons. 
 
But in any case, Mr. Chairman, what I will say to the member is 
that I will give him the assurance that the commission has the 
broadest possible mandate to look at this. They have not, and it 
would not be appropriate for myself or for the Premier to put 
restrictions upon these folks — they did not; they should not have. 
And I think the reason that we were able to have affirmative 
answers from many of the people who are on that committee was 
because they had that assurance from both myself and the Premier 
that restrictions would not be placed upon them for them to go out 
and do their very challenging job, and no one can deny that it is a 
challenging job that they’ve undertaken. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I agree, it’s a challenging 
job. And I agree that there needs to be a look, a futuristic look at 
the health care system in Canada and in 

Saskatchewan. 
 
I took part in, perhaps not the greatest study that was ever done, 
but it was certainly a study on ageing in technology with the 
Canadian Medical Association myself and saw how difficult the 
task was. That’s not the direction that I’m criticizing, or at least 
questioning. I’m trying to determine, and I think the press and the 
public wants to know, exactly what it is the government intended. 
 
Now please, Mr. Minister, I don’t mean this in any personal basis, 
but verbal assurances for the purposes of this government and for 
me, with the greatest of respect, are not good enough. This is an 
important undertaking and enterprise. I want to know where it is, 
why it is . . . Well I’ll reword it this way: I want to know if the 
minister says that the provisions of the Canada Health Act are not 
to be studied, universality — you know the debate that has been 
going on about universality. Your government in Ottawa, for 
example, thought that universality with respect to old age pensions 
was something that should be looked at. We know there’s a lot of 
literature on the question of universality. Now if that’s verboten, if 
that’s out, if that’s not under the consideration as an example, then 
why would the government not consider — I refer the minister to 
the mandate statement, Mr. Minister, page 3, where in the broad 
mandate . . . it’s not page 3, I’m sorry, paragraph 3, you say the 
following: 
 

The Saskatchewan Commission on Directions in Health Care 
will: 
 
. . . 3) recommend policy options to the government on: 
a) ways to improve health care delivery and efficiency of the 
system (now I’m underlining these words) while maintaining 
quality and accessibility of service . . . 

 
Why didn’t you add in there, “while maintaining quality, 
accessibility, and service, and commitment to the principles of 
universality, comprehensiveness, and public administration,” the 
four corner-stones of our publicly-funded health care system that 
members on this side of the House fought so hard to implement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — I believe that, as I said before, that those 
principles are understood. I believe that they were. And I just say 
to the member, just let’s be very clear here in the sense that we 
have to . . . you can’t look at, you know, in the broadest sense, in 
terms of some of the issues which are out there and the challenges 
that are there for this society. 
 
We talked a little bit tonight, your member from Lakeview and the 
critic . . .(inaudible interjection). . . No, but the critic talked about 
specialist shortages, for example, tonight — obviously an area that 
must be looked at in terms of solutions to some of that problem 
and so on. Now you cannot, nor can the commission, nor any of us 
can look at that in a major way without looking at and discussing 
and recognizing problems of accessibility. Whether for, you know, 
for people who live in more remote parts of the province, 
whatever. Accessibility and the whole . . . all of the principles 
there have to be looked at as it relates to the specialist shortage 
circumstance that 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2272 
 

has to be studied. 
 
You look at the comprehensive nature of the medical care system 
and of the health care system, I mean, you . . . In terms of some of 
the new technology that’s around, in terms of transplant centres of 
excellence, the kinds of things that we are going to need, those are 
the kinds of things that have to be studied. 
 
You cannot look at that, no one can; this commission can’t, I 
can’t, or the officials in Health can’t, even you can’t — if you 
wanted to get into this in some kind of a serious way — discuss 
this without dealing with the comprehensive nature of the area — 
even the study that you referred to that you were a member of, the 
commission sponsored by the CMA, a study on what I believe is 
ageing and technology, was the title of that. Accessibility, the 
comprehensive nature of the health care system, those things have 
to be looked at in the context of the accessibility of health care for 
our ageing population, all of that. 
 
So you know, it’s very hard to draw a line and say, well you can’t 
study this and you won’t be able to touch that, because it really 
does tie the hands of this very excellent committee in terms of 
dealing with the issues. 
 
But as I go back to the principles of accessibility for our citizens 
and wherever they might live and the universal nature of medical 
care and so on, I say to you, those are given principles, those are 
principles that have been around a long time, and those are 
principles that will remain a good, long time for sure. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Minister, let me just get a little more 
specific, if I can, to see if I understand your assurances. Under the 
terms of reference, as opposed to the mandate — I’ll just pick one, 
although I could pick several here — I’ll direct your attention to 
paragraph 2 under the terms of reference, “insured services,” the 
task force is to look at “insured services.” 
 
Is it the minister’s view that the comprehensive nature of the 
mandate to the commission gives it the power to both look at, and 
in theory recommend, de-insuring a variety of services which are 
currently covered by our medicare and hospitalization plans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — As it relates to the paragraph you refer to, it 
says insured services such as medical services, dental services and 
drugs and so on . . . Is that the one that you’re referring to? And I 
say to you that in a very wide nature of what they must do . . . I 
suppose hypothetically they could say several things. They could 
say in these areas we think that there should be a wider area of 
insurance in some areas. And on the other hand, they may say 
these services probably should not fall under insurance services. 
They could say both of those things, hypothetically. They must 
have the mandate to be able to look at this in the broadest context. 
And they have that mandate. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well that’s the point. I think they have a 
mandate all right, and it is a broad mandate. There’s no doubt 
about it. The minister’s answer, I think, goes to show how broad it 
is. The minister says they could seek to 

expand the insured services, but equally true, they could seek to 
limit or contract the insured services. That’s a potential threat to 
the medicare system as we know it. You admit that. 
 
Let me refer you to paragraph 11, the utilization of health care 
services. Is it the minister’s view that theoretically the task force 
could say that utilization of the health services is so great that here 
needs to be placed some form of disincentive for the use of 
hospital or doctor’s visits? Does it have that freedom and 
comprehensiveness too? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — The answer here will be the same, Mr. 
Chairman. The committee has the mandate to look at all of this 
system. I mean, what the . . . and they have the mandate to come 
forward with recommendations which will look at this system as it 
is now, as they believe it should be into the future, for the benefit 
of our . . . and the health and well-being of our citizens. That’s 
really what the whole thing is all about. And that’s what they’ll do. 
 
It will not serve that commission well, you know, at the risk of . . . 
because of the very wide mandate of you saying because this is 
excluded that, you know, there’s some problem at that . . . You go 
ahead and say it if you like to, but this mandate is very wide, and 
it’s very wide by design for them to have the opportunity to go out 
and look and to make recommendations for perhaps some change; 
perhaps some additions to the services that are now there, because 
of changing demographics, changing technology, whatever; 
perhaps deletions. I don’t know. 
 
I mean, they can say whatever. They must have that mandate. I 
can’t go any further than to say that they will continue to have that 
very broad mandate without restrictions being put on them by me 
at the time of announcement, at the time of discussion with the 
various members, and with the entire commission in terms of what 
its terms of reference and what its mandate would be, or at a time 
like this, here in the House, where I would give, as you would like 
me to do, is to give some quotation which can be widely touted in 
their face, sort of thing, and say well, but your restrictions are here. 
I will not place those restrictions upon them now, as I did not 
several weeks ago. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well that’s fine, Mr. Minister, and fair 
enough. And I think that that, in fact, means — if I may say so, 
Mr. Chairman — to me it means how it is that almost every so 
often in our political history in this province we have to, in effect, 
reconvince somebody again about the social advances which have 
been attained by our province. 
 
No question about it, as the minister says. We have to go through; 
perhaps it won’t be as it was in 1962 but since this commission’s 
mandate is unlimited — unlimited, notwithstanding the Canada 
Health Act. It means that it can consider the very pillars of 
medicare and hospitalization under some guise, some notion in 
your minds, this government’s mind, that those four principles 
must be considered again. 
 
And I think that that, without making any aspersions on 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2273 
 

the members of the committee, indicates to the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan, I think, a very serious challenge posed 
by this commission because it’s excluded some things such as 
quality and accessibility, but not others. Everything else is in, 
everything else, on not only the principles of universality but some 
of the details; as the minister admits, even the prospect of 
utilization fees. 
 
You want to limit the hands of the commission. That, I think, is 
disturbing, and coming as it does, the creature of this government, 
all the more disturbing. People of this province should take note 
and watch carefully how this commission operates and what this 
commission is about in the next 18 months. 
 
Now what I want to know, Mr. Minister, in addition to that is: 
would you be kind enough to tell the members of the House what 
the financial arrangements are for the members of the 
commission? What per diems and expenses are afforded to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Mr. Chairman, could I just . . . I would like 
to send that over to the . . . I could send it over to the member. I 
don’t have it with me right now in terms of . . . I want to be sure of 
the exact numbers on the per diem, and I’m just told I don’t have it 
here. We’ll give it to you tomorrow morning, if that’s fine, or 
afternoon? You’ll have that. 
 
In the broadest sense, we expect that the commission will cost 
about in the order of $1.7 million for the term that it’s undertaken. 
The arrangements, you know, I’ll just give you in the broadest 
sense, and I just want to be accurate in terms of the per diems of 
the chairman and others and the sort of thoughts that they will 
have. And I think they’re coming to some of that now in terms of 
the number of days per month that they think they’ll be working, 
some of those thing which will be things which the commission 
will deal with themselves. The executive director and the assistant 
chairman will be on salary because he will run the office of the 
commission and all of the rest of that. That’s the former deputy of 
health. 
 
An Hon. Member: — When did he become a former deputy? 
That’s okay. I’ll ask that question later. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Pardon me? Well, he will be the former 
deputy of health as of the 1st of July, and that was . . . and I just 
say to the members that’s the general gist of it. And I’ll send over 
the per diems to the hon. member tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well I want to be . . . I’m not . . . I’m a little 
bit nonplussed by the fact that the minister’s officials, while I 
don’t want to . . . the officials aren’t in this debate, but the minister 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . no, no, that the minister is not able to 
tell us. I mean they set up a commission here, Mr. Chairman. 
They’ve got terms of reference; they got a mandate statement; 
they’ve got bodies named; they’ve got executive directors; they’ve 
got the location of the commission, and the minister is unable to 
tell me how much they get on a per diem basis. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to be reasonable in terms of some 
information, but surely to goodness that 

information must have been sorted out at the very beginning and 
there’s no big deal about it. I just want to know what you’re 
paying them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — I’m not withholding anything, I’m just 
telling . . . I told your member the general outline, and I just don’t 
have the exact numbers, and I want to be sure that I give you 
accurate numbers because if I give you, well, I think that I 
remember it to be this, and I turned out and I thought we had it, we 
don’t. I will have it for you tomorrow. If you’d like me to put it on 
the record, I’ll undertake to put it on the record when we come 
back to Health estimates. At the first opportunity I’ll put it on the 
record. So it’s not a matter of withholding anything. I will have it 
for you, and I’ll give you the exact per diems of the chairman and 
the other members of the commission. So I’m not withholding 
anything from you. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll accept the minister. I have 
no choice, I guess, but to accept the minister’s in this regard. 
 
I must say parenthetically that it certainly is a little bit confusing 
that you wouldn’t know whether it’s $150 a day or $400 a day or 
whatever the figures are. You would be kind enough, as you say, 
to put that before us, and we’ll have an idea as to what this works 
out to. 
 
Mr. Minister, having said that, I note on page 3 of the Premier’s 
statement on this task force the following: 
 

The work of the commission will not be restricted, but three 
major categories will be reviewed in detail: institutional, 
treatment and support services, insured services, and 
community (health) services. 

 
Now if the commission has the independence to decide which of 
its mandate and terms of reference it should or shouldn’t study in 
detail, how is it, why is it the Premier is telling us that the 
commission will study those three? I thought they had a totally 
free rein to do what they wanted to do here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — The reason that those three are mentioned 
— and I think if you really analyse them and look at them 
carefully, if you were to look at this whole health delivery system 
that we have, the whole thing can be divided into those three 
areas; I mean, that’s where it is now in terms of . . . So they’re to 
look at those three and they don’t have to . . . as I say, because 
their work is not restricted and will not be, if they decide it should 
be divided up in some other way or some other term, that’s fine. 
 
But institutional services, obviously, you know, anyone . . . and 
we won’t get into all the details of what that is, but certainly 
institutional services, the insured services, and the community 
services are the services that are right out there on the ground, in 
the community, and so on. Those are the three areas — very basic 
to what’s going on. And we just said, look, it’s just a statement of 
the obvious, I guess. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Just a statement of the obvious, but why 
wouldn’t the Premier state the obvious and highlight 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2274 
 

the importance of, say, number 10: the assurance of quality in all 
aspects of health care. I suppose the minister’s answer as well: of 
course it’s obvious, everybody wants quality. But that’s the whole 
point, you see, in this question and answers in estimates, and I 
don’t mean to be overly critical of you, sir, but you see, you’re not 
. . .(inaudible interjection). . . No, I don’t. You’re not clear to us as 
to what the commission’s all about. On the one hand, it is to be 
comprehensive and that clearly is the case, but no, the Canada 
Health Act excludes. On the one hand, it’s got a right to pick its 
own priorities, but the Premier identifies three of the priorities that 
it will report on. That’s what he tells us it will do it. 
 
We asked you about the per diems. Well you don’t have the exact 
figure of the per diems. We’ll let you know tomorrow what the 
exact figure of the per diems are. It turns out, really, that as I said 
in my earlier remarks, that the concepts, the very concepts of 
medicare and hospitalization are before us. I think it’s just that 
kind of uncertainty and less than forthcoming approach about 
what this government really wants this commission to do that 
fosters, in the minds of some people — you can say it’s only on 
this side of the House; I think it’s more than on this side of the 
House — in the minds of some people exactly the motivation 
behind the government in setting this commission up. 
 
I want to ask one other area before I leave this topic, to move on. 
Is the government going to take the position in view of the fact 
that so much money is going to be spent on the study of this health 
care field that for the next 18 months, or whenever it takes from 
now until the report of the commission, that the various areas that 
need improvement and repair are not going to be touched by the 
government; for example, the dental program to be reinstituted or 
the drug plan to be reinstituted. Is it the minister’s position that 
these will . . . Well let’s leave those examples out, if you don’t like 
them. It’s clear that it’s government policy. It will take an NDP 
government to reinstitute those. But let’s leave those examples out 
of it. 
 
Is it the position of the government in other areas that in effect it’s 
a status quo for the Department of Health until this commission 
reports? Surely there can be no other conclusion than that, 
otherwise you’d be acting on new initiatives while the commission 
is doing it’s study. So what is your position in that regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Well I said very clearly at the time of the 
announcement of the mandate, very clearly it is not our intention 
. . . I mean, it’s one of those things that one in your particular role, 
at the present point in time, if we said no, we’re going to leave 
everything to the commission to study and we’re just going to sit 
and do nothing and wait for it, you would say that well, that’s just 
a cop-out. On the other hand, if we were to say well, as I am 
saying, that we are going to continue to operate the Department of 
Health . . . 
 
Remember that the Department of Health is a $1.2 billion 
operation, very large operation, divided into those three categories 
that we just spoke of in terms of institutional care, insured 
services, and the community services — all those three very basic 
areas. Some of the concerns that have been raised by the health 
critic and other members 

as it relates to recruitment of specialists and all of those kinds of 
things, those are the ongoing, day-to-day, and month-to-month 
operations of a very large and all encompassing department. And 
we will continue to operate in a proactive way in that department, 
in this department. There’s no question about that, and we must do 
that. 
 
And just to restate it, the mandate of this commission is not to look 
at initiatives which may come into place necessarily in this next 
month or two months or whatever, or next year or whatever. The 
commission’s mandate is to set out a blueprint for well on into the 
future. And that’s, as I say before, and as they will all reiterate, all 
members of the commission will say that it’s a very onerous and 
humbling and challenging sort of process for them to enter into. 
I’m pleased that they took it on, but at the same time they know 
very well that the operations of the Department of Health will 
carry on. 
 
They are not there, the commission is not there — I’ll make it very 
clear — to be either proponents of, or apologists for, initiatives 
that may be taken by the Department of Health through the time in 
which they are conducting their study, and that’s as it should be. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess I have one 
comment and/or question to the minister as I close off this 
exchange on the mandate of the commission. I know for sure that 
the hon. Minister of Education must have had something to do 
with writing the terms of reference because the mandate statement 
talks about the needs of Saskatchewan people into the 21st century 
and beyond. I think we shall remember the hon. Minister of 
Education as he fades into the political sunset for that phrase. In 
the meantime, the concerns of the people in the 20th century we 
leave to other governments to deal with. The more temporal needs, 
I guess others will have to worry about, and the Minister of 
Education can worry about the 21st century. 
 
(2145) 
 
So the position of the minister is, I guess, that if under paragraph 9 
of the terms of reference the task force recommended that it is not 
the best way to communicate illness prevention or health 
information or education of the public in personal health matters 
by way of massive — say $2 million — advertising programs for 
something called “everyone wins” or something of that nature, it 
wouldn’t matter, would it? 
 
The government, if it in its wisdom felt that that’s the way to go, it 
would simply say, well, we’ll worry about this recommendation in 
the 21st century. I guess that’s the position that we’re in. You’re 
asking an independent task force to recommend to you, but in the 
meantime you’re going to continue doing what you want to do. 
 
Now that is confusing logic for a government which supposedly is 
operating in a systematic and orderly way. Surely the minister 
does not mean that, but maybe he does. And if that’s the case, I 
guess all we can do is just await the outcome of the task force, 
hope that the citizens of Saskatchewan understand the need to 
protect and defend their medicare and hospitalization, get out 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2275 
 

there, unfortunately have to reconvince the commission and the 
government again about the four principles, the basics, and hope 
that it isn’t too badly attacked, the report, by this government once 
it is tabled. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Well, first of all I think the member does a 
disservice to the members of that commission when you say that 
they need to be reconvinced or convinced at all about those 
principles. And I think, if you think about that for a moment, 
you’ll know that’s the case. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’ve thought about this a lot. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — I bet you have. I just might say one thing as 
it relates to . . . He was making a comment as it relates to my 
colleague — my colleague, younger than I, even younger than I, 
sir — the Minister of Education who speaks of the 21st century. 
And for those who are of the younger age group, let’s say, the 21st 
century being 12 years away from now, we do not write off 12 
years from now as some kind of a time into the aeons of the future. 
It all depends on one’s age where one’s perspective of the 21st 
century comes. 
 
So I would just say for those of us who are in our 30s and 40s, 
let’s say, we understand that the 21st century is just very close to 
being around the corner. We also understand that those young 
people who are finishing kindergarten right now, in the month of 
June, will be graduating from grade 12 in the 21st century. So, as 
long as we know where that is. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well, I think I understand that, too. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — I’m sure glad you do, because I’ve been 
concerned about the hon. member, a little bit, in terms of his 
perspective on the time. As time goes by, because of . . . and he 
will know, I mean, those who have come to the House in the ’60s 
and so on, and deal with the issues of the ’60s, it’s a little different 
ball game now to be dealing with the ’80s. And then to come with 
a perspective of the 1960s to the 1980s legislature of 
Saskatchewan, and then to have the very onerous possibility of 
having to think forward as much as 12 years from now for one of 
that age, I’m not sure. So, Mr. Chairman, that’s difficult for the 
member, but I want him to really think about that carefully as well. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I give the assurance again that the commission 
will be doing its work, and the Department of Health will be 
operating the necessary, very necessary work of the day to day, 
month to month, and year to year operations of this department 
throughout time. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, the 
minister talks about the 21st century, but his government would 
have us living in the 18th century with respect to medical care. 
And the proof of that is the fact that his party passed a resolution 
saying that deterrent fees should be implemented in the province 
of Saskatchewan, the PC Party for the province of Saskatchewan, 
the PC Party for the province of Saskatchewan. 

They’ve privatized medicare, Mr. Chairman, they’ve privatized 
the school-based children’s dental plan, they want to move 
towards privatizing labs in the province of Saskatchewan. We can 
sit here and talk about one aspect after another with respect to the 
privatization of health care: their acknowledgement and 
acceptance and approval of the free trade agreement in Ottawa, 
which provides for Americans to come in and administer our 
hospitals and nursing homes, Mr. Chairman, which would result in 
the privatization ultimately of the administration of our hospitals 
and nursing homes in Saskatchewan. What this government wants 
us to do, Mr. Chairman, is to move back to the 18th century with 
respect to health care, not the 21st century. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, the minister talked in response to a question 
from the Leader of Opposition about a $1.2 billion budget for 
health care. And I simply want to point out that that statement is 
very misleading. It’s misleading inasmuch as this government has 
over the years transferred things from other departments and other 
agencies and put them in the Department of Health for the 
purposes of padding and inflating the Department of Health 
budget. That’s what they’ve done, Mr. Chairman. While they were 
cutting back on health care services, they were taking things out of 
other areas and putting it into the health care budget so that they 
could make it look larger than what it actually was. And that 
amount, in effect, comes to about $260 million in this budget, 
1988-89 — $260 million of reallocated funding, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And I want to comment on these Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation payments that are in this Health budget, 
Mr. Minister. I believe that subvote 60 and 61 of the heath care 
budget, Mr. Chairman, they come to approximately 16 million, in 
one case, and then vote 61 is 788,700, Mr. Chairman. We’re 
talking a substantial amount of money. 
 
And what this money represents is loans to the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation, as I understand it, money that 
was already allocated in provincial budgets. And now the hospitals 
have to pay it, back to the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation. This money was already paid out, and if I’m correct, 
Mr. Chairman, was already allocated in earlier budgets. 
 
And there’s a reference to some $62 million to the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation in this year’s budget, which I 
suggest to you, Mr. Chairman, is going to show up next year and 
the years to come as health care spending n terms of loans being 
paid from hospitals and special care facilities to the Saskatchewan 
property management — a total fabrication, an untruth as to the 
amount of money that’s being spent in Saskatchewan on health 
care, a total fabrication, Mr. Chairman. And that’s what we’re 
seeing in this budget. 
 
If one takes a look at ’83-84, there was a re-allocation of some 
$163 million into the health care budget and they called it an 
increase. But it was just taken out of other departments and put in 
the health care budget. In 1984-85 it came to a 180 million; in ’87-
88, 242 million; 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2276 
 

and this year in the vicinity of $260 million, Mr. Chairman. And 
that puts an entirely different picture on the health care budget 
than this government would like to paint in this province, Mr. 
Chairman, an entirely different picture. 
 
With respect to the allocation of funds to the community health 
services, we see a situation here, Mr. Minister, where there was a 
substantial cut-back of last year’s budget of $155,0000, and they 
reduced the staff available to perform these very valuable services 
by something like 22.5 person years. 
 
And now we see, now we see, Mr. Minister, in this budget, ’88-89, 
that being increased. In other words, the staff that was cut out has 
been replaced. And I find that rather interesting because I believe 
that that is an acknowledgement by the government that their cut-
backs were hurting people, in particular were hurting rural 
Saskatchewan people, and they found it necessary to reinstitute the 
funding that they had cut back originally, Mr. Minister. 
 
However, needless to say, in spite of the fact that they are putting 
more funding there, the fact of the matter is, is that early childhood 
psychology services and speech and language pathology services 
have suffered substantially in Saskatchewan, because we saw back 
from March ’86 to March ’87 an increase of something like 16.3 
per cent in the demand. Notwithstanding that 16.3 per cent, they 
cut back, and it has certainly hurt those services very seriously in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And in particular, I know a case in point, in Regina, of a family 
that I’ve been dealing with, with respect to speech pathology, Mr. 
Chairman. And this family has been attempting to get services 
paid for by the Department of Health, and they’ve just been 
getting the run-around. They’re told that the school system 
provides it through Wascana hospital. What do they do? They’ve 
underfunded Wascana hospital; Wascana hospital had to release 
two speech pathologists. They released two speech pathologists 
and the services simply aren’t available there, not just because of 
lack of staff but also because of inadequate funding, so that they’re 
unable to provide the specific service and only give consultative 
services, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And that’s what’s happening today in Saskatchewan. We have 
concrete examples coming to us every single day, Mr. Chairman, 
concrete examples of people who are suffering in the area of early 
childhood intervention and in the area of speech pathology 
because of funding cut-backs by this government. And I think that 
they know that it has hurt people, and I think that is why you see a 
slight change in the budget in this area today, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And with respect to community health services, I want to ask the 
minister, and he can answer it tonight or he can answer it next time 
we’re dealing with health estimates, whether in effect there were 
community health services based in P.A. with some 11 employees, 
and how many of those employees are still left? 

Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — I see my officials are writing down the 
specific question. I’ll give you the answer when we return to this 
place — different time, same station, one of these days. So I’ll 
give you that answer. 
 
Just a couple of comments, Mr. Chairman, before we wrap up the 
committee tonight, as it relates to the specific question of the 
speech pathologist at Wascana. The member mentions this, the 
cut-backs of this government are taking out two speech 
pathologists and you cut them out of Wascana. 
 
The facts, Mr. Chairman, the facts are the following: they had two 
part-time speech pathologists. The Wascana Hospital believed that 
they could provide the service better. Everybody in the field 
knows and believes that they can provide the service better with a 
full-time pathologist, speech pathologist, and that’s what they’ve 
done and they’ve made the change — two part-timers to a full-
time job. And that’s what’s been done. And so while you portray it 
as some kind of a major cut-back, it is in fact the very opposite of 
that. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the member, in the very initial stages of those long 
and involved comments, most of which were not anywhere close 
to the facts, she said in the initial comments that the padding of the 
health care budget, it wasn’t anything close to a billion and two, 
because you padded the budget by bringing in a lot of unrelated 
things to the health care budget — unrelated. Here’s how 
unrelated the things that this government has consolidated into the 
health care budget: we brought ambulance services into the health 
care budget, Mr. Chairman; that’s unrelated, I’m sure, to that 
member, unrelated ambulance services, pre-hospital care. Do you 
know where they had them when the NDP was in these chairs, Mr. 
Chairman? In Urban Affairs. Urban affairs department looked 
after ambulance services. That was really related to urban affairs. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, they are rightfully located in health care now 
and definitely they will remain as long as we’re in the government 
because it is the right place. And the health care sector in 
Saskatchewan says thank you for putting the ambulance services 
in the health care department. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — Secondly, Mr. Minister, nursing homes. 
What did we do with nursing homes? Padded up the health care 
budget with bringing nursing homes over from the social welfare 
department, senior citizens and nursing homes on welfare and 
being dealt with by the Social Services department because they 
believed that it was a social welfare sort of issue. 
 
Well I believe the care of seniors and the housing and the care of 
those seniors in special care homes, and every member n this side 
believes, that those are rightfully located, and special care is 
rightfully located in the Department of Health because it is, 
without question, a health issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
  



 
June 20, 1988 

2277 
 

Hon. Mr. Mcleod: — So we are not padding the budget; we are 
putting appropriate services in the appropriate department. We’ve 
done that. And, Mr. Chairman, those are appropriate decisions to 
have been taking and everybody in the health care sector says so. 
And do you know what they say when those people come with 
those kinds of comments? They laugh about the way they operated 
in those days. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 


