


















































May 24, 1988 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 May 24, 1988 
 

1523 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I wonder, with leave of the Assembly, if 
we could go directly to orders for return (debatable). 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 
 

Return No. 3 
 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move that an order 
of the Assembly do issue a return for no. 3 showing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, this is the only order for 
return that I intend to offer an amendment for tonight, but it 
simply . . . it changes the order to be consistent with the return 
ordered last time, no. 1. But no. 2, a disclosure of the type of 
work, may also jeopardize the government’s position on a 
particular legal matter, Mr. Speaker.  
 
So my motion will simply amend this return or this order by 
deleting all the words after “firm” in the last line. That will 
simply have the effect of “the purpose of the work performed,” 
Mr. Speaker. I am told by legal people around the place that it 
would be improper to offer that kind of information in the 
circumstances, and so I move, seconded by the Minister of 
Health: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word “firm” in the last line. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 14 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it is of concern to members on this 
side of the House and to, generally, people within the province 
the amount of money that this government is spending on 
advertising. Also, making reference back to the order that was 
implied by the organizer of the Tory PC convention, implying 
that kickbacks are in order when using advertising firms within 
the province, it becomes a significant question to know just 
where the money that’s spent on advertising is going and for what 
it is being used. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member 
from Regina Elphinstone, that an order of the Assembly do issue 
for return showing: 
 

For the period September 15, 1978 to the date this return 
was ordered: (1) the amounts paid to the firm of Mercury 
Printers Limited by each department, agency or Crown 
corporation of the Government of Saskatchewan; (2) in each 
case, the nature of the work performed. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I had indicated seconded by the member from 
Regina Elphinstone. 
 
Motion agreed to. 

Return No. 24 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the Assembly do issue for a 
return no. 24 showing, seconded by the member from 
Elphinstone. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
 Education 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, the other day I asked the 
minister- in fact, it was two days ago, the second last day that we 
did estimates — for some information on officials in his 
department, and also the increases to his personal staff. I was 
wondering if the minister had that information for me now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The official who would have the 
information the hon. member talked about is just on his way here. 
He’s in Legislative Review Committee; so maybe we can 
proceed until he shows up. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, does that include the information, 
both on your personal staff increases and also on the . . . 
(inaudible) . . . Okay, fine. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to begin this evening to ask you some 
questions on core curriculum and where we are at in core 
curriculum. I don’t intend to spend any amount of time in detail 
as to what has transpired, but certainly there is some serious 
concern out there by the practitioners on just how ready you and 
your department and officials are in implementing core and what 
we can expect come December on several accounts. 
 
First of all, are we going to implement core in the same degree 
throughout the province? Number two: what preparation is your 
department in making sure that there is sufficient in-service 
training? And what is going to be done in preparing the teachers 
from now until December in making sure that the core curriculum 
is implemented as it should be? 
 
Would you tell me now to what extent are you ready. Do you 
have the staff? What about funds? What about in-service 
training? And what about the implementation of core throughout 
the province? How do you see it happening come September? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, and hon. member, if I 
could have a page take over this information.  
 
Relative to what’s happening this September, first — two things 
really. Number one is the common essential learnings will be 
introduced, and they’ll be introduced   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1524 
 

and uniformly applied across the province. Secondly, we will be 
moving to the 24-credit requirement from 21 starting with grade 
10.  
 
The requirement will be uniformly applied across the province, 
but how they must meet that, we’re allowing for some flexibility 
during this initial phase so that we don’t cause any hardship to 
any school boards or, more importantly, to any students. 
 
And in so far as what particular measures we’re putting in place, 
there’s been a number of initiatives already, and I think most 
notably, but not particularly, of the common essentials learning 
conference a month or two ago, which I heard nothing but good 
reports on from those educators who attended it. 
 
As well in this budget there are some new moneys, $1 million to 
be exact, to provide for in-service training prior to the educators 
going back into the class-room this fall, and I can detail how that 
money will be spent if you so wish. But I’ve said now, really for 
some good long time, that in-service is important to any 
profession, or continuing education as some professions would 
call it, and it’s going to be particularly important to teachers 
given the new core curriculum and the new directions. But really, 
if you think about it, for any job in the future, updating and 
retraining are going to be a fact of life, and certainly — although 
we haven’t a special reason right now for educators- that’s going 
to be the fact . . . or that’s going to be the norm, as opposed to the 
exception, in the jobs of the future. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, you haven’t really told me very 
much about what is happening, or what is going to happen. Am I 
to gather from what you are saying that really we aren’t ready for 
the fall. I mean, to increase from 21 to 24 takes no preparation. 
You issued the directive that from now on those who begin grade 
10 will have 24 credits. 
 
What I wanted from you is: are the curricula ready for the various 
subject areas? Have we had people in the class-room doing the 
actual testing of the curricula? Are you getting feedback from 
various people on what changes ought to be made to some of the 
curricula? I’m hearing a number of . . . I’ve talked to a number 
of people, and they’re telling me they have some concerns about 
some of the curricula and they have to be revised. 
 
Exactly what preparation have you done up until now? I mean 
you can’t just go into the core curriculum and say, well okay, 
here are all the great things the core curriculum is going to do 
without making certain that teachers have the materials. Do they 
have the back-up material? Will they have the actual text? Will 
they have the copies of the actual curricula which they are 
expected to use? What have you got and what you can tell the 
teachers today, and those that are possibly watching tonight, that 
yes, I can assure you that by September you will have all these 
things in your hand and we are ready to go? Or are you telling 
them that basically what you are saying is, well, we’ll go from 
21 to 24 credits, and here and there we may have some 
experiments done it the 

new curricula, but overall, no, we’re not ready in September. Is 
that what I’m to gather from what you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. member 
I doing a bit of grandstanding here in so far as what he pretends 
to know or pretends not to know. 
 
As was pointed out to me when, about a year ago now, we 
announced what the new core curriculum would be, the message 
clearly from educators was that the implementation . . . define the 
core was one thing, and it was very, very important, that 
minimum body of knowledge which our children must learn. But 
what they impressed upon me was that the implementation of that 
core was as critical as the defining of core itself. What they said 
is that you know, you cannot define this new core curriculum and 
then drop it on the teaching profession overnight and expect them 
to be up and running. And I think the hon. member probably 
knows that, but I thinks he’s maybe trying to play devil’s 
advocate or something here tonight. 
 
Being cognizant of that, and certainly my officials being very 
much aware of it, some time lines have been established, as you 
will know. As you will know, curriculum development doesn’t 
occur overnight. You require writers; there’s an advisory 
committee; there’s an overall steering committee to help me and 
our department implement this. And the various required areas 
of study, for example, social studies and language arts are two 
that are most advanced, it would be written input from the 
advisory committee. Then it would even be piloted for probably 
a year, take that feedback which we’ve had an some of them that 
have been written already, so some fine tuning where necessary, 
and then it becomes an official curriculum, if you like. It’s a 
dynamic process. The social studies and language arts are 
probably the farthest along; math and science less far. 
 
And if I was to speculate a little bit, I would think that this entire 
process of directions and core curriculum probably will take five 
to 10 years. That’s what I said some several months ago, that’s 
what was said at the time it was announced, and it may well be 
that that is the reality. Time lines have been set. We are in a hurry, 
I suppose, to do it right, but to think that, for example, through 
12 grades and seven required areas of study, that 84 new curricula 
would be developed for September 1 is . . . well I don’t even 
think you were expecting that kind of thing. 
 
We want to work with the profession; there’s in-service being 
provided; there’s been conferences. It’s a very busy agenda, as 
you well know, and it’ll be taken step by step in conjunction with 
educators and school boards so that indeed we don’t have chaos 
out there with these changes because they are massive changes. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, the accusations that were made — 
not by me — but by others in the profession, by the STF 
(Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) officials and by teachers 
and by trustees and others, that exactly what they predicted is 
happening. You know, when you fired all the people who were 
the centre core of your department and you fired them all, you 
had nobody left to do the writing for you. And then you had to 
run around   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1525 
 

very quickly to try and hire some people that were competent in 
that particular area but who had no experience or knowledge of 
what had transpired over the years in the department and between 
the department and the STF and schools and trustees. And I think 
we’re paying the price of that now, Mr. Minister, so it is not 
surprising — and I just want it on the record — that basically 
what we’re going to have next fall as far as core curriculum is 
concerned is that the credits in grade 10 will go up from 21 to 24. 
There may be the odd piloting here or there. But that’s basically 
it. So that . . . Well now you shake your head and you say no. 
 
I’d like to know exactly what is going to happen. Can you tell me 
how many pilot projects are you going to have in social studies. 
How many pilot projects are you going to have in math? In what 
grades, where? In-service training, has it been done? What has 
been done with the pilot projects that are carrying on right now, 
for example, the grade 9 social studies or the grade 9 history? 
There is great controversy about that curriculum right now; there 
is some concern as to the value of that curriculum or whether it 
should be rewritten. 
 
You give no assurances to the teachers out there and to the 
trustees and school boards that you have things in hand and that 
you’re ready to move come September. And you can’t start 
September unless you have the in-service training with the 
teachers. How are you going to have the in-service training with 
the teachers if the curricula aren’t written? 
 
So you may as well come clean and say: well all right, we just 
aren’t ready and there’s going to be very little done — so that 
everybody knows — and all right, then we’ll move from now on; 
we’ll start moving and get the curricula ready; we’ll do the pilot 
projects so that in the following year, with the time span of about 
15 to about 18 months, maybe even more, our teachers then can 
be ready for the 1989 school term. If you’re not ready, tell them. 
 
I’ve had a number of letters, and copies, sent to me that were 
addressed to you, of real concern that people have about the core 
curriculum and its implementation. Many think the $1 million 
that you have for in-service is not nearly sufficient if you expect 
to implement the core curriculum this fall. 
 
But I can see now, Mr. Minister, why there’s only $1 million in 
it — because you’re not ready to implement it. You’re simply 
saying, yes, we’ll do some in-service training and have some 
maybe teachers come in and do some writing and so on, but we’re 
basically not ready. And that’s maybe why you only have $1 
million in the budget. Maybe teachers out there are right, then, 
not to expect too much this fall, but I wish you’d tell them. If it’s 
other than that, Mr. Minister, will you please tell us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well when you did your summary of 
what’s going to happen, you conveniently ignored the number 
one point, and that was the implementation of the common 
essential learnings this fall. That was the two things I talked about 
for this fall, specifically, as relate to school — common essential 
learnings, and the in-service will focus entirely around those; and 
as well the raising of the standards.

For the hon. member’s information — and I see he’s pulling the 
Directions book out — maybe what you ought to look at in there 
is check the recommendations relative to the time lines on 
common essential learnings, and you’ll find that we are in fact 
ahead of schedule relative to what was laid out in Directions, 
point number one. 
 
Point number two, he says 1 million isn’t enough. I dare say, Mr. 
Chairman, given the socialist mentality over there — the 
ungrateful bunch that they are — it wouldn’t have mattered if 
we’d have put 10 million in the budget. They’d have still said it 
was too little, too late. 
 
You’ve got to do better than that, hon. member. You really do 
have to do better. I say to you, that $1 million is over and above 
what boards and teachers spend this very day. And I would say 
to you that’s very substantial. You will say it’s not enough; others 
will say it not enough; I’ll say $1 million is very substantive. 
 
Thirdly, you want to know the specifics, what really is 
happening. Well, I’ll read off specifically to you what’s 
happening in the curriculum development. 
 
You pretend like you don’t know about piloting, etc. You’re a 
former teacher. I’m sure you know the process well. 
Development will continue in the following areas in ’88-89: 
language arts, kindergarten to grade 5; social studies, grade 6, 9, 
and 10; science, kindergarten to grade 5 and grade 10; arts 
education, second year of pilot, K through 5 and begin 
development on grade 9 and 10; health, complete middle years 
curriculum and AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) 
education in middle years and secondary program; in physical 
education and math, development of policy and scope of 
sequence; business education, continued development of 
secondary program; computer education, policy development 
and implementation, support documents completed; work 
experience, implementation of guide-lines; and on Indian and 
Metis education, the implementation of native studies 10, pilot of 
native studies 20; implementation of phase 2 of in-service; 
continued curriculum development in conjunction with core 
development, and the finalization of that policy, Mr. Chairman. 
 
So there are some specifics. You see, you tried to suggest that 
because of restructuring of the department last year . . . I mean 
this is an old line. 
 
I’m interested in output and that’s what the people are interested 
in, and that is the output. They have been very, very busy. I’ve 
heard nothing but good over the development of this core 
curriculum — very busy. They’ve got a hold of the process; 
they’ve laid out some time lines; they know where they’re 
headed, and they’re headed in conjunction with the overall 
committee. 
 
And you would suggest that somehow we don’t have enough 
people in the department to handle this. And yet what does the 
blue book show under vote 5, item 8, Mr. Chairman? It says 
we’ve gone from 35 person-years here to 51. That’s because we 
are committed to this process. And you could twist it and warp it 
for your own political purposes as you so wish, but I’m telling 
you we’re ahead   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1526 
 

of the time line set out in Directions. We have the staff to do the 
job. I don’t know, at any given moment I probably have four 
dozen or more curriculum developers on staff. 
 
Why won’t you acknowledge some of that? We’re on schedule. 
There’s going to be the flexibility there on the meeting of those 
standards, and the people want to see this change. I suspect when 
it happens that we’re going to have to . . . During this next few 
months we’re going to have to make sure the parents clearly 
understand what all this change is about. And we’re working with 
SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) and STF to 
make sure that we keep the public informed. But it’s an exciting 
agenda and one that ought not to be pooh-poohed, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, all I asked the minister was to 
answer to me where he was at with core curriculum and he tees 
off on the audacity of this member here to ask him those 
questions. That’s exactly what everybody is complaining about 
out there. As soon as they start asking you what are your plans 
for this or what are your plans for that, you come reaming off 
with, what do you guys think asking; who do you think you are? 
Who do people in the STF think they are asking me, the minister? 
I know best. 
 
Mr. Minister, that’s exactly what I said to you the other day. That 
is your problem — you think you know best. You think you have 
all the answers and that is why you can’t speak to anybody. You 
only hear yourself but you don’t hear anybody else. 
 
I didn’t say these things. I am sure that the STF was full of praise 
for you when you fired all those people; I’m sure the SSTA was 
just full of praise for you for firing all those people. That’s not 
what I read in the media. 
 
(1930) 
 
Oh surely you’re not going to blame the STF and the trustees 
association for being concerned about the core curriculum and its 
implementation when it criticized you of holus-bolus firing those 
people. You fired a whole bunch of people who meant a lot to the 
practitioners out there. They meant a lot, and I think you should 
accept that criticism, and say yes, we made a mistake. 
 
And now after firing all those people and you have no one left to 
do your work for you, then you go out and hire a whole bunch of 
people; then you hire a whole bunch of people. And I’ve got the 
list here. You provided them for me. 
 
Now surely all of those people that were in the Department of 
Education before weren’t incompetent people; weren’t the 
people that couldn’t develop curricula; weren’t the people that 
didn’t have any knowledge about how to do these things and how 
to proceed. Why did you have to fire them all holus-bolus? 
 
That’s what the STF was concerned about and that’s what the 
SSTA was concerned about. Wasn’t me that was criticizing you 
when I was out there in the school system. These were the people 
that were saying hey, look at, hold on a bit, you don’t understand 
how we develop curriculum and curricula in this province. And 
by firing all those 

people you’re doing a disservice not only to those people but to 
the Department of Education. 
 
Mr. Minister, I notice however for the people that you hired, I 
would like to . . . We haven’t got the time, but I’d like to know 
what experience many of these people have that they’re being 
paid 52,000 and 58,000, 54,000, 64,000, 64,000. 
 
Were they educators, by and large? Were they in the school 
systems? Were they principals? Because at a class 6, the most 
that they could make would be about 43 or $44,000. Who are 
these people, on the whole, that you have hired? Where are they 
from? What is their experience? I don’t want to go through 
individual names, but I’m sure you have the list there. 
 
Could you just tell me if we go down the list of people that you’re 
paying 52, 58, 54, 64, 64,000, 67 — I know that individual and I 
was very pleased you hired him, as he is at least somebody that 
has a great amount of experience out there and was one 
individual that has been doing a lot in getting ready for core 
curriculum. 
 
Now would you mind telling me: who are some of these people, 
where are they from, and why did they have to be hired? Why 
did you have to hire that many? Was it to replace those that you 
let go? And how did you find all these people, and why do we 
have to pay them these kinds of salaries? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well in so far as the restructuring of the 
department that went on a year ago . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — They called it restructuring — firing all 
those people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the hon. member says firing 
people, and quite frankly, that’s a misuse of terms because . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — What do you call it? That’s exactly what 
happened. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — And the hon. member from Saskatoon 
University said that’s exactly what happens. And he knows that’s 
also untrue because I defy any one of those members to go and 
find an employee’s record, whose position was abolished, where 
it says in their record that they were fired, because that’s unfair 
to the individuals. That’s quite unfair to the individuals, because 
to be fired suggests that you somehow weren’t doing your job. 
 
These individuals . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . it wasn’t that at 
all. The majority of those who left the employ of advanced 
education and Education last year took . . . it was of their volition. 
They took early retirement. Now if the hon. members can’t 
distinguish between early retirement and firing, then I say help 
us somebody, because to use firing is absolutely a misnomer — 
absolutely. That’s a simplistic example of political rhetoric only 
to be used to try and configure some kind of image in the public’s 
mind about a hard-hearted government, and it isn’t fair.  



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1527 
 

If there are some qualifications, specifically, you would like me 
to go over of current officials, you’ll have to name some names 
and I’ll have to send it over to you, because, quite frankly, I didn’t 
come with the curriculum vitaes of several hundred departmental 
staff. I probably have the curriculum vitaes of the top, the 
executive-level staff, but you’ll have to name some names if you 
want specific curriculum vitae because I’d have to send them to 
you. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, I don’t want, as you and I have 
discussed some time ago, we don’t want to discuss individual 
people if we don’t have to. It’s not my intent to do that. 
  
Could you tell me, Mr. Minister, were most of these people hired 
from other departments in government or were they hired out in 
the field? Were they educators in the field? Maybe . . . I don’t 
want individuals. Generally speaking, were they hired from other 
departments; were they hired practitioners; were they teachers in 
the field? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well if I look at the first eight at the list 
that I sent across to you, with 17, for example, the first 1, 2, 3 are 
on the post-secondary side, with the exception of the third person 
who handles everything because it’s a human resources, 
administrative position. After that, the rest . . . the next two are 
regional directors who were practitioners, and the next three are 
all practitioners. And then after that, you’re out of the curriculum 
side. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Now, Mr. Minister, I’m not going to get into the 
details of why we have to . . . That’s the other thing that bothers 
me a bit. The reasons I’m asking these questions is that very often 
we are reluctant to hire the people who are right in the 
class-room. 
 
To hire a principal or hire a director or regional director is a little 
different than hiring the actual practitioner, the teacher in the 
class-room. I think we overlook them very often, and we think 
we have to pay these high salaries by hiring regional directors 
and the others — nothing wrong with those people, but many 
times they are not in the class-room themselves. So I’m not sure 
that we need to hire the regional directors as opposed to, let’s say, 
for curriculum development, as opposed to teachers in the 
class-room. 
 
Mr. Minister, the other day I asked you also for a list of your own 
personal staff and I remember you saying that you didn’t have it, 
but I’ve got it here now, and I thank you for it. But I did recall 
you making a comment that, oh, I think it only included one 
person that got a raise from my personal staff. Looking at this, 
Mr. Minister, very quickly, I see that there were 1, 2, 3, 4 — four 
people who received raises, some very slight raises, but . . . So, 
Mr. Minister, if . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — One’s for $2 and one’s for six . . .  
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Well I don’t know . . . All I’m saying is they got 
raises. I don’t know why they got raises, but maybe that’s all they 
are worth. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to, very quickly . . . I think it is fair for me 
to say and to go out and say to the teachers that, 

generally speaking, not to be overly concerned about, come 
September, being asked to implement the core curriculum to any 
great extent. I think that is fair to say, except for those pilot 
projects that are presently being done. We will continue with 
those, and we will have in-service training, possibly, for those 
teachers that will have to implement the curriculum in that area. 
But other than that, teachers shouldn’t have to worry too much 
about having to implement the core curriculum. 
 
You talk about common essential learnings, Mr. Minister. Those 
common essential learnings, generally speaking, although not 
explicitly, implicitly have been in the curriculum for many, many 
years — many years, except, for example, maybe technological 
literacy, which many schools can’t carry out now anyway 
because of the cut-backs in the EDF (educational development 
fund) program — had to cut their computer program. And if you 
don’t believe me, I’ve got the letters here of a number of school 
systems who indicated they had to cut their computer program 
because of lack of funds. 
 
So when you say that we’re going to carry on with these common 
essential learnings, that is one area that they probably won’t. But 
critical and creative thinking — I mean, any teacher that didn’t 
teach creative and critical thinking certainly hasn’t been doing 
their job. I mean, that’s been done for . . . I mean, in English, you 
mean to tell me they didn’t teach creative and critical thinking? 
Of course they have. 
 
You know, I mean communications . . . communications. Of 
critical, you must admit, you were very critical of me. You were 
very critical of me, and you say I was very critical of you. I mean, 
that proves my point, that critical thinking has been taught in the 
school systems. 
 
Numeracy simply means the excellence with numbers, and again, 
that’s been done over the years. Independent learning, personal 
and social values and skills — Mr. Minister, to some extent these 
common essential learnings have been in the curriculum for a 
number of years. I am glad to see that we are going to emphasize 
or re-emphasize them again. But if you’re going to say that that 
is one of the major things that’s going to happen this fall, as it 
pertains to core curriculum, then I think we’re going to be sadly 
disappointed in the school systems and so are the teachers in the 
class-room. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to turn to another topic. No sense us 
continuing with the core curriculum; obviously we’re going to 
differ. But I think from Hansard themselves, the teachers can 
make their own summations from what you’ve said. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to talk very . . . turn very quickly — our time 
is limited — to pensions. Could you tell me, in maybe 1 or 2 or 
3 reasons, why you feel, or the government felt, that the teachers’ 
pensions have to be privatized. What is wrong with the pension 
plans as we have . . . as they have been handled and conducted 
and invested over the years? Why do you feel now suddenly that 
we have to privatize the pension plans at a cost to the individuals 
in the pension plans? 
 
Up until now, the administrative cost has been borne by   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1528 
 

government; now they will be borne by the various pension 
groups. Could you elicit for me, very quickly, two or three 
reasons, valid reasons, as to why the pension plans have to be 
privatized or are in the process of being privatized? 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member covered a number of 
subjects there, not the least of which was my personal staff. And 
just to be fair, you’ve counted as a pay raise somebody who got 
a $2.67 raise per month, and that probably had something to do 
with their Canada Pension Plan deductions or something. I don’t 
mind you raising legitimate points, but let’s be fair. 
 
The reason I said, to my knowledge, there was only one that 
really truly received a raise was because my present chief of staff 
had not been my chief of staff before, and in so becoming chief 
of staff, it was a promotion, and hence she got a raise because of 
it. Other than that, the only other raises that would be there would 
be the normal increment. So if you call those raises here, then 
when we’re discussing the Public Service Commission, you 
would have to call increments that all public servants get raises, 
and I don’t know as that’s normally considered raises. You can 
tell me differently, if you think so, but I’m sure public service 
would be quite happy to hear that. I just wanted to get that on the 
record, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The other point that I want to get on the record . . . In fact I may 
even consider sending your comments and mine to all teachers in 
Saskatchewan because I would have to wonder how the teaching 
profession and the 12,000 teachers would feel about you, as the 
Education critic, pooh-poohing, writing off as an insignificant 
initiative, something that they feel very strongly about — and 
that is the common essentials learnings. You have written it off 
as somehow insignificant. I would suggest to you that you’re 
undermining a very important process, you’re undermining a 
very important initiative, and that’s unfortunate. It’s one that all 
the players in education have spent a good deal of time on. 
They’re going to spend even more time on it. It’s an important 
initiative for our children and certainly for their future. I guess 
you and I will have to agree to disagree on the importance of that 
initiative, but I’ll stack it up with the teachers’ view of that any 
time, and I think it’s important that I make your view and mine 
known to them in that regard. 
 
And finally, once again, the hon. member tried to suggest that 
because of the fact that we’ve stretched the excellence fund or 
the educational development fund over 10 years, that somehow 
school boards have stopped important initiatives. That’s not true, 
and he used the example of computers, Mr. Chairman. And I 
want to show you how false his accusation is. 
 
I, in my home the other day, received a four-page pamphlet or 
brochure from the Regina school board. And on the front page of 
that they had a graph at the bottom that showed . . . a bar graph 
that showed the number of computers that they’ve put into 
schools in their system in Regina here over the last seven or eight 
years. And the bar graphs start, I think, in 1980 with a very small 
number, and it just went up like that, Mr. Chairman. And why I 
use 

that example is because that’s not some kind of government 
propaganda, but what that showed to me and to my family and to 
my children who attend Regina public schools, is that despite the 
rhetoric of the member opposite — despite the rhetoric — that 
school boards continue to go onward and upward in terms of 
computer literacy for our children. Year over, they have shown 
every year an increase in the number of computers they’ve put in 
schools. 
 
Now I ask you, Mr. Chairman, how does the hon. member 
opposite square that with his sweeping accusation that somehow 
because the educational development fund has been stepped out 
over 10 years that there’s computer programs falling by the 
wayside. How does he square that, Mr. Chairman? He probably 
squares that the same way that he’ll have to square his comments 
on the common essential learnings with the teachers of this 
province, and, more importantly, the students of this province. 
 
And I want to tell you, Mr. Chairman, this is a feature of 
socialists. They can go on for hours and hours in this legislature 
— as they did last year in Education estimates. We’ve already 
been in estimates in Education this year probably close to six 
hours, and I would ask you, Mr. Chairman — because I suspect 
you’ve sat here for many of those hours — I would ask you: how 
often has any one of those critics over there used the word 
children or students? I ask you. They can go on for hours and 
hours and hours and never really talk about the thing that’s most 
important — the child, the student. We saw that as a feature of 
the debate last time that went on in this House for 45 hours or 
something of that magnitude, Mr. Chairman, and we’ve seen it 
again. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we’re interested in pursuing this new direction, 
these changes, because of our children and our children’s future 
and we will not be deterred in that goal, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, how you can twist what someone 
says! Now, it’s no wonder you are held in such low regard by 
people out there — it’s no wonder. You know you are, if I could 
use the word in here . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Windbag. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Well, yes that’s what I . . . Windbag. But I had a 
different word for him. Coming from the veterinary medicine 
field, there lies your strength, if you know what I mean — a 
backhand compliment to you. 
 
I tell the hon. member that if that’s the way you twist the words 
of teachers and trustees out there, it’s no wonder that someone 
doesn’t have any high regard for you. 
 
Why don’t you listen, why don’t you listen? Mr. Minister, I said 
to you, these weren’t my words. But there have been severe 
cut-backs in education. And I have a whole list of letters, some 
of which you have received, some of which the Premier has 
received, and many of which I have also received. I want to spend 
a little bit of time later on if we have time. 
 
Here is one school district. They said the following. Yes,   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1529 
 

the member opposite will be very familiar with this one because 
it comes from the Wilkie local staff — and here it is. Here they 
say the following programs were cut altogether: special 
education, grades 7, 8, and 9; music, grades 8 and 9; art 10; 
accounting 26; general math 20; psychology 20 and 30; Christian 
ethics 20 and 30; economics 20; industrial arts 35. All have been 
cut because, they say, of cut-backs to education. 
 
Mr. Minister, these aren’t my words, and I could go on and on. 
As I say, I have a whole slew of letters here where people indicate 
where because of the EDF program, the cut-backs in the EDF 
program, they had to cut those programs. And many mention 
computer programs that they’ve cut back in the program. 
 
Mr. Minister, what I said, just to clarify the thing, what I said was 
that common essential learnings — everyone, everyone has 
incorporated those common essential learnings. What we are 
doing in the new core curriculum is to re-emphasize those. But if 
that is all that you are going to do, if that is all that you’re going 
to do for the core curriculum, then, Mr. Minister, you have not 
satisfied, you have not satisfied the demands of the people out 
there. That is not what they want for their children, that is not 
what they want in the fall of 1988. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Minister, I want you to turn to your personal staff. 
I want you to turn to your personal staff. You said there was only 
one that received an increase. I don’t know, but the third one on 
your list went from 3,274 to 3,397. That was a $123 a month 
increase, other than the other one that you were referring to who 
you said that she, I guess, got different responsibilities. So it’s 
not true to say that only one. There were at least two that got 
substantial increases. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I said, other than that, they were just 
increments. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Well if $123 a month is an increment, okay, fine. 
I will buy that then, if that’s what it was. 
 
Mr. Minister, I asked you about pensions, why they were 
privatized. In all your side-tracking and trying to misconstrue 
what I was saying, you forget entirely about the pensions. 
 
My question to you was, Mr. Minister, give me two or three 
reasons why pensions had to be privatized. Could you address 
yourself to pensions, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, relative to the pensions, 
the reason that the negotiations or the discussions, if you like, 
have been instituted is not because of some wish particularly by 
the government but more by the teachers themselves. And I think 
what they see in this new structure would be less government and 
more of the profession, if you like, in charge. 
 
And as I understand, no matter which pension fund has been 
looked at, the view has been the same. They see it as a chance to 
get it a little arm’s length from government and have themselves 
more in control of their own destiny. And it’s not something that 
we’ve been trying to ram their throats certainly. They tend to 
want to 

go that way. 
 
Other than that, I don’t know as I can be much more specific, 
because the Minister of Finance tends to be involved in the 
discussions, and you may want to put your question to him more 
directly. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, I will do that, but, Mr. Minister, I 
think you’re totally misinformed on that. 
 
There was no initiative, as far as I know, by teachers. Teachers 
were very satisfied with the way the pensions were being handled 
by government, the way the money had been invested. They were 
very . . . felt very secure. 
 
 I have talked to a number of teachers. I’ve also talked to 
members of the STF. It is not my impression that they wanted 
this at their initiative — that it was the government that had called 
the various groups together and said hey, look at, we want to 
privatize the pensions, we want to get out of them — and you 
will be paying the administration costs. 
 
And if your impression, Mr. Minister, is that it was the teaching 
group out there that wanted the pensions privatized, you are 
mistaken, because they don’t. They were very pleased with the 
. . . If you want me to, I’ll certainly check with the STF again, 
because I just talked to them last week, and they have some very 
serious concerns about pensions being privatized. And, I think, 
one phone call from you can put a stop to that very quickly and 
leave it the way it is. 
 
I as a teacher am also very concerned about it because I think that 
the investments that we have received over the years have been 
very good, and the plan has, we feel, some security in knowing 
that the government is directly responsible for the plan. 
 
So if that is your understanding, I think it’s a misunderstanding. 
Do you want to comment on that or do you want to leave it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I don’t have any more to say about 
that, particularly. As I said, you may want to put your questions 
more directly to the Minister of Finance. And your understanding 
and mine are different. 
 
I doubt, though, that you would give our government credit for 
the supplementary estimate, the $19.3 million that we put into the 
teachers’ pension fund last year as a result of these prudent 
investments that were made by the fund, and the 19.3 that they 
lost as a result of the collapse, the October collapse of the stock 
market. 
 
You know, we get a lot of berating for our commitment to the 
pension plan and what goes in over and above the 7 per cent, etc., 
etc. But I never hear but one good word when probably, legally, 
we did not have to do that but morally we felt obligated to, and 
we put $19.3 million in. That’s what the supplementary estimate 
is all about, but not one word by you on that — not one word. 
And I think that was a pretty handsome and moral, if you like, 
commitment on our part.  



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1530 
 

I want to get back to Wilkie though, for a minute, because I heard 
what you were saying about all these cut-backs. And as you will 
know — and I’m not trying to pass the buck — but these are 
board decisions that they make in terms of their configuration. 
And the hon. member smiles, and I say I’m not trying to pass the 
buck because he used the term, Mr. Chairman, and I quote him, 
“severe cut-backs in education”. Well what’s his definition of 
severe? I have the grants that Wilkie received last year and this 
year and they went from 2.5 million, roughly, Mr. Chairman, to 
2.6 million. Now, if my arithmetic serves me right — if my 
schooling and the common essentials learnings, specifically 
numeracy, has served me at all well — that translates in my 
books to a 1.56 per cent increase or nearly 2 per cent. 
 
But the hon. member would say but yes, yes, yes; but what about 
the education development fund? For example, Mr. Chairman, in 
1985 Wilkie received $65,575. If we move now to say, 1987, 
what do we find, Mr. Chairman? Ninety-eight thousand, three 
hundred and thirty-five. And in 1985, Mr. Chairman, what do we 
find? Over 106,000. Now the way I understand that, if they are 
receiving in ’85, $65,575 and this year they receive 106,121, 
unless I haven’t learned my math, Mr. Chairman, that’s — what? 
— a 35, $40,000 increase. Now how would the hon. member 
square that with his observations and his rhetoric? I don’t think 
he can, Mr. Chairman. 
 
I’m not trying to suggest for a moment that we didn’t stretch that 
fund out. But I say much better to have stretched it out over 10 
years than to have eliminated it totally, because that’s the fund 
that is putting computers and books into our schools, Mr. 
Chairman. My only regret with that fund is the name we gave to 
it. Everybody refers to it as EDF or education development fund. 
It should be called an excellence fund because it helps our 
children pursue excellence with books and resources for their 
libraries and computers. 
 
So I just wanted to set the record straight for the hon. member, 
on that school board particularly. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, you can do all you want. The 
teachers and schools boards had all planned over a five-year 
program. They had committed themselves to the program, and 
you unilaterally made the decision. 
 
(2000) 
 
And I complimented you the other day on the EDF program. I 
complimented him on it the other day, on the EDF program. But 
he thinks that I should also compliment him when he makes a 
promise before the election that there will be an EDF program, 
five-year program. Immediately after the election they stretched 
it to 10 years. On the one hand I complimented him for initiating 
it, and he wants me on the other hand to compliment him also 
when he stretches it to 10 years. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you won an election on some of these 
promises that you’ve made, and there should not be . . . You 
shouldn’t now be surprised when teachers out there are very 
concerned and are very angry with you. It was a 

good program, it was a good announcement. I know the elation 
that there was out in the schools because I happened to be out in 
the schools — and the things that we could do with that kind of 
a fund. But I was not in the schools when you stretched it to 10 
years, and I can also imagine the anger that there was in the 
various school districts. 
 
Now Mr. Minister, I also spent some time in the Tisdale school 
district, and they listed a number, a number of programs that they 
had to cut, a number of teachers that they had to cut. I was also 
in the Nipawin school district and they also mentioned the very 
fact that they had to cut programs that they had expected to 
implement because of the EDF program. And that, Mr. Minister, 
goes throughout the province of Saskatchewan. Now surely if I 
compliment you on the one hand of implementing it, you should 
be able to take a little bit of criticism when you change the rules 
of the game. 
 
Mr. Minister, the other thing is you said that, oh, you wanted a 
compliment of the $19 million you put in. How much money did 
you take out of the teachers’ fund that earned more than 7 per 
cent? Millions of dollars were taken out that you didn’t put in. 
Now surely if something drastically happens to the pension funds 
and you had taken out millions that were earned by the pension 
fund, then on the other hand, you shouldn’t expect compliments, 
you know, when you put in $19 million. You took out a lot more 
than 19 million that was earned over 7 per cent. 
 
Mr. Minister, I will leave the pension funds because, as you say, 
that’s basically the Minister of Finance, and I will ask him some 
questions when his estimates come up. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to turn very quickly to another area. And 
here, Mr. Minister, I hope that we can keep the rhetoric down. 
You have a number of areas in the province where there are some 
problems between division boards and local boards, and there 
really are no mechanisms available to resolve the situation other 
than through the election process, and that sometimes doesn’t 
work. 
 
 If, for example, there is a difference of opinion as to closure of 
schools or redrawing of boundaries — particular closure of 
schools — between a division board and a local board, the local 
board really is at the mercy of that division board. 
 
And the one that I want to bring up, because I told them that I 
would, is the Success, Pennant problem. Now my understanding 
is that they have resolved some of that where the division board 
had planned on bussing the children to Swift Current, a total 
mileage, I believe, of about 45 miles one way. — or is it 30 miles 
one way, I’m not sure, it might be 30 miles one way, there’s 
another district involved — but for five-year-olds and 
six-year-olds being on the bus for about at least three hours a day. 
And the parents were objecting to that. And I have some 
sympathy with them on that, having five- and six-year-olds 
sitting on the bus that long. 
 
Mr. Minister, is there no mechanism available, or should we 
implement some method whereby disputes like this   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1531 
 

can be resolved, where a local board at least has someone that 
they can turn to? I know they came to you, and you rightly so — 
I’m not criticizing — you rightly said, look that’s not my 
problem, that’s not my problem — some words to that effect — 
and rightly so. But should we not look at maybe implementing 
some mechanism, some method to resolve those disputes? 
 
And I know you have others because I have received letters from 
others. So I think it’s something that can be done so that the local 
boards have at least some avenue that they can go to or some 
person that they can go to or some mechanism that they can use 
to say, hey, look it, maybe arbitration is the answer or 
conciliation or something to that effect — some person or some 
mechanism they can use to try and resolve the dispute. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the hon. member asks a legitimate 
question and, certainly, one relative to school bussing and routes 
and boundaries and some of those kind of disputes that get raised 
with me over the course of a year, as minister, on many, many 
occasions. 
 
The first sign, I suppose, that some trustees might be unhappy 
with a given decision or a contemplated decision, if they feel they 
can’t get it reversed to their satisfaction at the local board level, 
they almost always, and perhaps rightly so, turn to the Minister 
of Education. And I get a lot of correspondence on some of these 
questions. 
 
Having said that, almost . . . well not almost, with rare exception 
my reply is the same to all, and that is that local boards . . . this 
falls within their jurisdiction. It is up to them to plan the 
configuration and the school bus routes and those kinds of things, 
Mr. Chairman, as we all know. 
 
Having said all of that, I know there are probably some instances 
where boards maybe haven’t been as flexible or as understanding 
as they maybe should have been or could have been in the past. I 
think of an example, even in my own constituency — and once 
again I’m not criticizing the board because I wasn’t sitting in 
their chairs — but it seemed like such a tragedy when because of 
the rules if you like, a young couple with 3 or 4 or 5 young 
children became so distraught with the rules and the inflexibility 
of the rules, they ended up — and they lived along grid road — 
they ended up building a brand-new house on the opposite side 
of the road. They happened to own land on both sides, and in one 
case you’re in one boundary, in another case, the other side. And 
they ended up building a brand-new house to get around the rules. 
And I thought to myself, you know, there’s got to be something 
wrong when the system was that inflexible. And I say that, not 
being Minister of Education at the time and not having access to 
all the information that local boards did, but it certainly seemed 
to me that there was perhaps something gone astray there, at least 
there was a perception of that. 
 
How does one handle these situations if in fact the local boards 
and the trustees or the concerned parents can’t come to some 
satisfactory resolve? There is a mechanism, and that is that a 
boundaries commission can be struck. It’s used extremely rarely 
because it’s . . . I suppose it’s 

tantamount to bringing in back-to-work legislation, because what 
you’re saying is I’m going to usurp the board’s local authority 
and local autonomy. So it’s very rarely used — very, very rarely 
used. 
 
I think the example that you’re referring to, the Pennant, Success, 
Swift Current rural, is one of those kinds of example that’s 
generated a fair amount of discussion and letter-writing and 
meetings, and meetings with my Legislative Secretary and 
perhaps even with yourself from some of the people from that 
area. 
 
My understanding is, as is so often the case, that the local board 
and the concerned parents, particularly those from Pennant have 
resolved it on their own. They’ve come to a solution. It may not 
be the preferred one in everyone’s mind, but I think it’s now one 
that . . . they have a game plan that everyone seems to be able to 
agree on. And I know that that was one of those very emotional 
examples, as so often they always are. But I think they’ve come 
to a satisfactory resolve on that one, and it’s been handled once 
again without Regina or central government interference, and for 
that I’m thankful and pleased, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Yes, I think the Pennant, Success one has been 
resolved, but not to everyone’s satisfaction, I think as you 
indicated. That’s not the point, Mr. Minister. It has caused a lot 
of hostility in that area, a lot of hostility, and people are out, you 
know, gunning for some of those people in the elections. 
 
And I think we’ve go to find some other method other than the 
boundaries commission. Can’t we look at something else that the 
local board can turn to once they have used pretty well all their 
options, before it gets to the stage that I think Pennant, Success 
got to? I mean, these people were extremely concerned — 
extremely concerned. 
 
I wish, Mr. Minister, that in that particular instance, though, that 
you would have felt that you could have met with those people. 
They came to Regina, and I know you were in town, but you 
didn’t meet with them. I think just to show them, hey, look, yes, 
I’ve got some understanding; there’s nothing I can do, nothing I 
can do under the present circumstances; and we’ve got to work 
these things through, but yes, I’ll try and look at something, some 
other mechanism that maybe we can come up with. I won’t 
guarantee you anything, but I agree that we shouldn’t allow these 
disputes to get to the stage where we cause a lot of hostility 
amongst friends. And I know, under the present circumstances, 
there wasn’t very much you could do, but I thought the least you 
could have done was to meet with them. 
 
Mr. Minister, you didn’t answer the question for me again. In 
your opinion, isn’t there something that you should maybe look 
at, or are you prepared to look at something other than the 
boundaries commission to try and resolve some of these 
situations? And just to wash your hands of it and say, well, that’s 
division board’s responsibility and not mine — maybe the time 
has come that we look at some method. And I don’t know what 
it is, but goodness, you tell me you’ve got all those officials in 
your department who are highly intelligent. And I see the   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1532 
 

deputy minister agreeing, at least smiling, and I don’t blame him 
for that. 
 
But really, seriously, can’t we come up with something or at least 
give some thought to it because this won’t be the last dispute that 
you’ll hear of if — well, it may be the last dispute that you will 
hear of — but, you know, can’t you come up with something at 
least, or at least look at something that we can try and resolve 
some of these problems? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I can’t resist, Mr. Chairman. The hon. 
member suggests that it might be the last dispute that I would 
deal with, and I just want him to know that rumours of my 
demise, as Mark Twain might have said, are highly exaggerated. 
 
Relative to the meeting with the concerned parents from the Swift 
Current region, I had my Legislative Secretary attend on my 
behalf at that meeting, and he did a very good job for me, thank 
you. And as well, I think it’s safe to say, in this and in many other 
instances, the role of our regional directors, working in 
co-operation and in conjunction with the local boards and the 
directors and the local trustees, very often probably prevent 99.5 
per cent of these from ever surfacing into any issue, because there 
is that co-operative spirit. And I think very often that the regional 
director can come in and have cooler heads prevail because 
sometimes these things get quite emotional. And in this 
circumstance, in this instance, the regional director, Brian 
Keegan, had done a very good job, I think, of trying to finding a 
mutually acceptable solution, if you like, working in conjunction 
with the board and local trustees. 
 
(2015) 
 
I must say, and I would say I would extend my compliments to 
him and to other regional directors who do . . . they serve many 
roles out there. But one of them is this trouble-shooting kind of 
role, and I know in many instances they solve these problems 
long before you and I would ever hear of them. I think too often 
that role goes unrecognized, if you like. 
 
In so far as you’re asking me would I be prepared to look at some 
other mechanism or some other process, if you’re asking me if it 
be my nature, as opposed to perhaps the socialist approach, if I 
would be more interventionist, my answer would be no. If you’re 
asking me if the trustees themselves sense that this was an issue 
that was arising too often and that they felt more needed to be 
done, if they came with the suggestion because of that, then I 
would certainly give it serious consideration. But at this point in 
time I would be . . . without some pretty serious recommendation 
coming forward from the umbrella organization of directors or of 
trustees, my first inclination would not be to get into that. 
 
Because in addition to the boundaries commission that one can 
put in place, other tools are there according to The Education Act, 
one of which is you can hold an inquiry. When the Yorkton 
situation, which you may be somewhat familiar with, when they 
couldn’t find . . . the three boards couldn’t find a satisfactory 
resolve, and it was very complex because of operating 
agreements and 

all kinds of things like that, Brian Ward, who I think was a former 
deputy minister of the Department of Education, was called in to 
be the mediator, and he successfully mediated that. I think we’ve 
seen similar kinds of processes put in place; for Northern Lights, 
we had the Scharf report, before that the Burnett report. 
 
So there are some tools there. They’re used sparingly because we 
do very, very much respect local autonomy, and for me to do 
more, to become more interventionist, to ask for more tools 
without the trustees saying yes, we want that kind of intervention, 
I’d be hard pressed to do that as a departmental initiative, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, I don’t know what possess the 
minister in making everything political — everything political. 
He can’t give you one straight answer. And again, Mr. Minister, 
it’s ample proof, it’s ample proof, why you are so disliked out 
there. If someone had asked you . . . if someone out there at a 
public meeting had asked you the question that I did, and you 
gave that kind of an answer, as you are prone to do from what I 
hear, it’s no wonder that you’re held in such low regard by the 
teachers and the trustees out there. 
 
I asked you, I asked you very sincerely if you would put your 
officials to work. I didn’t ask you to intervene. I didn’t ask you 
to intervene. And with your attitude, I wished you wouldn’t 
intervene. But all I asked you to do was from your experience as 
a minister. You hear of all the problems. Individual trustees in 
their divisions don’t hear all the problems so naturally they’re not 
going to make recommendations to you. But you, as the minister 
who hears of these problems, comes to grips with these problems. 
All I asked you to do is would you give consideration . . . not to 
implement but to take before the trustees association and say, hey 
look it, I’ve had a half a dozen problems, or I’ve had a dozen 
problems and they haven’t been amicably resolved, it’s caused a 
fair amount of hostility, wondered whether you people would 
consider these. Is this a different process? Is this a process 
possibly that we can use so that communities don’t have to tear 
themselves apart. I didn’t ask you to intervene at all. 
 
What I’m asking you to do is to put the resources that you have 
at your disposal to address some of the problems that exist out 
there. Parents who are extremely concerned at the local board 
level when decisions are made by the division board, which they 
have a right to make. But there’s a difference of opinion as to 
how those problems should be addressed. And when local boards 
feel that they have no alternative for the welfare of their kids, 
they’re saying to me as the critic, and they’re saying to you as the 
minister, isn’t there another way that we can deal with these 
situations so that we have the welfare of our children at heart? 
And you’re simply saying, no, I’m not going to do that — you 
want me to politically intervene? Are you . . . no, I’m not going 
to do that. 
 
I’m not asking you to intervene. All I’m asking you is to use your 
good offices, your officials, to see if we can come up with some 
other process in trying to resolve these problems. But, obviously, 
you don’t have any more interest in his area than . . . Well I 
shouldn’t expect that you would have any more interest in it. The 
minister takes   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1533 
 

this very lightly, but I can tell you that the people in Pennant and 
Success and other areas sure as the heck don’t. 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, they were very disheartened 
driving all the way in, knowing full well that you were in the 
building, and that you refused to meet with them. You had lots 
of opportunity. You had all afternoon when you were in the 
House, here. They were willing to meet with you at any time of 
the day, any time of the day. All you had to do is mention the 
time. They met with me, and it took only half an hour of my time. 
And, Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I was 
concerned about their problems. And they asked me if I would 
raise the situation with you to see if you would look at another 
process. Not for them any more, because their problem has 
basically been resolved, but they’ve gone through a heck of a lot 
because they didn’t want their children to be on the buses for 
three hours a day. 
 
And all the minister can say is, well I’m just not going to be 
concerned about it. Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I will send 
your words to the people of Pennant and Success and, as I say, if 
that’s your nonchalant, non-caring attitude, I can well understand 
why people don’t think very highly of you as the Minister of 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, one can only draw 
one conclusion from what he has just said, and that is that 
somehow he doesn’t have faith in the local government 
administration of our . . . of school boards across this province. 
And he doesn’t have faith in trusteeship and trustees and all that 
it means. He’s saying that he doesn’t have faith in the tools that 
are in place. 
 
What he is saying is that — and this is an interesting paradox, 
Mr. Chairman, because for the first six hours that we were in this 
examination of estimates he said the problem with me — at least 
in his mind, and I’ve got lots of problems, and I’ll be the first to 
admit — he said the problems with me as the Minister of 
Education is that I’m prone, or I make unilateral decisions, I 
don’t consult, I don’t collaborate, I don’t co-operate, I just decide 
I know what’s best, and that’s the way it will be and that’s what 
shall be done, is what I decree. That’s his words; I’m 
paraphrasing, Mr. Chairman. Hence he spent the first six hours 
saying that to this legislature, that all the decisions are being 
made in head office and never mind what the people are saying. 
 
Now this is your classic example of socialist logic — classic 
example. That kind of criticism worked fine when he was 
wanting to make a particular point. Now all of a sudden, he’s the 
defender of head office education, that the people in Regina 
somehow know better than the trustees, that we should intervene. 
That’s what you’re saying.  
 
On the one hand you say, don’t make decisions in isolation and 
insulation in Regina, collaborate, co-operate — which is what we 
do, quite frankly. In the next breath he is there saying, intervene, 
never mind trusteeship, throw that out the window, never mind 
how well it’s worked. I haven’t had the trustees association come 
forward and say that we should design another tool 

over and above boundary commission and mediators and 
inquires and those kinds of things that already exist. 
 
I was happy to see in this instance that there was a satisfactory 
resolve to a tough situation, and it’s a credit to trusteeship, once 
again, in this province. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — What an exasperating individual. What an 
exasperating individual. It’s no wonder you got three portfolios 
already. You know, you just will not listen, will you. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I indicated — oh, I see the member from 
Mayfair, the member from Mayfair who so successfully, ardently 
supports and defends our fair city of Saskatoon. Not once has he 
made a defence on anything in Saskatoon — not once. 
 
Mr. Minister, the only question that I have left for you in this 
particular area is that if you’re not going to look at trying to 
resolve the problems at the local level, maybe at least you could 
have a look at your own department and see if there is some way 
or some means that you could have some consultations with 
division boards. I said from the outset that they were certainly 
within their rights and no one denied that, but there’s a lot of 
hostility that still remains and suspicion that still remains in that 
area. You didn’t even use your good office to try and, not 
intervene, but try and listen to those people. No one wanted you 
to intervene. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I’m going to leave that and I’ve got you on 
record and I will tape the Hansard and I would send it out to the 
Pennant people and that is your response. And, you know, that’s 
what we want; we want it on record so that they know exactly 
what kind of a minister they’ve got to deal with. No one has asked 
you to direct everything from your office. That’s been your 
biggest problem, that you have unilaterally made decisions. 
 
All I’m asking you now is to look at — that is not intervening; 
look at — different ways of trying to resolve the situation. And 
when you find something, you don’t then arbitrarily implement 
it. But that’s the way you accept them. Maybe that’s the way you 
operate. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, my colleague from Saskatoon University has 
a few questions he would like to direct to you and I will turn it 
over to him now. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, my first question to you relates to 
the R.J.D. Williams Provincial School of the Deaf. Last year at 
this time I suggested to you that you ought to . . . Instead of the 
proposal that your staff at the senior level of your department 
were making to the parents and the students at the R.J.D. 
Williams school for the deaf, that perhaps the school for the deaf 
would be closed within one to two years, I suggested to you that 
you ought to implement a task force in this province to look at 
the educational needs of hearing impaired students and to look at 
the future of the R.J.D. Williams school for the deaf. And I want 
to commend you for establishing that task force. I’m pleased to 
see that that task force has been established; I want to 
congratulate you for that. 
 
My question to you is: I see from the estimates that the   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1534 
 

budget for this year, in effect, retains the operations of the school 
for the deaf throughout the coming fiscal year. Two staff 
positions have been eliminated. Can you give us your assurance 
now, Mr. Minister, that the R.J.D. Williams school for the deaf 
will function as we see it now for at least the next two years, that 
there will no significant budget cuts, certainly no phasing out of 
the school as was originally suggested by your senior 
departmental staff? Can you give us that assurance? And can you 
indicate when you expect to receive a report from the task force 
that you have established? 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, and hon. colleague from 
Saskatoon University, I welcome your questions tonight. Albeit 
your portfolio has changed as critic, I know your heart still is very 
much in some certain aspects of education, and particularly 
post-secondary education. And I was pleased to be able to 
respond to your suggestion, about a year ago now, relative to the 
task force. I said then it was a suggestion that had merit, and one, 
indeed, at the end of the day, I found had considerable merit. 
 
In so far as when this task . . . Mind you, on the one hand, I could 
get schizoid between what you say and what your colleague says 
about whether we consult or we don’t consult or whether we do 
things unilaterally. We don’t do things unilaterally, but I’ll leave 
that. 
 
The expectations is that the task force will report by the end of 
December. And through this period they would be . . . And I 
would use this opportunity to encourage interested individuals to 
forward briefs to the task force. What I would see happening is 
that they would put together a preliminary report after these 
meetings and receiving these briefs, etc., put together a 
preliminary report, then bounce that off affected and concerned 
individuals to get their sense of whether they are somewhere on 
the right track or they’re not on the right track, and then after that 
feedback — and I say this very sincerely — that they would then 
formulate a final report for our consideration. 
 
I want to say again that my goal through all of this, if I stand back 
and look at the larger issue here, and that is educational services 
for the hearing impaired — my goal through all of this is to do 
better, not worse. And that’s the why for the task force, if you 
like. 
 
Your specific question about the numbers of person-years being 
down — I think it’s two — is just a reflection of the enrolment at 
the school. And a word on that. The fact that the enrolment is 
down, on the one hand one could say, well does this mean we 
have less hearing impaired children, when the reality is fewer . . . 
I’m sorry, fewer hearing impaired children. The answer is 
probably not so. But what it’s a reflection of is the successes that 
local boards, parents, and concerned individuals and educators 
— perhaps especially educators, special educators — are having 
at integrating these children in the traditional school model, if 
you like. 
 
And so on the surface what looks like some kind of a down side, 
if you like, is another success story 

going on, if you like, in the special education initiatives by 
teachers and parents with these children. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, I want to say that the 
process sounds reasonable. I want to urge you and the task force 
to involve students and parents at the school and in the hearing 
impaired community at large as much as possible, and I see you 
nodding your head. I’m pleased that you’re planning to do that. 
 
I want to make two points in closing this off. First of all, Mr. 
Minister, your department could be doing a lot more to advertise 
the very good services that the R.J.D. Williams school for the 
deaf offers. I think one of the reasons that enrolment is declining 
over and above the reason that you mentioned is that the services 
of the school are inadequately advertised, and that many parents 
of hearing impaired children are not aware that the school exists 
and are not aware of the services that it offers. 
 
But I want to come back, Mr. Minister, to my initial question to 
you which you only partially answered, and that is: I’m asking 
your assurance that the R.J.D. Williams Provincial School for the 
Deaf will continue to operate for at least the next two years with 
at least its present budget in place before there are any major 
changes implemented. In other words, Mr. Minister, I want your 
assurance that throughout the task force period there’ll be no 
further cuts at that school, and that the school’s future is assured 
for at least another year beyond the task force filing their report 
— unchanged in any significant want. Can you give us your 
assurance, in other words, that you’re not going to make any 
dramatic cuts to that school in the near future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t quite 
understand the hon. member’s question nor his logic behind his 
question totally. I don’t say this by way of criticism. 
 
I’m wondering in so far as you asking for a solid commitment 
that there’ll be no cut-backs or whatever for two years, if that 
maybe doesn’t handcuff the task force. I mean, if they come out 
with some sort of newer and better way of dealing with these 
impaired children, then I don’t know as I’d want to be handcuffed 
to the old way, if you like. 
 
If you’re asking me for a commitment that there won’t be cuts to 
hearing impaired children throughout the provinces, 
categorically as I can give that, I give it to you. But I don’t know 
as I’d want to be handcuffed by staying with the old — if 
something different or better comes up in this collaborative and 
co-operative and consultative process that we’d be handcuffed to 
it. 
 
Perhaps the question has to do with, you know, if we went from 
A to B . . . And I don’t know as that would be the case, but if we 
did, would it recognize some kind of transition and be sensitive 
to that? And that would be uppermost in my mind as well if, in 
fact, that was to come to pass. So if your thinking and my 
thinking are on the wavelength in that regard, then I give you that 
much assurance.  



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1535 
 

Mr. Prebble: — Well I want to thank the minister for that 
assurance, because the point I want to make to the minister is that 
many of the children at this school, the school is a very, very 
central part of their life. Many of them reside in the school on a 
permanent basis for nine or 10 months of the year. For many 
others the school is an important part of their cultural life, more 
so than most children because they are so dependent on the 
educational and cultural environment of the school as a central 
part of their life. 
 
And therefore what I’m urging, Mr. Minister, is that if any 
changes are recommended by the task force that they be 
implemented gradually so as not to uproot those children, and 
that funding not be pulled from the school. And the reason, of 
course, I ask these questions is that originally your officials 
threatened to do just that, Mr. Minister, and I’m glad to see that 
you’re now taking a different path. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you another question and that is with 
respect to the publication that your department issued called My 
Daily Journal. I wrote you about this publication, Mr. Minister, 
a number of months ago and at the time, you and your deputy 
minister declined to answer the question that was of greatest 
interest to me, and that is, Mr. Minister, what the cost of 
publishing, printing, and distributing My Daily Journal to junior 
high school students in this province was. Could you tell the 
House how many thousands of young people in this province 
received a copy of My Daily Journal, and what the cost was of 
printing and distributing that particular document to children in 
the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, relative to My 
Daily Journal, which was circulated to grade 7 and 8 students . . . 
And I saw the hon. member — members, maybe — smiling 
somewhat relative to this project, or this little journal, My Daily 
Journal. 
 
I would maybe just say a few words about that. I think there are 
some questions about its usefulness and why one might do it. If I 
look at one of my own children and some of her friends, their 
initial reaction was one of some delight and that it was something 
special for them and it had some food for thought, if you like, on 
the various pages. But like any other diary, whether you’re an 
adult or a child, unless you keep it up, so to speak, the novelty 
quickly wears off. And maybe that’s some of what we’re faced 
with here. 
 
On the other hand, I would be less than honest, too, if I didn’t say 
that we haven’t had some very positive commentary about it from 
all sectors, educators and others, and indeed requests from some 
wanting to know if we’re going to repeat the project. So I offer 
up that commentary so that you have some sense of both sides, if 
you like. 
 
How we got to where we got with the journal was that we 
contracted the Regina separate school board to cover the costs of 
development — the research, design, and that kind of thing. And 
for that to them we provided a grant of 37,930 or just about 
$38,000, and for that we got 31,000 journals, or a little over a 
dollar a piece. And then we provided a further $5,000 grant for 
the posters; and then they had another 1,000 posters printed up at 

additional cost of $316. So you’re looking at a total cost of 40 — 
what? — 40, 44,000, something like that. 
 
And I gave you the perspectives on how it has or has not been 
received, I think certainly from a standpoint of self-esteem and 
developing self-esteem, which is so important in dealing with 
drug and alcohol abuse, chemical abuse in those adolescent years 
that grade 7 and 8 represent. 
 
I suppose I’ll put it another way: if we’ve accomplished some 
small increment in terms of addressing that mega-issue, then 
that’s $44,000 well spent when it comes to the awful spectre of 
drug and alcohol abuse. But I know there’s some snickering, if 
you like, on occasion, about it, but that’s the perspectives and 
that’s the cost — a little over $1 a journal. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could tell us also 
what the distribution cost was. Or was there no distribution cost? 
Were you simply able to use regular deliveries that may be going 
out to the schools to cover the cost or was there any extra 
distribution costs associated with the project? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I don’t have any separate numbers for 
the distribution costs, but we’ve got a fair distribution network 
there relative to textbooks and everything else, so it went under 
that kind of process. In any given year we send out a fair amount 
of stuff, as you can well imagine, but I don’t have a separate 
number broke out for you. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — In light of the cost, my feelings about it are not 
as strong as they were. The cost is, I think, a little exorbitant, Mr. 
Minister. You might refrain in the future from publishing your 
picture in the front. I think you could reduce the size of the 
publication to perhaps about a third of what it is now. It runs at 
about 120 pages of relatively empty pages with a few sayings and 
words of advice scattered around the book. 
 
Mr. Minister, we on this side of the House are very supportive of 
any initiative that might be taken to curb alcohol and drug abuse 
in this province. I think you could have found better ways to 
spend the money. I think you could have come up with a more 
modest publication, given the fact that this is a time when there 
have been many other cuts to the education system. I don’t think 
we should be wasting money unwisely. So if you do the project 
in the future, would you try to keep the cost down and try to 
publish a more modest publication, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, just one quick comment 
relative to that. I think your suggestion is well taken. I mean the 
issue is this: it’s about a $44,000 project. Yes, if it did something 
on the drug and alcohol abuse side, that’s good. Is there a better 
way to use $44,000 on that whole drug and alcohol abuse 
question? There may well be and for that reason it’s not 
something that we’re about to repeat without examining all 
options. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to just make   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1536 
 

a couple of comments about the journal because I’ve had a few 
people ask me about it, and I’d make comments which I think the 
minister would really appreciate hearing at this time about it. 
 
The question I would like to ask the minister is: who was it that 
asked for it? Judging by his remarks, I think you would feel that 
it was a decision that was made perhaps by the minister’s 
political staff so that they could test to see whether 44,000 
children, how they would react to having the minister’s picture 
right on the very front of this particular journal. 
 
I suppose if he’d not put his picture in it, the thing probably 
wouldn’t have come up at all as a matter of discussion. But the 
fact that he did makes it look more and more like an 
advertisement for the minister. 
 
I’m asking whether he wouldn’t have considered taking it out of 
his MLA communications allowance, like I have to any time I 
want to send something out across the province. Mr. Minister, 
did any school boards or any teachers or any students ask for this?  
 
The other thing you mentioned was that you learned something 
from the experiment. I think you could have learned something 
from that experiment by using a test or a pilot project some place 
along the line, in one area of the province, or a selected area of 
the province, and then you could have made that particular 
decision. You know, it’s only a $44,000 mistake, but it could 
have been a lot more. It’s what it represents, really, that there is 
objection to here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. 
member has used some terminology to describe this book that I 
can’t agree with, to call it a mistake. I don’t know as it’s at all a 
mistake. 
 
Where did the idea come from, he asks. Experts in the field — 
including in terms of those who work in drug and alcohol abuse 
and in those who work in curriculum development, personal 
development, those kinds of things — obviously had some fair 
say in this. 
 
In fact, if I was just to share with the hon. member, the 
background information I have is: these documents were part of 
a package consisting of a student activity program, a parent 
literature and a middle years principal’s conference as part of our 
government’s initiative on drug and alcohol abuse. As I said 
earlier, we contracted with the Regina school board to cover the 
research and development and design costs — not a mistake at 
all. 
 
Can we use the $44,000 better to achieve our goals relative to 
drug and alcohol abuse? Maybe so. At the same time, I know 
there’s been, as I said earlier, some sniggering about this, but I 
can’t totally ignore either the fact that we’ve had numerous 
requests for a wider distribution, also requests to repeat the 
journal. So I think it has had its impact. 
 
I would be the first to admit that why my picture was in there, 
and if I sanctioned that — which I don’t recall if I did or didn’t, 
to be honest with you — that was the mistake, because there’s no 
need for that in there. Not 

that I am apologizing for our government’s interest in drug and 
alcohol abuse, because I’m not. 
 
And in fact, the latest poll — and I suspect you would find the 
same thing true in Canada and, indeed, in Saskatchewan and, 
indeed, in Prince Albert — you know, drug and alcohol abuse is 
the number one issue now across the U.S., and I suspect the same 
is true for Canada. So we don’t . . . I think it has and can and did 
serve a worthwhile purpose. 
 
Did we get $44,000 worth out of it? I would suggest, yes, and 
then some, by quite a bit in terms of the group that it was focused 
at. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Are you going to do it again, Mr. Minister? 
And if you do it again, will you leave your picture off of the 
journal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — We have no plans to do it again, but if 
we did, my picture won’t be in it. And I hear what the hon. 
member’s saying about, it was a good likeness, but having said 
all of that, it won’t go in again. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, one of the students looked at the 
picture and the question he asked me: how long a term did he 
get? That’s not true, Mr. Minister; I’ll retract those words. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to now turn to the final report, the final 
report of the Local Government Finance Commission, 
September, 1986. And this was headed by Ray Clayton, as you 
know, and I won’t read the other members. 
 
Minister, the reason I want to turn to that report and not in any 
real detail, Mr. Minister, is because I have said to you time and 
time again that the operating grants over the last number of years 
have simply not kept pace with inflation and that when you have 
a 2.1 per cent increase, on average, in operating grants, this puts 
tremendous pressure on the local boards to increase taxes. And 
they’ve had to; there is just no other way of doing it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to read to you . . . In case you haven’t read 
the report, I want to read to you from chapter 4 on some of the 
things that the commission had said. Mr. Minister, I start with 
chapter 4, page 149. And this is what the commission said: 
 

However, the commission is concerned about the level of 
expenditures that are recognized in the formula (the level of 
expenditures that are recognized in the formula, foundation 
formula). Over the years, recognized expenditures have 
fallen behind actual average expenditures of school 
divisions. In 1985, the total foundation formula recognition 
for items other than pupil transportation and tuition fee 
expense amounted to $524.1 million while the actual 
expenditures of school divisions for the corresponding 
categories amounted to 580.5 million, a difference of $56.3 
million. 

 
A difference of $56.3 million, Mr. Minister, and that difference 
of $56.3 million had to be made up by raising   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1537 
 

the taxes at the local level — property taxes. It says: 
 

The per pupil recognized amount would have to be 
increased by 11.5 per cent in order for recognized 
expenditures to equal actual expenditures for the province 
as a whole. 

 
That is the point, Mr. Minister, that we have been trying to make 
to you, that the operating grants simply have not kept up with 
inflation and in fact the school boards have lost about 11.5 per 
cent. The actual expenditures are considerably higher than the 
recognized expenditures. 
 
Now they say: 
 

A different way of stating the foregoing is that, on average, 
school divisions have decided they need to spend 11.5 per 
cent in excess of the per pupil amounts recognized in the 
foundation formula in order to provide the level and quality 
of educational programs and services they believe are 
required. The implications for spending that additional 
amount are quite different for school divisions with a small 
tax base compared with a school division with a large tax 
base. 

 
And then they go on to say, and I want to read one last paragraph 
from here: 
 

The commission has concluded (the commission has 
concluded) that the shortfall between recognized and actual 
expenditure represents a serious impairment of the 
equalization principles underlying the funding of education 
in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Minister, that is the point that we have been trying to make 
to you and your response simply has been, no, we have increased 
our expenditures. And the Minister of Urban Affairs says, well, 
if the local boards can’t be more efficient we can’t simply pour 
money after it. So, Mr. Minister, the commission goes on to say: 
 

The commission believes that the level of recognized 
expenditures in the foundation formula is too low and ought 
to be equal to, or at least much closer to, the actual average 
expenditure level. 

 
Mr. Minister, the point that the commission made was simply 
this: that the actual expenditures out there is what you should be 
recognizing. That is what the people expect out there. That is 
what the people think is needed in order to have quality 
education, and your recognized expenditures simply are not 
adequate. 
 
Mr. Minister, with that background, and before you get on your 
feet, I want to turn to the school operating grants for this year. If 
you have a look at those school operating grants, Mr. Minister, 
you will see that there are 47 of 116 school divisions who had 
decreases, or 41 per cent — 47 out of 116 had decreases, or 41 
per cent received actual decreases. 
 
Now if you take the inflation rate and look at those who received 
less than inflation or/and decreases, then 71 out 

of 116 school divisions received decreases, or 61 per cent. 
 
 In other words, 41 per cent outrightly received decreases from 
last year and last year they got a 1 per cent decrease overall. And 
secondly, this year alone over 71 per cent did not even get the 
increase in inflation in your operating grants. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, that has been borne out by this commission. 
What this commission is simply saying is that the provincial 
funding under the foundation formula has not kept up with the 
actual expenditures that are needed out there. And what you have 
done is simply shifted the responsibility from the provincial 
government to the local government. 
 
The only recourse they have, of course, is to increase taxes. Not 
only that, Mr. Minister, what you did since 1982 — your 
government — is you have cancelled the $80 million that used to 
go out for property improvement grants which were meant for 
offsetting, I believe if I’m correct, 25 mills. It kept, I think, about 
25 mills to offset that. 
 
What I indicated to you the other day, Mr. Minister, is that the 
funding for education had decreased significantly since 1982. 
And I think the commission — and that is not me speaking, that 
is Ray Clayton and his group speaking, saying that you ought to 
increase significantly. So what did you do last year? You cut all 
operating grants by 1 per cent. What did you do this year? You 
gave them a 2.1 per cent increase. So over two years, Mr. 
Minister, if numeracy is right again, 2.1 subtract a minus and you 
end up with a plus 1.1 over two years — plus 1.1 over two years 
increase. 
 
(2100) 
 
That is not meeting the requirements as seen by the commission. 
In fact the actual expenditures and the recognized expenditures 
— the gap is going to get larger. It won’t be 11.1 per cent now; 
it’s going to be considerably larger. And the only recourse that 
local boards have, as I said to you the other day, is to reduce the 
program, the quality of the program, cut programs, as they have 
done, and I’ve read to you some of them already and I could read 
to you dozens and dozens more. Or they could dismiss teachers 
as others have done, and again I could read to you dozens and 
dozens of school districts who have reduced staff. Or they could 
combine classes, or they could combine subject areas. In one 
particular area I remember well, they are now teaching algebra 
11 and calculus 12 in a combined class. Now that certainly is not 
quality education. And those people are objecting and they 
should be objecting. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you look at your operating grants for this year, a 
lot of school districts are suffering very badly. What you’ve done 
in some of the areas like Saskatoon and Prince Albert, you’ve 
simply raised the computational mill rate and you said therefore 
they are better able to raise more money. Sure, if you raise the 
computational mill rate, you know, why not raise it four mills? 
They could even raise more money. And they were complaining 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, the   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1538 
 

directors of education and school boards were complaining very 
vociferously, but again you didn’t hear them. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to go through some of these, and some of 
these will not be defended by anybody, so I think I’d better have 
a look at them. Lanigan. Lanigan received a 17.2 per cent 
decrease this year — 17.2 per cent. Here is another one. Maple 
Creek, 11.9 percent decrease; Moosomin, 13.25 per cent 
decrease. Let’s go through some of the others here. I’m only 
picking out the big ones. Here’s another one, Pilot . . . oh, Big 
Butte, 15.56 per cent decrease. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Are there any increases? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Yes, there are some increases obviously. If 41 per 
cent receive decreases, my math tells me that 59 per cent received 
an increase. They didn’t do that in your math, I know, but we will 
pick that up in the new core curriculum. 
 
Mr. Minister, here’s another one, Mathieu, 10.71 per cent 
decrease. Now here’s one, and I . . . St. Olivier, I believe that’s 
what it is. Is it Olivier? They received a 27.14 per cent increase. 
I’d like to know why that dramatic change. Here’s another one 
received a 28 per cent increase, St. Alphonse. Why these 
substantial increase, 28 per cent increase? 
 
Here’s another decrease, Wolseley, 12.17 per cent decrease. 
Here’s one, Yorkton public . . . And by the way, at a meeting the 
other day that I was at, there happened to be member from 
Yorkton. He wanted to know why they received such a 
tremendous reduction in the operating grants, and I said, really I 
don’t know, but I would ask the minister in estimates and I would 
send him a copy of Hansard so that he would know. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m asking you now specifically to tell me why 
Yorkton public received a 23.39 per cent decrease this year — a 
$551,938. Why? 
 
There have been some other increases, but I will not go through 
those. 
 
Mr. Minister, those have been dramatic decreases for some 
school boards, and over all, Mr. Minister, the increase in the 
operating grants this year have only been 2.1 per cent. Now 
surely, Mr. Minister, you can’t justify that. How can you justify 
that to school boards when your own commission in 1986 stated 
that they recognize expenditures and the actual expenditures, the 
gap ought to be closed. This isn’t going to close it. 
 
Last year, minus one; this year, 2.1 per cent increase. That means 
that the heavy burden for education is going to have to be shifted, 
and in some instances, as I’ve already indicated the other day, 
Saskatoon public, from about 49 per cent a few years ago to now 
33.9 per cent. I think Regina is down to about 35 or 36 per cent. 
And even, I’m sure that you’re well familiar with the chairman 
of the Regina Public School Board, Ray Matheson, who was very 
critical, and he is saying, hey, look it, we have no other choice. 
Either we decrease the number of teachers, or we decrease the 
quality of education, which we don’t 

want to do, or we have to increase property tax. And that’s what 
they did — they increased the property tax. And then, your 
colleague, the Minister of Urban Affairs, has the audacity to 
criticize the Regina Public School Board and separate school 
boards for increasing the property tax when the operating grants 
for those school districts simply don’t keep up with inflation. 
 
Mr. Minister, there are a number of other areas, other school 
districts that have not received, over the last number of years, the 
rate of inflation. They haven’t seen their operating grants 
increase. Mr. Minister, I think it’s incumbent upon you to use 
your influence with your government. I notice, Mr. Minister, you 
said the other day: but everything, since 1982, things just haven’t 
gone well; you know, our resources are down, our oil prices are 
down. Well I want to remind the minister that in 1982, a barrel 
of oil was 28.52 cents a barrel; 1983, $26.19; 1984, $25.88; in 
1985, $30 a barrel. It’s only in 1986 and ‘87 that the price of oil 
has gone down. The price of oil was the highest it had ever been 
from 1982 to 1985. You should have received a lot more 
revenues from the resource industries, which you didn’t. You 
gave them huge breaks, and in our estimation, lost about $1.7 
billions. Your priorities simply weren’t right, and what has 
happened is that school boards and people at the local level are 
the ones that had to bear the brunt of the mistaken policies of 
your government. 
 
Mr. Minister, even if you take into consideration ordinary 
expenditures and capital expenditures, you are still short about 
10.6 per cent over the last four years when you add the cost of 
inflation. Inflation was about 23.6 per cent; your increases, I 
believe, were about 13-point-some per cent. So add in your 
capital and your operating, you are still short. I know you’re 
going to add in the EDF and you’re going to add in all the other 
expenditures, but that isn’t going to really help the taxpayer out 
there. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you even had a look at the commission 
report and noted some of the concerns that they expressed and 
what we can expect, or what school boards can expect in next 
year’s budget so that the shift from the provincial to the local 
taxpayer will be reversed. And that, Mr. Minister, will mean a 
significant increase in expenditures and operating grants to local 
school boards. 
 
Mr. Minister, with those words I will give you an opportunity to 
respond, and I think some of my other colleagues would like to 
get in on this debate, thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the hon. member has covered a 
significant amount of territory over the last few minutes and 
raised some questions relative to some specific school systems 
about why they would get such large increases, or in his mind, in 
some instances, decreases. And there was a couple, the St. 
Olivier, I think it was — do we have the information on that one, 
as to why it had a 27 per cent increase. 
 
Maybe my officials, if they can find that, I’ll answer that one 
while I’m on my feet as well. There’s two issues here and the 
Local Government Finance Commission report is   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1539 
 

not dealing with the level of funding — and now the member is 
preoccupied, but I’d like him to hear this — they’re dealing with 
the equalization formula. There’s the two issues: (a) the level of 
funding, which you and I can debate; and the second issue is how 
you distribute the equalization formula. 
 
With all due deference to the hon. member, I honestly don’t think 
you understand how the equalization formula works. And I say 
that based on your comments when you talked about, we can 
raise the computational mill rate and that will somehow allow the 
boards to raise more revenue. It’s got nothing to do with that. All 
that does is deal with how we distribute the pie. Whether the 
computational mill rate is up here or down here, doesn’t affect 
how much revenue the board collects based on the mill rate that 
they’ve set. And if you would like — and I say this not 
facetiously or invidiously — if you would like, I’m quite 
prepared to make some time available for you with my officials 
to go through that very complex formula in some detail because 
the . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — By raising it in certain school districts, 
they get less operating grants. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — It’s exactly that. It’s an equalization 
formula. 
 
And the two major things that impact on how much money a local 
school board will get from the provincial treasury is based on 
how much assessment can they themselves collect money on; and 
secondly, how many students do they have to teach. If your 
students were to double in any given year, just by that alone, 
never mind where the grant percentage was, they would probably 
show a substantial increase because of that. Similarly, if their 
assessment went way up, which meant that they were richer, if 
you like, then we would take and give less to them and more to 
some other area. And I went through that the other day, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
If one looks at all the examples that he rattled through, Lanigan, 
Meadow Lake, Moosomin, Humboldt, both public and high, 
Prince Albert, Prince Albert separate . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — I didn’t mean those at all. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well some of them you mentioned, 
certainly. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not Prince Albert. I didn’t mention . . .  
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I’ll take away Prince Albert then 
if you don’t want to hear the whole story. If one looks at those 
school boards to try and account for why their grant may have 
gone down, if we assume that somehow it’s not because of the 
pupils — although that’s part of it — the question that you have 
to ask if you, indeed, want to get an honest representation of the 
whole story is: did, in those school boards, their assessments rise? 
That’s the question. 
 
In Humboldt, what do we see? We see that the assessment went 
up over one and a half million in the public and over 1.2 million 
in the separate — 6 and 5.88 per cent 

increases there. 
 
So you can talk about somehow the government grant didn’t keep 
up with inflation, but why would you not talk about how their 
assessment base rose far higher and far faster than inflation? 
Could the hon. member explain that to the Assembly in he, in 
fact, wants to give a full and honest representation. 
 
If he’s not happy with that one, what about the 4.56 per cent 
increase in the assessment base for Last Mountain? Or what 
about the 2.22 per cent increase for Meadow Lake, or the 4.22 
per cent increase for Moosomin, which is one of the ones he 
raised? 
 
Now either the hon. member believes in the equalization formula 
or he does not. And also you should know that raising the 
computational mill rate really is addressing a question of fairness, 
because who you are penalizing by keeping the computational 
mill rate lower than the actual? you are penalizing the less well 
off school boards, the school boards with a lower assessment 
base. 
 
Or conversely, you are indirectly rewarding — and I hesitate to 
use that word, but you are indirectly rewarding those who have a 
very rich assessment base like the Reginas of the world. 
 
The hon. member must not, if he wants to give honest 
representation of the granting structure and its distribution, he 
must not ignore the two major components of that formula, 
assessments locally and number of pupils. Because he talks about 
inflation, and the other day — and I know you meant this not to 
be a dishonest representation; I know that because you’re an 
honest person — but the other day in these estimates, and I quote, 
you said: 
 

Mr. Minister, as I pointed out the other day, your operating 
grants have increased about 12.5 per cent over the last six 
years. That’s an average of 2.1 per cent when inflation 
actually was over, I think, over 5 per cent, or 4.9 to 5 per 
cent, maybe a little higher. 

 
Well I had my officials do some research on that and what did 
they find? And I know that you didn’t mean for this to be 
dishonest representation, but what did they find? In 1981-82, the 
operating grants, and these are blue book numbers, was 258 
million 600 — I’ll round the numbers off, okay? — $258 million 
approximately. In 1987-88 it was $329.736 million. 
 
(2115) 
 
Now the hon. member went through his computations and came 
up with the twelve and one-half per cent. But what he failed to 
acknowledge, Mr. Chairman, is that in ’85-86 we pulled the 
long-term debt dollars out and put it in a separate budget line. If 
we had done the same for the numbers, if you want to truly and 
accurately compare apples to apples and oranges to oranges, he 
would have had to pull the long-term debt numbers out of his 
starting point to get a fair comparison. And it would suggest that 
in ’81-82, if in ’85-86 the long-term debt was 56 million, I would 
suggest that in ’81-82 it was probably what? 45-50   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1540 
 

million. 
 
Well, what do you get, Mr. Chairman, if you compare apples to 
apples and oranges to oranges? If it’s acceptable to not have the 
long-term debt in the ’81-82 numbers and we pulled out of the 
’87-88 numbers the 62.7 million, then what do you come up 
with? Do you come up with twelve and one-half per cent if you 
want to do this fairly and honestly, Mr. Chairman? No, what you 
come up with is a 51.7 per cent increase and that’s on the 
operating grants without long-term debt in, and that’s not with 
the education development fund in it; it’s not with the capital 
grants in it. 
 
So what I’m saying to the hon. member is, I know politically you 
have to be seen to be making the case that this big, bad, rotten 
Tory government doesn’t care about education. The reality is we 
do care about education. Our commitment has been there 
consistently through good times and, I might add, Mr. Chairman, 
through bad. Even when wheat went to $2.50 a bushel; when 
potash was selling for half what it was in the halcyon days of the 
’70s; when oil was selling for $8 a barrel as opposed for $40 a 
barrel; when uranium prices have plummeted . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Not true. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, the hon. member tries to suggest 
that the resource revenue in this province is somehow fine, when 
everybody out there knows that that is not the case. 
 
Now if he wants to live in wonderland or the world of make 
believe, he can, but every farmers out there knows that the world 
wheat market is a third of what it was ten years ago. Everyone 
knows that except perhaps for the NDP. Now I’m saying to you 
that our commitment has been there 51.7 per cent on that 
operating grant. And I’ll tell you what, Mr. Chairman, we’re 
proud of that commitment, and you’re going to see more of the 
same in the future. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, facts don’t seem to mean a thing to 
you. Mr. Minister, I have here the actual price of a barrel of oil 
in U.S. dollars — they’re right here. From 1982 on, there wasn’t 
one year where oil was at $8 a barrel. The lowest it was was 
February 20, 1986, at 13.6 dollars a barrel; that was the average 
price for that year. Never, never in the history of this province 
has oil been at $40 a barrel; the highest it was was in 1981 at 
31.77. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, when you take the average from 1971 to 1981, 
the price of a barrel of oil was $10.47 a barrel — through the 10 
years that we were the government, $10.47 a barrel. 
 
From 1982 to 1985, the price of a barrel of oil was $27 and, I 
believe, 50-some cents — in three of those four years, 27 and a 
half dollars a barrel.  
  
Now, Mr. Minister, it is not our fault that the former minister, 
Colin Thatcher, one of the first things he did was reduce the 
royalties to the oil companies, and you people lost about $1.7 
billion. But don’t ask the people at the local level to have their 
taxes increased because it was your policy to give the money 
away from the resources. 

You should have had another $1.7 billion which you could have 
used for education, which you could have used for health, but 
you didn’t — you didn’t. 
 
Mr. Minister, this report clearly indicates that the recognized 
expenditures are simply too low for the actual expenditures. And 
Ray Clayton’s committee clearly indicates and says to you, look, 
the recognized expenditures must increase dramatically, and he 
said at that time, 11.5 per cent — 11.5 per cent they should have 
been increased at that time. 
 
And I said to you before, the gap now between recognized 
expenditures and actual expenditures has, instead of narrowing, 
has widened even further. 
 
And consequently, consequently, Mr. Minister, you have shifted 
the burden of education on the property taxes, on the property 
taxpayers. And they’re simply saying, look, we’ve had enough, 
we can’t afford this any longer. You’ve got lots of money for 
other things — lots of money. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Call an election. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Oh, I’d love to see you call an election. The 
Deputy Premier says, call an election. Well he and the Premier 
are the only ones that can decide that. The people out there would 
love to have an election right now. They were conned once; I 
don’t think they’ll be conned again — actually they were conned 
twice. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you going to address the problem as recognized 
by the Clayton commission that your operating grants simply 
have not . . . your operating grants have simply not kept up with 
the need that is out here — those aren’t my words; those are the 
words of the commission — and you simply haven’t met those 
demands. 
 
I’m asking you again: will you address the problem in the 
upcoming budget next year so that the people out there will say, 
look, we cannot accept any more of the shift from provincial to 
the local levels? 
 
And, Mr. Minister, the other question I did ask you is: would you 
please answer as to why the operating grants for Yorkton had 
gone down a whopping 23-point-some per cent? I want that on 
the record. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member 
asks for a commitment. I’ve already given the commitment that 
we stand four-square behind education and will continue to do 
so. 
 
I would throw this out to the hon. member in that he, presuming 
that he and I both continue in these roles, I would make available 
to you my officials because I think — and I say this sincerely; 
I’m trying to be fair to you — I don’t think you understand how 
the formula works; I don’t think you understand the relationship 
between the computational mill rate and what it really does and 
what it really means. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Neither did Clayton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In fact, by raising it — I’m saying   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1541 
 

you don’t understand it. I don’t criticize you for that because it is 
very complicated, and I didn’t pretend to understand it. Because 
what the local government commission is raising there is not the 
question of level of funding and the ratio; what they’re raising is 
the whole question of the distribution . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Did you read it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, I’ve read that particular section, 
and I stand to be corrected. 
 
What this points out, Mr. Deputy Chairman, is this: when we 
were in estimates last week, we got into this whole question of 
whether the government is providing adequate funding or 
whether we’re somehow off-loading our responsibilities on the 
local jurisdictions. At that time, the hon. member raised issues 
like inflation, and today, and then; I’ve shown him and our 
colleagues in the legislature here that we’ve met inflation at every 
turn; 60 per cent — or comparing apples to apples and oranges 
to oranges, on the operating grants alone, 51.7, per cent when we 
know inflation was probably 40 per cent in that time frame. 
 
So we destroyed his inflation bogyman. Then we destroyed the 
notion that somehow the ratio of provincial local funding — that 
percentage is somehow out of whack over this last ten years, 
when in fact since our government, our party took power, it has 
varied by maybe 1 or 2 per cent at the most — 51, 52 per cent. 
 
So we destroyed that argument. Then we even used a couple 
others that he hadn’t thought of. We went through the fact that 
mill rates increased much more dramatically under the so-called 
halcyon days of the NDP, and if we had been off-loading, the 
mill rate should have increased during our term of administration. 
But ’87, zero was the average change in mill rates; the year before 
that it was 0.25; 1985 was zero. We had one year, granted, five 
and a half. So the argument that somehow mill rates had to go up 
dramatically to offset the fact that the provincial government was 
sneaking out of its commitment — we destroyed that bogyman. 
 
Then knowing all those arguments were fallacious and that we 
had selectively and systematically shot every one of them down, 
Mr. Deputy Chairman, what does he raise today? Well what he 
did is he went back with his researchers . . . Actually, probably it 
was the other way around: his researchers probably came to him 
and said, look, you got hurt bad with your faulty logic; we got to 
find something else here. So what they did is they went and dug 
up the Local Government Finance Commission report. This is the 
new straw man. And now he’s trying to say somehow, by 
increasing the computational mill rate, it changed the revenue 
that the boards themselves will bring in. Well that’s not the 
reality. It talks to the . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — I didn’t say that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, you did, and it speaks directly to 
the point of fairness, and unless I hear some more support for 
changing the formula, the equalization formula that you use and 
we use has been pretty fair.

But I touched a nerve when I talked about how resource revenues 
has declined, and yet even through that decline in resource 
revenues our commitment had been there to education . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The hon. member says it’s a 
falsehood. Well, let’s look at his version of a falsehood. 
 
He says what we should do, and his friend the salt-water sheikh 
from Shaunavon says, let’s go back to the energy policy — the 
good old NDP energy policy. Well, what was that? That was the 
Liberal-NDP coalition, Mr. Deputy Chairman, They were the 
ones that ganged up on Alberta and Saskatchewan and virtually 
shut our oil patch in. You see, he talks about the price per barrel, 
Mr. Chairman. You see, he talks about who enjoyed the highest 
price per barrel, but I ask you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, does it 
matter at all what the price of oil is or what the royalties are if 
there is not one barrel being pumped out of the ground? Well of 
course it doesn’t. You could have oil . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . And there’s the hon. member for Regina North East who’s 
got an upgrader being built in his constituency and yet he will 
consistently stand in this legislature and say oh, those big, bad oil 
companies; how rotten they are. 
 
I ask the hon. member from Regina North East — I challenge the 
hon. member from Regina North East — to go and find out how 
much education taxes that Co-op upgrader pays. I challenge him. 
I challenge him. I challenge him to go and find out what that 
complex pays in taxes and what the share is for education. I’ll bet 
you it is one handsome sum, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I don’t know. I don’t know. I asked my 
officials to see if we could get that number. They were unable to 
come up with it on short notice, but I would sure enjoy knowing. 
 
You see, the hon. members opposite think that if you put your 
royalties high enough that somehow you’re doing a great public 
service. Well, I’ll tell you, all that did in my riding and in the 
member’s riding from Souris-Cannington, the member from 
Rosetown, the member from Maple Creek, the member from 
Swift Current, the member from Kindersley, Lloydminster — the 
list goes on and on, Mr. Chairman — I’ll tell you what the 
NDP-Liberal coalition did in my riding. This policy that he thinks 
is so great and that was so useful to our school system, you know 
what it did in my riding, Mr. Deputy Chairman? It virtually shut 
the oil patch in. 
 
And it wouldn’t have mattered whether royalties were at 92 per 
cent and oil was at $110 a barrel, there wasn’t a cent of revenue 
to be had because they squeezed the life out of the oil patch. They 
shut those wells down. They shut the jobs down. 
 
And you know what else they did, Mr. Deputy Chairman, they 
shut Main Street Weyburn down. Hotels were boarded up in my 
town because of their policy. There was marches on this 
legislature from my oil patch buddies who worked on the same 
lane as I did in Weyburn, that said, that decreed, that pleaded for 
these people to come to their senses when it came to resource 
policy. They did   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1542 
 

not, Mr. Chairman, and they were defeated. This government 
came in, and we’ve never seen oil patch activity like we’ve never 
since this government came into being, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And I’ll tell you who it’s good for. I forget the numbers. I used 
them the other day, and I’m assuming I’m reasonably correct, 
although I am working from memory. You see, the school boards 
in my area, Mr. Chairman, they kind of like having oil wells 
around. I’ll tell you why. Because for every oil well, the school 
boards get the same revenue as they get from five quarters of 
land. So if you have lots of oil wells, that means the oil 
companies, not just the farmer, share in the bills. 
 
(2130) 
 
And so what that means, Mr. Chairman, you can raise more 
revenue and have the farmers pay less tax. Now they like that, 
Mr. Chairman. They like that those big, bad oil companies are 
putting oil wells in there, and batteries, because they pay tax on 
them. The local R.M. likes them, the school board likes them and 
the people like them because their children get jobs there working 
on the oil patch. They build a lot of good roads. 
 
So we in the government and the socialists opposite will for ever 
be at opposite ends of the political spectrum on this debate. And, 
Mr. Chairman, quite frankly, the oil patch workers in my riding 
get a little tired of being booted around as some kind of bad guys, 
because in my town they are decent citizens. It’s their children 
that are being educated in our schools, and they, Mr. Chairman, 
see themselves as making a very fair and full contribution to the 
economic and social well-being of our communities. They don’t 
see themselves as being hoodlums like the hon. members would 
always want to paint them. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to begin 
by congratulating my colleague, the member from Saskatoon 
South. He obviously struck a nerve, which tells us one thing: that 
what the member was bringing forward here makes a lot of sense, 
otherwise the minister would not have had to react in the way that 
he has just reacted. 
 
Now by totally getting into the pumping of oil and the amount of 
revenues, which is quite relevant except for what the minister is 
saying, now, Mr. Chairman, I want to ask the minister in the 
process of making my remarks, when he says that there is all this 
oil activity out there, all this oil that’s being pumped, I simply 
ask him to consider: what’s the purpose of it all if the people of 
Saskatchewan are not getting any benefit? 
 
The thing that he loses sight of is that if you pump that oil, it’s 
only once you can pump it, you get rid of it; and if you don’t get 
any revenue today, you’re sure not going to get it tomorrow. And 
that’s where this government has failed. This government has 
given away this oil, has given the royalty holidays to the oil 
companies, have given away almost $2 billion of revenues that 
should have went into the provincial treasury, and some of it 
should have went into school grants, and we are never going to 
be able to get it again. But he doesn’t recognize that.

Now the minister talks about school boards in his constituencies 
are glad to have oil wells. Well I don’t doubt that at all, but once 
again this minister, as this government, fails to recognize what 
the role of government is. Surely if there is oil being drilled in 
Weyburn or southern Saskatchewan, there should accrue to the 
school board in Hudson Bay, or the school board where there are 
no oil wells, or the school division in Sturgis or the school 
division in Humboldt where there are no oil wells. If you give 
this oil away without charging the right rent for it, those are the 
people that pay the price, and therefore have had their property 
taxes going up. 
 
It just doesn’t make any logical sense at all when you listen to 
the argument that the minister has been making. There is a role 
of government, and that is to make sure that the wealth of this 
province is distributed equitably throughout all of the province 
and not simply benefitting only those where the wealth may be 
generated in some particular local area. And even the people in 
those local areas would not argue against that. They haven’t in 
the past, and I’m sure that they wouldn’t argue that now. 
 
I want to just make a comment here, and ask some questions of 
the minister about something very specific. The minister talked 
about the fact that there have been something like 51 per cent 
increases in school operating grants in the term of this 
government. Well I’m wondering: if that’s the case, what 
happened in the city of Regina? And here is the case in the city 
of Regina, where this year property taxes are going up on the 
average of $37 a home — that’s $37 this year. There was an 
increase last year, and I believe there was an increase the year 
before. And in 1985-1986 there was $241, on top of the mill rate 
increase, that came about on the property tax . . . property owner 
because this government did away with the education grant . . . 
education tax rebate. A massive shift of taxes from the provincial 
level and the cost of education from the provincial level to the 
property owner. 
 
A very deliberate policy: give oil companies a royalty holiday of 
almost $2 billion, and shift that tax load to the property owner 
who’s struggling out there to make a living, who’s not sure if he 
is going to have a job tomorrow. And here is the specific point: 
in the city of Regina, in the Roman Catholic School Division No. 
81, the operating grant for 1985-1986 was $13,661,000. That was 
the actual operating grant. I ask you, Mr. Chairman: did you 
know that in 1988-1989, this budget that we’re considering, the 
operating grant in the city of Regina public school system is 
going to be only $12,610,000 — a reduction of $1 million 
between 1985 and 1988? 
 
That’s a major shift. That’s doesn’t even take into consideration 
the increase in costs that the school division has had to incur 
because of inflation and because of increased costs in all aspects 
of its operating. 
 
Now the public school division has not been left alone. In the 
public school system in Regina, division no. 4, in 1985-1986 the 
operating actual grant was 26,608,000; in 1988-1989, some four 
years later, it’s only $26,121,000 — a reduction of $500,000.  



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1543 
 

Now, Mr. Minister, how in Heaven’s name can you talk about 
. . . nothing to do with computational mill rate here, nothing to 
do with your debt reduction here, because I’m not using the years 
that you spoke about. How do you justify to a — let’s just stay 
with the Catholic school system where the enrolment has gone 
up, where the costs have gone up, where the inflation this year is 
5.4 per cent, and in previous years sometimes higher — how do 
you justify between ’85 and ’86 and ’88-89 a cut in the operating 
grant of $1 million? Will you explain that to the taxpayers of 
Regina? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I think we have here 
another member — and I don’t criticize because it is very 
complex — who does not understand the equalization formula. 
 
He started out his remarks about how school boards probably do 
like having oil wells because it does add to their assessment base. 
But then he went on to argue that if municipalities and/or school 
boards will have access to that tax base, that have those oil wells, 
well that’s all fine and well for them to have oil wells or any other 
economic development that they might have that’s unique to 
them. But he said, but how does that help the Hudson Bays of the 
world? 
 
To use but one example he used, he said, you know, how does 
this broadening and increasing and diversifying economic base 
in a Weyburn, for example, help a Hudson Bay? Well, of course, 
that’s exactly why you have a equalization formula. If Weyburn 
— to use that as an example — has a broadening and 
ever-growing assessment base, hence their need is less than, for 
example, to use your example of Hudson Bay, then the formula 
reflects that, and less will come from the provincial coffers for 
Weyburn, and more would go to Hudson Bay. But you see, Mr. 
Chairman, here’s where his logic fell apart. He then immediately 
went into the Regina separate school board. Is the hon. member 
listening? 
 
On the one hand you said, on the one hand you said oil wells are 
good for them that have them; economic development is good for 
those that have it. But what about, to use your example, Hudson 
Bay? And of course the formula would adjust. But then he 
immediately turned his logic around and said, what about Regina 
separate? Okay. Now there is a board, Mr. Chairman. I asked the 
question, they don’t maybe have oil wells; they might have an 
upgrade to draw on, but do they have oil wells? No. But do they 
have a broadening and ever-increasing assessment base like an 
area that has oil wells for example? And the answer is yes. 
 
In fact, I don’t think the hon. member is going to like to hear this: 
if you compare their assessment base in ’81 to ’87, did it go up 
by 20 or 30 or 40 per cent like inflation did, Mr. Chairman? The 
answer is no. This could be one of the highest examples in the 
province. Their assessment base increased between ’81 and ’87 
— 66 per cent. Now if the hon. member’s logic in the first 
example is right where he said, you know, those communities 
that have access to oil wells and a broadening and expanding 

assessment base, they ought to be expected to take a little because 
the Hudson Bays of the world are the ones that would need it, to 
use his example, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And that’s exactly what we see there. If their share of the 
provincial grant went down, it’s because they had this 66 per cent 
increase in their assessment base. Is he saying that we should 
ignore the equalization formula, ignore the Hudson Bays of the 
world, to use his own example? You can’t have it both, you can’t 
have it both ways, Mr. Chairman. But then he said, well, oh yes, 
but their enrolments are way up. Well, what are the numbers on 
enrolment? Is there a 66 per cent increase in the enrolment? Is 
there a 30 per cent increase in the enrolment? You know what the 
answer is, Mr. Chairman? A 1.2 per cent increase in the 
enrolment. 
 
And the grants, Mr. Chairman . . . a 1.2 per cent increase in 
enrolment, 120 more pupils in ’87 over ’81, and their grant, the 
provincial grant, went up 22 per cent. 
 
An Hon. Member: — For whom? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — For the Regina separate. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Between when? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — ’81 and ’87. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What happened to ’85 to ’88? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well you see, he doesn’t understand 
the formula. Their assessment went up, their pupils basically 
stayed level, but even in the face of that, the provincial 
government was putting more money in every year. 
 
Now did the percentage change, what they raised locally versus 
what they got from the government? You bet. That’s called 
fairness. If another community’s assessment had gone up by 66 
per cent, well surely he wouldn’t have wanted that grant to go up 
when the fairness question would have precluded an assessment 
who had gone down from not getting more. 
 
So you see the hon. member cannot have it both ways, Mr. 
Chairman. There has been a dramatic increase in assessment. We 
went through that bogeyman last time, and . . . I’m tempted to get 
into the argument about the oil again, because what the hon. 
member says is that somehow the PCS aren’t getting fair 
economic rent. 
 
Now there are a number of models for economic rent. We’ve 
employed one; they employed one, another one. And what he’s 
trying to make a point of, is that somehow our revenue is less, or 
that what we net out as a society is less with our model than it is 
with theirs. 
 
But what do they consistently not acknowledge, Mr. Chairman? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Jobs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — My colleague from Swift Current says, 
jobs. You see, the socialist notion goes this way, Mr. Chairman.  



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1544 
 

An Hon. Member: — Well tell us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — And the hon. member from Fairview 
says, tell us. Well you see, their logic was this, Mr. Chairman, 
when it came to resource policy, energy policy in particular. They 
said, well, we’d like to extract a very high rent if we can. And 
what they did, essentially, they overshot the mark a little. Even 
today, Saskatchewan is higher than both Manitoba and Alberta, 
okay? 
 
We’re extracting more, much to the dismay of the oil companies 
and our sister provinces. But they extracted so much that they 
shut the oil patch down, essentially. And what that means, Mr. 
Chairman, is the 15,000 direct and indirect jobs were shut down 
too — and these are, for the most part, very good jobs, good 
paying jobs. But you see they never factor that into their 
numbers, Mr. Chairman. 
 
(2145) 
 
They were quite happy to have, I don’t know how many thousand 
oil patch workers on welfare and on unemployment insurance. 
But that is the socialists’ way. That is the socialist way. They like 
to have people on welfare and on unemployment insurance. And 
I’ll tell you why, Mr. Chairman, because they like to have them 
subservient to the state. They like to see people come crawling to 
the government for the dole on a weekly basis. They can laugh if 
they like, Mr. Chairman, but that is the truth. That is the socialist 
way. The more people that you have subservient to the state — 
you see that’s their measure of success. The number of people 
that you’ve got on the dole is how they measure success, Mr. 
Chairman. These people wanted to be productive citizens. And 
I’ll tell you, under the policies of the member from Swift Current, 
we’ve probably got 10 to 15,000 direct and indirect jobs in that 
oil patch today, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The hon. member made an additional point. He said, you know, 
we’d be better to leave this oil in the ground than to give it away. 
At least, according to him, that we’re somehow giving it away. 
 
And I just want to relate a little story, Mr. Chairman. You know, 
when I became Minister of Energy and Mines, I was confronted 
with a couple of facts. The first one was . . . the first one was this: 
that we were buying about 65 per cent of all our natural gas, 
another form of energy, natural gas from Alberta. The gas that 
goes into your farm, Mr. Chairman, or into my house, or the 
Minister of Highways’ house, two-thirds of that gas, in 1982, was 
coming from Alberta. We were buying it from Alberta. 
 
We drilled, I think . . . In 1982 there was 9 gas wells drilled in 
this entire province, Mr. Chairman. What we were doing is we 
were buying this gas from Alberta. And that’s okay if they’ve got 
gas and we can buy it, that’s fine. But in buying it from Alberta, 
what else were we doing? I wonder, Mr. Minister, or Madam 
Minister of Energy, I wonder how many hundreds of millions of 
dollars we paid in royalties to Alberta over the years when we 
bought natural gas from them. I wonder how many times we 
could have run the school system in this province with the dollars 
we spent that we sent to Alberta in royalties. I’ll bet you it was, 
what? maybe a couple hundred million 

dollars over the course of time, which is the same as the . . . it’s 
the same as the budget, almost, when we took over in Education. 
I wonder how many hundreds of millions of dollars. Well that 
was . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — What about the jobs we exported? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — And the jobs that were exported, all the 
drilling was done over there. 
 
So when I became Minister of Energy, I saw this unusual fact: 65 
per cent of our gas is bought from Alberta. But you know, in 
Energy and Mines, Mr. Chairman, they have this map of the 
province, a geophysical map or some fancy term like that, and 
what this map shows is — they colour code it, they colour code 
the map of Saskatchewan. And where there are natural gas 
reserves, it’s, I think, in green; and where there’s uranium 
reserves, it’s in red; and where there’s oil, it’s another colour, and 
so on and so forth. 
 
And if you take the map of Saskatchewan and you put it next to 
the map of Alberta, Mr. Chairman, do you know what you find? 
You find that where the border is, you would see that on the 
Albert side of the border there would be all kinds of green, which 
meant natural gas reserves. And then there would be the border, 
and then you would see virtually no green. So the NDP, Mr. 
Chairman, assumed that somehow that border must have went 
20,000 feet into the ground and that the gas on the Alberta side 
couldn’t possibly have crept into the Saskatchewan side. Well 
what convoluted logic! 
 
Well you know, Mr. Chairman, what do we find out now? How 
many gas wells do we think will be drilled this year? Eight 
hundred, somebody says, maybe 1,200 gas wells this year. Well 
you know what that proves, Mr. Chairman? The border doesn’t 
go 20,000 feet into the ground. 
 
There’s gas on both sides. And do Saskatchewan people win? Oh, 
the hon. member from Regina Centre says, you want to give it 
away. I mean, that’s the classic socialist response. It was okay to 
give maybe, what, $200 million away to the Alberta government 
in royalties, plus the jobs, plus the indirect spin-off. That’s okay, 
Mr. Chairman, but it’s not okay to have security of gas supply 
for natural gas for Saskatchewan consumers. It’s not okay to have 
deregulated environment that means lower gas costs. It’s not 
okay to have our people busy drilling 1,200 wells. Somehow that 
doesn’t count because they’re not subservient to the state. And 
you know what else doesn’t count? Compare the revenues from 
natural gas in ’81-82 to the revenues in this blue book, and you’ll 
find there’s a handsome return in royalties to this government, 
not the Alberta government. 
 
So I say, Mr. Chairman, it doesn’t matter whether you’re talking 
oil or natural gas or uranium, Saskatchewan is an energy 
supermarket, and we’re going to develop those resources for our 
children and their children’s children and for our future. That 
policy has proved to be very wise for this generation and will be 
for subsequent generations. And it’s a course that we will 
continue because, Mr. Chairman, it is those royalties, it is that 
economic benefit, it is those taxes which pay the bills in 
education. That’s the economic wealth that we’re going   



 
May 24, 1988 

 

1545 
 

to continue to capitalize on for this important area of our society, 
Mr. Chairman, and that’s educating our children for the future. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I want to . . . I’m glad that 
the excitable minister talked about models because I want to 
compare some models and I want to compare the model that was 
used prior to 1982 and the model that has been used since. 
 
The model prior to 1982, Mr. Chairman, even though the minister 
talks about oil wells being shut down, somehow had an 
opportunity for the government of that day to balance all our 
budgets. The minister’s model that he talks about, which has been 
implemented by his former colleague, Mr. Colin Thatcher, back 
in 1982, somehow has resulted, in spite of this imaginary activity 
out there, in the massive deficits where we now are burdened 
with something like $370 million a year in interest on the public 
debt because these guys gave away all that revenue to the oil 
companies in tax holidays. 
 
I’m prepared to compare our model, which brought in balanced 
budgets and operating grants to school boards which were 
realistic, to his model, which had brought about massive deficit 
accumulated astronomically, and school board grants which have 
seen reductions in Regina to both school systems between 1985 
and 1986, in spite of the fact that their costs have gone up 
dramatically. 
 
Now I want to talk about another model. The minister says that 
his model is important because it creates all these jobs. He uses 
the job model. Well I ask the minister, if he would be so good as 
to listen, if that model is so effective, if it has worked so well, 
why has there been, between 1982 and 1988, an increase of 
something like 7,000 family households who are recipients of 
welfare — an increase of 7,000 because there aren’t enough jobs 
for those people? These are families. Why has the total number 
of people dependent on welfare increased, in round figures, from 
20,000 to 40,000 between 1982 and 1988 if that is such a great 
model that has created all these jobs? 
 
The minister says their policy is right because it’s a job-creation 
policy. Where are those jobs? Keeping in mind that we have had 
in the last two years a massive out-migration of people from 
Saskatchewan, one would think that with that fact and with the 
fact that this model that he talks about, we should be so effective 
we should not have an increase in the number of people on the 
welfare rolls from 20,000 to 40,000, and we should not have had 
our unemployment rate increase from around 4 per cent to 7.8 
per cent in that period of time. 
 
That model that the minister talks about is a failure. It’s a failure 
in every sense of the word. If all that so-called activity is so 
beneficial, what happened to those jobs? Why has the 
unemployment increased? 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, what is the result? The result is that we’re not 
taking about education. You have had to say to school divisions 
that you cannot carry your fair share, the provincial share, of the 
operating costs of our school boards, of our education system, to 
the extent that in the 

Regina public school system, whereas in 1982 the province 
picked up 43 per cent of the operating budget and it also provided 
a property improvement grant which brought that up 
substantially even higher, now in 1987 — and I don’t have the 
right figure yet for 1988 — that percentage of operating budget 
picked up by the provincial government had dropped to 37 per 
cent. 
 
Now that’s got nothing to do with computational mill rate; that’s 
got nothing to do with assessments, Mr. Minister. The facts are 
clear and straightforward and simple. Your proportion of 
operating grants covered provincially in ’82 was 43 per cent. 
They have dropped to 37 per cent, a massive cut in funding to 
education which has caused an increase in property taxes each 
and every year since you have been in power. 
 
And I say, and I submit, Mr. Chairman, that that is a very 
deliberate policy of this government. It has not happened by 
accident. It’s been a policy in which this government has decided 
that they’re going to put more of the cost of education on property 
taxes, and less on the provincial government, which is better able 
to distribute the wealth of this province and pay for the education 
our children need. 
 
The result, Mr. Chairman, why? Because they chose their 
priorities — the corporate sector and, in this case, the oil 
corporations to whom they have given tax holidays, royalty 
holidays — and instead shifted that expense on property tax 
owners, bringing our property taxes in this province among the 
highest in Canada. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you don’t need to answer this today if you 
don’t have the time, but you should think about why there has 
been a reduction in the provincial share of operating grants to the 
public school system in Regina from 43 per cent in 1982 to 37 
per cent in 1987. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!  
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’ll just go through this quickly again. 
The hon. member obviously didn’t hear last time. He talks about 
how the percentage had changed from ’81 to ’87. The provincial 
share went down, Mr. Chairman, and that’s for good reason 
because during that same time the assessment in Regina separate 
went up 66 per cent. So if you want to give to those who need the 
most or have a lesser ability to raise, than you take, if you like, 
from Regina separate and you give to Northern Lights, 
Assiniboia, North Battleford, to give you but three examples of 
who gained by an equalization formula during that same period, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:59 p.m. 
 
 


