


















































April 18, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 18, 1988 
 

629 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour 
today to present a petition under rule 11, which I’m given to 
understand the Minister of Transportation is both aware of and 
supports. 
 
This petition is signed by well over 600 Saskatchewan people, 
primarily from the Rockglen and Killdeer district, and it refers 
to the CTC (Canadian Transport Commission) abandonment 
order affecting the CP Rail colony branch line. 
 
These petitioners are calling upon this Assembly and the 
Government of Saskatchewan to support the Killdeer rail 
retention committee in their appeal to the federal governor in 
council against the CTC abandonment order, which order would 
prematurely and improperly remove their local rail service. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly, on behalf of the Premier and MLA for 
Estevan, 22 grade 9 students who are seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They are from the Immaculate Heart Junior High School in 
Estevan; are here to watch this afternoon’s proceedings. They 
are accompanied by their teacher, Arlene Anderson, and bus 
driver, Ken Anderson, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ll meet with them at 2:30 for pictures, and I think they’re 
going to have drinks as well after, Mr. Speaker. I would ask all 
members to welcome these grade 9 students from Estevan, 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the 
minister who has just spoken in welcoming our guests from 
Estevan. For a period of time it was my opportunity to represent 
these people in the House of Commons, and I would certainly 
like to welcome them to the legislature. And a particular hello 
to the Andersons, and wish them well in their visit to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure today to introduce to you, and to this Assembly, a 
group of 54 students from grade 10, 11, and 12. Some of these 
students come from my home town of Young, Saskatchewan, 
and they are accompanied by students from Port Rexton, 
Newfoundland, on an exchange program. I would like to 
introduce the teacher accompanying them, Mr. Tom German, 
who is the principal up at Young, and chaperons from  

Newfoundland, Selbe Freeman, Wayne Pond, and Marilyn 
German from Young, and bus driver Bev Wingrove. I see some 
of my other neighbours up there so I'd like to welcome them 
here. I hope they have a good day, and I hope they enjoy the 
proceedings gong on here today. Could we welcome them in the 
traditional manner, please. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to members 
of the Assembly, grade 12 students, 17 of them. They are with 
the National Honor Society from Dawson County High School 
in Glendive, Montana. They are seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. They are accompanied by their teachers, Avis 
Anderson and Eileen Melby; and their bus driver is Lester 
Sampson. It’s always a pleasure to welcome visitors from other 
provinces, and especially from our friends across the line in the 
United States. So I would ask all members to welcome them. 
I’ll meet them at 2:30 in room 218 for some coffee. And I 
would ask all members to please welcome our guests in the 
usual manner. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Farm Debt Crisis 
 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Acting Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, 
last week your colleague tabled a flop of a report in this 
legislature which was supposed to deal with the farm debt crisis 
issue and farm financing. You took a year to travel and table a 
report that offers no help to Saskatchewan farmers. Since this 
was obviously a political PC public relations exercise, will you 
now direct the bill to the Progressive Conservative Party and off 
the backs of Saskatchewan taxpayers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I think the MLA 
committee report, Farm Finance for the Future, those members 
should be commended for going out and listening to farmers, 
some several thousand across this province, to help us, as 
government, grapple with the farm debt situation. Our 
government believes in consultation; your party may not. We 
believe in consultation and worked closely with groups in 
designing numerous programs and will continue to deal with 
that. 
 
And I might point out, Mr. Speaker, that’s in sharp contrast to a 
month or two ago when NDP members from Alberta and 
Saskatchewan and Manitoba gathered together to look at the 
whole farm situation at a conference on agriculture. And as was 
quoted in the paper of the day, they had no new initiatives to 
announce at the meeting, and that’s the NDP style, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

 

630 
 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, how 
much taxpayer’s money did you waste on this project; was it 
400,000, 600,000? How many hard-earned taxpayers’ dollars 
were used? Could you tell me that today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, when you’re dealing 
with the problem the magnitude of the farm situation, indeed in 
the western world, we do not look upon this exercise as a cost. 
In fact, we look at it as an investment in farming, and we’ll 
continue to make those kinds of investments to help 
Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, in 
your own report you quote an Angus Reid poll that says about 
25 per cent of the farmers do not think they’ll be there in the 
next three years. Farm Credit Corporation says 11 per cent of 
the farmers are insolvent; another 28 per cent having terrible 
cash flow problems. 
 
You went out across this province and talked to those people 
and they rejected your equity financing proposal, solemnly 
rejected it, and yet you ignore the farmers and continue with 
your own idea of how to bail out the banks. 
 
Now my question is this: why have you again ignored 
Saskatchewan farmers and why have you again come up with 
no real solution? Are you void of ideas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, when the hon. member 
quotes studies that talk about 25 per cent of the farmers won’t 
be here, etc., etc., I mean this is the same thing that this party 
said two and three and four years ago. This is what they said. 
They said when we brought in the calf program that it wouldn’t 
work; they said when we brought in The Farm Land Security 
Act that it wouldn’t work; they said when we brought in the 
production loan program it wouldn’t work, Mr. Speaker, and 
that’s the usual rhetoric. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, all of these initiatives 
that we’ve in place have been useful at protecting our farmers, 
on the one hand; getting their crops in, on the other hand, and as 
well, the Minister of Trade and the Premier have been looking 
for solutions at the international level. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Speaker, what have the hon. members done? Did 
they help our farmers get a deficiency payment? No. Did they 
help our farmers, Mr. Speaker, deal with the international trade 
situation? No. They pooh-pooh trade, Mr. Speaker. We’re in 
favour of it, and that’s part of the solution, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, we have a severe 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. New question? 
 

Mr. Upshall: — New question, Mr. Speaker. We have a severe 
problem in agriculture today as far as debt is concerned. It’s 
been building and building and building over the last six years. 
Your government has had no ideas. Any solution is short term, 
ad hoc, and they’re not a solution. And we continue to see the 
bankruptcies and foreclosures going higher and higher. 
 
When are you going to come down with an idea to keep 
Saskatchewan farmers on the land instead of your idea of 
bailing out banks and having farm land go into the hands of 
corporations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, with the measures that 
have been put in place, including things like debt review boards 
and The Farm Land Security Act, the evidence is there to show 
that the numbers of foreclosures have been minimal, Mr. 
Speaker. The protections have been there, and one could take 
that and what’s happened over the last five or six years here, 
while agriculture has been in some distress, and compare that to 
the 10,000 census farms that disappeared in the decade 1971 
through ’81 when the NDP were in power and it was the 
so-called good days in farming, Mr. Speaker. One could 
contrast the two sets of numbers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Deposits for Application to SIAST 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to the Minister of Education. I have here, Mr. 
Minister, a copy of an advertisement which ran in the Saturday, 
March 26 edition of the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. This ad invites 
Saskatchewan young people to apply for openings in various 
courses offered at the Kelsey institute in Saskatoon. Students 
were told they had a week to apply before the selection process 
was over . . . or would begin. They were also asked to deposit a 
non-refundable application fee of $25 per course. 
 
Mr. Minister, when this ad ran on March 26, a number of those 
courses advertised were already over-subscribed — they’d 
already had numbers of applications. Can you explain why you 
collected the $25 non-refundable application fee from students, 
knowing that the classes they were applying for admission to 
already had applications on hand totalling five to six times the 
number of spaces available in those courses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the hon. 
member is suggesting that the Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology runs ads in the paper to notify 
students about courses that are already filled, that story I would 
want to check out, Mr. Speaker, because clearly that would not 
be our intention. The intention of the ad was to notify students 
that there are some opportunities available in some program 
areas. 
 
Now from the time the ad was placed till the time it ran, if some 
of them got filled, so be it, and that’s great, Mr.  
  



 
April 18, 1988 

 

631 
 

Speaker. I like to see full classes, not empty classes. But 
certainly the institute merely wants to make sure that young 
people are aware of the fact that some classes are available, and 
that if they want to take them that they get filled, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — New question to the Minister of Education. 
Mr. Minister, it is my information that the day this ad appeared 
in the Star-Phoenix there were already 130 applicants for 20 
spaces in the early childhood education program at Kelsey; 
there were 75 applications for the 20 spaces in the personal 
development worker course; and there were 105 applications for 
the 30 spaces in the hotel and restaurant administration course. 
 
Mr. Minister, what we have here is students getting ripped off 
by the very department that’s supposed to help them. Mr. 
Minister, is this your government’s new strategy of lowering 
the $3.7 billion deficit that your government has racked up in 
the last six years, by collecting non-refundable application fees 
of $25 from young people when they don’t have a hope of 
getting into some of these courses. Is this your strategy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member, Mr. Speaker, is 
incorrect. I already went through the application fee, and what 
was happening under the old system, if you like, Mr. Speaker, is 
that the same students might apply at nine different courses and 
it would look like there was eight on a waiting list when, in fact, 
it was the student applying for a number of different courses, 
Mr. Speaker, and hence inflated the data. 
 
If there are some courses that were full when the ad hit the 
newspapers, obviously that’s something that I would want to 
avoid, and I’m sure that the institute would want to avoid. But if 
you’re asking me if we’re going to stop from notifying young 
people of opportunities in post-secondary education and some 
of the very fine opportunities that are there, the answer is no, 
we will not stop making sure they know of these opportunities, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister, we have an ad 
placed in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, March 26; deadline for 
applications, March 31 of 1988. We have a fall program 
registration form listing all of the courses available. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I’ve just given you information that there 
were five to six times the number of applications for positions 
in those courses. My question is this: you have created this new 
super-institute, and this was to mean more efficiency and 
improved productivity . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. The hon. member is using a 
fairly lengthy preamble for a supplementary. Please put your 
question. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Explain to the 
students of this province how these kinds of ads were approved 
by your new super-institute, and will you  

refund that $25 fee to those students who applied when courses 
had already been oversubscribed? Will you do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the 
$25 fee, I took notice of that question some good long time ago 
and I reported back to the House, but I will repeat the policy. 
 
The $25 application fee is non-refundable and it’s not an 
unusual fee. Many institutes across western Canada have it, Mr. 
Speaker. But, and I repeat this again, should a program be full 
or the waiting list too long, the application can transfer his 
application to another program within the SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
during the same academic year and no further . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 

Tax Breaks to Large Corporations 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to direct my 
question, in the absence of the Minister of Finance, to the 
Acting Minister of Finance, to the Acting Minister of Finance 
or the Deputy Premier, and it deals with the cost of the tax 
breaks in the last budget for large corporations. I want to ask the 
minister: can you confirm that on a 12-month basis that the 
reduction in the corporation income tax introduced in the 
provincial budget will save large corporations some $13 million 
in income tax? Can you confirm that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, that type of question 
would tend to find its way into the House by way of estimates. 
 
My understanding, and don’t hold me to the precise number, 
but in the budget brought down by the Minister of Finance, the 
net result is the increased revenues flowing to the Government 
of Saskatchewan from the corporate sector increased in excess 
of $35 million this year. That’s the net increase that is coming 
in to pay for health and for education and other services. The 
corporate sector paid its share of tax this year. The budget 
raised those taxes, and overall, to the corporate side, there was 
some balancing off to the corporate side in the sense of business 
tax, but when you look at it overall, the corporate tax went up, 
and went up significantly. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, supplemental, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, when you are raising taxes on the average family by 
increasing the flat tax and taking from their pockets over $50 
million, how do you justify cutting corporate income tax by 
over $13 million? How do you justify it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member would 
wish to read the budget document, he will find the following. 
The flat tax this year — even though there was a one-half per 
cent increase in the flat tax, 95 per cent of  
  



 
April 18, 1988 

 

632 
 

Saskatchewan taxpayers will pay less income tax effective July 
1, 1988 — 95 per cent will pay less, not more. The corporate 
sector will pay in excess of $35 million more. That strikes us as 
being reasonable. The corporate sector is paying more, and the 
hon. member is misleading the people of the province because 
95 per cent of those people are going to pay less income tax 
under the flat tax. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, can 
you also confirm that in respect . . . a second tax break for big 
corporations, and I’m talking about the resource royalty 
reduction, can the minister confirm that the new tax break will 
in fact deliver to the potash corporations and the oil companies 
and other resource companies in the neighbourhood of $20 
million in reduction in your budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I think that question was 
posed to the Minister of Finance. The Minister of Finance 
rightly indicated that the adjustments made in the corporate tax 
field in this budget had the net effect of increasing the revenue 
to government by some $35 million. 
 
Now when you look at that corporate sector, some pay less, 
some will pay more. The most noticeable case which will pay 
less, obviously, is those that pay business tax. And the Minister 
of Finance and the Minister of Urban Affairs are today working 
with SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 
and various local governments as to how that will be phased in. 
 
The net result of that though, which will be the most significant 
reduction on any corporate side, will be a $10 million reduction 
in their tax. And that’s significant, and that’s to the 
small-business sector. 
 
With regard to the other question posed by the hon. member, 
corporations as a whole will significantly pay more. That was 
the design of the budget, and that’s what is going to happen. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I have a supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, are you aware that the new tax breaks which we have 
referred to, the corporate income tax reduction and the resource 
royalty, will in fact save about $35 million for the large 
corporations, and conversely what you did with your flat tax is 
to pick the pockets of ordinary Saskatchewan citizens by over 
$50 million. 
 
I ask you, when it came to making choices in this provincial 
budget, why did you choose big business over Saskatchewan 
families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, it simply goes to show the 
rhetoric of the members opposite and how he has lacked, and 
how he did not bother to sit and read the budget. Ninety-five per 
cent of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, income taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, 95 per cent of them will pay less tax this year 
when you combine provincial and federal tax — 95 per cent of 
them  

will pay less. 
 
From the corporate tax sector, Mr. Speaker, they will pay in 
excess of $35 million more to the Government of 
Saskatchewan. That strikes me as valid public policy where the 
corporate sector is paying — some of those that have 
improperly avoided before are now paying. The net result is $35 
million more to the people of Saskatchewan and to the revenues 
of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Funding for Saskatchewan Ambulance Association 
 

Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Minister, your Legislative Secretary admitted this past 
weekend at a meeting of the Saskatchewan Ambulance 
Association that the present system for funding ambulance 
services in Saskatchewan is being “neglected”, and is “not 
working”, and will be “re-examined.” 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, when did the government come to this 
rather startling revelation that its funding system for ambulance 
services in Saskatchewan is getting away out of whack, and will 
the minister give us his commitment that that problem is going 
to be corrected, not some vague time in the future but in this 
current fiscal year. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well first of all, Mr. Speaker, the hon. 
member says, quote this, and end of quote. I will give the quote 
to the House, Mr. Speaker, and to the hon. member exactly 
what the Legislative Secretary for Health said at the ambulance 
meeting. It’s the following, and I quote: 
 

Our funding to ambulance boards has increased by a full 
100 per cent since 1982. This year, funding will increase 
by 6 per cent and top $6.8 million. We wish it was more, 
but it should address some of the concerns you’ve raised 
on the increase and volume of service, compared to only 
$3.2 million in 1982. I think you’ll agree that you have 
seen a health increase. 

 
That was the actual quote of what the Legislative Secretary for 
Health said. There were some folks, you know, who have 
quoted him somewhat out of context. Obviously the member in 
his quotation said, “We wish it was more.” I will say to you, 
and I will say to the House, I wish it was more, too. I wish it 
was; I wish that I could take more to the health sector. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as relates to ambulance services, we can be 
justly proud — we can be justly proud of the way in which 
we’ve been dealing with them over this period of time in this 
six years since we’ve been in office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government opposite, that we replaced here, 
had the ambulance services hidden over — now just hear this, 
Mr. Speaker — over in municipal affairs, over in municipal 
affairs, where they could keep the funding down, and they did. 
Mr. Speaker, the reason that we have a 100 per cent increase, a 
100 per cent increase in ambulance funding since 1982 is 
because it was sadly lacking then. And we’re still saying, even 
with 100 per  
  



 
April 18, 1988 

 

633 
 

cent increase we still readily admit we wish it was more, and I 
truly do wish it was more. But we are looking at this with the 
ambulance industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when they were in government over here, the 
NDP was in government — I know that’s not who asked the 
question — but when the NDP was in government, the 
ambulances of this province were circling this legislative 
building. That’s the way . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the same 
Minister. Based upon the answer that the Minister has just 
given, is the Minister now denying the media reports carried 
today that suggested that the ambulance funding system in 
Saskatchewan was under review? Is the Minister telling us there 
is no such review, no such re-examination taking place, and that 
the Minister is turning down the representations of the 
Saskatchewan ambulance association in that regard? Is there a 
re-examination or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, I’m not saying that at all, Mr. 
Speaker. I’ll say to the hon. member, yes, we are reviewing, and 
we have been for some time with the ambulance industry, and 
the ambulance industry knows that well. And certainly they’re 
disappointed, as some others are, that they would like to see 
more. Every sector would like to see a little bit more, and what 
we’ve been trying to do is respond to that in a reasonable and 
responsible way as we make choices, which is a necessary thing 
to do. 
 
I might say to the hon. member, as one of my colleagues has 
said, when his party was in power, we’re not even sure there 
were ambulances in Saskatchewan. 
 

Civil Service Pensions 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, my question is 
to the Acting Minister of Finance, and it deals with his 
government’s unfair treatment of civil service pensioners. 
 
Mr. Minister, for nearly two years the pension of some 6,000 
civil service superannuates have been frozen with no 
adjustments whatsoever for inflation. 
 
With inflation running at nearly 6 per cent in this province, the 
highest rate in Canada, do you think that it’s fair to have frozen 
the pensions of these thousands of Saskatchewan families for 
nearly two years? And can you assure them that there will be an 
inflation adjustment to their pensions introduced during this 
session? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I would certainly take that 
question under advisement as to whether or not there would in 
fact be a review on that. Obviously one has to look at how one 
allocates their money in various ways. We will certainly look at 
this. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The hon. member has taken notice of the 
question. 
 

I’d just like one thing clarified with the minister while he’s on 
his feet then. He takes the question under advisement; does he 
expect to bring an answer back to the House? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I simply said I would take 
it under advisement to . . . It’s a representation made by an hon. 
member of this House, and certainly when an observation is 
made we can take it under advisement and look for answers to 
that. 
 
What I’ve simply said is this, though, is that there are choices 
that have to be made and priorities where you have to allocate 
your money to, and so this is obviously one that we’ve had to 
look at. These individuals still have a pension; they have a very 
good pension, and each year they try to have . . . have to have 
an adjust even though — an adjusting clause — even though 
they didn’t make that contribution or have that type of a policy 
when they were in government. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Advisement. Notice. It’s just a lot of 
foot dragging, Mr. Speaker. 
 
New question. Mr. Minister, these pensioners worked hard for 
many years for Saskatchewan taxpayers. You’re awfully vague 
when it comes to finding the money to adjust their pensions to 
take into account inflation, but you’re not so vague in your 
budget speeches when it comes to finding tax breaks for large 
corporations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Can you explain this double standard, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, if you want to talk about a 
double standard, it’s the members opposite. They’ve been in 
government in this province . . . they’ve been in government in 
this province, or were in government in this province for 
somewhere around 30 to 35 years, Mr. Speaker, and during that 
time, during that time what they did is they entered into an 
agreement with a lot of public servants and a lot of school 
teachers, gave them a pension. They . . . not only did they not 
adjust their pensions, they didn’t put their share of the money 
into it, leaving a situation now where about $1.5 billion of the 
civil servants’ pension plan is unfunded. That means they didn’t 
put the money away, and some government in the future is 
going to have to find one and a half billion dollars to pay for 
that. So if anybody talks about a double standard, to the 
member opposite, look in the mirror once in a while and you’ll 
see a double standard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the minister 
how, in light of what he has just said with regard to pensions, he 
and his government can justify siphoning off earnings from the 
Saskatchewan teachers’ superannuation fund into the treasury, 
which they have been doing for the last three years, earnings 
that should be going to help to pay for the superannuation of the 
teachers and the deficit that exists in that superannuation  
  



 
April 18, 1988 

 

634 
 

plan. How do you justify that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member 
doesn’t have all of his facts. And this is one that I had a number 
of letters on, and so I did some research on it and the facts are, 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the teacher’s superannuation 
fund there is more than $130 million in excess of our statutory 
requirements in that fund, Mr. Speaker. That’s our party’s 
commitment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Justice 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 3 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I asked you Friday before 1 
o’clock for some information with respect to your staff. Could 
you give that to me now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — They misunderstood. They thought it 
was for Trade and Investment they provided the stuff. We’ll go 
arrange and get it and have it for you before the day is out. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the first issue I want to raise 
is that of farm debt. The Farm Land Security Board is in your 
department. That is, Mr. Minister, the only program you have at 
the moment. I therefore want to raise the whole issue of farm 
debt. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t intend to repeat what was said in question 
period so ably by my colleague from Humboldt. There are any 
number of statistics which prove that farm debt is an enormous 
problem. As my colleague indicated, some 10 per cent of the 
farmers are classified by FCC’s (Farm Credit Corporation) 
conservative standards as insolvent; another 28 per cent . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I missed that. Could you give it to me 
again? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well if the minister will . . . Perhaps 
someone would draw the minister a sign so you can say, I’m 
paying attention, or I’m not paying attention. It’s difficult, Mr. 
Minister, for me to know when you’re paying attention. If I now 
have your attention, then let me start the comments all over 
again. 
 
Mr. Minister, included within your estimates is the Farm Land 
Security Board. There’s, I think, little question that that board is 
empowered to deal with what is one of the most serious 
problems in Saskatchewan today, the whole question of farm 
debt. 
 
As my colleague from Humboldt so ably indicated, 10 per  

cent of the farmers, the FCC, are classified as insolvent — and 
by FCC’s very conservative standards, I might add; another 28 
per cent of the farmers are in arrears and in financial trouble. I 
could go on in the same vein, Mr. Minister, but I think these 
facts are well known to all concerned. 
 
What distressed I and my colleagues on this side of the 
legislature was the report of the — and it was not a ministerial 
statement — the 14-page ministerial statement of the member 
from Kelsey-Tisdale, the Minister of Rural Development. He 
finally filed the report prepared by members of your caucus at a 
very considerable cost to the public, and what we got from that 
was, in the words of the member from Quill Lakes, nothing 
more than a promise that we’d have a hot line so farmers would 
know about debt legislation. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Farm Land Security Board — with no 
reflection on the people who have so ably tried to make this 
thing work — the Farm Land Security Board has been 
inadequate from they very beginning. Mr. Minister, it has . . . it 
didn’t cover, as I and my colleagues pointed out, it did not 
cover farm machinery, livestock loans; just real property 
mortgages. 
 
Mr. Minister, if it was inadequate when it began, it is totally and 
completely inadequate at this point in time. Prices are 
considerably lower than they were in 1984 when this legislation 
was introduced. I’m running from memory now, but I think 
they’re in excess of . . . the price of grain is in excess of 20 per 
cent lower than it was at that time. 
 
Mr. Minister, the debt has grown, the number of farmers who 
are in arrears has grown, and you’ve basically done nothing. 
Mr. Minister, I think it’s a fair characterization of your 
approach is that before the election you threw money at the 
farmers; after the election you’re prepared to let the chips fall 
where they lay. 
 
Mr. Minister, there are those who are cynical enough to believe 
that this government has a hidden agenda with respect to 
agriculture, and that is a rationalization of farm ownership. The 
federal minister in charge of the wheat board, Otto Lang, the 
former federal minister, was responsible for issuing a report 
called task force on farming, which suggested that two out of 
three farmers should go. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think it’s fair to say there’s quite a number of 
people believe that you have the same agenda, but you’re not 
stating it; that you also think that a rationalization should take 
place. It’s the only conclusion that can be drawn from your 
inaction. Mr. Minister, I implore you and your government to 
do something about farm debt while we still have an institution 
which we can fairly call a family farm. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you’d begin this discussion by giving 
us the number of bankruptcies . . . I’m sorry, the number of 
applications to the Farm Land Security Board since the board’s 
inceptions, the number of reports issued, and the number of 
reports which were in favour of the farmer. 
 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

 

635 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well this is a good question and I think 
it’s something that needs airing, and I would hope that it is 
properly reflected for what it is. 
 
There are . . . Let’s start and go through the list of the things 
that you asked for, and I’ll add a few more to give you the 
perspective. There are in total in Saskatchewan some 63,000 
farmers. The number of farmers who have received notices, 
whose notices have been received by the Farm Land Security 
Board today — that’s the number of farmers who have had a 
notice come from a financial institution — has been 1,806. That 
is . . . of the total farmers that is about 2.87 per cent of all 
farmers who have had notice served on them from a financial 
institution, have taken that notice to the Farm Land Security 
Board — less than 3 per cent — 1,806 farmers. 
 
Of those 1,806 farmers, 1,061 have had their case dealt with by 
the Farm Land Security Board — 1,061. That leaves 739 that 
are still pending before the board. All right, so their cases have 
not been dealt with by the board as of yet. So of the 1,061 who 
have been dealt with by the board — are you following me? — 
475 of those have been successfully mediated and have gone no 
further than that —475 have been successfully mediated. 
 
That means that through the Farm Land Security Board, the 
farmer and the financial institution cut a deal — that are going 
on out there on a regular basis — arranged a deal, farmer has 
gone on, and the process continues. 
 
Of that group, that leaves 586 who have not been mediated and 
have gone to the next step which is to the court process. 
 
Of those, 289 farmers have had a negative report to the court by 
the Farm Land Security Board — 289. One hundred and six of 
them have had a favourable report, 107 of them have requested 
that no representation be made, and 84 of them have been 
neutral. 
 
If you are to look at that, at the beginning, of the 63,000 farmers 
in Saskatchewan, those that have gone through the Farm Land 
Security Board, which every farmer has a right to, those that 
have received a negative report by the Farm Land Security 
Board has been .45 per cent. In other words, less than one-half 
of 1 per cent of the farmers of Saskatchewan who have been . . . 
action has been taken by financial institutions, have gone 
through the Farm Land Security Board, less than one-half of 1 
per cent of the farmers have in fact had a negative report to the 
court. That’s 289 farmers. That is current to the end of March 
31, 1988, back to 1985 when this started. 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I might say, Mr. Minister, that less than 5 
per cent of the farmers who have applied for this board have 
had the board find in their favour. That’s the bottom line. 
Eighteen hundred and six have gone there; 106 got a positive 
report. 
 
Let me just go through those same statistics as I copied them 
down. Eighteen hundred and six have received notice — first of 
all, there’s a substantial backlog and I want to get to that in due 
course. Four hundred and  

seventy-five have cut a deal. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, let me tell you what cutting a deal involves. 
Without exception, when you’re dealing with a chartered bank 
in this country, cutting a deal means the farmer loses the land. 
They all take the same position that they either want their 
money or they want title to the land until the farmer can pay 
them, and that is the universal rule. There may be hidden in that 
475 some exception, but if there is, it just simply proves the 
rule. All of the chartered banks have taken the position that the 
only deal they’ll accept is title to the land and lease back to the 
farmer. 
 
Mr. Minister, so the 475, by and large, with which there’s been 
a deal mediated, by and large were not in serious trouble or 
they’d lost title to the land. Of the remaining 586, less than 5 
per cent have . . . less than 5 per cent received a favourable 
report. 
 
Mr. Minister, when less than 5 per cent of the farmers are able 
to stay on the land, what your program amounts to is in effect 
an opiate. It just simply takes some of the pain out of the 
process, that’s all it’s doing. 
 
Mr. Minister, you aren’t saying any significant portion of the 
farmers who have applied. I don’t have a demographic 
breakdown of these farmers, but I know from experience the 
ones who are coming into my office, by and large, they aren’t 
my age, they are a little younger than that. They’re generally 
younger farmers who have borrowed, sometimes with their 
parents who have put up their land for security. These are, by 
and large, younger farmers, they’re our most productive 
farmers, and we’re losing them. 
 
Mr. Minister, we live in a country in which we have an 
unknown sum of money to bail out Pioneer Trust. We have a 
billion dollars for a couple of banks. If my figure is correct, we 
had $300 million to bail out Chrysler some years ago. We 
haven’t got any help for the industry which produces our basic 
food. You gave them $25 an acre, but now you’re pounding 
their tails wanting it back again. 
 
Mr. Minister, . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the member from 
Kinistino lends us his assistance. He says why did we charge 
them so much interest, Mr. Member, you may be aware that 
interest rates are set by a national government, by a Liberal 
government in fact, a government which philosophically, at 
least, you people are close to. 
 
Mr. Minister, I say again that this Farm Land Security Board 
has just been an opiate. It’s just simply taken the pain out of the 
process, but the process continues. You’re taking the farmers 
out of farming. 
 
If out of 1,806 all you’ve salvaged is five per cent, then you 
haven’t salvaged very many, Mr. Minister, and the program 
isn’t working. And we beseech you to come up with a program 
which will save the family farm. 
 
Some say there isn’t much chance of this government being 
re-elected, and a more energetic and inspired group will get a 
chance after 1990. Whether or not that’s true, Mr. Minister, 
there isn’t going to be enough to salvage after 1990. 
 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

 

636 
 

The program demands . . . This problem demands attention 
now. You ream off a bunch of statistics which I say proves that 
the board is not adequate to do the job. And as I say, I cast no 
reflection on those who have so ably and conscientiously tried 
to serve it. 
 
The whole structure was inadequate; it was inadequate from the 
beginning, Mr. Minister, it has served the needs of the banks 
nicely. Only 106 have got favourable reports, and I might say 
that of the 106 which have got favourable reports, a goodly 
number of those have not found a very sympathetic court 
process. 
 
One of the problems with using the existing courts is they take 
the position that the money’s owing, and if you can’t pay it, 
favourable report or otherwise, the foreclosure proceedings 
start. A number of judges do take that position. So of the 106, 
the five per cent which did get a favourable report, the number 
which have actually been salvaged, I suspect, is very few. 
 
Mr. Minister, the figures given to us prove that the board isn’t 
working, and the problem cries out for a solution which will 
keep young farmers and productive farmers on the land. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I mean, let’s — for the hon. member, a 
couple of observations. Number one: what I indicated to you is 
less than one-half of one per cent out of all farmers in 
Saskatchewan who . . . Okay, there’s 63,000 farmers. As you 
know and I know, there’s lots of them that are not being 
foreclosed. 
 
When you get down to the process, some are being foreclosed 
and they go through the board. There are almost twice as many 
being mediated as go further on to the court. Now if less than 
one-half of 1 per cent are finding themselves ultimately to the 
court, as you know and I know, while that maybe is higher than 
it’s traditionally been, there has always been people going to the 
court on foreclosures in Saskatchewan. And I don’t think you 
would deny that. 
 
Now you say when they make a deal . . . You talk about the 
number of people going into your practice that are dealing with 
the farm debt problem, and I don’t know how large your 
practice is with regard to that issue . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Very large, but I act for the farmers. You 
guys act for the banks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well we’ll get into that in a minute too, 
about who acts for the banks. But let . . . If you want to raise 
that, we’ll get into that. I tried to avoid it. 
 
But I can assure you that of the area where you will see the 
largest concentration of people in trouble with their farms 
happens to be in the area that I represent, in the Kindersley, 
Rosetown, Eston, Kerrobert area. And statistics will show that 
that is where the largest number of these problems come. And I 
know many of the people in the Kindersley constituency that 
have that type of problem, and I’ve talked to many of them. 
 
And there’s a lot of arrangements being made out there,  

and I will say particularly with two institutions — the Royal 
Bank and the credit unions, who are the . . . who are doing what 
I would say is the most commendable job in this — but are 
making deals and making arrangements where they are cutting 
off, in many cases 200, 300, $400,000 of debt, writing it off 
over in excess of, let’s say a quarter section or half section 
that’s being transferred back to the financial institution. 
 
So they take maybe a quarter section or half section back, and 
they write off from there anywhere up to 3, 4, $500,000. That’s 
being done, and it’s being done on an individual by individual 
basis. So I think for the hon. member to say that it’s simply a 
matter of coming in and giving them as much land as they got, I 
don’t think he’s being fair to the process that’s going on out 
there. 
 
And if he is, he’s not representing his clients very well because 
there are a lot of clients going to the board, making 
arrangements with the various financial institutions, cutting the 
debt down significantly, maybe selling a quarter off or a half 
off, raising some money from that, paying the debt down 
further so the debt is then manageable, and on they go. Very 
often, when they in fact are turning the land back over to the 
financial institution, they lease it back to the same farmer, so 
the farmer is still farming the set piece of land. 
 
Now I don’t say that times are not difficult out there; clearly 
they are. But I think it would be unfair for the hon. member to 
simply suggest that the bank is not giving one inch and you 
simply transfer the land back to it, because that’s not what’s 
going on. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I would like to know how 
many of the cases which are successfully mediated result in the 
farmer losing title to all, or a portion, of his farm land. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — There’s no set statistics as to how many 
of the arrangements are in fact done that way. But what I ask 
the people from the Farm Land Security Board to do is to draw 
out perhaps four random samples of people that were successful 
before the board and four that were not successful, to try to get 
an idea of the situation. I know that’s difficult because it’s not a 
random sample, just like yours is not, and statistically it’s not. 
 
But if you wish I could go through those four random samples. 
If you don’t wish me to, I wouldn’t go through them. But that’s 
the type of situation that you are looking at. If a farmer finds 
himself in a situation where he owes a lot more money than he 
can service, he’s not a whole lot different than a lot of other 
people. 
 
Let’s say an individual farmer had 10 quarters of land and he 
had a very large debt and he could not service that debt given 
the present economic environment in the field of agriculture. 
Very many times you’ll find a situation where the farmer 
maybe would sell off a half-section and take the proceeds from 
that sale, pay down the debt, at the same negotiate a deal with 
the financial institutions to reduce the debt — maybe get 
another bank to refinance it — so he’s left with now eight 
quarters rather than 10 quarters. But he’s also left with a 
serviceable debt that he can handle out of his cash flow, and 
then on he goes. 
 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

 

637 
 

Now the hon. member sits there and says that, well that’s not 
fair. The problem in Saskatchewan is that the total farm debt is 
what, about $5 billion — between 5 and $6 billion. Now is the 
hon. member to suggest that none of this debt should be paid 
back, and there should be no enforcement on debt whatsoever in 
any way, shape, or form, or no enforcement on mortgage debt 
whatsoever. Is that what the hon. member is suggesting? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, if this government wants to follow 
the dictates of the public which show that your support is about 
half of ours, if you want to resign, we’ll take over and then I’ll 
be happy to tell what our policy is. 
 
Mr. Minister, and I run, at least once every quarter, a 
constituency meeting where my constituents can come and ask 
me questions. I invite the hon. minister to show up with his 
questions there. The function of question period, however, is 
not to ask the opposition questions but to examine the Estimates 
of the government. 
 
Mr. Minister, the whole approach of your government is that 
when a farmer is in trouble, a private investor ought to own his 
land. Whether that be the banks, under this scheme, which is 
what is happening, or whether it is speculators, under the equity 
financing proposal, the whole of your . . . your whole approach 
is that if a farmer is in trouble, he ought to be bailed out by 
private investors and by having his farm land owned privately 
by somebody other than himself, and you become a tenant. 
 
I know, Mr. Minister, that is in accordance with the finest 
dictates of free enterprise which I suggest that no one today, 
apart from you people, really believes it. I suggest, Mr. 
Minister, that very few farmers really believe that they ought to 
be subject to the same rules as someone who opens up a car lot; 
if he doesn’t pay his bills, someone takes over the lot. Mr. 
Minister, with respect to farming, the normal rules of the 
market-place need to be set aside. I think that is generally 
agreed and I think most farmers believe that, that in these 
circumstances the ordinary rules of the market-place should not 
be allowed full rein. 
 
Mr. Minister, I suggest with respect to your existing policy, 
when the farmers don’t pay, the banks wind up owning the land. 
In due course, much of that will probably be sold to existing 
farmers, I grant you that; that, in effect, is a consolidation of the 
ownership. 
 
(1500) 
 
Your equity financing, Mr. Minister, has the same result, that 
private investors are going to own that farm land if the farmer 
gets himself into trouble. And I say again that very many 
farmers got themselves into trouble through no fault of their 
own. 
 
Mr. Minister, there aren’t very many industries which would 
survive as well as farming if the price of the commodity is 40 
per cent of what it was seven, eight years ago, which is the 
situation the farmers face. So I say to you, Mr. Minister, that 
your policy is that if they can’t pay their debts, somebody else 
ought to own the land. I say to you, Mr. Minister, that’s not 
acceptable to farmers, and it shouldn’t be acceptable to this 
government. 
 

Your equity financing proposal was initially . . . I first initially 
heard it being promoted by the credit union system. They soon 
abandoned it as being unacceptable. Anyone other than . . . if 
any group other than this government, anyone who was a bit 
more sensitive or a bit better able to listen to what people are 
saying, would have long ago abandoned it as well. But being 
complete slaves to the free enterprise system, Mr. Minister, 
you’re going to let the farmers go and let the banks or private 
investors own their land. I say that’s just simply not 
satisfactory, Mr. Minister, and something a great deal better 
than that is called for from this government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I think when the hon. member 
suggests that the governments, both in Saskatchewan and 
Canada, Progressive Conservative governments have not come 
to the aid of farmers, he is somewhat being tongue in cheek 
with that. 
 
If you look at within the last 12 months alone, the federal 
government have given to the farmers 1.1 — $1.2 billion 
deficiency payment, and they have funded out of the western 
grains stabilization program, the program that was in effect 
broke, went to the treasury and had $775 million more. Now 
that’s in excess of $2 billion to farmers, and I don’t think the 
hon. member would suggest, and certainly farmers in this 
province are not suggesting, that governments have not come to 
their aid. 
 
Now obviously other governments in other parts of the world 
have come to the farmers’ aid even more than we have, and 
some a lot less, but clearly, there has been aid provided, and 
significant amounts of aid provided. If you go back over two 
years, two years from today, back, you will find that 
contribution by way of the production loan program, by way of 
two deficiency payments, by way of two western grains 
stabilization payments, well in excess of $4 billion — $4 
billion. Now that’s hardly doing nothing. 
 
There has been more money put out in those last two years to 
farmers in Canada and in Saskatchewan than there has in 50 
years of total contributions by government before that — more 
in two years than there was in 50 years before that. And to say 
somehow that is not standing up for the farmer, making a 
contribution, is absolutely false. 
 
With regard to the equity financing, now the member talks 
about equity financing, and I’m not going to here get into a 
whole deal of equity financing because that does not fall under 
the Farm Land Security Board. But suffice it to say the 
following, that there are various options on equity financing for 
agriculture. There’s not just one, there’s not just one equity 
financing proposal. Clearly the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has a 
proposal for equity financing; clearly the credit unions have a 
proposal for equity financing in a variety of forms. 
 
If the hon. member got back and asked who owns the bulk of 
the land of lenders — that have gone back to lenders — almost 
half of the land that has reverted back to the lender has reverted 
back to Farm Credit Corporation. Over half that you see today 
in Saskatchewan, or almost half is Farm Credit Corporation 
which, as you know, is the  
  



 
April 18, 1988 

 

638 
 

federal government. So when the member says you’re just 
simply giving it back to the banks, when almost half of the land 
that has been retaken is by the federal government through the 
Farm Credit Corporation, which is a Crown corporation 
financed by the federal treasury, then where does the logic of 
his argument flow, because over half of it is that way. 
 
Now with regards to the option that hon. member is really 
talking about, is that he is proposing once again — I’d thought 
you folks had moved off this issue — but you’re proposing that 
the government step in and take it through land bank. I think 
that’s the proposal you’re really talking about again. We 
thought in the last session, from ’82 to ’86, you guys had started 
to give up on that theory, but looks like you’ve come back to it. 
And in my view, the land bank is not the way to go. 
 
Now we can sit and debate that for some time, but we’re in the 
area of Justice estimates, and we’ll leave the Ag guys to get into 
the rest of those details. I can talk only here about Farm Land 
Security Board. I can honestly say to the member opposite that 
the board has been doing a commendable job and it’s working. 
And if you look at other areas of the country, it is working there 
as well, some similar, some in various forms, and we have been 
studying those throughout the winter months as looking at ways 
that we might improve the Farm Land Security Board. And 
that’s clearly something that we have been addressing, and it’s 
something that we hope that we will be able to come forward 
with some proposals in the near future. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you may consider yourself 
fortunate that you don’t have to sell the equity financing, 
because I think it’s going to be a very hard program to sell. I 
have heard farmers describe it as a process by which the 
farmers get to pull all the weeds, and the investors get to make 
any money that there is to be made on farming. 
 
Mr. Minister . . . But we will leave equity financing for another 
forum. Suffice it to say, Mr. Minister, that if you listen to the 
wheat pool, which has put a proposal forward, as this thing 
from the credit union which did not put your proposal forward, 
specifically started to promote it and quit because of its 
unpopularity, I think you’d know, Mr. Minister, that there is a 
role for government in dealing with this problem. I think it’s 
fair to say, Mr. Minister, that a great many farmers would rather 
have to deal with a government which at least has to get elected 
by the people of this province rather than investors from New 
York, Toronto, and Montreal, which are accountable to no one 
but the almighty dollar. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, if you listen to the wheat pool, what 
they’re saying, and if you look at what the credit union system 
did which was abandon this proposal, I think you’d know 
there’s a place for the government in solving this problem, and 
it is not enough to leave it to the free market. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to return to the Farm Land Security Board. 
I say again, Mr. Minister, that you said it’s doing a good job. I 
say, Mr. Minister, it is doing a good job of what you want it for. 
I say, Mr. Minister, your policy, unstated,  

is that there’s a role for rationalization of ownership, and some 
of the farmers have to go. Having learnt from Otto Lang’s 
experience, you don’t put a precise figure on it, but that’s your 
proposal and that’s what’s happening. 
 
The Farm Land Security Board, Mr. Minister, is just simply an 
opiate. It’s just taking the pain out of the process, but the 
process is going on none the less. Farmers are leaving and 
losing title to the land. I think the vast majority of the 475 
which were mediated lost title to the land. I’m not interested, 
Mr. Minister, in your four cases. I don’t believe you’d give me 
four representative cases. I’m interested in some facts, some 
statistics. 
 
Mr. Minister, let me just stop on that point for the moment. Will 
you undertake to give me a statement of how many of the 475 
farmers who’ve cut a deal wound up losing title to all or a part 
of their land? Are you prepared to undertake to give me that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’ll undertake to try to get that 
calculation. You can appreciate it might take some time to do, 
though, the calculation in that term. I will give you that 
calculation. I will also give you the calculation of those people, 
how many of them are still farming. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Oh I think that a lot of them are still 
farming, Mr. Minister. This proposal, this program is only three 
years old and, to be quite frank, the banks are having some 
difficulty selling the land. They say that quite openly. One of 
their big problems is selling land which they have taken. 
 
Mr. Minister, you point out that the Farm Credit Corporation is 
responsible for half the problem. I grant you that. I don’t deny 
that. I say two things with respect to the Farm Credit 
Corporation. One is, you might have noted the political stripe of 
the government in Ottawa in recent years. You might have also 
noted that the Conservative government in Ottawa reversed a 
policy which had been standing for some time, and that is the 
. . . John Wise announced that foreclosures would begin. 
 
Mr. Minister, there are some chilling statistics with respect to 
the amount of Farm Credit Corporation land. I have, Mr. 
Minister, statistics which suggest that one in 10 Saskatchewan 
farmers has a Farm Credit Corporation mortgage which is in 
arrears. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t believe I had to remind you that, 
according to well established banking practices here and in 
other countries, a loan which is more than 90 days in arrears is 
considered non-functioning. Mr. Minister, there are over 10 per 
cent of the Saskatchewan farmers have loans with Farm Credit 
Corporation which are non-functioning. Mr. Minister, that 
suggests that the Farm Credit Corporation is a major part of the 
problem. By beginning foreclosures, as they have, they’re going 
to contribute very largely to the consolidation of ownership and 
the disappearance of the family farm as we know it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I think that you’ve partly identified one 
of the problems, and that’s with Farm Credit Corporation. I 
think that it was not . . . You indicated that he cancelled the 
long-standing policy of moratorium on all foreclosures at farm 
credit. 
 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

 

639 
 

I think it would be stretching it a bit to say that he had done 
away with a long-standing policy in the sense that he was the 
individual that brought in the policy in the first place, and 
they’ve only been in government since 1984. 
 
So that was done about a year ago, and that would mean that 
they . . . that policy, I think, was in place, and I stand to be 
corrected, but for two years. And what happened and why I 
think your party’s policy of total . . . of coming down and 
saying there shall be no . . . there shall be a total moratorium on 
all foreclosures — what happened when farm credit did that, 
quite frankly, is a lot of farmers just ceased and quit paying 
their mortgage payment to the Farm Credit Corporation. Two 
years later they found themselves in quite a problem because 
the number of . . . the amount that that particular individual 
farmer owed was significant and growing. 
 
With regard to your first question, with regard to role for 
government, clearly there’s a role for government in this 
process. I think the hon. member would not be fair to the public 
to suggest somehow that the process used, as it relates to farm 
debt, is a similar problem as a used-car dealer or small-business 
dealer, and that’s not true at all. 
 
What a farmer has to go through, or what an institution has to 
go through in order to foreclose a farmer, is far more 
significant, far more onerous, with far more checks and 
balances in it as it relates to farming than it does relate to 
business sector. 
 
So I think the hon. member, in fairness, would admit that, as a 
practising lawyer that says he does a lot of this work in court, 
would have to acknowledge that to be the case. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Let me just assist the minister with some 
information about the role that Farm Credit Corporation is 
playing on this. 
 
Mr. Minister, for your information, in May of ’87 the 
moratorium was lifted; it had been in place for 19 months. Mr. 
Minister, of the Farm Credit Corporation loans, 6,750 are in 
arrears; one-third of those are in arrears for more than two 
years, which suggests a very serious problem. 
 
The number of people who get two years in arrears in their 
mortgage, and they never catch up again, in statistical terms is 
fairly small. 
 
(1515) 
 
What that means is that one in 10 Saskatchewan farmers is in 
arrears to the Farm Credit Corporation — not one in 10 Farm 
Credit Corporation clients but one in 10 Saskatchewan farmers. 
And the Farm Credit Corporation is now moving on those 
farmers, the one in 10. 
 
Mr. Minister, your government has made its own contribution 
to . . . well, just let me go back a moment to the Farm Credit 
Corporation. I think it will illustrate what I was indicating 
earlier about mediated settlements. Mediated settlements, in the 
majority of cases, result in the farmer losing the land. Mr. 
Minister, the information which I have suggests that 180 
foreclosure notices have been mailed out; another 120 were 
negotiating  

settlements. With respect to the Farm Credit Corporation, over 
50 per cent of those with which there was a settlement, the 
farmer lost title to the land. That illustrates the point that I was 
making earlier, that in my experience negotiated settlements 
mean the bank gets the land, the farmer gets a short lease, and 
that’s all he gets. 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, just as soon . . . and at some 
point in time the clouds will break, the sun will start to shine, 
and the price of grain will go back up again. And just as soon as 
that happens, almost all of those people who have transferred 
their land to the farm or to Farm . . . sorry, to the bank or to the 
Farm Credit Corporation, are going to lose title to the land 
because those institutions will then sell the land. And it’s most 
unlikely that any of those farmers who are presently in 
difficulty, and thus lose their land, will ever be able to buy it 
back. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, the statistics which I have on Farm Credit 
Corporation in fact illustrate the point I was making. Negotiated 
settlements usually result in the farmer losing title to his land 
and becoming a tenant, often with a very short lease. 
 
Mr. Minister, and this is . . . I recognize not squarely within the 
confines of your department, but the problem is one, and it’s 
difficult to talk about part of the problem without talking about 
it all. The lands branch of the Department of Agriculture, in 
administering the provincial Crown land, has taken its own 
merciful approach to the farmers. On December 5, the Premier, 
the Minister of Agriculture, issued instructions to get tough 
with the agricultural leases and to start collecting the arrears. 
And they were told that unless the lessees could bring their 
payment into order within one year, the government was going 
to take further collective action. 
 
I don’t know, Mr. Minister, whether or not this falls underneath 
the Farm Land Security Board; I don’t think it does. But I say 
that across the board, Mr. Minister, your policy, whether it be in 
the Department of Justice, whether it be in the Department of 
Agriculture, or whether it be your federal brethren running the 
Farm Credit Corporation, your policy is that if the farmer can’t 
meet his debts then the free market will take care of the 
problem, and that’ll result in the farmer losing title to the land. 
That just is not satisfactory, Mr. Minister. There’s an awful 
difference between car lots and farmers. 
 
The number of farms in this province is very important to the 
social fabric of this province. If the structure of ownership 
changes such that instead of having 50,000 farmers we have 
10,000 farmers, the social structure of this province changes 
fairly dramatically. 
 
I don’t think any of my constituents have any interest in 
whether there’s 10 car lots in the city of Regina or 50 or 100 or 
500. I don’t think they care, nor do I think they should interest 
themselves in the problem. But Saskatchewan people do have a 
legitimate interest in the ownership of farm land. It’s important 
to the social structure of this province. Your problem, as I said 
some . . . and your solution, as I said some time ago is just 
simply to let the chips fall where they lay. 
 
Well the member from Esterhazy finds himself amused by  
  



 
April 18, 1988 

 

640 
 

that. I believe the member from Esterhazy sat on the committee 
which eventually resulted in this MLA report coming forth to 
the legislature. The member from Esterhazy undoubtedly will 
want to add to that report and tell us what they’re going to do to 
solve the problem, because it isn’t in that report. All they’ve got 
in there is a hot line which will do no good, and an equity 
financing proposal which nobody will buy. 
 
Mr. Minister, I say again that your government needs a proposal 
that’ll keep farmers on the farm land, on the land, and it isn’t 
going to come about through the private market. Mr. Minister, 
these things have a habit of coming along every now and then. 
Some 50 years ago, in fact five decades ago, during the ’30s, 
similar problems arose. The government of the day, then not 
quite so wedded to the free enterprise principles, brought in a 
debt adjustment board. I took the opportunity to reread that 
piece of legislation that I think might be of some assistance. 
 
It did not write off the debt, as I thought it did; that was the 
practical effect of it, but in fact what it did was set it aside. Mr. 
Minister, that’s one of the proposals which you might interest 
yourself in, which would result in the farmers keeping their 
land. 
 
The wheat pool proposal is another proposal which gives the 
farmers a good deal more security than your equity financing 
proposal. There’s any number of proposals around, Mr. 
Minister, but you stubbornly continue to insist that an 
inadequate proposal brought in three years ago, when the 
situation wasn’t anywhere near as serious as it is now, is 
adequate. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, this isn’t adequate and I wish you’d 
admit that. That would permit us to get on to another stage of 
the discussion and that is what ought to replace it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Let me reserve my comments with 
regards to debt adjustment board and a total moratorium, which 
is all I’ve heard from him so far. The hon. member started out 
this questioning by saying that he has seen a number of farm 
clients in his office. Now I say to the hon. member, when you 
posed a question to me about somebody with leased land and 
how that applies to Farm Land Security Board, well it doesn’t 
apply. Now if you’re not familiar with that, I question how 
much help you’re going to give to the farmer, because anybody 
with the lease goes to the federal board; you don’t go to the 
Saskatchewan Farm Land Security Board. 
 
So I would think that you should be aware of that so the next 
time somebody comes in and asks you that question, you can 
advise them accordingly, because I’m sure that he would 
appreciate having that kind of advice. That’s number one. 
 
Number two: you say that if the land is taken back to farm 
credit or to a financial institution like the credit union or 
whatever, in the vast majority of cases, there is a clause written 
in the contract — and I’m sure the hon. member, who does a 
fair amount of farm practice, would do this in his contracts — 
of the right of first refusal. And many of these, certainly all 
farm credit ones, or most farm credit ones, have the right of first 
refusal — that they could claim  

the land back or transfer some of the land back to farm credit, 
lease it back over a three-year period, or whatever, whatever the 
arrangement is, with a right of first refusal. And in the event 
that things turn around, these particular farmers have the right 
to meet that price and buy the land. 
 
The reason that the lease-back, of course, is less than three 
years for most institutions, is the Farm Ownership Board only 
allows two years of a lease-back, otherwise you can’t go 
beyond that. And that’s why the arrangement is such with 
regard to that particular question. 
 
Then you make the mention of Farm Credit Corporation. And 
again, as a lawyer you are fully aware of the fact that Farm 
Credit Corporation is a federal Crown corporation, a federal 
institution. And you’re also, being a constitutional expert, know 
that it’s very difficult for the Government of Saskatchewan to 
bind the federal Crown. In fact there’s been many constitutional 
cases that have said you can’t do that. So farm credit is a 
different coloured animal when it comes to this particular issue. 
And so the rules as it relates to farm credit can be somewhat 
different than the rules as it relates to other financial 
institutions. 
 
You asked a question with regard to farm credit. Of the 1,806 
farmers that have served notice to the board by the end of 
March 1, I believe, 437 of those were farm credit that brought 
the action, so roughly about a little less than 20 per cent of 
those. That’s somewhat of a distorting figure in this sense, that 
only recently have farm credit started . . . begun to commence 
these actions. And what you’ve seen in the first quarter of this 
year is about 60 per cent of all actions being filed before the 
Farm Land Security Board have in fact been farm credit driven. 
So when you look at the new ones coming forward these days, 
over 60 per cent of those are Farm Credit Corporation, and so 
that clearly is something that we recognize. 
 
Now, as . . . and I don’t want to get in to a whole lot more with 
regard to where farm credit is, etc., because they’re really not 
estimates that we can appropriately deal with under this narrow 
area of the Farm Land Security Board. I’m prepared to have 
fairly wide latitude on this, but I would just as soon not get into 
too much into the stuff that really they don’t in fact deal with. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, will you admit that on April 
18, 1988, the grain prices we have, and the length of this 
particular recession, agricultural recession, that this program is 
now, at this point in time, not adequate. I’m not asking you to 
agree with me that it was inadequate when it began three years 
ago, but will you admit that at this point in time this legislation 
is not adequate to do the job? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — My response to the hon. member would 
be the following: that I believe, and I think if he was fair, if he 
was fair he would say that Farm Land Security Board has done 
a commendable job since 1985, has served the farm community 
well. 
 
Now if you go back to 1985 a lot of people anticipated that 
perhaps the cycle would have been finished by 1988-1989, and 
all things were going to be well. That seems that it’s going to 
take a little longer than that.  
  



 
April 18, 1988 

 

641 
 

There’s some optimism, I suppose, on the front these days with 
some, at least, modest increase in the price of grain, and I hope 
that that’s a positive sign of things to come down the road. 
Clearly, there is a farm debt problem out there; that debt 
problem is a magnitude of in excess of $5 billion in this 
province. Clearly, the value of land has de-escalated to a point 
that it perhaps dropped three and four times in many areas of 
the real value. Land that was selling for 12, $1,500 an acre in 
the Kindersley area now sells for maybe 4 or $500, and that’s 
even high now; for other areas it’s perhaps down to 3 and $200 
per acre. So clearly, there is a problem associated with low 
grain prices — high debt. 
 
Many farmers got trapped in the ’70s with raw and runaway 
inflation; farmers got trapped. And I remember back in those 
days when I was not a politician but practising law, and many 
farmers would come in — and the price of land maybe was a 
hundred bucks an acre — come in with maybe their son and 
say, we should maybe bid on this. Well, it went too high ;it 
went for 150; we’re not prepared to pay that. So the next year 
they would come in again, and there’s some more land up for 
sale and they say, well the bid probably this year to get it is 
probably going to have to be 250 to 300 bucks an acre. And 
they would sit and root at that, and eventually decide not to buy 
that. This went on year after year, and eventually maybe they 
bought some land that cost them $1,000 an acre. Then all of a 
sudden the price of land dropped, along with the price of grain 
and everything else; interest rates went up, and they found 
themselves trapped, quite frankly. Now you say that’s none of 
their doing; I agree with you. Many of them saw that, well, if 
you don’t buy it today, it’s going to be twice as high tomorrow; 
that was the issue of the ’70s. 
 
But then all of a sudden, the price of grain went down, the price 
of land went down, interest rates went up, and they got caught. 
Now all I say to the hon. member is that I have a great deal of 
sympathy for those people that are trapped in that situation on 
the farm, without question. Not only have they faced that 
problem here, they faced that problem in virtually all areas of 
the world with the exception of three major areas that subsidize 
in horrendous amounts of money. 
 
(1530) 
 
You have to manage your way through it. If you go back to 
earlier this year, you run the great danger . . . You can say, well 
we’ll have no more foreclosures, as you say, or we’re going to 
force the write-down of debt, as you suggest, and then all of a 
sudden the financial institutions cease to provide money by way 
of loans — operating loans or whatever — and then a whole 
bunch of farmers that have been doing fairly well get trapped 
because they haven’t got the wherewithal to get operating 
money. So you have that problem. 
 
And so what has to be done is that balance. Does the hon. 
member say, do we have to look at changes? I think in a 
problem like this it constantly evolves, and it constantly calls 
for changes and modifications, and those . . . I indicated to the 
member two or three answers ago that those are areas that we’re 
looking at as to how we best respond to it. 
 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Farm Land 
Security Board has been put in place . . . or was put in place to 
serve the purpose of trying to help farmers stay on the land, as I 
understand it, and try to help them rearrange their problems, 
their debt. And yet the board itself was given no power, with all 
due respect, to those people on the board. 
 
And I think the figures indicate that . . . you know, the purpose 
of keeping farmers on the land has not been achieved, not been 
accomplished. When you look at, you know, 106 
recommendations out of 1,800 farmers written in favour of the 
farmer . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Give me that again? 
 
Mr. Upshall: — 106 recommendations to the court, written in 
favour of the farmer out of the 1,806 farmers that foreclosure 
notices were filed upon. 
 
Now I know I heard you saying earlier that this was a small 
number of people, but the problem is that the numbers are 
continuing to grow, and we’re not having a solution by the 
government to stop that. And so in order to have the farmers on 
the land and to keep them there, we’re going to have to give the 
Farm Land Security Board some more power as to . . . or maybe 
broaden their field as to what they can actually do to help 
farmers, because when we’re looking at 106 recommendations 
written in favour, you know, and 289 recommendations written 
in favour of the lender, that’s 3 to 1. 
 
And the problem isn’t the inefficiency of the farmer, it’s the fact 
that there’s nothing in place in these times of high inputs, high 
debt and low returns to keep them there. The programs are 
lacking, the government programs are lacking. The programs 
that you have in place aren’t accomplishing the job, and I just 
ask myself, why? 
 
You know, when we look at the grain prices, in 1986 of $130 a 
tonne for wheat, and 1987 of $104 a tonne, a drop of 20 per 
cent, we have to have a government that’s committed to 
keeping farmers on the land. And right now I really don’t see 
that, and the farmers don’t see it either because when I talk to 
them they’re asking me why, you know, why there is no hard 
program to keep us here. Oh, there’s Band-Aids here and 
Band-Aids there. Unfortunately the Farm Land Security Board 
is one of those Band-Aids, I believe. 
 
So could you, Mr. Minister, just enlighten us as to how you 
could see the Farm Land Security Board having more teeth so 
that their objective of keeping more farmers on the land, or 
keeping all farmers on the land, could be accomplished. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — To the hon. member, when you say that 
you should give the Farm Land Security Board more power, 
and I assume that what you’re asking for there is the power to 
adjust debt or write-down debt, or that type of thing, the hon. 
member has to be aware — and you should consult with your 
colleague the member from Regina Centre as to the 
constitutionality of what a provincial body or board could do; 
perhaps you could consult with the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg . . .  
  



 
April 18, 1988 

 

642 
 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, he might know something. 
 
The reality is this: you can go so far as a provincial body, and 
then if you go too far beyond and have the power to write-down 
debt and this type of thing, you violate the constitution of 
Canada. And there’s various decisions on that, and if you wish I 
could get a list of those decisions that have been advanced over 
the years and I could give them to you and you might read those 
and for yourself determine why there’s a restriction or 
limitation on that. 
 
The hon. member was out of the House when I gave the figures 
to the member from Regina Centre, and I will go back and give 
them to you again. There are 63,000 farmers in Saskatchewan. 
The number of farmers whose notices have been received by the 
Farm Land Security Board is 1,806 out of that 63,000. So that’s 
less than 3 per cent, 2.87 per cent. Of that 1,806 farmers, 1,061 
have been dealt with by the Farm Land Security Board to date. 
The rest are still to be dealt with. Now 475 of that 1,061 have 
been successfully mediated. They’re still on the land, they’re 
still farming, but that’s been mediated and they’ve made an 
arrangement or a deal. 
 
That leaves 586. Of that 586 only 289 have in fact had a 
negative report by the Farm Land Security Board to the court, 
and that is less than one-half of 1 per cent of the farmers of 
Saskatchewan have received a negative report by the board 
being forwarded to the court. Of that 289, many of them are still 
before the courts now and are still on the land, I would guess 
almost half of them, which comes down to less than 200 . . . 
less than 150 people probably, have in effect lost their land and 
gone through the Farm Land Security Board, of the 63,000 
farmers. So that’s less than a quarter of 1 per cent are not, in 
fact, farming. 
 
Another interesting statistic I think worth looking at, as you’ve 
also indicated that so many people are leaving the land, in the 
year 1971 through 1981, an average of a thousand farmers per 
year left the land in Saskatchewan. Under the NDP 
administration, 10,000 farmers left the land. There is in fact 
more . . . there is fewer farmers in fact leaving the land today, in 
the last three or four years, even under desperately difficult 
financial conditions, than there was back in the decade ’71 to 
’81. 
 
So when you’re talking about keeping people on the farm, I 
think the various programs — you call them Band-Aid 
programs — the various programs have, in fact, had the effect 
of keeping farmers on the land. Is it difficult out there for the 
farmers? Clearly it is. Some of them are not going to make it, 
that’s true, and that’s unfortunate. 
 
Is it their own doing or somebody else’s doing? I think in any 
one of these situations, individual basis you have to look at. 
Some are in trouble because they paid too much for land. Some 
are in trouble because maybe they bought too much machinery 
for the size of their farm. Some of them are, and many of them 
are in trouble because they ended up borrowing money and then 
running into the 18 and 20 per cent interest rates of the late 
1970s and early 1980s. And that’s a reality. 
 
And perhaps some of them are in trouble because they’ve  

had five or six years of very, very poor crops because of 
weather conditions or whatever. So there’s a variety of reasons. 
There’s no one farmer the same as another farmer of the 63,000 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well I can see, Mr. Minister, that you’ve 
washed your hands of the problem, and that’s sad. You’re 
saying, well the law says this: we can’t do anything about it; 
I’m sorry sir — as he loses his farm. 
 
Regardless of the constitution, Mr. Minister, there are ways and 
means of keeping farmers on the land. And instead of trying to 
find out those ways and those means, what you say is, I’m 
sorry, we can’t do it because of the constitution. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, that may be okay for you to say, 
but the problems remain, the problems of the farmers remain. 
And I’d just like to ask you one question. Do you believe that 
the farmers are better off today than they were in 1981, as you 
said, with fewer farmers leaving the land? And do you believe 
that this problem of farm debt is not severe enough to go 
beyond the Farm Land Security Board to attempt to help 
farmers in other ways to stay on their land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, I mean it’s nice for the hon. 
member to say regardless of the constitution, or forget the 
constitution. I guess we’ve all learned in this left that the 
constitution is the constitution. Sometimes you agree with it; 
sometimes you don’t agree with it. 
 
But the reality is that the constitution is there, and we, as 
Canadian citizens, whether we are in government or whoever 
we might be, still have to live by the constitution or live by the 
rule of law. Now I don’t think that the hon. member would 
somehow suggest we don’t live by the rule of law. 
 
He asked a second question: are farmers better off today? Are 
farmers better off today than they were in 1981? Well that is 
somewhat of a foolish question. Clearly they were better off in 
1981, and the reason they were better off in 1981 is because the 
price of grain was significantly higher than it is today, as we all 
know that. 
 
Now how do you then carry through and deal with the 
environment that we find ourselves in today? You do it in a 
couple of ways. Number one: you do it by giving assistance to 
farmers. And as I indicated to your colleague while you were 
out, if you look at the contribution being made by governments 
in Canada and in Saskatchewan in combination over the last 
two years, you’ve seen more assistance to farmers in the last 
two years than you saw in total 50 years before that. That’s the 
reality — over 4 to $5 billion. 
 
Now you do it by (a) providing assistance out there for the 
farmer. That’s being done. Should more be done? If there was 
more money, clearly we would like to see more go to the 
farmer. And you do it by assisting the farmer and coming to 
grips with his debt problem. The Farm Land Security Board has 
done an effective job in that. Has it saved every farmer? 
Obviously the answer is no. 
 
And should we have a policy that says, no farmer in  
  



 
April 18, 1988 

 

643 
 

Saskatchewan should ever lose his land? Should we have that 
kind of a policy? And if you were to propose and advocate that 
policy as you do, then you run into the second problem, is that 
the farmer then loses his ability to obtain credit. And if you lose 
your ability to obtain credit, are you solving the problem for the 
majority of farmers, or are you not? Now the credit union, the 
Wheat Pool, and people acknowledge that point; the members 
opposite choose not to even address that — choose not even to 
address that. So then it becomes a combination of the two 
things that you seek to do. 
 
There’s no simple, easy answer to the farm debt question. It 
must be dealt with on an issue-to-issue basis. It must be dealt 
with by constantly modifying and upgrading the programs and 
the policies that you have, and we, I think, have been doing 
that, and if the member opposite wishes to get into this idea of 
farm debt set aside, then we can get into that as well. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, it amazes me how you attempt 
to low-key this problem. I mean there’s a serious, serious debt 
crisis out in the country, and yet you say, well look, only 
one-half of 1 per cent — or whatever the number that you used 
— is the problem, the Farm Land Security Board have dealt 
with that. 
 
It amazes me how that attitude can prevail, unless you’re so far 
out of touch with what’s going on that you don’t know any 
better. And you talk about your assistance to farmers. Well I’ll 
tell you, that money was necessary but the problem is, between 
this Tory government and the federal Tory government, those 
programs were meant as much to keep Tory governments in 
power as they were to keep farmers on the land. And that’s the 
problem. You talk about the constitution. Well, you got a Tory 
government in Ottawa I’m sure you could work well with if you 
really wanted to get around this problem. 
 
But that’s the key here: does the Tory government want to get 
around the problem of farm debt? And if they did, they’d be 
doing something about it. But they don’t, so they’re not doing 
anything about it. They’re saying, well we’re doing all we can. 
 
(1545) 
 
The member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden says that the 
provincial treasury is too small, we can’t handle it. And then 
they’ll turn around and say, well look, we gave you more 
money in the last few years than you’ve ever gotten. So what! 
The farmers are still being pushed off the land. And the Farm 
Land Security Board is not doing the job to keep them there, 
and there’s a number of others who are in great difficulty and 
who are losing their farms. 
 
And if your solution is for the Farm Land Security Board to 
keep the parcel of land, the 10 acres or five acres around the 
building, well that’s some solution; and let the farmer rent the 
land back, that’s not the problem. The problem is your inability 
to allocate and properly distribute funds from the federal and 
provincial treasuries in order to keep farmers on the land. And 
the farmers out there know that and that’s why the move is on, 
away from Tory governments. 
 

Again, I would just like to underline and ask: in light of what’s 
going on, why the low-key approach? Why the lack of 
solutions? Why not attempt to go to the federal government and 
say, look, we need a solution to this problem, instead of 
abdicating your responsibility to the farmers of this province. 
And that’s what you’ve done. You’ve abdicated your 
responsibility. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Minister, and to your government: if you 
really wanted to help the farmers out, you would find a way to 
do it. You would find a way to do it in many ways, including 
the Farm Land Security Board. And I’ll tell you, your lack of 
action, your lack of response and your voidness of ideas are 
telling the farmers of this province that, Farm Land Security 
Board or not, the Tory government isn’t standing behind them. 
 
So I ask you again, why haven’t you attempted to go to Ottawa 
to talk to the Mulroney government and use some of your ideas, 
if you have any, to maintain the people on the farms today, 
instead of slowly eroding the number, slowly year by year, 
fewer and fewer? 
 
I guess my question is this: are you following the plan of your 
Premier who in 1977 said that he had to reduce the number of 
farmers, and is that the game plan of this government, to, with 
all the programs including Farm Land Security Board, kind of 
low-key it, sit back, just wait, and eventually get the numbers 
down where they’re manageable? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well let’s look at it. The member says 
that this is why we’re seeing the move against Tory 
governments. The next big test about whether they want a Tory 
government or not is going to be in Manitoba on April 26. 
 
Now I don’t know what’s going to happen there, but I would be 
. . . If I was to listen and believe what I write in the newspapers, 
and I don’t, but what the newspapers are suggesting is that the 
NDP is not going to win one seat in rural Manitoba — not one 
seat in rural Manitoba. And they likely will all go to the Tories 
—likely all go to the Tories. So what does that say for NDP 
farm policy in Manitoba? 
 
The hon. member says about my leader: why doesn’t my leader 
stand up and fight for the farmers? In 1986 the Premier of this 
province stood up and fought for the farmers and got a billion 
dollar deficiency payment, and everybody acknowledges that. 
 
The member opposite said, oh they only did that because of the 
election and they just give that out because of the election. Well 
in 1987 there wasn’t an election, federal or provincial, and our 
leader and our Premier went to Ottawa again and demanded a 
deficiency payment and was successful in getting that 
deficiency payment. He never stopped there. He also said, pay 
out the western stabilization program; even though it was broke, 
go to the treasury and get $775 million and pay that out as well. 
 
So there are three things fought for by the Premier of 
Saskatchewan, spearheaded by the Premier of Saskatchewan, $3 
billion worth — $3 billion worth. Nobody has ever made that 
commitment before. That’s  
  



 
April 18, 1988 

 

644 
 

what my leader has done to help the farmers of Saskatchewan, 
and we’re all very proud of it. And I could go on and name six 
or seven other programs that he’s spearheaded as well. 
 
I ask you: what has your leader done for the farmers of 
Saskatchewan? I ask you: what has your leader . . . can stand up 
and say, what has he done for the farmers of Saskatchewan? 
When he was in government, what did he do? He bought their 
land from them. He bought their land from them when he was 
in government. And when he left government, what did he do 
for the farmers? He acted for the banks and foreclosed them. 
 
Now you are somewhat hypocritical as a party opposite, 
standing up and saying the Premier of this province has done 
nothing for the farmers when he’s contributed 3 billion, by 
fighting the feds to get 3 billion, not to mention the billion 
dollars that we put up as production loan from Saskatchewan. 
That’s $4 billion. And you say, what has your leader done? At 
the same time your leader finds a way to foreclose on farmers 
— foreclose on farmers. And who is he acting for? He’s acting 
for the big, bad banks that you talk about. 
 
Now how hypocritical is that? How hypocritical is that? And if 
I ask the farmer of Saskatchewan, who would you want to have 
to stand up for your rights, the Leader of the Opposition or the 
Premier, I’ll tell you where the farmers of Saskatchewan will 
come down. They’ll come down 10 to one on the side of the 
Premier of this province, for what he has done. And they would 
come down against the Leader of the Opposition for the same 
reason, what he has done for the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, I’ve heard that rhetoric before. 
I’ll grant . . . The Premier of this province is the only one that 
went down to Ottawa to get money back for Saskatchewan. But 
I’ll tell you, that doesn’t wash any more, and I find it quite 
amusing that that’s the only line that keeps coming back out of 
this Tory government, because all of the farmers and everybody 
in this province knows that there was a need for funds. 
 
And it wasn’t the Premier of this province who single-handedly 
fended off all the other villains and said we shouldn’t have it, 
and brought it here. And it wasn’t the Prime Minister of this 
country who was the only person in Canada who couldn’t 
delivered that. I mean, the need was there, and I find it so 
amusing that you continue to say, well the Premier of this 
province is the only one; he went down and got the deficiency 
payment. 
 
Well I’ll tell you his purpose. I thought that maybe at one time 
that his motivation, like the rest of us, was to keep family 
farmers out here, but it’s not. His motivation was simply to get 
himself elected — and I don’t care what year it was — and 
that’s his sole ambition. 
 
And you talk about the land bank. Well I’ll tell you, if I had a 
dollar for every time somebody said, I wish we had land bank 
back, I would be a rich man. Because that type of a program, 
although not perfect, was the type of program that 
Saskatchewan farmers needed. 
 
What was your answer? The farm purchase program. And  

how long did it last? And there’s nothing now; you have 
absolutely nothing in place to assist transfers. What type of 
government . . . although the rhetoric says, yes, we’re right 
behind you — they’re behind you; they’re following them off 
the land. That’s the problem. You don’t have any programs of 
land transfer, and the other programs that you have in place are 
not solving the problem of debt crisis. All you’re doing is 
throwing money at the situation. 
 
And you mentioned the production loan program. Well I’ll tell 
you, Mr. Minister, you don’t borrow yourself out of debt, and 
that’s what you attempted to do to the farmers — throw the 
money at them. Instead of thinking it through carefully and 
finding out who was in trouble and what the needs were, you 
bought yourself some more votes. 
 
And that’s the problem that the farmers of this province have 
with this government, is that they sit back and plot and try to 
buy themselves vote after vote after vote. And I think that is 
terrible, in my estimation, when your only response to a 
problem is throwing money at it. 
 
And then when it comes to something like the Farm Land 
Security Board where you could put some teeth into it and stop 
foreclosure actions, you sit by and say, well the constitution 
says we can’t do this, I’m sorry. 
 
And what’s happening all the time? The numbers are growing 
out there — 11 per cent insolvent, Farm Credit Corporation 
says; 28 per cent can’t meet their commitments. In fact in a 
recent report, for every $4.11 of debt there is in this country, net 
income for farmers is $1. That’s the magnitude of the problem, 
and your solutions fall very, very short of even coming close to 
rectifying that. 
 
The Farm Land Security Board is a program that has spent 
many, many dollars over the last few years. And I’m saying to 
you, the cost of the program for the benefit that we’re getting 
out of it is not functional because we’re not getting the numbers 
of farmers helped, we’re not getting the results we need. You 
haven’t addressed the other side of the problem; you’ve just 
thrown money at it, and that’s the problem. 
 
I’ve seen the Premier of this province operate since 1982, and 
he’s come and he’s built this little vision in the minds of the 
farmers that I’m the boy that can lead you there, out of this 
problem, out of the debt. 
 
Where is he leading them? He’s leading them off the farm. 
That’s the problem this government has, and the farmers. I’ll 
tell you, out there, the farmers that I’ve talked to and call me are 
saying, you know, at one time I believed him, but not any more; 
he can’t be trusted. Because when you list on one side the 
rhetoric, and I give the Premier of this province full credit, if I 
sat down and was from Mars I would probably agree with him. 
But nobody in Saskatchewan does, or very few do now, because 
although he can talk nice and present the case, if you list the 
facts on the other side of what he’s done and the 
accomplishments, the accomplishments that he has delivered 
for the farmers, she’s a pretty short list. 
 
Like I say, the numbers are going up; the debt situation is going 
up. Farm land in the United States, while the value  
  



 
April 18, 1988 

 

645 
 

of the land dropped by some 50 per cent, the value of the debt 
problem dropped about 20 or 25 per cent. In Canada, the value 
of the farm land has come down, and the debt has gone up 
because the government haven’t had any programs in place to 
stop that action. Yet you continue to try to tell the farmers of 
this province that, yes, we’re right behind you boys. 
 
When they line up their little plus and minus sheet on the 
rhetoric and on the action — or inaction — I’ll tell you, they 
will know where this Premier is leading this province. He’s 
leading them off the land, and that has to stop. In every program 
that I can mention, it’s designed for large corporate operations; 
you’re cutting back on family farm for your programs, and 
you’re increasing assistance for large corporations. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, that the Farm Land Security Board is 
not doing the job that I believe it was set out to do, because it 
was set out to try to help farmers stay on this land, and it’s not 
doing that to any successful degree, and the problem continues 
to grow. 
 
So I ask you again: will you consult with your Tory buddies in 
Ottawa to try to present a solution in the form of a Farm Land 
Security Board that will have some teeth to stop some of the 
foreclosures instead of giving us your rhetoric and say . . . 
abdicate your responsibilities, and say we can’t do anything 
about it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well the hon. member says that there is 
nothing being done. If you were to go out into the province of 
Saskatchewan today, you would find that a majority of farmers, 
when they’re preparing their tax return at this time of year, they 
would find that almost half of their income, almost half of their 
income, is coming from government support programs — half 
of their income. Whenever before would you see a situation like 
that? Half their income from the market, half their income 
coming from the support programs of government. When has 
government ever stood in for that type of support to the 
province of Saskatchewan, the farmers of the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The hon. member says that he was against — it was a poor 
program, the production loan, a 6 per cent production loan 
program. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s right. It was indeed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The member from Regina Centre says it 
is a bad program. Why is it, when the program was brought in, 
the members opposite supported it? Such a bad program, why 
did you support it? 
 
An Hon. Member: — We didn’t. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — No you did, and go back to the Votes 
and Proceedings and you’ll see you voted for it, and you spoke 
for it. Now the hon. member from Humboldt was not here at the 
time, but the member from Regina Centre was. And the 
member from Regina Centre stood in his place and voted yes to 
that particular motion . . . that particular Bill. 
 
And I would ask the member to go back and look at the  

Votes and Proceeding because he clearly did. So I mean, the 
record is what the record is. Now, so now they don’t like it. It 
was okay before, but now they don’t like it. 
 
And then the member from Humboldt is now saying what he 
advocates — this is the clearest I’ve heard him say this — what 
he advocates is a return to the land bank. That’s what I hear 
them saying out there, we want the land bank back. 
 
Well we don’t believe that government should own the land and 
dictate who is going to be the leasee of the land. That program 
hurts you . . . hurts your party in rural Saskatchewan like 
nothing else has ever hurt your party in rural Saskatchewan. 
And many in your party acknowledge that, but I’m interested 
now to hear the NDP solution to the farm problem out there is: 
bring the land bank back. 
 
Well you can advocate that. I don’t agree with that. We can 
argue that for the next six years if you like, and I don’t think 
there will ever be a time when the members of this side of the 
House support the land bank concept of doing this. And I 
suspect that for some time to come the NDP will in fact endorse 
the land bank as the solution to the farm debt problem. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, I didn’t appreciate you putting 
words in my mouth, but I’ll repeat what I said. I said the 
principle of land bank was a good principle and a lot of farmers 
out there are asking that that principle be returned. 
 
Not just because it’s a good principle. I mean, I agree that land 
bank had problems, and you’re not a Houdini to figure out that 
that was true. Yes. But I’ll tell you, the farmers now say, we 
have land bank, and now we have bank land. And they’re 
saying, the principle of land bank was a good principle — fix it. 
 
But this government has nothing. They have no program. And 
I’ve been out in this country, and I’m sure many of the people 
out there have walked around, and they say, the farmers are 
saying, look, we have to have some type of intergenerational 
transfer, because all we’re doing is remortgaging this land every 
generation. And then I’ll say to them, well who’s remortgaging 
for you this time? Is the government giving you any assistance? 
And the odd one will say, well I had the farm land . . . or farm 
purchase program, but it’s gone. And anybody retiring now, and 
the age of farmers is getting higher, anybody retiring now can’t 
transfer their land to anyone if they need assistance to buy, 
because there’s no program in place. 
 
And you can talk about land bank and try to do your politics on 
the land bank, but I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, it won’t work 
because I know what the country is saying out there, and 
they’re saying this Tory government has no program to transfer 
land. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Doesn’t want it — to solve the problem. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — And that’s exactly right. The problem is  
  



 
April 18, 1988 

 

646 
 

they don’t want a program, because the Tory vision of 
Saskatchewan is to reduce the number of farmers, to reduce the 
number of towns, and to reduce the population. And that way 
they’re going to reshuffle the boundaries to make a few small 
constituencies in rural Saskatchewan to make sure that they try 
to maintain their base. Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, that 
won’t work. That won’t work. 
 
The Premier of this province has a chance, an opportunity now 
to do something. He’s had it all along, but especially now, 
because the need is there in rural Saskatchewan to have people 
stay on the farms. The stress is there. The family crisis is there. 
The debt crisis is there, and we’re losing these people. And you 
and your colleagues and the Premier of this province have a 
chance to do things like make the Farm Land Security Board an 
operable mechanism to keep farmers on the land, and right now 
it’s not. 
 
And the figures justify that. A costly program that’s not doing 
the job, so you and your colleagues over there are abdicating 
responsibility. You’re throwing up your hands and you’re 
saying, I don’t know what to do. And yet when we sit here and 
say, why don’t you give the Farm Land Security Board some 
teeth, you use a feeble excuse like, well, we can’t do that; it’s 
unconstitutional. 
 
Well I say to you, Mr. Minister, that’s about the extent of your 
commitment to rural Saskatchewan and the farmers of this 
province. It’s non-existent. You’ve thrown up your hands and 
the Premier has thrown up his hands, because I think you don’t 
have any ideas. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I’ve gone through this, and I’m 
going over it again now for about the sixth time, Mr. Chairman. 
 
I’ve told you what we have done. Over 50 per cent of the 
average farmer’s income now comes from government. The 
member stands up and says, do something. He has yet to stand 
up and offer any alternative — not one, not so much as one, 
other than the land bank. He offers that. That’s the only thing 
he’s stood up. 
 
We have made the overtures to the federal government. The 
federal government has come through with a fair degree of 
money. The problem has not gone away yet. There still has to 
be some more work done on that, and clearly that’s what we 
will be doing. And the member opposite stands up and hollers a 
lot, but he simply offers nothing more than land bank. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
want to turn to a different subject — we may return to this one 
— but I want to turn to a different subject, and that is the 
Human Rights Commission. 
 
Last year you cut the funding . . . cut the staff by 25 per cent, 
the funding by a similar but slightly different figure. Mr. 
Minister, I want to read for you, and for those other members 
who are taking part in this and listening, some comments from 
the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission annual report. 
They say on page 4: 
 

The Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission  

had a total of 521 complaint files under investigation in 
1987, an increase of 43 per cent over the number of files 
investigated in 1986. 

 
Mr. Minister, their work-load went up by 43 per cent; their staff 
went down by 25 per cent. The case makes itself, Mr. Minister. 
I will read you one other sentence from the annual report. On 
page 1: 
 

One of the major concerns in 1987 was the effect 
substantial budget cuts would have on the work of the 
Commission. 

 
Mr. Minister, yours is a government which has shown itself 
ready on any occasion to not only violate human rights but to 
treat minorities and to attempt to ingratiate yourself with people 
who don’t like minorities. You’ve done that with any number of 
groups. 
 
Mr. Minister, this is part of the same problem. Your failure to 
provide anywhere near adequate funding for the Human Rights 
Commission is a display of the same attitude which the 
French-speaking community has encountered and any number 
of the minorities have encountered over the years that you 
people have been in office. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the name of all that is fair and decent, I would 
suggest to this government that you ought to bring back the 
level of staffing at least to what it was. With a 43 per cent 
increase in the work-load, indeed it should have an increase in 
staff. It’s no wonder the Human Rights Commission is unable 
to process its claims. It’s no wonder that not only the public but 
the commission themselves are complaining, as the commission 
did take the occasion to complain in your annual report. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think it’s fair to say I don’t know of another 
occasion, when a minister . . . I think . . . Yes, indeed, Mr. 
Minister, you tabled this. It’s given by the chief commissioner 
to yourself. I don’t know of another occasion in which the 
annual report contains a complaint about inadequate funding. 
 
Tell me, Mr. Minister, when you tabled this, did you do so with 
the . . . did you approve of the comment herein that one of 
major concerns in 1987 was the effect substantial budget cuts 
would have on the work of the commission if you approved that 
— and I assume you must have, or you wouldn’t have filed the 
report — do you intend to do anything about it, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The hon. member is aware, fully aware I 
think, is that when this report is prepared by the Human Rights 
Commission, the Human Rights Commission sends it over to 
my office and I table it in the Assembly. It’s not up to me to say 
whether I agree with it when I file this. I file it because the law 
says I’m supposed to file it, and that’s exactly what I did. 
 
With regards to funding of the Human Rights Commission, let’s 
look at the situation in the three prairie provinces. On a per 
capita basis Alberta spends about 50 cents per capita on their 
Human Rights Commission. The province of Manitoba spends 
86 cents per capita; we spend 85 cents per capita — so almost 
the same as  
  



 
April 18, 1988 

 

647 
 

Manitoba. On a per capita basis Alberta spends substantially 
less. 
 
So if you look at it from an overview on a per capita basis, and 
because our populations are roughly the same size, what we’re 
spending on the Human Rights Commission is no different than 
what is being spent in the province of Manitoba on the Human 
Rights Commission. Now that is a fact. 
 
So the member opposite says, well we in the NDP believe that 
we should spend twice as much on the Human Rights 
Commission, but that’s not what we see where there’s an NDP 
government in place. They spend exactly the same as we do. 
 
Last year there was some reduction in funding to the Human 
Rights Commission. Nobody denies that. This year there’s no 
reduction in funding; they’re getting the same as they got last 
year. I’m advised that there was . . . I’m advised that, contrary 
to what the hon. member says, there was in fact no staff cuts 
last year in the Human Rights Commission, no staff cuts. He 
says 25 per cent, and that’s wrong. 
 
With regard to minorities, we can get into the question of 
minorities as well. If we in fact take a position with regard to 
the French language issue in this case, and that’s the one the 
hon. member referred to, then he comes out and says, well 
you’re against all minorities because you’re against that 
particular minority. Well I think that issue has to stand or not 
stand on its own two feet, and that’s something that will be 
debated in the days to come in this Assembly, and I think there 
are varying views with regards to that. 
 
I think it’s not fair to say, though, to the hon. member, that just 
because you take a particular position and stand on a particular 
position, that you’re against this particular group as opposed to 
the members opposite, or say they always support that group or 
the next group or the next group. 
 
You also have to be aware of just because someone takes a 
position, which we have a right to do in a democratic process, 
does not say that you are against minorities, and certainly when 
you lump minorities into an entire group. So I don’t think that’s 
particularly fair. 
 
With regard to the Human Rights Commission, I don’t think the 
Human Rights Commission has a whole lot to do with the 
French language question, although I stand to be corrected, but 
I don’t think that falls within the parameters of the Human 
Rights Commission. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I know you people 
strenuously avoid the facts. I said the staff was cut by 25 per 
cent last year. I refer you to the ’87-88 estimates. In the year 
previous to that there were 20.4 person-years voted; last year 
there was 15.4. That is a 25 per cent decrease in funding for 
staff, Mr. Minister. I think I can fairly leave your record on 
human rights to speak for itself. It’ll do so quite eloquently. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to refer to the question of judicial 
appointments. The quality of judicial appointments  

which this government has made have been, even for this 
country which does not have a — people in this country, in 
Canada as a whole, have got kind of hardened to an 
appointment system which doesn’t do the justice system much 
credit. But yours, the appointments of this government, Mr. 
Minister, have been particularly bad. 
 
I refer, Mr. Minister, to the former minister of Justice, member 
from Lumsden, Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, who appointed his 
executive assistant as a chief justice. Mr. Minister, I think I’m 
correct in referring to you, who appointed a — virtually a 
sitting MLA, in fact he was a sitting MLA; he may have 
resigned very briefly before the appointment, but you appointed 
an MLA to the position of judge. 
 
Mr. Minister, I refresh your memory that the Canadian Bar 
Association has passed a resolution, not long before the 
appointment of Mr. Young — Kim Young was the member 
who was appointed — not long before his appointment the 
Canadian Bar Association passed a resolution urging 
governments not to appoint anyone, not to appoint any retired 
politicians for at least two years after their retirement. You 
violated that resolution, Mr. Minister, and your appointments of 
this government have violated even our sense of fair play, and 
our sense of fair play is not very refined. 
 
Mr. Minister, I note that the Government of Canada is finally 
turning over a new leaf. They have set up an advisory board. It 
may be stretching a point to call it a new leaf, but it may be an 
improvement. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if this government has 
ever given any consideration to an advisory board or a judicial 
council who make recommendations. 
 
(1615) 
 
I’m aware, Mr. Minister, there is in place some 
recommendations which are now made by the advisory council. 
The difficulty with your system is it isn’t public. I’ve no way of 
knowing who was recommended for those appointments. I have 
no way of knowing whether Kim Young was one of them. The 
system is wholly and completely inadequate unless it’s done in 
public. I say to you, Mr. Minister, that . . . I understand the 
change which the federal government has made is the judicial 
advisory group will make its deliberations public. 
 
So I say, Mr. Minister . . . That’s right, a member from 
Lloydminster says, I’ll never make it. That’s precisely what I 
plan on, because Mr. Young was appointed because he was 
afraid to go to the electorate. I’ve not been afraid to go to the 
electorate and take my chances on re-election; I don’t expect to 
for some time. So you’re right, I’m never going to make that 
because it’s often a badge of something less than brilliant 
success in the political world. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if your government has given any 
consideration to cleaning up the mess we have with respect to 
judicial appointments in Saskatchewan and elsewhere. You 
didn’t create the problem, to be fair; it’s been around for a long 
time, but I think your government’s exercise of this power has 
been particularly ripe. And it’s particularly important in this 
province that  
  



 
April 18, 1988 

 

648 
 

we clean up this problem so that the system of justice will enjoy 
the respect that it deserves. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well first of all, to the hon. member, 
that Mr. Young was appointed to the bench prior to the election 
of ’86 — and I became Minister of Justice after the election in 
1986 — I would correct him that I was not involved with that 
particular appointment. 
 
With regards to the present situation, there is a judicial council 
in this province, and all people that are being appointed go 
through the judicial council, and they approve or not approve 
with regard to any appointment. And I think, to a degree, the 
nature of confidentiality. I think, and ever, the hon. member 
would recognize that there’s some need for that. 
 
With regards to the question: should there be a situation where 
politicians are excluded from being appointed to the bench. I 
happen to have the following view. You tend to fall into two 
categories: one, is that politicians are not qualified to go to the 
bench. And we have many politicians in Saskatchewan, and we 
have many politicians across the country who have gone to the 
bench, and I think, you know, perhaps some of them made 
reasonably good judges, perhaps some of them not so good. 
And I would guess that the politicians that have gone to the 
bench . . . I would suggest that the politicians that have gone to 
the bench have done as a good job as ones that were 
non-politicians. 
 
Now you go to the other extreme which I would see as a 
danger, and that is if we get too carried away with the idea that 
the appointment of judges should be not going to the politician, 
you end up perhaps with a situation where too many of the 
judges are appointed by the law society, the Canadian Bar 
Association, that type of thing. And you have an equal criticism 
that that tends to be the old boys’ club that sometimes gets into 
that. That’s number one. 
 
Number two, I think, with the charter, my sense is that maybe 
the politician having served his job as a politician going to the 
bench, becoming a judge at that point in time, and I think the 
hon. member would agree with me that the ex-politician going 
to the bench distances himself from politics. And I think you 
would agree with that. I think that perhaps they bring a 
dimension to the bench, particularly in some charter cases that 
is worthwhile bringing, and not simply the very narrow 
legalistic view that perhaps the strong legal mind might bring, 
and that being his strength. So I think there’s arguments both 
sides. 
 
Clearly, the federal government appear to have moved in a 
different direction. Now let’s wait and see. Let’s see that stand 
the test of time over the next 10 years before I pass judgement 
with regard to what’s happening there. I’ve heard those type of 
suggestions before. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I do not accept the minister’s comment that 
there’s any need for confidentiality. There are two models to be 
used: one is the British model with the judicial council, which 
operates in public; the other is the American model which has a 
committee of their legislature, the House of Representatives, to 
be precise, which approves federal appointments, and that is 
certainly a public process. 
 

Both of those, in my opinion, are vastly preferable to our 
system which is based on raw patronage. A minister can talk all 
he wants about bringing another dimension. The truth of the 
matter is, Mr. Minister, one of the reasons why the Canadian 
Bar Association suggested a two-year cooling off period is 
because if they go back to private practice for a couple of years, 
the pressure to appoint them will disappear and they’ll have to 
get approved on their own merits. 
 
And that’s precisely what lies behind the resolution, is after two 
years their qualifications and the enormous breadth of mind 
which is acquired in these partisan debates will have to stand on 
its own without any pressure from the political system. 
 
I disagree, Mr. Minister, that politicians necessarily make good 
judges. I don’t think that’s true at all. I think there are some 
special qualities which it takes to pursue this profession, and I 
think they’re very different than the qualities which make up a 
good judge. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to deal with Principal Trust. This issue 
came up last year at this time, Mr. Minister, was a ripe enough 
issue last year, but this year it’s an awful lot worse. 
 
What we didn’t know last year, Mr. Minister, was that the 
activities of the Cormie family, if they aren’t illegal, certainly 
border on it. It’s apparent now that large sums of money have 
been siphoned off through fair means or foul, and has found a 
way into the hands of the Cormie family. It’s also apparent the 
practices of the employees of Principal Trust are even worse 
than what we alleged last year in the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Minister, last year you were asked if the RCMP was doing 
an investigation. They volunteered, in fact, that they were. I 
wonder, Mr. Minister, if you’re now in a position to report to 
this Assembly on what that RCMP investigation showed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’m advised that the RCMP 
investigation in Saskatchewan has been an ongoing 
investigation. They are now working in conjunction with the 
RCMP in Alberta, and that investigation is still ongoing, and 
whether or not there will be . . . what will come out of that, I do 
not know. One, I’m not at liberty to say. And for the hon. 
member, I think in fairness, if the investigation is ongoing and 
the inquiry is ongoing, it’s somewhat difficult for me to (a) ask 
the RCMP for what you have; and then (b) to make it public 
would be somewhat improper. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just have 
some brief questions for the minister. Mr. Minister, on Friday 
my colleague, the member for Regina Centre, asked you some 
questions about the operations of the land titles office and 
pointed out that in the fiscal year ’86-87, although the 
work-load had increased by 10 per cent, the staff complement 
had decreased by 3 per cent, and that there now are delays that 
really are quite unacceptable, not only for the legal community 
but, I think, people who need this information for transactions 
that they are undertaking. Often those delays end up  
  



 
April 18, 1988 

 

649 
 

costing them considerable amounts of money, and I don’t think 
you would disagree with that. You indicated on Friday that 
there will be more staff being put into place to deal with that. If 
that’s wrong, please correct me, but I understood that to be the 
case. 
 
Now I guess this goes back to the whole concept of people 
paying taxes and the services they get for those taxes. And I 
think the public generally understands that if you pay taxes, you 
can have services; if you don’t pay taxes, you don’t have 
services. Nobody would argue about that, but they would argue 
about whether the tax load is fair and whether the services are 
adequate. 
 
Now the other area that was raised briefly on Friday was the 
whole question of maintenance enforcement. And I just simply 
make the land titles office comment because it’s only one 
example of a number of examples in your department and 
throughout the government where the system is overloaded and 
you have made no efforts to deal with that problem. 
 
As a matter of fact, the efforts have been the other way, as has 
been pointed out by the Human Rights Commission funding, 
which my colleague just mentioned a few moments ago. But I 
have had cases of people who have come to me who have 
indicated that they have applied for maintenance enforcement 
and have had to wait many, many months in order to get even 
their application considered. I have one particular individual, I 
won’t mention names, who had to wait for over five months. 
My colleague indicated on Friday that some people are waiting 
18 months. Now having waited for those five months, that 
individual then found that the former spouse had moved to 
Alberta. So the whole process has to start all over again, and it 
may take another five months or eight months or nine months, 
or whatever it is, creating all kinds of severe problems and 
difficulties which really are unnecessary if the administration of 
the program was adequately carried out. 
 
I know that several months ago, and I forget how long it is, 
there was . . . well, in November there had been 3,200 
applications under the maintenance enforcement program; In 
March there were 4,000 which had been received by the 
maintenance enforcement program, and many of these people 
are waiting for extended periods of time and undergoing severe 
financial difficulties in the meantime. The support that is 
supposed to be there for the children, or whatever the situation, 
is not coming through. And your department — no fault of the 
staff who, I know, are overloaded to the point where I know 
they just can’t handle this, because they’ve been very 
co-operative and helpful to me in my questions — they just 
can’t handle it. 
 
Now you said on Friday in your question that you have doubled 
the amount of money. Thank God for that! Finally somebody 
has recognized that there is a problem. 
 
I can ask you, Mr. Minister, two questions to start this series of 
questions off: one, what is the present backlog; and two, can 
you identify where that additional amount of money that you’ve 
put into your budget is going to be spent, for what purpose? 
And therefore I ask it, because I want to know whether it’ll 
solve the problem. 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The total applications received to date, 
as of March 31, 4,359; applications registered and assigned to 
date, 3,688. So there is . . . what would that be? — 600, 6,700 
still to be assigned. 
 
With regards to the numbers in the budget, which is the second 
question you asked, it would be: additional money would go 
primarily to staff, and will be increased from 12 PYs, or 
person-years, to 22 person-years. So the bulk of the increase is 
going to people, recognizing the problem that you set out. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. I appreciate that direct 
answer to that. Can you then tell me, Mr. Minister, what does 
your administration then anticipate will be the turn around when 
people make an application, under this new staff contingent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — It is the view of the department, with 
these new staff positions, following their training, that we 
should be able to bring it current. That’s the target that we’re 
shooting for. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — That’s laudable. Now can you tell this 
House, Mr. Minister, when it is the intention of your 
department, yourself, to put these staff into place? Is this 
something that’s going to happen as a priority basis, or are you 
going to wait till the 11th month of the year so that you don’t 
have to spend most of this additional money which you have 
put in. And I don’t say that facetiously; I’m really wanting to 
know. When is it the intent to begin to recruit and put this staff 
into place so they can deal with this cruel problem? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The ads are out now, I’m advised, and 
there are hope that we’d be able to fill all the positions by June 
15. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. I think we’re making great 
progress here. 
 
Mr. Minister, there has been talk last year, and there is still talk 
going around in some circles this year, that the government had 
considered putting the public trustee’s office as one of the 
programs in your scheme for privatization, and I know you said 
last year that that was not going to happen. I’m asking you, has 
that decision of the government changed, or is now there being 
another consideration of privatizing the public trustee’s office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — As I indicated last year, we put that out 
to tender, and the tenders that we received were (a) more 
expensive, and (b) did not provide the service as adequate as we 
were doing it now. We closed the door and then the door stays 
closed. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. I appreciate that. I have one 
more question, and it’s a long-standing issue which I am 
somewhat confident has been dealt with, but nobody has ever 
confirmed it, and I have not had the occasion or the need to go 
to visit the court-house in Regina. 
 
I had correspondence with yourself and with, I believe,  
  



 
April 18, 1988 

 

650 
 

even the former minister of Justice, about handicap access to 
the court-house, and it had been indicated to me that work was 
in progress to make sure that there was a handicap access. Can 
you give us a report of the status of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’m advised that both in the main 
court-house and the provincial court there are handicap ramps 
available, and both are in use now. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, what do you mean by 
available? Are they in place; have they been constructed; are 
they easily accessible; or are they in some back corner of a 
parking lot? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’m advised that there’s a ramp at the 
provincial court building, and at the court-house on Victoria 
there is an access through the west entrance. And also people 
have been advised that if that’s not appropriate they can use the 
judges’ entrance and use the elevator system that is there. 
Apparently no requests have been made yet to use it, but that 
certainly would be available for handicapped people should 
they want to use that. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have four or five 
questions to raise with the minister. Some of them are 
supplementary to matters that have already been raised this 
afternoon. 
 
Mr. Minister, first of all, with respect to the Principal Trust 
matter which you have discussed at least in part this afternoon, 
a year ago in your estimates when we were discussing this 
issue, the point was raised that the province of Alberta, on the 
matter of compensation, seemed to be taking a position which 
was remarkably different from the position taken by the 
province of Saskatchewan in the previous Pioneer Trust matter, 
in that Saskatchewan, in the case of Pioneer, chose to offer 
compensation to those who had been victimized in those 
circumstances, to all of the victims, whether they were in 
Saskatchewan or not. And it was out understanding last year 
that the province of Alberta was taking a much more restrictive 
attitude in the case of Principal, and was considering 
compensation only to residents of the province of Alberta. 
 
I believe in our exchange a year ago, Mr. Minister, you 
indicated that you found that attitude on the part of the 
Government of Alberta to be inappropriate, and I wonder what 
further discussion has transpired in the last six or eight months 
between the Government of Saskatchewan and the Government 
of Alberta on this issue of compensation extending beyond the 
physical boundaries of the province of Alberta. 
 
Is the Saskatchewan government still pursuing that issue? And 
if you are, have you made any progress in indicating to the 
Government of Alberta that their responsibilities in this matter 
do not just begin and end with the four corners of their 
provincial boundary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I don’t wish to beg off the answer to this 
question, but that file is being handled by the Minister of 
Finance, and that issue is being dealt with by the Department of 
Finance. And so, while I don’t wish to  

avoid the question, I think it’s more appropriate that you pose 
that in estimates of the Department of Finance. 
 
I would only make one . . . One observation is that we should 
not confuse the covering of deposits not covered by the deposit 
insurance, and an investment certificate. So there’s a difference 
between those two. With regard to what is an ongoing thing, 
though, that is being handled by Finance, and I am not 
qualified, nor is the Department of Justice qualified, to 
comment on it. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Would the Department of Justice by involved 
in any way, Mr. Minister, on the issue of whether or not the 
Government of Alberta might be legally obliged to extend their 
compensation package should they have one? I wonder if you 
and your officials have examined that question. 
 
Should Alberta be in a position at some future date of providing 
or having to provide some form of compensation in the wake of 
the failure of the Principal Group, would there be any grounds 
upon which the Government of Saskatchewan, as a legal matter, 
could pursue this point with the Government of Alberta? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I suspect that . . . Let me try to 
respond to that question this way: is that first of all, there is an 
inquiry presently going on in Alberta, and it’s a very in-depth 
inquiry, as we all know from reading the papers. 
 
My guess is that the inquiry is likely to come down with a series 
of recommendations, and if there’s fault found in the way 
Principal Trust was handled by Principal Trust or by anybody 
else, my suspicion is that there is going to be recommendations 
by that commission, or that board of inquiry, and I would tend 
to want to wait until that point in time with regards to that. 
 
Clearly the second part is that there are a number of investors 
represented by counsel who, I think, have taken the view, if I’m 
correct, that they would wish to commence action, but at this 
point in time are going to handle it through the inquiry route 
before they opt to go to the further court route. So I would not 
want to say anything that could be interpreted by the court, and 
would be so instructed not to. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Fine, Mr. Minister, I’ll leave it at that point 
for today. But I do gather from your answers that you and your 
officials are pursuing, if I can put it this way, an active 
watching brief on this situation. And I trust the people of 
Saskatchewan can be protected in, at least in some measure as a 
result of that. 
 
I’d like to turn to another subject, Mr. Minister. It has to do 
with one of the programs or services which were cut last year in 
the budget exercise of 1987, and that refers to the, what used to 
be the native court worker program in Saskatchewan. I wonder 
if you or your officials have conducted any system of 
monitoring, in the last eight or nine months since those cuts 
were imposed, to determine the impact of those cuts upon the 
justice system, and to specifically address the question of 
whether native peoples, who previously had access to this kind 
of service, are now, in the absence of that service, finding 
themselves prejudiced before the courts because the  
  



 
April 18, 1988 

 

651 
 

advice that used to be available is no longer as readily available 
as it was while this program was in existence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I suppose the easy response is that, 
having cut that program last year, there has been no formal 
review by the department one year hence. The native justice 
committee of the department is looking at ways to deal with the 
larger problem of natives in the justice system. That review is 
under way now and has not yet reported to me. I would 
anticipate that in sometime into the future, but the direct answer 
to your question is: have we done a formal review as to what 
happened, we have not. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, would you or your officials feel 
at this point in time that that kind of a formal review would be 
appropriate bearing in mind the potential impact that that 
particular cut of the native court worker program might have 
upon a particular segment of our population in Saskatchewan? 
Would it not be both wise and appropriate for your officials to 
keep a very close eye on that situation, because I’m sure neither 
you not I nor anyone else would want to see a particular 
segment of our population being unfairly prejudiced by the 
removal of that program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I think it would be fair to say that the 
department made a fairly in depth review of this before we took 
the decision, recommended that, and the review that is being 
undertaken now, I think, while will deal maybe with some of 
the similar problems, I think is looking to find perhaps other 
programs or other solutions perhaps to that problem as opposed 
to reinstating the one that was dropped. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Will the results of that review, Mr. Minister, 
be made available in the legislature, and when would you 
anticipate being in a position to report to the legislature on the 
status of that review, and under the review the one precise 
question of whether there is now a vacuum in our system in the 
absence of the native court workers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, the review is an internal review 
not unlike internal investigations being done in any department. 
The normal processes that would have come up through the 
department recommendation would come to the minister. The 
minister would either approve it or reject it and send it back, 
and if it was to be approved it would then go on to the cabinet 
process and become policy. So it’s not an internal review that’s 
likely to make a public statement on what it’s proposing. It’s 
internal to government and I think it would normally stay that 
way. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, could you give us your 
undertaking that at some point before this particular session of 
the legislature rises, that you would take the opportunity in the 
House, perhaps in the form of a ministerial statement, to 
provide a report to members of the House and to the public of 
Saskatchewan on the consequences of the abolition of that 
particular program, and also on the details of what you’re doing 
within the department or otherwise to fill the vacuum that might 
have been created. 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well I can undertake to the hon. 
member that I will look at perhaps a response that we might 
have. Whether I can have that ready for the end of this session, I 
don’t know. Number one, will it take the form of a ministerial 
statement? One always has to get approval from the House 
Leader before he can make any ministerial statement, and 
whether he would approve this or not. I can undertake to the 
member though is this, is that we are looking at options and 
hopefully we can have those options brought forward as soon as 
possible and hopefully maybe we can make a response before 
this session rises. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Well I thank the minister for that information. 
I’ll move on to a couple of other matters, Mr. Minister, in the 
field of agriculture which is a subject that was discussed earlier 
today in the estimates. 
 
In your estimates last year and in the report on farm financing 
that was just tabled in the House on Friday, reference was made 
to the consolidation of debtor/creditor legislation as it affects 
the farming community in particular. And I recall in the 
questioning last year that you indicated your department was 
reviewing that question and had in mind coming forward with 
perhaps some form of omnibus legislation that would draw 
together the various statutes of Saskatchewan that might affect 
the debtor/creditor situation in rural Saskatchewan affecting 
farmers. 
 
Now that we’re eight or nine months down the road, I wonder if 
you could indicate at this point in time how that process is 
going internally within your department and, specifically, how 
many statutes are involved in this review. 
 
It may be a bit of a cumbersome list to try to just run through in 
the House, but I would appreciate it, either today or in a few 
days, if you could provide me with a list of the actual statutes of 
Saskatchewan and any other legislative instruments, regulations 
or whatever, that may be involved in this review. Just exactly 
what is the total picture here of what’s involved in terms of the 
consolidation of this legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — There are, as I’m advised, seven major 
statutes that would be involved in this, that we have spent a 
great deal of time working on this particular question. One 
would hope to have a response fairly soon, but it is . . . Let me 
put it this way: it’s a lot trickier than one thought when we first 
undertook it. 
 
Each of those Acts has their own little aspects of it, that if one 
does not want to create fewer hurdles, if you like, or assistance 
to farmers, and by consolidating that you must maintain at least 
what you have now, and perhaps strengthen it and clarify it, but 
not make it easier to foreclose. And that’s the trick of it, and 
that’s the issue that we’re working on right now. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, could you indicate to me, how 
many people in your department are involved in this process? 
Do you have a specific designated working group on the issue 
of legislation related to farm financial  
  



 
April 18, 1988 

 

652 
 

situations, or is it more informal and ad hoc than that? And how 
long, specifically, have they been tackling this particular issue? 
And when do you think you would be in a position to present 
legislation in the House? Do you, for example, anticipate it 
would be definitely before the end of this session? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — There has been about five or six 
spending a goodly part of their time on this issue for the last six, 
seven months, reviewing various other jurisdictions, trying to 
get a handle on the legalities of one to the other. 
 
It is our intention to bring this forward to cabinet in a fairly 
timely manner. It would be our hope to be forward with that in 
the . . . very soon, certainly this session. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, on one specific point that I 
raised with you last year, it has to do with The Exemptions Act 
and whether The Exemptions Act binds Crown lending 
agencies such as the Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. We, of course, had a court decision in 
Saskatchewan last year that indicated that the ACS 
(Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) was not, in 
fact, bound by The Exemptions Act, which presented at least 
some potential difficulties for farmers facing tough financial 
circumstances. 
 
Could you tell me today if The Exemptions Act is specifically 
one of those statutes that’s involved in this review, and are you 
contemplating rendering Crown lending agencies in 
Saskatchewan, like the ACS, subject to The Exemptions Act 
just as all private sector lenders are bound by that Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The Exemptions Act is one of the Bills 
that is being . . . or one of the pieces of legislation or statutes 
that is being reviewed. The issue that you raise is clearly an 
issue that’s being dealt with. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, I’m sure you appreciate how 
anxious at least some farmers would be to see what the form of 
your legislative package would be. 
 
Just to close on this subject, could I ask if you have in mind in 
the work that you are doing, a simple consolidation, and as 
you’ve pointed out, in this field nothing is particularly simple, 
but in terms of drawing all of this legislation together, is it your 
intention simply to draw it all together in some legislative 
package where it’s all to be found in one place, or do you have 
in mind, in the course of this review, going beyond just a 
consolidation to, in effect, to change the law in some way? 
Would you anticipate there would be substantive legal 
implications flowing from this work, or is it merely a 
consolidation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Suffice it to say, it’s more than a 
consolidation. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 5 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, something curious here.  

This, I understand, this subvote I understand to be entirely 
salaries, nothing else here, no pens, no pencils, erasers, 
telephones, floor space, or anything else. I understand this is all 
salaries. 
 
The number of judges is going up by 2 per cent, but the vote is 
going up by 8 per cent. Is it therefore to be assumed that there is 
an increase in salary for the provincial court judges built into 
this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — That reflects the number of judges that 
are going to be there; it does not reflect any salary increase. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The figures don’t quite add up. There’s, as 
I say, an increase of 2 per cent in the number of judges, one, but 
the total vote goes up by 8 per cent. Why does the amount of 
the money go up by 8 per cent and the numbers go up by 2? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Last year there were some vacancies for 
a period of time, and that’s what explains the difference. 
 
Item 5 agreed to. 
 
Items 6 and 7 agreed to. 
 
Item 8 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, there’s an enormous increase 
in this vote, a 36 per cent increase for police services. I wonder 
if you’d give us an explanation of why police services — and 
I’m not suggesting that this is not a worthy recipient — police 
services go up so much? 
 
I would suggest to you that if you spent a little more money on 
preventative work, if you were a little more careful in stripping 
the non-government agencies of the resources, some of these 
ferocious increases in policing costs wouldn’t be necessary. But 
having made that point, I’d ask you, Mr. Minister, why the 36 
per cent increase in this subvote? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’m advised the explanation of the 
additional cost is for forms that were not used before, that’s 
$22,000; and $20,000 for a person who was improperly 
recorded last year as being in the wrong space, or something. 
 
Item 8 agreed to. 
 
Items 9 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 14 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, this again has gone up by 31 
per cent. Do I take it you lost somebody else here and have . . . 
the real gravamen of the question is: have you found whoever 
you lost in this area? 
 
An Hon. Member: — What’s the issue here? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well I just wanted an explanation for the 
increase. Is it . . . There is 14 . . . The funding last year was at 
525,000. This year goes up to 687,000. That’s a 31  
  



 
April 18, 1988 

 

653 
 

per cent increase, once again, with a 25 per cent increase in 
staff. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — That’s in the police commission. Almost 
all of that increase is for additional training under The Police 
Act, catching up with some training that was not done before or 
had to be caught up on. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Is there any intention to review The Police 
Act. I have received submissions from individual police officers 
and from the Federation of Peace Officers urging that this Act 
be reviewed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — It’s being reviewed now. It’s being 
reviewed now. It’s under review now. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What is the minister’s timetable with 
respect to completing the review and introducing the 
legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Probably legislation next session, not 
this session. 
 
Item 14 agreed to. 
 
Items 15 and 16 agreed to. 
 
Item 17 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’ll choose subvote 17 as representative of 
all of these subvotes. I really, again, urge the minister and the 
government to adequately staff our corrections. Mr. Minister, 
your . . . and I dealt with this Friday before 1 o’clock. I won’t 
repeat what I said. Suffice it to say, Mr. Minister, that you are 
exposing the staff of the corrections to considerable danger. 
 
After having made the comments Friday, and this is why I raise 
it again, after having made the comments Friday, those 
comments inspired some contact with the staff who were not, I 
think, breaching any legal or moral responsibility, but did tell 
me that not only are the prisons and corrections understaffed, 
but it goes to the point where they feel their lives are in danger. 
 
Mr. Minister, I said on Friday that there is some increase here, 
but nowhere near enough to make up for the increase in the 
population. The prison population has gone up by 30 per cent. 
This will amount to about a 13 per cent increase in staff. It isn’t 
enough, and I plead on behalf of the correction staff who have 
to face this directly, I plead for a considerable increase in 
funding and some additional resources. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, directly on Vote 
17, related to Pine Grove, in Prince Albert, the minister may 
recall last year a considerable concern being expressed by a 
number of people and the general public, and I think especially 
of the Elizabeth Fry organization, about facilities and services 
at Pine Grove being substantially less than facilities and 
services available with respect to male prisoners. And I wonder 
in the very small increase that’s involved in the budget this year 
for Pine Grove compared to last year, I wonder if the minister 
can report any progress at all in dealing with the issues that 
were raised in 1987 about that particular  

institution, in effect, being put in a discriminatory position in 
relation to female prisoners compared to male prisoners? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Two observations. The increased money 
is designed at Pine Grove to increase training and education, as 
well as our intention to build a half-way house for female 
offenders this year. 
 
Item 17 agreed to. 
 
Items 18 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 25 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, on this subvote, you’ve 
reduced spending, you’ve reduced the staff and the spending by 
a very considerable degree. I’m surprised. This board has been 
in existence for a couple of decades at least, and its work has 
not changed in those two decades. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, why is that now their work has 
decreased by 30 per cent? I mean you cut the staff by 30 per 
cent. 
 
(1700) 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I think what happened, if you go back a 
year, you’ll find that there was a significant increase to that last 
year. This reflects one person fewer that is needed in that 
department this year, that they’re getting by without that one 
person. 
 
Item 25 agreed to. 
 
Items 26 to 33 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 34 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, there’s quite a significant 
increase in funding here. Is this all increases and awards? I’m 
just curious as to how the funding goes up from 334,500 to 
450,000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — As the hon. member might be aware on 
that, we pay exactly what the Crimes Compensation Board 
awards and it of course has to be somewhat of a guess and this 
is simply upping it because last year was insufficient amount of 
money. 
 
Item 34 agreed to. 
 
Item 35 — Statutory 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Once again, the cost has gone up by 24.3 
per cent, Mr. Minister. I’m wondering what this item is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — That addition is for a Legislative 
Secretary that works for me. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Are you saying you didn’t have one last 
year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — That’s exactly what I’m saying. 
 
  



 
April 18, 1988 

 

654 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, is this an additional 
Legislative Secretary to the system or is this a Legislative 
Secretary who was transferred from another minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Transferred. 
 
Item 35 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 3 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates (No. 2) 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Justice 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 3 

 
Items 1 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 3 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I would like to thank the minister and his 
officials. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. I also would like to 
thank the officials for the assistance they’ve rendered us in 
these debates. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


