


















































May 13, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 May 13, 1988 
 

1313 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 
to the Assembly, His Excellency, Bereng Augustinus 
Sekhonyana, the High Commissioner of Lesotho. His 
Excellency is in Saskatchewan to sign some agreements both 
with the federal government and the provincial government, as 
well as visit with several agencies. His Excellency is sitting in 
the Speaker’s gallery, and I would ask all members to welcome 
our distinguished guest from Lesotho. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me to introduce 
to you, and through to the rest of the Assembly, 46 students, 
grade 7 and 8 and 9, from the school of Frontier. It also gives 
me the pleasure to introduce to you the teachers that are here 
with them today, Murray Legge and Ruth Armstrong, along 
with chaperons Ron Bukken, Judy Erickson, Merle and Sandra 
Sanford, Arlene Briggs, Liz Christensen, Collette Anderson, 
and Wendel Patzer. And also along with them is their bus 
drivers, Wendel Patzer and Joel Christensen. 
 
I would like to welcome them here, and I hope they enjoy their 
stay in Regina, along with sitting in the Assembly here for 
question period. And after the question period, I’ll be meeting 
with them for drinks and for a chat in room 218. So I’d like for 
everybody here to help me welcome them to Regina and to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you, and to all members of the Assembly, a group 
of 38 grade 9 students from the Stobart Higher School in Duck 
Lake. They’re accompanied by teachers, Walter Epp and Nora 
Perrilat; chaperons, Jean Cameron and Linda Blanchard. 
 
I will be meeting with them for pictures and refreshments later. 
I would like to ask all members of the House to give them a 
warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
introduce to you, and through you to the Assembly, 23 grade 8 
students from Ituna, Saskatchewan, who are here in you gallery 
today. They are present with their teach, Bill Hudema, and their 
bus driver, Mr. Petrowsky. I would hope that the students have 
an interesting day in Regina today and that this trip to the 
legislature adds to their education and to their experience. 
 
I would point out that I am schedules to meet with them for 
pictures at 11 a.m.; however, since Social Services Estimates 
will be in process at that time, possibly the  

members opposite would be indulgent at that time to allow me a 
two-minute adjournment to have that process take care of, 
otherwise I would not be able to meet with them at 11 at all. So 
at approximately 11 I will be asking for some sort of leave, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I ask the members to welcome these students from Ituna, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Jailing of Former Credit Union Manager 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — My question is to the Minister of Justice. Mr. 
Minister, you will be aware that yesterday Gerald Morris was 
arrested and was taken to jail to serve out a 30-day sentence. He 
was, of course, the former manager of the Cabri Credit Union 
who was convicted of unlawfully accepting commissions from 
a law firm. The two lawyers involved, who are now Mr. Justice 
Maurice, of the Court of Queen’s Bench, and Mr. Geoff 
Wilson, the Conservative member of parliament from Swift 
Current, have never been charged with any offence for paying 
these same commissions, but Mr. Morris, an ordinary citizen, is 
in jail for receiving those commissions. 
 
Mr. Minister, this leave the people of Saskatchewan wondering 
about the integrity of our justice system. As a minister, I 
suggest it’s up to you to take steps to restore people’s faith in 
the justice system, and I suggest that you have a further 
responsibility to provide a satisfactory explanation for this 
apparent contradiction. Will you do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member raises an 
issue that I think perhaps reflects the attitude of the general 
public in this particular case. 
 
I could advise the hon. member that when this matter first came 
before me as the Attorney General and the matter was up for 
decision, one finds himself in the position, as Attorney General, 
to follow the long-standing tradition of as an elected official, 
and as the Attorney General, to not to interfere in the decision 
of the director of public prosecution. That was in fact the 
recommendation. I think all attorneys general have followed 
that practice in this province for a long, long time. 
 
I can advise the hon. member that when this matter came before 
me and the recommendation was not to proceed with charges, I 
in fact referred that file back to the director of public 
prosecution, asking that it be reviewed and to determine 
whether or not in fact it was a proper decision. I did that at that 
time. The report again came back suggesting that they not 
proceed with charges. I therefore found myself in a . . . I found 
myself in a situation, as Attorney General, that you do have to 
recognize the fact that the director of public prosecutions in this 
province is the one that makes those decisions, and not me as 
the Attorney General and as the politician. 
 
  



 
May 13, 1988 

 

1314 
 

I pursued that course, a course that I think has been, as I say, 
followed, and a practice that has been followed by attorneys 
general in this province for a long period of time. 
 
I do say, however, I agree with the hon. members that justice 
appears in the public, as it sometimes does, not to be full and 
fair. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Minister, in the circumstances of this case where two such 
prominent people are involved, and one indeed being a 
prominent politician of your party, would it not have been more 
appropriate to have instructed that the charges be laid and allow 
the courts to make the very judgement that you made yourself? 
 
And can I also ask, as a second question: would it not be 
appropriate, in your view, in light of the public attitude towards 
this matter, to give the public an explanation as to how it is that 
it can be an offence to receive the commissions but not an 
offence to pay them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I think the hon. member, in raising the 
issue of should the Attorney General superimpose his views 
upon the director of public prosecution — the rule is, and the 
rationale of the rule is, as follows: that if I, as Attorney General, 
am to interfere in the decision of the director of public 
prosecution on this issue, do I also interfere on the next issue 
and the next issue and the next issue? And do you then run the 
risk of saying that I, as Attorney General, superimposed my 
political views upon the director of public prosecution. 
 
The individual who made the decision in this particular case 
was Ken MacKay, who was at that point in time the acting 
attorney general and also the director of public prosecution, a 
long-standing employee of the Attorney General’s department. 
He was the one that make the decision. I was advised. I checked 
with other attorneys general across the country. They advised 
me that this is an area that you should not interfere with. I acted 
upon that advice, and that is the way this particular case 
unfolded. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — It still leaves unanswered, Minister . . . I 
mean, you’re giving us fresh information, but even that will not 
be sufficient to satisfy a sceptical public that this case was 
handled properly, particularly in light of the fact that the law 
society has attempted to proceed against both of these people 
and did in fact carry through a hearing against one of them. 
 
Mr. Minister, in these circumstances, let me renew my question: 
is it not appropriate for you to provide, either through yourself 
or the director of public prosecutions, an explanation as to how 
it can be that it is an offence to receive the commissions but not 
an offence to pay them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, again I would not see it 
appropriate for the Attorney General . . . I have no problem with 
the director of public prosecution explaining as to why that 
decision was taken. I’m not sure it’s appropriate for the 
Attorney General, though, to stand up and say: this is a decision 
taken by the director of  

public prosecution, and I would then set about to explain how 
that decision was taken, review the file, etc. I don’t think that’s 
appropriate. 
 
I have no problem with the director of public prosecution 
making a statement as to why the decision was taken in that 
particular regard. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — A final supplementary, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Minister, can I simply ask you: will you instruct your director 
of public prosecutions to make this information public and to 
provide this explanation to the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I would be prepared to 
instruct the director of public prosecution to be as forthcoming 
with the information as they would in a normal case with regard 
to where a case is lying. It is not for me to dictate, as you know 
as a practising lawyer, it is not for me to dictate as to what 
information the director of public prosecution should make 
public, and I think that you under that, and the legal system 
understands that. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — We are the lawmakers in the province in this 
Assembly, and we have a collective responsibility here to 
ensure the integrity of the system . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — . . . to ensure that people maintain their 
respect for the law as an essential element of the functioning of 
our society. 
 
In those circumstances you, as the minister in charge, would 
have authority to direct your officials, your director of public 
prosecution, to provide this explanation in a complete and 
thorough way, not couched in language of . . . as he would in a 
normal case because this is not a normal case; this is a very 
serious matter. And I would ask you to make a commitment to 
us to direct your director of public prosecutions to make a full 
explanation to the people of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’ve indicated to the hon. member that I 
would be prepared to request that the director of public 
prosecutions make a statement with regards to this, and make a 
statement within the parameters of what is appropriate. And 
that’s not decided by me, it’s decided by the director of public 
prosecutions, what is appropriate in criminal cases of this 
nature. 
 
Now you talk about we as lawmakers. I think as lawmakers you 
have to also recognize that what we’re dealing with here is a 
Criminal Code matter which we are not the lawmakers on. The 
federal government is, or the Parliament of Canada is. 
 
So I have no problem with this, only to say this: that sometimes 
as Attorney General you find yourself in a situation, you find 
yourself in a situation where the requirement of your office, and 
to properly perform the  
  



 
May 13, 1988 

 

1315 
 

job that you are given in that office of Attorney General, 
requires certain restrictions. 
 
And I will live to those restrictions that tradition and the system 
of justice imposes upon me, and I always must. And I will 
pursue this case in that traditional way, the way that attorneys 
general have in the past and, I would suggest, the ways that 
attorney generals will in the future, to maintain that sense of 
justice that we have. 
 

Ward System in City Elections 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
direct a question to the Minister of Urban Affairs, and it 
concerns his rather peculiar definition of democracy. 
 
Mr. Minister, last week in Moose Jaw you told a meeting of the 
Saskatchewan chamber of commerce that you had absolute 
disregard and that you had no concern at all, or respect, for the 
decisions of the voters of Regina and Saskatoon in plebiscites in 
support of the ward system. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, those plebiscites were held four and six 
years after the beginning of the ward system in those cities. The 
people had an experience with them. they like the system. They 
thought it worked for them and they supported it. And so by 
saying what you said, Mr. Minister, you have accused the 
people of those cities of being unable to make an informed 
choice. For that, you should apologize. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Minister, the least you could 
do is clear the air and tell the dwellers in the cities of 
Saskatchewan where you stand on this. And so I ask you this 
question: is it your intention to unilaterally impose a system 
against the wishes of those people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first of all, the 
preamble of what I said in Moose Jaw he must have received 
second-hand, because members of the NDP don’t traditionally 
go to chamber of commerce meetings. 
 
But in any event, I have never ever said that I disregard the 
wishes of the people, and as a result, certainly I don’t have any 
apology to make. And anybody that knows our government, 
knows our representative’s an MLA, know that it’s the reverse, 
in fact, that is true. 
 
We continually talk to the people, and we listen to all of the 
varying organizations, and we act once we get that response. So 
I believe that the member has a lot of misinformation, and I 
don’t know where he received it from. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 
problem with the minister’s answer about listening is that he 
may listen and he may talk — the problem is that he never 
hears, and neither do his colleagues. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the Regina city council has urged you in 
resolution to hold a plebiscite, to allow them to hold a  

plebiscite on this issue. 
 
Are you aware also, Mr. Minister, that the cities of Weyburn, 
Saskatoon, Melville, Prince Albert, Moose Jaw and Saskatoon 
— which I have said — have indicated their support for this 
objection by the city of Regina to your intention to unilaterally 
impose a ward system? And if so, Mr. Minister, why do you 
hold the opinion of those elected municipal officials with such 
disdain that you’re prepared not to listen to them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the member has 
some misinformation. We didn’t unilaterally impose the ward 
system; they did. And they did it following a plebiscite in which 
the voters of Saskatoon clearly indicated that they did not want 
the imposition of the ward system, and the NDP government of 
the day unilaterally imposed the ward system on the city of 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, can I ask you once again: 
will you heed the advice given to you by all of those cities, 
which I have indicated to you, who have supported the 
resolution of the city of Regina. Will you heed that advice and 
declare in this House today that you’re not going to arbitrarily 
impose your legislation to do away with the ward system, or 
will you ignore their advice? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, if I may, I would like to once 
again quote as I have in the past what the present Leader of the 
Opposition, the member from Riversdale said concerning: 
 

Plebiscites are costly and expensive procedures. 
Plebiscites are matters which have been established, as a 
matter of fact can, and I think, be open to some serious 
criticism. 

 
And he goes on to say that in terms of expenditure by city 
fathers and in terms of all the other priorities: 
 

Plebiscites will in fact be an expensive and costly opinion 
poll which will hurt the ratepayers of Saskatoon. 

 
I didn’t say that. The Leader of the Opposition said that at the 
time that they unilaterally imposed the ward system on the city 
of Saskatoon against the wishes of the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister . . . Mr. Speaker, to the 
minister who refuses to answer the question and continues to 
evade it. Well, Mr. Minister, as I listen to you, you sound like a 
voice in the wilderness and it’s fading very fast. 
 
Not only have the cities, whom you ignore, disagreed with you 
and said you to hold off, but the board of trade in Saskatoon 
held a survey and also told you that you’re  
  



 
May 13, 1988 

 

1316 
 

wrong. You have rejected all of those decisions, Mr. Minister, 
supposedly, it seems. 
 
Now I ask you once again: do you intend to reject any vote 
results which don’t conform to your blind determination to 
interfere with the electoral system of those municipalities which 
the people have adopted and have accepted and have said so to 
you. 
 
Do you propose to ignore those plebiscites that have been taken 
and those resolutions that have been passed in all of the other 
cities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, he refers to the board of trade 
in Saskatoon and the fact that a small percentage of people that 
responded indeed did choose to stay for the ward system. 
 
But let’s talk about the Regina chamber of commerce, where 
they are totally against the ward system. So now you’ve got our 
two major cities, and you’re talking about two interest groups. 
Certainly we listen to everybody, Mr. Speaker. We listen to 
various interest groups, whether they be the chambers of 
commerce or whoever the group might be. 
 
But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, we listen to the taxpayer. In 
this day and age, and as times change, if indeed the government 
chooses that the ward system is an expensive and ineffective 
way for our cities to operate, if indeed our government believes, 
Mr. Speaker, that the ward system is an ineffective way to 
operate a municipality, we will have to deal with it. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — New question to the minister, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Minister, we’ve heard you say before about how 
the ward system is expensive, and somehow you kind of make 
this argument that it’s bad economics to have a ward system. 
 
Mr. Minister, the city manager of the city of Regina has 
answered you in that argument when he said that the increase in 
spending for the city of Regina is 2.9 per cent this year with no 
tax increases, municipal tax increases, and that the largest part 
of the increase in the cost to the city of Regina is because of 
increases in the provincial hospital levy, the sales tax and the 
fuel tax. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’re responsible for those kinds of increases of 
expenditures, and so I ask you: how do you propose to stop the 
kind of irresponsible approach by your government by doing 
away with the ward system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, this government has not yet 
done away with the ward system, and if we do . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, order. I believe the minister 
should have the right to give his answer without too much 
interruption. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That member 
from Quill Lakes every now and then . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. I believe if we just 
get on with the questions and answers it’ll be much better than 
debate among personal members. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I believe, Mr. Speaker, that if our 
government indeed decides to alter the ward system, it will be a 
responsible position. 
 

Provision of Meals for Hungry Children 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Social Services and it deals with the unacceptable level of 
poverty in this province. The minister will be aware that 
Saskatchewan has 64,000 children a year living in poverty, the 
second highest rate for family poverty in Canada. 
 
In Saskatoon, many people have been asking for over a year 
now for an expanded school lunch program, and now we have a 
group in Regina asking for the same thing. That group estimates 
that to expand the breakfast and lunch programs currently 
offered at some Regina schools, so that 900 children could be 
fed, would cost only $48,000 a year. Mr. Minister, that’s less 
than half of what you pay . . . that’s only a day and a half’s 
worth of what your government is spending on empty office 
space. And my simple question to you is: can you not 
restructure your priorities so that the hungry children of the city 
of Regina can be fed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 
inaccurate in his calculation of empty office space, again he is 
sevenfold out in his calculation. He does not take into account 
that a lot of that empty space is at Whitespruce where we are 
reserving it for future use, a drug and alcohol treatment for 
young people. 
 
The member opposite has statistics that are questionable. When 
the member opposite was asked by myself to send me the 
names of hungry children who needed assistance, he said there 
were hundreds. Mr. Speaker, he sent me one name and we 
attended to that case. I told the department to go and check into 
the case and make sure that child is eating regular. One name, 
they sent over, when they alleged there were hundreds. I think 
they have a responsibility to give the information to us if there’s 
child neglect, and we will assist in the feeding of those children. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister of 
Social Services. Mr. Minister, I have the latest 1987 
province-wide statistics for demand at food banks in 
Saskatchewan, and at the four major, largest centres, urban 
centres in the province, on a monthly basis last year 12,682 
people a month were being fed, and 48 per cent of those where 
children. 
 
Mr. Minister, in 1987, 36,000 people approximately, in this 
province, depended at some time on the food banks in one of 
our four largest urban centres. Now my question to you, Mr. 
Minister is: are you talking abut issuing individual food 
vouchers to 36,000 people, or are you going to finally realize 
that you have to start dealing with these problems by changing 
your unfair social assistance rates and other unfair health and 
taxation policies in this  
  



 
May 13, 1988 

 

1317 
 

province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, first of all, the province 
of Saskatchewan has the highest welfare rates for children and 
families in all of Canada, at least in the provinces. I won’t go so 
far as to say in the Northwest Territories and the Yukon, but in 
the provinces of Canada we have the highest rates for children. 
 
Secondly, it is not a surprise that statistics on poverty would 
reflect, in Saskatchewan, the agricultural situation and our 
agricultural problems. It is not a surprise that we would have 
statistics that would show there are a lot of people below what 
they might call a poverty level. 
 
That does not mean that people are going hungry, but it means 
that Saskatchewan has the highest percentage of people making 
their living in agriculture, and we have the highest percentage 
of native population, and we know that those two groups of 
society do not have large incomes. 
 
So it is not a surprise that he can find statistics to tell us that 
things are tough out there because we know agriculture is in 
trouble, and we know that people on Indian reserves and the 
native population do not have high incomes. And we are trying 
to solve those problems, and he is trying to sensationalize them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, 
Indian people are not even included in your provincial welfare 
statistics, otherwise they would be much larger than they are. 
 
But Mr. Minister, I want to ask you about the plight of single 
employable people in this province who are living, as a result of 
your policies, more than $6,000 a year below the poverty line. 
Mr. Minister, your solution has been to give them 
two-week-on/two-week-off jobs where they can make only 
$316 a month in take home pay. 
 
And my question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: why do you feel 
that you have the right to keep beating up on these single 
employables while supplying unprecedented corporate welfare 
to out-of-province oil companies and Alberta millionaire, Peter 
Pocklington? Will you stop forcing these people to live on the 
unfair rate of $316 a month despite the fact that they’re 
working? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, this government offers 
people jobs instead of welfare. We have thousands of people 
who have received jobs rather than having to stay on welfare 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Order, order. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Trade Agreement with Marubeni-Hitachi 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to advise the 
legislature of the progress that’s been made in accessing new 
markets abroad. As the members will be aware, Mr. Speaker, 
SaskPower purchased two 300-megawatt steam turbine 
generators for the Shand power station project over one year 
ago from the Marubeni corporation, manufactured by Hitachi 
Ltd. Of Japan. 
 
The choice was made for a number of reasons. First, Mr. 
Speaker, we had used turbines manufactured by Hitachi — I 
think 10 of the . . . the last 10 turbines installed in 
Saskatchewan were Hitachi turbines — and we found them to 
be of excellent quality. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, Marubeni and Hitachi were willing to 
locate a turbine manufacturing facility in the province and use 
Saskatchewan resources to build a product in Saskatoon that 
can be marketed throughout North America. Construction of the 
plant is near completion and we look forward to production 
beginning in early 1989. 
 
In addition, Hitachi’s marketing affiliate, Marubeni corporation, 
signed an $80 million counter-trade agreement with Agdevco 
(agricultural development corporation) calling for the purchase 
to market Saskatchewan products abroad. 
 
A management committee comprised of Marubeni and 
provincial representatives has completed a review of the 
progress made to date, and I’m please to announce that 
Marubeni corporation has increased its purchases of 
Saskatchewan products to $86.8 million for the period August 
1986 to July 1987, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The credit value towards the counter-trade agreement, because 
some products are weighted more than others, will be $34 
million. This value is based upon incremental purchases of 
traditional products, that is, purchases over and above their 
average buying commitments. Traditional products include 
wheat, barley, rye, canola, uranium, and malt. 
 
Also included in a new purchase, Mr. Speaker, Marubeni 
purchased for the first time ever, fine quality paper pulp. This is 
a new product Marubeni is marketing abroad for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we look forward to their continued assistance in 
marketing other new products in the future. 
 
As you can see, Mr. Speaker, through this agreement we are 
returning to the province what was paid for the turbines. The 
management committee will be meeting in one year to review 
and report on the progress made in the second year of the 
agreement. 
 
I have written, Mr. Speaker, to the chairman of Marubeni, Mr. 
Haruna, who incidentally, Mr. Speaker, is an honorary citizen 
of Saskatchewan, expressing on behalf of the province our 
appreciation for his company’s efforts and co-operation and 
support for this agreement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the squawking of members 
opposite cannot be interpreted as a sign of  
  



 
May 13, 1988 

 

1318 
 

endorsement for this kind of arrangement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s astonishing that 
this would be the subject of a ministerial statement in this 
House. I can’t think of any other province where this would be 
the subject of this kind of treatment. Perhaps a press release 
from some minor official in the department concerned, but 
certainly not a statement from a minister in the House. 
 
We have been critical, consistently critical of your government, 
and more so as years go by, for your lack of any kind of an 
industrial policy. That’s an area where the public expected you 
guys would really be able to do something because they listen 
to your rhetoric. That’s what it’s been after six years — just a 
lot of rhetoric and hot air about the industrialization of 
Saskatchewan, about the development of industry in this 
province. 
 
I’ve quizzed your minister for two years now on the industrial 
strategy of this government for the province, and the best that 
he’s been able to say is what everybody, what everybody says 
in every province in the country, every state in the United 
States, every country in the industrialized world, and that is, we 
will build on our natural strengths. 
 
And we’ve been saying, that’s good, but everybody’s doing 
that; we need something more than that in this province. We 
need an effort to do something different, to do something new, 
to get something going again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 21* — An Act to amend the Cost of Credit 
Disclosure Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 
a Bill to amend The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Order. I’m sure the 
members can carry on their discussion privately rather than 
across the floor of the House. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

STATEMENT BY MR. CHAIRMAN 
 

Ruling on a Point of Privilege 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Before the estimates, I come with a ruling. 
 
Yesterday the member for Regina Centre raised a point of 
privilege stating that comments made by the Minister of Social 
Services constituted an attack on a legislative officer. 
 
I have now had an opportunity to review the point raised and 
the circumstances surrounding it. I first want it clearly 
understood by all members that it is not the role of the chairman 
to decide if the privileges of the Assembly have been breached. 
I refer all hon. members to Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules 
and Forms, Fifth Edition, pages 24 and 25: 
 

(1)  A question of order concerns the interpretation to be 
put upon the rules of procedure and is a matter for the 
Speaker or, in a committee, for the Chairman to 
determine. 

 
(2)  A question of privilege, on the other hand, is a 

question partly of fact and partly of law — the law of 
contempt of Parliament — and is a matter for the 
House to determine. 

 
(3)  It follows that though the Speaker can rule on a 

question or order, he cannot rule on a question of 
privilege. His function, when a question of privilege 
is raised, is limited to deciding whether the matter is 
of such a character as to entitle the motion, which the 
member who has raised the question desires, to move 
the priority over the orders of the day. 

 
The role of the chairman is to review the arguments as 
presented and to determine on the face of it whether a prime 
facie case of privilege has been established. It is thus quite 
properly up to the Assembly as a whole to decide whether any 
privileges have been breached. 
 
It is clear from The Ombudsman Act that the Ombudsman is an 
officer of the House and therefore entitled to those protections 
outlined in Erskine May’s Parliamentary Practice, Twentieth 
Edition, page 162: 
 

Both Houses will treat as breaches of their privileges, not 
only acts directly tending to obstruct their officers in the 
execution of their duty, but also any conduct which may 
tend to deter them from doing their duty in the future. 

 
It is vital, if parliament is to get fair and impartial service from 
its officers, that these officers must be defended from 
intimidation while conducting their duties. Members know that 
it is their responsibility to protect the independent status of 
officers of the legislature. I refer all members to a precedent of 
this Assembly on June 24, 1987 respecting the Office of the 
Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk. 
 
With respect to the specific point of privilege raised here, it is 
questionable that past officers of the House retain the  
  



 
May 13, 1988 

 

1319 
 

protection of privilege. I have given serious consideration to 
this point. 
 
Parliamentary privilege is the protection given to members and 
officers of the legislature to enable them to carry out their duties 
without interference. Because the individual in question is no 
longer an officer of this Assembly, he cannot be obstructed in 
the execution of parliamentary duties. 
 
While the comments made by the minister may reflect on the 
credibility of a former Ombudsman, those comments do not 
necessarily obstruct the present Ombudsman from carrying out 
his duties. For these reasons I find that this matter, while 
regrettable, does not constitute a prima facie case of privilege. 
 
(1045) 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Social Services 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 36 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I do not rise to comment on 
your ruling because I am fully aware of what the rules of the 
House say. And although members opposite, or certainly some 
members opposite prefer not to pay any attention to the 
privileges and the rules of the House, I like to believe that 
members of this House do on this side of the House. 
 
And I want to make some comments on the attack by the 
member from Melville, the Minister of Social Services 
yesterday, on the office as well as the officer, of the position of 
the Ombudsman, that he did last night. I say, Mr. Speaker, 
through you to the minister opposite, with regard to his 
comments last night, that he was making comments on the 
Ombudsman when he was indeed the officer in charge of that 
position. and I think that’s a relevant point that this House 
ought to consider and keep in mind. 
 
I regret very much, Mr. Speaker, that what we saw happen last 
night was the minister, the member from Melville, who is 
well-known for the comments he makes, comments of 
disrespect not only for this legislature and the institution as it is, 
but minorities and individuals all over the province who are 
unable to defend themselves. That by his comments, Mr. 
Chairman, he was demeaning the very institution of the 
legislature, as well as the institution of the Ombudsman. 
 
And so I regret that this matter even had to come before us 
today. I regret that even it had to be raised yesterday by my 
colleague, the member from Regina Centre, who did so out of 
the fact and the knowledge that the rights of this legislature and 
the rights of each and every member of this legislature is 
threatened when a member of this legislature begins to attack 
the integrity of any officer of this legislature, as the member 
from Melville did last night. 
 
And he stands accused, and although, Mr. Chairman, the ruling 
is as it is, and I don’t want to get into that, I think it is 
well-known, and the record will show that this member  

did indeed attack the very institution of the Ombudsman which 
is an institution of this Legislative Assembly. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Chairman, he was wrong and he ought to 
have apologized. And if he has any sense of decency, any sense 
of respect for this legislature, he will so do in spite of what the 
ruling may be on this issue. And we will find out whether he 
has that kind of stature and that kind respect for this institution 
when he speaks on his comments of last night. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the history of the member from Melville is 
well-known. He very deliberately and very regularly, not only 
in this House but outside of this House, maligns minorities and 
individuals who in most cases cannot defend themselves. We 
should not accept that, as responsible legislators. 
 
An officer of the House, Mr. Speaker, does not have a forum. 
An officer of the House does not have a forum to defend him or 
herself. Therefore it is the responsibility of the members of this 
House to make sure that those kinds of attacks which we heard 
last night, do not take place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member deliberately cast unfounded 
reflections on the professional integrity, who I submit was an 
officer at the time that the Minister was taking about. He was 
talking about the Ombudsman at the time when this gentleman 
was the Ombudsman. he did so at some length. 
 
And I regret to say, Mr. Chairman, that this is only one example 
of many which have transpired in recent months, which show 
the complete contempt by not only that member but other 
members of the Executive Council, to this legislature, and those 
requirements that it puts upon us as elected representatives of 
the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
Not long ago, the member from Kindersley, last year, made 
comments derogatory to the Legislative Law Clerk and attacked 
the Legislative Law Clerk. I must say, at least that member, 
when it was indicated that he had acted in a way that is not 
acceptable, had the decency to rise and apologize. And we 
accepted that, and we hoped that it would never happen again. 
 
But now the member from Melville does so again last night on 
an individual, in this House, who cannot defend himself. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No evidence. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — He has no evidence. He simply does it, 
Mr. Speaker, in line with other attacks which the member from 
Melville has made on the Ombudsman’s office which he made 
in January of 1987, when the Ombudsman reported about 
certain problems which he had detected with the Department of 
Social Services regarding foster-children and the kind of 
conditions that they were faced with. And when he was 
confronted with the report, Mr. Chairman, rather than taking it 
and trying to follow up on it and understand that maybe there 
was a problem he should deal with, he proceeded to attack the 
Ombudsman. 
 
  



 
May 13, 1988 

 

1320 
 

Now, Mr. Chairman, this is an unfortunate trend that we see 
happening on behalf of this government. Whenever there is 
even the smallest element of criticism, rather than listening and 
indeed hearing, they choose to attack and destroy. 
 
Recently, a director of a study on water in Saskatchewan was 
suspended for two weeks because he dared to make a 
professional opinion on the water situation in Saskatchewan 
with regard to the Rafferty-Alameda project. 
 
Just the other day at the correctional institute a guard was 
suspended because he dared question his own ability to 
administer drugs to inmates in that institution and therefore 
made himself liable, because of policy of this government. He’s 
suspended. 
 
Now we have non-profit organizations, groups who are trying 
to be helpful, people trying to provide counselling to battered 
women, all kinds of these non-profit organizations, 
non-government agencies, being issued in the agreement that 
the minister has written up, gag orders. So they either have to 
take what the government says and what the minister says and 
lump it. They don’t dare comment on it and try to get policy 
changes because that minister will cut off their funds. 
 
Now what kind of a society, Mr. Chairman, is that, that we are 
living in under this government when all of those kinds of 
threats are imposed and given to individuals and to 
organizations and to groups, day after day after day. I fear that 
kind of a society, and so should every member who has any 
sense of what a democracy is all about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I say to you, Mr. Chairman, this is an 
unhappy day, because it highlights once again the kind of 
disregard that this government has for the institution of 
parliament. When the institution of parliament is threatened, 
every single citizen in Saskatchewan is threatened. The rights 
and the privilege of citizens are no longer safe and secure. 
When the Minister of Social Services can say to 
non-government agencies: if you say one word, or if you 
question at any time the policies which I want you to abide by, 
I’m going to cut off your funds, then I say, Mr. Chairman, we 
are all threatened — we are all threatened. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re being self-righteous. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And this is . . . the member from 
Rosthern talks about being self-righteous. He doesn’t 
understand, Mr. Chairman. He thinks this is funny. He’s a new 
member, but he’s been here long enough to know — he’s been 
here long enough to know the importance of the integrity of the 
legislature and the importance of the integrity of the officers of 
the legislature. And for him . . . if he want to speak on this, he 
can get up in his seat. But for him to sit in his seat and laugh at 
the legislature, and laugh at the non-government organizations 
who now have to live under a gag order, I say he’s just as 
irresponsible as the member from Melville, the Minister of 
Social Services. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now these are people, Mr. Chairman, 
who were elected in a democratic system to uphold the 
democratic rights of the citizens of Saskatchewan. Instead they 
attack them and undermine them. 
 
And it’s not just the member from Kindersley who tried that, 
Mr. Chairman, last year. It’s not just the member from Melville 
who again did it yesterday — and he’s done it numerous times. 
He has a habit of doing this; he’s the government hit man, it 
seems. Go out there and attack people. 
 
Now this is the guy, this is the member who talks about 
morality every second day. I say to him, I say to him: what is 
moral, Mr. Minister, about taking the Ombudsman and the 
Ombudsman’s office and attacking it the way you have? How 
can you say about this office, Mr. Chairman, that the . . . that 
because the Ombudsman criticized your department, which was 
his role to do, which you should have taken as helpful advice so 
that you could follow up. . . . Instead of doing that, you say that 
the Ombudsman was indulging in politics and that he’s — if I 
recall from what I was . . . reported to me yesterday — that the 
Ombudsman was slandering foster-parents. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that in itself is slanderous, and if the 
minister had any kind of courage of his convictions, he’d say it 
outside this legislature. But he won’t. He won’t because he’ll 
hide behind the immunity of himself as a member who will 
speak in here. 
 
Now this is just another example of many. We have had now, 
Mr. Chairman, for over seven months, orders for return ordered 
by this legislature that have yet to be tabled in this House. It is 
information that the public has a right to know. Over seven 
months. And when, some over two weeks ago, I asked the 
House Leader on the government side of the House, will he 
table those orders for return, he said in his usual offhanded way 
that he would check into it. He has yet to report to this House, 
because he has no respect for what this House requires of 
government and of all of us as members. 
 
We have had, from the year 1986-1987, the Public Accounts, 
which the Minister of Finance has had in his hand since April 4, 
yet to be tabled in this House — another example of disregard 
for the very institution and requirements of this institution. 
 
Now, I don’t care whether it is members on the opposition or 
whether it is the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg or 
whether it is members on the government side of the House; 
when it comes to protecting the democratic rights of citizens in 
Saskatchewan, we all ought to be concerned. When it comes, 
Mr. Chairman, to besmirching the integrity of the officers of 
this legislature, we all ought to be concerned. 
 
And if the minister has any sense of the terrible mistake he 
made last night . . . And I will give him the benefit of the doubt, 
and I’ll say that he possibly made a mistake. I’ve said earlier 
that it was deliberate. But that’s fine, I won’t debate that. But if 
he has any sense of the damage and the  
  



 
May 13, 1988 

 

1321 
 

harm that he is doing along with some others’ actions that this 
government has taken, he will stand up today and he will 
apologize and he will withdraw, so that his doesn’t become 
even a worse and further precedent that we seem to be seeing 
developing by members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That was 
rather a long question and warrants a rather long reply. 
 
First of all, I hope that the people of Saskatchewan realize what 
the NDP are really like and what their greatest concerns are, and 
that is concerns about things that happened two and three years 
ago, and that the people of Saskatchewan, their greatest fear 
should be that we ever have and NDP government again. And 
they have a prime example of how the members opposite 
conduct themselves and how they conduct personal attacks on 
everyone within earshot. And that’s an example of what kind of 
a government we might have some time in the future should an 
election ever go against the interests of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well first of all, Mr. Chairman, I will defend foster-parents at 
all times against anyone, anywhere. And I don’t care what the 
position of that person is, I will defend foster-parents when I 
believe they need defending, and that’s what I have done. 
 
Secondly, there is some concern about my defence of 
foster-parents yesterday evening. I can say, Mr. Chairman, that 
I did not use unparliamentary language, that I stated an opinion. 
And I can say, Mr. Chairman, that I respect officers of this 
Assembly, and I even respect former officers of the Assembly. 
However, there has to be a balancing of rights. And I will 
criticize former officers of the Assembly, and in the future, if 
necessary, I would criticize present officers of this Assembly if 
they engage in public discussion and in public debate that is the 
realm of politicians. 
 
And I submit to the members of this Assembly that the rights of 
the members to speak freely are above the privileges of the 
officers of this Assembly. And when the officers of this 
Assembly get engaged in public debates, which they should not 
be part of, then they are engaging in politics, and no officer of 
the Assembly should ever be engaged in politics — and for the 
most part they have not — for the most part they have not, and I 
don’t think they will in the future. But if that happens, as it 
happened in the past, then I will speak and stand for 
foster-parents if there is a public debate. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we respect freedom of speech in this country. 
The freedom of speech of members of the legislature is 
paramount to anyone in this society. This forum has to have 
absolute freedom of speech with the exception of the use of 
unparliamentary language and personal attacks on members 
attacking each other. That is a principle of democracy. 
 
And the privileges of officers of an Assembly cannot be  

greater that the privileges of the members because this is a 
democracy governed by elected members and not by officials. 
And so therefore, yes, we respect the privileges of officers of 
this Assembly, and they respect the privileges of members, and 
it is not a privilege of the officers of this Assembly to engage in 
public debate, and I want to make that quite clear. And the 
members opposite should know that, that in a free and 
democratic society there is freedom of speech in the legislature. 
 
And the members opposite who write things and have their 
friends say in public that cabinet ministers cannot say that, they 
should not be allowed to say such and such, or this or that — 
they advocate freedom of speech for people who dissent with 
the views of this government, but they do not, the members 
opposite, do not permit freedom of speech for elected members 
of the Assembly. They try to deny a cabinet minister freedom of 
speech. 
 
They suggest, they write editorials or letters to the editor 
suggesting that a cabinet minister has less freedom of speech 
than an ordinary citizen. Certainly, when I am elected to this 
Assembly I do not lose my rights of freedom of speech. And 
within this Assembly we have privileges of speaking freely. We 
have privileges of speaking freely as to what we think the law 
of this province should be, what the policies of this province 
should be. We have freedom of speech subject to certain orders 
of decorum and behaviour. 
 
And it is unbelievable that the NDP, and the people that write 
letters on their behalf, write to papers saying that cabinet 
ministers should not be able to say this. Yes, they can write and 
say we disagree with what that minister said, or we disagree 
with what the MLA said. That is the freedom of speech. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who wrote the letter? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — That is what free, democratic debate is 
all about. And the members opposite say, who wrote the letter? 
They would know who wrote the letter. They have people who 
write letters for people. they would know exactly who writes 
these letters. They organize these letters. 
 
The members opposite should understand and respect the 
fundamental principles of freedom that everyone has freedom of 
speech within the law of Canada, and that when I am elected as 
a member I do not lose my freedom of speech. That they should 
understand . . .(inaudible interjection). . . Now somebody shouts 
out there and calls me Mr. Zundel. I say to the member 
opposite, my name is Schmidt, and I’m not ashamed of it, and I 
don’t need the members opposite calling me a Mr. Zundel. Mr. 
Zundel is his own business. Now you say you didn’t call me 
Mr. Zundel. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Does he have freedom of speech? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Does Mr. Zundel have freedom of 
speech? Yes, within the laws of Canada. 
 
  



 
May 13, 1988 

 

1322 
 

Don’t you stand over there and call me Zundel. That gives you 
an example, an example, Mr. Chairman, of the mentality of the 
members opposite who call themselves a New Democratic 
Party, and an example of what kind of a democracy they would 
give us, where freedom of speech is for them, but not for 
anyone else. Freedom of speech is for New Democrats, but not 
for anyone else. 
 
That is the kind of hypocrisy and the kind of fear that we fear in 
Saskatchewan, that we have a new democracy. We are quite 
happy with the old democracy. We don’t need a new democracy 
that prevents people from speaking, that has members opposite 
calling people names, making personal attacks on members in 
this Assembly, having them shouting from their seat, calling 
somebody a Zundel or calling somebody a Nazi. 
 
I have been subject to those kind of personal attacks. And yes, I 
can accept that. I can take that. But they shouldn’t stand here 
righteous, holier-than-thou, saying they are a New Democratic 
Party when they don’t respect democratic rights of freedom of 
speech. There has to be a limit, a limit to the kind of distortions 
the NDP bring to this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I heard them call me Zundel. My name is 
Schmidt, and I’m not ashamed of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — With respect, Mr. Chairman, to 
foster-parents, I indicated yesterday evening that our record of 
assisting foster-parents, in bringing in new training programs 
and increasing the rates, in developing a spirit of co-operation 
between foster-parents and the government so that we can serve 
the children in need — our record is so good that they try to 
cover it with their rhetoric about attack on people and attack on 
officers of the Assembly. 
 
I reserve the right to defend foster-parents at any time that they 
need defending, and I reserve the right to attack the NDP every 
day of the year, and I will do it because it is necessary. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, we have truly seen the 
measure of the man. And I want to say, Mr. Chairman, it does 
not measure up very well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — This is a member, Mr. Chairman, the 
minister talks about freedom of speech, but he has no sense of 
what freedom of speech is all about. Freedom of speech is about 
honesty. Freedom of speech, Mr. Chairman, is about talking 
about the facts as they are. Freedom of speech is allowing 
non-government organizations the right to say: the policy of 
your government is wrong and we think you should change it. 
Freedom of speech is the right for those organizations and any 
individual citizen of this province to be able to disagree with the 
government. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Without fear of repercussions. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Without any fear of repercussions.  

We no longer have freedom of speech when the minister puts in 
his contract with non-government organizations a provision that 
says they have no right to question. That’s taking away freedom 
of speech. 
 
Freedom of speech is gone when a guard at the correctional 
institute is disciplined and has his job taken away with a 
suspension for a period of time because he thinks he should not 
do something for which he is not qualified, for which he is then 
legally liable—serving medication to people in that correctional 
institute. 
 
Freedom of speech is gone when a senior officer in charge of a 
study on water supplies in Saskatchewan is suspended for two 
weeks for making an honest and professional statement about 
the supply of water for a certain project in Saskatchewan. 
That’s what freedom of speech is all about. Freedom of speech 
is being responsible for what one says. 
 
Now part of this whole concept of the freedom of speech, Mr. 
Minister, Mr. Chairman, is for minister of the Crown to set an 
example. And when ministers of the Crown who bring laws to 
the legislature and are the custodians of those laws then turn 
around and time after time break those laws, they are destroying 
the idea of freedom of speech which is the basic tendency of 
this democracy. 
 
The rules of this House say — and I’m very sorry that the 
minister refused to talk about it — but the rules of this House 
say — and there’s all kind of precedent — that no member of 
this House should try to attack the integrity of an officer of this 
legislature. 
 
That House is passed by the members of this rule, of this 
House, and that minister is a member of this House, so he’s 
breaking his own rules. He’s breaking his own rules. Now what 
kind of a minister, who would even have an inkling of what 
moral values are all about, would pass on rules and then break 
them. that is beyond the whole realm of freedom of speech 
when members of this House begin to do that. Freedom of 
speech does not mean we can break the law. He’s breaking the 
law, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Freedom of speech does not mean that any individual citizen of 
this land can defame other people. that’s not freedom of speech, 
but that’s what’s happening from the government members 
opposite, and particularly this minister. Freedom of the speech 
does not allow us to disseminate hate, but that’s been happening 
on the part of this government and this Executive Council time 
and time again. Freedom of speech does not allow the slander 
of officers of this legislature, but that minister slandered an 
officer and the Office of the Ombudsman. and he refuses even 
to acknowledge it and speak on it. 
 
Freedom of speech does not allow for the deliberate 
development of intolerance and hate which seems to be the 
strategy of this government, led by that minister in recent 
months. 
 
(1115) 
 
Freedom of speech has limitations too. And when it is used . . . 
when that umbrella is used to destroy individuals, then it’s no 
longer freedom of speech. It is  
  



 
May 13, 1988 

 

1323 
 

then only a case of where the most powerful, whether it’s 
physical, economic, or any other criteria, begin to dominate and 
have society work for them at the expense of those who don’t 
have that power . . . freedom of speech does not allow us to do 
that. 
 
It’s only people in government or not in government, people in 
the legislature or not in the legislature, who will begin to use 
this argument, freedom of speech, to attack people who cannot 
defend themselves, as has happened here. 
 
And I ask the minister one more time. We don’t need this 
debate in particular. All he should do in order to protect the 
integrity of the office of this legislature is withdraw those 
remarks in which he attacked the Ombudsman, at the time when 
he was the Ombudsman exercising his duties, and then we can 
go on with our work. 
 
Because by doing what he has done, Mr. Chairman, he has 
muzzled the present Ombudsman. he has served notice to the 
Ombudsman today that if he ever, at any time, chooses to point 
out to his department that some of their administration of policy 
is unfair and is hurting some people and is wrong, then that 
Ombudsman will expect to be attacked by the minister opposite 
under the pretence of freedom of speech. And for that reason, it 
is important that the record be clear and the minister withdraw 
those comments so that that threat to the present Ombudsman 
and any other officer of this legislature is lifted, because as long 
as that threat is there, it undermines the very functioning of the 
legislative process and the whole principle of democracy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all I wish 
to acknowledge that I received a note from one of the members 
opposite indicating that he did not call me a Zundel. It’s all I 
could hear over the shouting in the Assembly was that 
somebody was shouting Zundel on the other side, and if the 
member opposite said that he did not call me a Zundel, then I 
accept that member’s explanation that he did not call me a 
Zundel. 
 
I really don’t know what the other members might have been 
saying, but I accept that member’s explanation because that 
individual member is an honourable man, and I do have respect 
for the honour of some of the members opposite, and that 
member in particular — and he knows who he is, he’s nodding 
his head — I accept that he did not call me a Zundel. 
 
But I hear in the melee that goes on in this Assembly, 
somebody shouting Zundel from the other side, and if he’s now 
defining that, I will accept him as not having intended anything 
by that, but I don’t really know who shouted it, and I know that 
that member wouldn’t do that, but he others I’m not so sure 
about. 
 
So you know, in the confusion of the debate here, it’s hard to 
tell exactly who is saying what over there, but I did hear them 
shout Zundel from the other side. So I accept that member’s 
explanation. 
 
The other thing that I have to point out, Mr. Chairman, is  

that — I’m quoting now from the Wednesday, January 14, 1987 
Saskatoon Star-Phoenix — and there’s a quote of the former 
Ombudsman that says: 
 

Most of the problems with the present system exist 
because the government isn’t willing to give the issue the 
priority and effort it deserves. 

 
And the next paragraph says: 
 

“That won’t likely happen unless the public puts pressure 
on the government to act,” Tickell said in an interview. 

 
So here we have an officer of the legislature telling the public as 
to what their political opinions should be, as what they should 
do politically, and I suggest that an officer of the legislature 
should not be doing that, and I’ve never known of any other 
case where an officer of the legislature has done that. 
 
In addition, I quote from the Leader-Post of January 15, 1987, 
and these are only quotes: 
 

Social Services Minister Grant Schmidt is irritated because 
he says Ombudsman David Tickell did not have the 
common decency to give him a report on child care system 
before releasing it publicly Wednesday. Reached by 
telephone in his Melville constituency after the report was 
released . . . 

 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, you have invoked the rule 
before about referring to members by name. The member just 
did it. I wonder if you would draw his attention to the rules. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I would ask members not to use members’ 
names, whether they be their own or other members. Use the 
position or constituency. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, you mean I can’t 
use my own name in the Assembly? 
 
Mr. Chairman: — It has been ruled by the Speaker and by the 
Chair that quotes are not allowed . . . even in quotes, you’re not 
allowed to use members’ names. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you. I’ll expunge my name from 
the quote: 
 

Social Services Minister (blank — we know who he is) is 
irritated because he says Ombudsman David Tickell did 
not have the common decency to give him a report on the 
child care system before releasing it publicly Wednesday. 
Reached by telephone in his Melville constituency after 
the report was released, (and I change the word — he) said 
he had not seen the report, was not prepared to make a 
special trip to Regina Wednesday to get a copy, and 
therefore could not immediately comment on many of the 
recommendations. On Tuesday a number of media outlets 
were given advance copies of the report on “urgent need to 
improve a system in crisis,” and (the member for Melville) 
grumbled that common decency should  

  



 
May 13, 1988 

 

1324 
 

suggest that Tickell should have given it to him on 
Tuesday when he was in Regina at the legislature. 

 
So lastly, I quote — and I quote from the Leader-Post, Regina, 
Thursday, January 15, 1987. I quote from the article of Dale 
Eisler, who is an authority on many things, and I’m sure he will 
not object to that. But I quote, and I think Mr. Eisler — if I’m 
not entitled to say in the legislature what I have said, then I 
think Mr. Eisler is in even greater danger in saying what he had 
said because he wrote in paragraph two of that article: 
 

With his second term as Provincial Ombudsman ending in 
April, Tickell made a conscious decision he was not going 
to go quietly. 

 
Now I think no more needs to be said on this. Officers of this 
Assembly have traditionally been responsible, and officers of 
this Assembly have traditionally not gotten involved in public 
debates, have not gotten involved in politics. I say that they 
should not. And if I have to defend citizens like the 
Saskatchewan foster-parents from comments of a public 
official, than I will do it when necessary. I’ve give you these 
examples so that people will recall what actually had taken 
place at the time, and I believe those quotes to be accurate. 
 
So when the member opposite suggests that I am breaking the 
law, he is challenging the ruling of the Chair, and challenging 
the fundamental principles of democracy that an elected 
member is entitled to speak for or against whatever that 
member believes is right. 
 
So I deny breaking any laws of this Assembly; I deny breaking 
any laws of Canada, and therefore I believe that we have had an 
open and public debate on this topic here, and that’s the way it 
should be. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, I have attended this 
institution for quite some time now, and I believe that over the 
years I’ve developed an appreciation for this institution and the 
people that make this institution operate. 
 
The people that make this institution operate are the Clerks, the 
Ombudsman, the Provincial Auditor, the Legislative Counsel — 
they’re all independent, non-partisan officers of this Assembly. 
 
Now if in fact the minister wishes to cloud the issue by drawing 
in all kinds of extraneous material that has no relationship to 
what happened last night, that is his problem but I think all 
members of the Assembly, and I include members on the other 
side of the House, would bite their tongue rather than make the 
comments that the Minister of Social Services made yesterday, 
I know that they respect this institution, and they would not put 
themselves in that position, let alone attacking its officers, but 
attacking the positions of those officers. 
 
What the Minister of Social Services did yesterday — and I 
don’t know whether it’s clumsiness or whether it’s 
deliberateness; I haven’t decided on that yet, and I’ll let the 
public decide whether in fact it’s clumsiness or it’s intentional 
and deliberate. He has again clearly signalled to the officers of 
this Assembly — and I include all the  

officers in this Assembly, because none of them can escape this 
— he has warned them that in the future he will attack; he will 
attack them. That’s not a position that any members of this 
Assembly should allow this Assembly to be put in. 
 
The member for Kindersley was in a difficult position with 
regard to attack of an officer of this Assembly, and I give the 
member for Kindersley full credit for standing up before this 
House and saying, I apologize. 
 
Apologies, according to the books that govern this Assembly, 
the rule books that govern this Assembly, must be so generous, 
so liberal in their terms that they cannot be misconstrued as 
anything but a sincere apology. We have heard nothing of that 
from this minister. 
 
This minister feels himself free to go to Saskatoon, interfere in 
the small-business scene with directives from his office; he sees 
it his position to put legislation before this House that will gag 
non-governmental organizations; he feels free to roam around 
and attack the positions of the officers of this Assembly. 
 
This minister may continue to do that, Mr. Chairman, but he 
does it at his peril and at the peril of this institution, and I have 
a great deal of respect for this institution. I know there are 
members on both sides of this House that have a lot of respect 
for this institution and its officers, and would not attack those 
officers or those positions at any time unless there was clear 
evidence that something should be done about the officers. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, there is no evidence at this time that that 
position should have been attacked. It is the imagination of the 
minister’s mind that leads him to do that. And as I say, I do not 
know whether it’s deliberate or whether it’s just plain 
clumsiness of this particular minister, but I know there are other 
ministers on that side of the House that would not utter those 
words under any circumstances. 
 
I was a minister of the government, and I had the Ombudsman 
bring unpleasant news to me about my department. I said 
nothing about it; I did not attack the Ombudsman. I said to my 
officials in the department, see if you can straighten up that 
problem, and they straightened up the problem. In retrospect, I 
was pleased that that officer of the Assembly listed that the 
department I was running at that time had made some errors 
that should be corrected, and they were corrected. 
 
(1130) 
 
I know that ministers in the government that I served in also 
had messages brought to them by the Ombudsman that they 
found unpleasant, and I know that some ministers in this 
government have probably had messages brought to them by 
the Ombudsman which they, at the time, were uncomfortable 
with. But they were big enough, they had the kind of mettle that 
makes good ministers and makes good members, and they took 
the message in the light that it was brought to them, that it was 
the job of that official to note that certain corrections or changes 
were required. 
 
  



 
May 13, 1988 

 

1325 
 

That’s what his position mandated him to do. And those 
ministers, on both sides of the House, accepted that word and 
did what had to be done. And I thank them because they honour 
this institution and its officers and positions. 
 
And I say it’s a sorry day for this institution when this minister 
continues, continues his interference, not only in this Chamber 
but outside this Chamber in affairs that are no business of his, 
and he should keep his hands out of them. And it’s unfortunate 
that this minister cannot see that. I wish he could but, however, 
I have no control over that. 
 
I just wanted to say, Mr. Chairman, it is a sorry day for this 
institution when the minister made the kind of statement that he 
made and refuses to back off. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, it’s a sorry day for this 
institution when officers of this institution get involved in 
politics. And I don’t think we’ll see that again in the future. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, the members opposite have talked about a 
contract with non-governmental agencies that my department 
has proposed to these agencies, most of which signed the 
contract. And they have done some grandstanding on this topic 
and they think that . . . There’s a headline in Saskatoon’s paper 
today, “Schmidt claimed issuing gag orders.” Now at least the 
headline says “claimed.” Because I’ve not issued any gag orders 
to anyone. 
 
I have a copy of page 5 of the agreement which the members 
opposite have been complaining about. And what I have in this 
agreement is, “Requirements of Agency”: 
 

The Agency agrees that: 
 

(A)  Its Directors and employees shall treat as confidential 
any information received with respect to any client of 
the agency. 

 
That, I indicated yesterday, is the policy of our department, and 
I will be not changing that sentence. 
 
The second sentence, I agree, is a bit ambiguous. And it says: 
 

The Agency further agrees to treat as confidential any 
policy information provided by the Department of Social 
Services. 

 
Now the member for Saskatoon University considers that 
sentence to be a gag order of some sort. I agree that my 
department could have drafted it clearer. And I have indicated 
to the media yesterday when they asked me about this, I gave 
them a copy, I said I have nothing to hide. I said, I am looking 
at an amendment to that second sentence to make it clear as to 
what out policy actually is. 
 
The department advises me they were concerned that the 191 
non-governmental organizations would re-publish the policies 
of the department and that these policies would not be current, 
because they are changed from time to time. And it’s all we ask 
is that current information  

go out and that it be accurate and that it be current. And we do 
not want, as the NDP have done on many occasions, to have 
inaccurate information or information, that is not current, put 
before the minds of the public so that they concern themselves 
over things that are no longer part of the policy. 
 
I agree, that sentence will have to be reworded. And what I will 
do is reword that sentence to reflect that we don’t mind having 
the non-governmental organizations having the policy 
information; we don’t mind if they pass on that information to 
other people. but we will have to insist that they pass on only 
current and accurate information. 
 
Now this is not a major issue, but something that the members 
opposite try to sensationalize. And so in the Star-Phoenix of 
today there is an article on this, and the headline is a bit 
misleading but the story in the article is quite accurate. They 
even go so far as to interview on Evanna Simpson, president of 
the Regina Transition House, and I quote: 
 

. . . said her agency is negotiating with Social Services on 
the issue in efforts to define what has to be confidential 
and whether change are possible. 

 
And the answer is yes, changes are possible, but not just for one 
agency. The change I make will be by letter, amending that 
section. I will send it to all of the agencies, saying this is what 
the clause now means, and the wording will be quite clear. 
 

She said she was reluctant to comment on the issue for 
fear of jeopardizing talks with the government about it. 
(And she said) “I’m a little disappointed that Peter brought 
it up,” she said. 

 
I think she was referring to the member from Saskatoon 
University. And so I suggest that he has even done a disservice 
to the people who are trying to solve this wording problem and 
try to bring up a sensational topic here to get a headline that 
says, “Schmidt claimed issuing gag orders . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. Order, please. I think that by 
now most members are aware of the fact that the Speaker and 
the Chairman have rules on numerous occasions about the use 
of members’ names, whether it be their own name or a member 
opposite or even initials. So I would ask all members to try to 
remember that for future occurrences. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the headlines says 
— and it says we can’t go “beep”, and the members opposite 
suggest we go “blank”. The headline says, Social Services 
minister claimed issuing gag orders, and I’ve edited it for the 
purpose of the legislature. And the individual quoted says” 
 

that I’m a little disappointed that “beep, blank” (the 
member for Saskatoon University) brought it up (she said). 

 
So I apologize for using a first name of someone or for using 
my own name. Sometimes we forget ourselves  
  



 
May 13, 1988 

 

1326 
 

because we’re so used to names. 
 
The point here is that the NDP are into sensational politics over 
one sentence in a letter that my staff drew up. And they’re not 
all lawyers like I am, and I can’t draft up every contract that 
they put out, and I can’t personally read every detail in all of the 
contracts and policies they put out. But I can say that I am the 
chief lawyer in charge of the Department of Social Services and 
that there will be an amendment to this clause so it is no longer 
ambiguous. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we are happy on this side 
of the House to see that the Minister of Social Services is 
finally going to relent and amend this part of the contract that 
he obviously has with all non-government organizations in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, you say that the previous wording was confusing. 
I think that, as you’ve indicated yourself, the previous wording 
was very clear. It said that: 
 

The Agency further agrees to treat as confidential any 
policy information provided by the Department of Social 
Services. 

 
And surely even you, sir, would have to acknowledge that that 
could easily be interpreted as meaning that non-government 
organizations were not free to inform the public of policy 
changes by your department, or to criticize policy changes that 
they might think to be unfair. And I’m very pleased that you’re 
going to be removing that provision in every NGO contract. I 
thank you for that announcement here this morning, and I hope 
that we can look forward to seeing that policy change 
implemented with all haste. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to turn to another subject, and that is the 
question that we were discussing this morning of child hungry 
in the province, and not just hungry children but hungry adults 
as well, Mr. Minister. And I was sharing with you during 
question period some of the latest statistics for the province 
with respect to this very serious problem. 
 
You’ll be aware, Mr. Minister, that we have five food banks 
functioning in the province of Saskatchewan. the figures that I 
gave you this morning did not include the statistics for he 
Lloydminster food bank. Of Course that food bank is serving 
residents in Alberta as well as in Saskatchewan, so I didn’t 
think it fair to include it. But that food bank is providing food 
hampers to, on a monthly basis, in the case of the month of 
March, 196 children and 198 adults. But it’s the province-wide 
figures, Mr. Minister that surely you must acknowledge are 
unacceptable for any government. And I want to go into these 
in a little more detail. 
 
Mr. Minister, there were in 1987, 2,174,902 pounds of food that 
were given by food banks in Saskatoon, Regina, Prince Albert, 
and Moose Jaw to needy members of the public. In the case of 
the city of Regina, Mr. Minister, we have a situation where 
80,261 individuals were provided with food during the year. 
now I want to clarify these statistics because I don’t want them 
to be misconstrued because, as I mentioned earlier in question 
period,  

approximately 36,000 people in this province depended on the 
food bank last year. this $80,261 refers to multiple use. In other 
words, if every time somebody came into the Regina food bank 
needing food, whether it be an adult of a child, that record was 
kept, you would have 80,261 people being served. However a 
lot of that, Mr. Minister, is repeat business, so to speak. 
 
But I think that that figure demonstrates the seriousness of the 
problem in the city of Regina, Mr. Minister. And the Regina 
food bank records show that over 52 per cent of the people 
being served in the city of Regina are children, and that more 
than a million pounds of food, Mr. Minister, was distributed in 
the city of Regina. 
 
And I’ve given you the Saskatoon figures earlier in this 
legislature, but the figures for Moose Jaw and Prince Albert, 
Mr. Minister, are also of real concern. In the city of Moose Jaw, 
87,755 pounds of food were distributed last year to needy 
persons. In the city of Prince Albert, 143,129 pounds of food 
were distributed to needy persons. 
 
Surely, Mr. Minister, these figures demonstrate the urgent need 
for your government to address this issue of hunger in our urban 
centres, and hunger that is no doubt hidden hunger in rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. Just because there isn’t a food 
bank in a rural community doesn’t mean that there aren’t people 
in that community going hungry. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, as I indicated to you in question period, the 
Regina child hunger coalition is estimating that the cost of 
putting a mid-morning . . . giving children a mid-morning snack 
of apple and cheese or tuna and crackers in half of Regina’s 19 
inner-city schools would cost about $60,000 a year for the 
school year. and they also estimate that expanding the breakfast 
and lunch programs already offered at Regina schools, 
expanding those would cost in the range of about $48,000 a 
year to provide 900 meals a week to children in need. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, if you add those two figures together, that’s 
only a cost of $108,000 for the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you now indicate that you are prepared to 
find $108,000 for the children of the city of Regina in your 
budget to expand school lunch programs and to put a snack 
program in 19 schools in this city? 
 
(1145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, food banks are a good 
thing; they help people who are in need for unforeseen 
circumstances. But they should not be used for political 
purposes by the NDP. They try to take a charity and turn it into 
a political campaign. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan should know that welfare rates do 
not correlate with the existence of food banks. Approximately 
85 per cent . . . now maybe the ratio has gone down a little in 
the last year, but when we last calculated it, approximately 85 
per cent of Canada’s food banks are in British Columbia, 
Alberta and Saskatchewan. and these provinces are among the 
highest paying welfare provinces in Canada. Saskatchewan has 
the highest rates for families; Alberta  
  



 
May 13, 1988 

 

1327 
 

has the second highest rate for families. I could look up the 
information for Alberta. 
 
Eighty-five per cent of the food banks are in these three western 
provinces which have the highest rates, Conservative 
governments and NDP opposition. Now there is two 
possibilities here, and maybe it’s a combination of those. 
Maybe people in western Canada are more generous than other 
parts of Canada, or maybe the NDP are trying to use food banks 
for political purposes. 
 
I say food banks are good for people, to help people, but the 
NDP should not use them for political purposes and should not 
organize them for political purposes. The NDP tried to organize 
a food bank in my city of Melville, Saskatchewan, and the 
citizens found that people were having enough to eat in 
Melville, Saskatchewan, and there was no food bank organized. 
 
I would not be opposed to the organization of a food bank in 
Melville if the need exists. If the citizens wish to organize one, 
that’s all right with me. But I discouraged the NDP from 
organizing one for political purposes in the home city of the 
Minister of Social Services; and that’s what the NDP tried to do 
in Melville, and they were not successful. They tried to do it in 
Melville because that’s where the Minister of Social Services 
lives. 
 
The next observation is that we have the highest rates for 
children in Canada, and that the minister refers to the problem 
of hunger in the inner city of Regina. I can’t understand why the 
problem should be concentrated in the inner city of Regina, 
because the welfare recipients in Regina area dispersed 
throughout the city; they’re not only living in the inner city. 
 
And the rates are the same in the inner city as they are in the 
outer extremities of the city. The rates are the same throughout 
the city. So there’s no reasons why there should be a 
concentration of hunger in the inner city and there should not be 
hunger in the suburbs of the city. 
 
So the NDP fail to explain. They say it’s a lack of money. If it’s 
a lack of money, then why isn’t this a problem throughout the 
city? It’s only in the inner centre. And I suggest that child 
hunger is related to social problems and not to cash being paid 
out, and I have indicated that with respect to the statistics. And 
then the member opposite gets into, there are hungry adults in 
the city. And I would hope that there are no hungry adults. 
 
I’ll give you an example of our idea of helping people get jobs, 
teaching them to get jobs. In Regina and Saskatoon we’ve 
conducted a job search training program, which the members 
opposite have highly criticized as forcing people to go and learn 
how to get a job. And it’s all we’re asking there is to sit and 
learn, and they say that it is wrong to ask people to come and 
get a job, or even they say it’s wrong to force people to learn 
how to get a job. 
 
And so what has happened is that . . . He refers to hungry 
adults. And I might point out that when you go for this training, 
you get a free lunch. It’s probably the only place you can get a 
free lunch, but you get, in addition to your welfare rates that 
you have, you get your transportation to  

come down and a free lunch. The taxpayers provide, in 
addition, a lunch that is not a cost to the person taking the 
course. 
 
So if they are hungry and they want to get a job and they want 
to get a free lunch, I encourage them to come to our three-week 
job search training program. But the problem is that out of 76 
invited in February, only 26 came for the training and the free 
lunch; 50 did not. Out of 46 invited in March, only 22 came for 
the training and the free lunch; 24 did not. Out of the 60 invited 
in . . . well in April there were two courses. The total results are 
that there were 237 people invited to come and get the training 
course and receive a free lunch; 148 chose not to. 
 
Now if you’re telling me that those were 148 hungry adults, I’m 
saying they turned down a free lunch and an opportunity to 
learn how to get a job, and that the people that did go, many of 
them have received jobs, some of them well-paying jobs. 
 
In addition, when we offered work to people to gain experience, 
some of those that went and took that experience now have 
good jobs. Two people from Prince Albert are working t the 
Weyerhaeuser mill — and I know that’s a dirty word to you — 
but they’re working at the plant site at the construction wages 
that are being paid to the unionized workers there. 
 
People at Par Industries — if you say they’re hungry adults — 
they can make more working at Par Industries than they can 
simply staying on welfare. We calculated so that they would 
make more because we believe there should be an incentive to 
work. 
 
And 71 of those people that you allege are hungry adults quit; 
30 found other employment — that’s good — and I bet you 
they’re not hungry now; 19 were fired — you say 19 of those 
hungry adults were fired because they wouldn’t get the job done 
— 18 decided to go to training or school, and then we educate 
them to get jobs in the future. 
 
At Meewasin, in your very own city — and you say you are an 
environmentalist, and you accuse us of making people clean up 
your park. You should thank us for having people clean up your 
park. And you say it’s demeaning for them to clean up your 
park. Somebody had to do it. If you say it’s demeaning, then 
who’s going to clean up the park? Are we just going to let the 
garbage build up because it’s demeaning for people to have to 
go out and clean up a park? 
 
In your own city, at the Meewasin Valley, 57 adults, that you 
allege were hungry, quit; 17 found other employment, and I 
congratulate them for that; 12 were dismissed, and I say I hope 
they do better on their next job. 
 
I have given you examples of what can be done when a 
government has policies, that do community work, that provide 
training, that clean up the environment, that build roads in the 
North on training programs. 
 
There are people right now in La Loche . . . The welfare rate in 
La Loche went down 11 per cent last month  
  



 
May 13, 1988 

 

1328 
 

because we put in a program to have the welfare recipients 
working on heavy machinery, cutting bush and building a road 
that has never been there and that they asked for. We are now 
paying them to build a road that they wanted, and the welfare 
rate in La Loche went down 11 per cent last month. 
 
And you’re telling me that you are opposed to welfare reform. 
Well you should tell me what you’re in favour of. Are you 
opposed to having people building a road for themselves rather 
than sitting on welfare and saying, somebody come and build a 
road for us? They are happy to build a road for themselves. 
They asked for the road; we got them the equipment; we’re 
paying them to build the road instead of having those 11 per 
cent on welfare. 
 
And we will do more of those kind of things because I’m 
certain the people of Saskatchewan do not deny that people 
should be encouraged to help themselves. And in this case it 
costs the taxpayers no extra money. We are simply paying them 
to do something for themselves rather than do nothing. And I 
can’t see how even the NDP can be opposed to that. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, we once again this 
morning in the Assembly heard two unbelievable comments 
from you just now. One is that you clearly stated that food 
banks were being organized for political reasons, Mr. Minister, 
which is an appalling comment, and I ask you retract it. 
 
Surely, Mr. Minister, you will acknowledge that food banks are 
being organized because there is a need for the food banks. And 
that is being demonstrated by the volume of business they’re 
doing — 36,000 people in the province in 1987 having to, at 
some point in the year, depend on a food bank in their locality 
for food assistance, Mr. Minister. 
 
That is an appalling comment, and for you to suggest for a 
moment that these food banks are being organized for political 
reasons by the NDP, is sheer nonsense, Mr. Minister, and I ask 
you to retract it. 
 
It’s also nonsense for you to suggest that we on this side of the 
House think that there’s anything demeaning about cleaning up 
the river bank in Saskatoon or cleaning up a park. We’ve never 
suggested that for a moment. That’s a very useful public 
service. What is demeaning, Mr. Minister, is that your 
government is only prepared to pay the people who do it $360 a 
month with a take-home pay of $316 — that’s what’s 
demeaning. I just want to make those concerns that we have 
perfectly clear. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I just want to close on this issue of the food 
bank, since it’s obvious that you’re not prepared to institute a 
school lunch program, by asking you if you will at least 
undertake, in concert with the food banks in the province and 
the friendship inns in the province and the crisis centres in the 
province and the church community in the province, a 
comprehensive investigation of how this serious problem of 
child poverty and child hunger can be addressed. 
 
We’re in urgent need, Mr. Minister, of having you bring 
together community leaders in the field of social services  

to think in a serious manner on how urgent action might be 
taken to resolve this problem of child hunger. So if you’re not 
prepared to go with the school lunch program, will you at least 
give this House a commitment that you will immediately 
convene a group of leaders in the community to see what kind 
of action the government could . . . to advise the government on 
what kind of action could be taken in an urgent manner to 
resolve this very serious problem of child hunger in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I believe we’re making 
progress. I believe the NDP now agree that we should have 
people working, cleaning up parks, and that is good. We will 
clean up more parks; we will try to clean up all the parks and 
I’m please that the member for Saskatoon now appreciates the 
clean-up of his park. 
 
With respect to the wages being paid, Mr. Chairman — and I’m 
trying to speak while the members opposite make snide 
comments and remarks on the other side. It’s a bit distracting, 
but I will not be discouraged — what I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, 
is that the member opposite is now complaining that some of 
the jobs that we have created under welfare reform are part-time 
jobs. And I indicated yesterday that between 350 and 400 were 
part-time jobs, but over the last three years, between us and the 
federal government on these type of projects, we have created 
over 10,000 jobs. And so 350 out of 10,000 is not a bad 
percentage on a ratio of full time to part time. 
 
Let me also point out to the member opposite that in 
Saskatchewan we always try to ensure that people working will 
make more than on welfare. That is a key objective policy of 
this government, that you’re always better off financially if you 
can work. 
 
Now we’ll try to continue reviewing the programs with respect 
to the handicapped so that we can increase income to the 
handicapped. And the members opposite may not know that at 
9:30 this morning there was a news conference, and I should 
tell them about this because they would be glad to hear this. 
There was a news conference at 9:30 this morning whereby the 
Minister of Environment announced that Saskatchewan would 
be going to aluminum beverage cans in this province, effective 
May 17. 
 
At the same time, before the television cameras at the news 
conference, there was a signing of a contract with the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres to give 
them the full provincial contract for the recycling of aluminum 
cans. They anticipate that they will be able to employ 150 
handicapped people in Saskatchewan in full-employment type 
jobs. They will try to pay more than minimum wage for these 
jobs. They have given me a commitment that they will try to 
pay more than minimum wage wherever possible, and I think in 
most cases they will be able to be above that level. 
 
There will be approximately 150 handicapped people working 
in Saskatchewan. We are creating another 150 jobs with our 
policies here of allowing aluminum cans and recycling rather 
than the policies of the NDP of having glass thrown out onto 
highways. Aluminum cans do not break and do not cause 
damage to property and to people, and little children don’t step 
on glass when you  
  



 
May 13, 1988 

 

1329 
 

have aluminum cans. 
 
And so the NDP, with their policy of “glass only” in 
Saskatchewan and no recycling, did not create those 150 jobs 
that will be created for the handicapped. 
 
I notice they are stone-silent right now, Mr. Chairman. I expect 
that they agree this is the right thing to do. At least they are not 
jeering as they do from time to time, but they are stone-silent 
today, and they are accepting that this government has done a 
historic act in assisting the handicapped in employment. 
 
(1200) 
 
The president of SARC (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rehabilitation Centres) today indicated at the news conference 
that, to his knowledge, this is the first of its kind in North 
America where the handicapped will have the provincial 
contract for the recycling of aluminum cans. There will be an 
environmental charge that will be used to pay for the labour 
provided by the handicapped. 
 
They will be setting up a regular business, and the members 
opposite say, oh, those Conservatives, their friends are big 
business. Well I am proud to say today, Mr. Chairman, to 
everyone present, that yes, we have helped our friends in this 
business. We have given a monopoly to our friends in this 
business. I do not apologize for that. We have helped our 
friends, and in this case our friends are the handicapped, who 
will have a business of their own, and could have had it years 
ago but the NDP did not have the foresight to allow the 
handicapped to get into business, to become self-sufficient, 
because they insisted on having them dependent on the NDP 
and their big-government mentality. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — So, Mr. Chairman, I wanted to point 
that out to the members opposite, because I told them yesterday 
they should be patient and they will see the largest employment 
project for handicapped in the history of Saskatchewan — real 
employment, real work. 
 
And the members opposite — yes, they are stone-silent. I 
challenge them to stand up and say: yes, this is the right thing to 
do; we would have done it if we would’ve been government. 
But I challenge them to explain why they didn’t. I challenge 
them to explain why they didn’t do it. 
 
With respect to consulting with people on the question of the 
child-hunger situation, as the members opposite describe it in 
the inner city of Regina, I have met with the school boards here. 
My department officials are trying to get . . . put together a pilot 
project to determine what the extent of the problem is and look 
at solutions. And no, one of the solutions will not be a free 
universal lunch program for every student in Saskatchewan. We 
will help those people who are in need and we will look at a 
pilot project to do that. We are receiving good co-operation 
from the school boards, and I expect that if the co-operation 
continues, we’ll be able to do something for fall with respect to 
a pilot project. 
 
That is a new idea. The NDP’s idea of a free universal  

lunch program is a part of their time-warp that comes from 
Britain. It’s the Labour government there put in a free universal 
food program in schools in 1944 or 1945 when they were 
elected. And then they continued their policies of dependency 
until people started joking that there was a British disease. 
There was something wrong with Britain, the whole country. 
The British disease was dependence on socialism. And it started 
with the policies that are 40 or 50 years old. 
 
We have no ideological block in allowing the handicapped to 
become entrepreneurs and running their own business, and that 
is what we have done today. And we have no ideological block 
with helping only those children who need food assistance. 
 
The NDP talk about free universal everything, and we say we 
will help those people who are in need. And we have consulted 
with the school boards, we have pilot projects that are being 
planned, and we will solve the problem. 
 
In addition, where the problem . . . the problem in society today, 
the greatest problem we face are social problems — the 
problems of inter-family relationships, family breakdown, lack 
of parenting skills. This department has increased the budget for 
family services by two and a half million dollars this year to 
thirty-four and a half million dollars, and we are hiring an 
additional six people to help with families. We have put parent 
aides into families to help them learn how to be parents. 
 
The members opposite have a simple solution: wither give away 
free food or give more money. We have to get to the root of the 
problem or society’s problems will never be solved. 
 
And I would encourage the members opposite to look beyond 
the immediate political expediency and the immediate political 
solution, and look into the future and find a way of making sure 
that we have a caring and prosperous society 15 years from 
now, rather than simply saying, pour money on the problem 
now. 
 
I had an article here which I . . . I had an article here that comes 
from Vancouver. It’s in The Toronto Star, but in Vancouver, 
Conrad Black, an entrepreneur whose name I know causes the 
NDP’s adrenaline to go up considerably because he has become 
successful and they would want to pull a man like him down, 
but he is also entitled to his opinions. And I don’t know if the 
headline in that paper is totally accurate or reflects what he said, 
but the headline says: “Welfare system a debt time bomb, 
tycoon says.” And it says: 
 

Canadians are heading for a show-down with their 
economy as they try to pay for one of the most expensive 
social services systems in the world, business man Conrad 
Black says. It is one of the most comprehensive welfare 
systems in the world and it has created a debt bomb that 
will almost certainly detonate during the next full 
parliamentary term. 

 
And he’s saying that we have to generate more money to pay 
for our social programs. The members opposite are against 
business; they’re against international trade; in  
  



 
May 13, 1988 

 

1330 
 

some cases they’re against work. They’re in favour of 
socialism, inefficiency, all the kind of things that will not 
generate the money we need to pay for our social programs in 
the future. We’re not paying for them now. 
 
Every province has a deficit; the federal government has a 
deficit. We are not paying for our social programs now. And 
how are we going to generate the money to pay for them in the 
future when we have people like the NDP that have vision that 
goes about that far? 
 
Statesmen, governments have to have leadership that plans for 
five years from now and 10 years from now and 20 years from 
now. And whether those plans are politically popular or not, a 
responsible government plans for the future and not for 
popularity. 
 
This government — and the members opposite jump up and 
down and cheer — is not popular. This government is doing 
what’s right for the future of Saskatchewan. we are a 
government for the long run because we will be here in the long 
run, and we are planning for the future, not for short-term 
popularity. The members opposite, certainly if they do not 
change their ways, will never be wise enough or fit enough to 
govern this province. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Chairman, for the minister, the need 
for meeting the child hunger crisis in this province is 
immediate. The need to respond is now, and not just through 
some long-term plan. And I think that’s self-evident, frankly, 
Mr. Chairman, to everyone but members opposite. 
 
I want to move to the subject of the Legal Aid Commission, Mr. 
Minister, which is under your department. And I want to begin, 
if I may, by presenting a petition that has been signed by some 
400 residents of the province of Saskatchewan, 123, Mr. 
Minister, of whom are lawyers. 
 
And I think I’ll read the petition precisely in terms of the 
wording that prefaces the signatures. It’s addressed to the 
Government of Saskatchewan and it’s regarding the deterrent 
fees that have been imposed by the Saskatchewan Legal Aid 
Commission. 
 

We the undersigned are adamantly opposed to the 
implementation of the plan requiring payment of a fee as a 
pre-condition to the provision of services to legal aid 
applicants. We feel this proposal will place an unfair 
burden on those who can least afford to pay. 
 
We are further opposed to any further funding cuts to the 
legal aid system in this province. We urge the Government 
of Saskatchewan to reconsider the funding decisions for 
legal aid with a view towards increasing future budgets. 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, that petition is signed by 486 people — 123 
lawyers or professors of law or scholars of law have signed this 
petition, and 363 other citizens of assorted occupations. And I 
would like to at this point, if I could, to table that petition with 
the Clerk of the Assembly. 
 

And, Mr. Minister, my first question to you in the context of 
that petition is: are you at long last prepared to reconsider your 
decision, your cabinet’s decision to impose user fees to the legal 
aid system in Saskatchewan? Are you prepared, Mr. Minister, at 
this point, to drop the deterrent fee that your government is 
charging the working poor of this province when they need 
legal assistance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, legal aid is adequately 
serving the needs in Saskatchewan. Only the NDP believe that 
it is not. Yes, they may have a few lawyers who would want us 
to spend more money on legal aid, on the legal aid industry. 
And lawyers certainly are not totally objective when it comes to 
saying spend more money on legal aid, because the money is 
primarily spent on lawyers. 
 
I am a lawyer. I understand the legal aid system; I’ve 
understood it for years and years. And I can understand also 
that the most the NDP ever spent on legal aid from the graph 
that I have before me is approximately . . . they were usually 
running under $4 million a year. and in their last year of 
government they got over that to 4.5 million. And as soon as the 
Conservative government took over, legal aid costs went up to 
approximately 6 million per year. we’ve held them at that level, 
and they went up year after year until last year we said, these 
costs have got to be brought in line. 
 
Here is how the expenditure goes for legal aid. The provincial 
government and the federal government — and it’s through out 
expropriation in this budget we discuss — forecast an 
expenditure of $5.77 million. The costs awarded are $13,000 
that they collect in costs. Their contributions are $152,000. This 
is the $152,000 that the member opposite is saying that the 
people should not contribute, but the taxpayers should throw in 
another $152,000. 
 
They have contracts with Health for $100,000, and other 
income of interest, sales of assets, of $34,000, for a total of 
$6,070,900. 
 
I’ve indicated earlier that the expenditure for legal aid on 
average under the NDP was not even $400,000. On average, 
ours is in the range of six . . . or was not even $4 million; on 
average, our expenditure is $6 million. And the NDP have their 
classic answer: it’s not enough, it’s not enough, it’s not enough. 
They’re like a stuck record in a time warp. It’s not enough, it’s 
not enough. That’s all you every hear from them. 
 
In addition, I have asked the law foundation to make a 
contribution. The lawyers themselves, through the law 
foundation, won’t contribute anything towards legal aid. We 
asked for $100,000 or some indication that the law foundation 
should also be used for legal aid, and they would not budge on 
that. Other provinces have law foundations contributing 
towards legal aid. 
 
I’m not asking for a lot of money, but I’m asking for a little 
contribution from those . . . If you have 123 lawyers who say 
the government should throw in more money, I’m asking the 
lawyers to take that interest accrued on trust accounts and take a 
little bit of that interest and spend it  
  



 
May 13, 1988 

 

1331 
 

on legal aid. They don’t believe the need is there; they say the 
taxpayer should throw it all in. I’m prepared to look at some 
sharing here. 
 
And so my position is clear, as a lawyer. And yes, I do not 
contribute to that law foundation money because I don’t 
actively practise law any more. But as a lawyer who is still 
licensed to practise, I say that lawyers have a responsibility 
through the law foundation to make a modest contribution 
towards legal aid. The taxpayers are throwing in $5.7 million; 
lawyers also do have some charitable obligation to assist others. 
 
(1215) 
 
And so the member opposite says, oh, the taxpayer should 
throw in more money. I’m saying that we are running it 
efficiently, the service provided is adequate, and that the law 
foundation should co-operate in a modest sum. And I’m not 
asking for a lot of money, but at least some indication that they 
care about legal aid. 
 
Now the member opposite will have some kind of observations 
about where we should go get out money, but I’m saying to you 
that the amount of money coming into this province is finite, 
and that the only way more money can come into this province 
is if we increase production in this province, increase 
diversification, and increase our trade with the rest of the world 
where the money is. so the member opposite should take all of 
those things into account. I say, legal aid is adequate. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, a new question to the minister, 
Mr. Minister, we on this side of the House certainly share your 
view that legal aid at this point is run in a highly efficient 
manner, but we don’t accept for a moment your suggestion that 
the current services are adequate or that the imposition of a user 
fee to the working poor of this province is acceptable, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
The point that I’d particularly like to draw to your attention is 
that you condemn the New Democrats on this side of the House 
for the past services that we were offering under legal aid. I 
suggest, Mr. Minister, that your comments are misguided. 
 
If you look at legal aid services which, I might add, were 
instituted by the former NDP government, you will see that 
legal aid in Saskatchewan under the NDP used to cover all legal 
services except for fee-generating ones, Mr. Minister, and that it 
was only when your government came to office that we saw a 
reduction in 1984 of legal aid services, effectively eliminating 
most areas of civil law except for family matters. And the 
minister is well aware of that change that his government 
instituted. So for you to suggest, Mr. Minister, that somehow 
services were inadequate under the NDP and then suddenly 
adequate under your government is misleading, to say the least. 
 
But the point that I’d particularly like to get at is the evaluation 
report that was recently done jointly by the federal Department 
of Justice and the province of Saskatchewan, and that was 
submitted to your government earlier this year. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the concerns expressed in that joint  

evaluation by the federal Department of Justice and the 
province of Saskatchewan was that the guide-lines that you 
were using for eligibility for legal aid services are very unfair to 
the working poor; that your family income plan guide-lines, 
because social assistance rates and the family income benefits 
have not gone up since you came into government, that in effect 
what has happened is that the law income cut-off that Statistics 
Canada uses is now a much higher figure than the family 
income plan guide-lines. In other words, Mr. Minister, a lot of 
people that the Government of Canada and Statistics Canada 
considers to be working poor are not people that you consider to 
be working poor in your government. 
 
In other words, the federal Department of Justice is saying to 
you, Mr. Minister, that it’s time that you expanded the income 
levels that are eligible for legal aid. And I’m asking you, Mr. 
Minister, whether you’re prepared to act on the 
recommendation of that evaluation report and to use the low 
income cut-off figures that Statistics Canada uses as the basis 
for legal and eligibility. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, people should know that 
anyone receiving social assistance in Saskatchewan 
automatically qualifies for legal aid. Anyone who is a treaty 
Indian in Saskatchewan automatically qualifies for legal aid. 
We will review the rates from time to time, and we are 
examining that report to see how it fits into the general theory 
of government. 
 
But again the member opposite has said that the social 
assistance rates have not gone up, and we just raised them last 
January — $13 per child, $17 per adult. How can he stand here 
and say the rates have not gone up? They do this over and over 
again, Mr. Chairman, right in the face of all of us. the cheques 
have gone out, the regulations have been passed, the 
newspapers reported the increase, and the member opposite 
stands here in front of us and tries to have us believe that the 
rates have not gone up. 
 
How can they keep doing this? Do they no understand what is 
true or what is false, or don’t they know the difference? There 
has to be something wrong with their philosophy or their 
education or their upbringing, because they cannot seem to tell 
the difference between what is true and what isn’t true. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m not going to bit the 
minister’s bait here on whether or not the welfare rates have 
gone up again. We’ve indicated yesterday, Mr. Minister, that 
the cuts to the travel allowance, the laundry allowance, and the 
utility allowance more than offset any increases that you’ve 
made. But it’s obvious, Mr. Minister, that you’re not prepared 
to respond directly to the question. 
 
I want to ask you a new question and that is that the evaluation 
report that you receive from the Department of Justice and the 
province of Saskatchewan, that joint evaluation also 
recommended that service in legal aid should be expanded to 
include, at least, matrimonial property on a contribution basis, 
administrative tribunals, wills and estates, landlord-tenant 
concerns and poverty-law advocacy, and in some cases 
expanded service on summary conviction matters where the 
budget permits. 
 
  



 
May 13, 1988 

 

1332 
 

Now, Mr. Minister, that report pointed out to you and your 
department officials that the need for the expansion of these 
legal aid services is reaffirmed by the fact that approximately 
half the defendants and litigants who appear in court do so 
unrepresented, presumably, Mr. Minister, because they’re 
unable to afford such representation. 
 
And my question to you is: will you, Mr. Minister, at least if 
you’re not prepared to drop the deterrent fees, at least expand 
legal aid services in the civil area to cover the fields that I’ve 
just mentioned so that working poor people don’t have to go to 
the courts unrepresented because they can’t afford to hire a 
lawyer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it does not surprise 
me that half the people in court are represented. I saw that 
myself when I used to go to court. It’s also a known fact that 90 
per cent of people who go to court are convicted or pleas guilty 
initially, and it seems to me that more than half the people pleas 
guilty. And if someone knows they are guilty and say, I’m 
guilty, I’m ready to accept my punishment or rehabilitation . . . 
that we should spend more money to insist that they have a 
lawyer to go with them when they know that they are guilty and 
admit it. 
 
So there again the member opposite is throwing about statistics 
that are not consistent to the facts out there. And that even, as 
far as I recall, even the statistics in Canada on contested trials 
have a conviction ratio of between 85 and 90 per cent. So 
ordinarily the police do not charge people who haven’t 
committed some offence. Yes, in some cases people are not 
guilty of what they have been charged with, and those people 
have lawyers if the need them. And those people who are guilty 
and need legal advice receive it. But those people who do not 
ask for legal advice, certainly I should not impose it upon them, 
nor should I require the taxpayers to insist that they spend their 
tax money on people who haven’t asked for any legal advice. 
 
So let’s be reasonable about this. We are providing adequate 
legal services to those people who need the services. again the 
members opposite are advocating free universal legal assistance 
to everyone, even if they don’t ask for it. That’s going even 
further than what they usually advocate. They’re advocating 
free universal legal aid, even to people who don’ t ask for legal 
aid. You know, they go on and on this way. Certainly even the 
NDP must have a limit to what they ask for. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, once again you’re trying 
to misconstrue the arguments that are being put forward on this 
side of the House. But I want to ask you another question about 
this evaluation report which, I think, clearly demonstrates the 
fact that while the staff in the legal aid system are doing an 
outstanding job, that the services that are able to be offered to 
clients are felt by staff and non-staff to be insufficient, in the 
sense that the range of services is too narrow. 
 
One of the things, Mr. Minister, that this joint report by the 
province of Saskatchewan and the federal Department of Justice 
recommends is that consideration be given to  

increasing legal aid funding in light of the present heavy 
case-load and restricted range of services. as you will be well 
aware, that’s what the report recommends. The report points out 
that Saskatchewan’s average case costs are the second lowest 
among non-Atlantic provinces. In other words, west of the 
Atlantic provinces we have the second lowest case costs in 
Canada. This is an indication of the very heavy case-load that 
legal aid staff are carrying. 
 
The report notes that in 1985 the average case-load was 306 
cases per lawyer. Obviously, Mr. Minister, that heavy case-load 
limits the ability of legal aid staff to provide the very best 
representation they would like to on behalf of clients. 
 
And my question to you, Mr. Minister, is: are you prepared to 
accept the recommendation in the report that funding for legal 
aid services be expanded and improved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, now the member 
opposite agrees that we have a good legal aid system, and I 
believe that if we have a good system and it’s working we 
shouldn’t start fiddling with it. 
 
And the NDP . . . And he says also that the average case-load is 
306. I want to point out to the member opposite that when I was 
in private practice my case-load was in excess of 306, and that 
almost every lawyer in private practice that I know has a 
case-load in excess of 306. Well, there’s one I know that 
doesn’t, but he’s not practising law, he’s in the legislature right 
now and he doesn’t believe that . . .(inaudible interjection). . . 
No, I can’t mention the name of the member. What I’m saying 
is that most lawyers in Saskatchewan have a case-load in excess 
of 306, so there’s nothing unusual about that case-load. 
 
You refer to the report. I told you we were analysing the report. 
We have detected some errors in the calculations in that report; 
we do not accept their calculations with respect to the FIP 
breaks in the family income plan. We cannot accept every 
report that’s written. We have to analyse it and examine it. It is 
only a report. They do not have a mandate to govern or make 
government policy; they were appointed to make 
recommendations. 
 
The people who write reports do not have to find the money to 
pay for their recommendations and so you have to take this all 
into account. The NDP are consistent here, they ask for more, 
more, more, more, always more. But their records is that they 
only spent 4.5 million; we’re spending 6 million; that’s more 
that keeping up with inflation, at least, the very least keeping up 
with inflation. And so they ask for more, more, more and I say 
that there is a limit to everything, and we have to use money for 
health care and education and raising social services rates, and 
that there’s not always more for every pet project of the NDP. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, I have one final question I want 
to ask you about the legal aid budget, and that relates to the 
question of privatization of services. Can you inform the 
Assembly whether you are planning to expand the role of the 
private bar in service delivery? And, Mr. Minister, if you are, 
could you be specific about  
  



 
May 13, 1988 

 

1333 
 

what areas of legal aid service you are planning to expand the 
services of the private bar in? How far do your privatization 
plans go, Mr. Minister? Can you elaborate on that, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ve had 
discussions with the law society about expanding the role of the 
private bar with respect to criminal law and criminal law 
defences. 
 
This would, if my recommendations were accepted, this would 
allow the individual citizen greater choice in their choice of 
lawyer and who they want to represent them. I might say at this 
stage, that the Law Society of Saskatchewan hasn’t shown 
much interest in having the private bar do more criminal law 
and I expect they’re divided on this topic, maybe even on 
political lines. But if the law society and the lawyers in general 
aren’t interested, I’m certainly not going to impose upon them 
the participation of the private bar. 
 
(1230) 
 
But I do believe that the grass roots, you might say, of the law 
community, that most of their private practising lawyers out 
there would be interested in participating in private defences 
with respect to legal aid and that they would be prepared to 
accept rates considerably lower than their normal rates in order 
to assist in providing this service to people. so it will take the 
matter up again with the law society and see if they are actually 
interested or not interested. 
 
This is an opportunity for the law society and the lawyers of 
Saskatchewan to fully participate in the criminal law field, 
which is now primarily dominated by legal and clinics. And 
there are views that we are restricting lawyers to certain areas of 
practice and are not gaining a broad enough experience, that we 
are not training young criminal lawyers in the private sector. 
And so I throw this out as a challenge to the law society and the 
lawyers of Saskatchewan, that if they are interested in 
participation in legal aid at the criminal law level, that they 
should communicate that to me and we will try to work out a 
system. 
 
But I do not operate on ideology. If they are not interested, then 
fine. I’m satisfied with the existing system, but I think people 
could be given more choice, and I’m prepared to look at that 
possibility. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, I should say that we urge 
you to use extreme caution in terms of your privatization efforts 
in this area, which we would not view with a great deal of 
support. 
 
I want to ask you finally in this area, with respect to 
privatization of services, whether on the civil side your 
government is also actively looking at significantly explaining 
the role of the private bar and reducing the role of legal aid 
staff? Are you considering that, Mr. Minister, and could you 
answer that question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, if we allowed the private 
bar to provide legal aid services, there would be no directive on 
the reduction of staff. We would have  

people having a choice as to who they want to represent them, 
and legal aid clinics would be in a competitive situation with a 
private bar. And those people that provide the best service 
would get the most business. 
 
So legal aid does not have to be threatened, but they would 
certainly have to measure up to the standards provided by the 
private bar. I think that legal aid recipients are entitled to a 
choice, and I think they are entitled to have the standards that 
are common in the private bar. 
 
So there are various possibilities here. I know the members 
opposite don’t like the word “competition”; I know they don’t 
like the word “choice.” They want people to be required to deal 
with a government-run clinic. But I have had complaints over 
the years from the clientele of legal aid that they would like to 
have a better choice of their lawyer, and I’m prepared to 
accommodate them if at all possible. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’m interested in the minister’s comments. 
Does the minister have any evidence that the quality of work 
provided by the Legal Aid Commission is not on a par with that 
provided by the private bar? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I did not say that the 
quality of the work is not on a par with the private bar, and 
therefore I do not have any evidence that it is not. What I said is 
that the Legal Aid Commission would have to compete, or the 
legal aid lawyers would have to compete with the private bar 
lawyers and the public would decide as to the quality of the 
service that’s being provided and make their choice. 
 
And I don’t suppose the member opposite has any objection to 
clients entitled to legal aid having a choice as to whether they 
would want a legal aid lawyer or a private lawyer, assuming 
that the cost to the taxpayer is the same. And so if they’re 
opposed to that kind of a choice, I would ask them to say so. 
 
But no, I did not say that the service being provided is not equal 
to what the private bar can provide now. I’m saying they should 
be entitled to a choice. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I 
want to ask the minister a few questions now on the matter of 
day care so that your officials can be appropriately preparing, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
My concern, Mr. Minister, is with respect to your proposed new 
day-care legislation. As demand for day care grows in 
Saskatchewan, the demand is growing at a much faster rate than 
the number of licensed day-care spaces in the province, and so 
we’re witnessing a mushrooming of unlicensed day-care 
centres, particularly in the urban areas. These unlicensed centres 
have no obligations to meet even minimum standards, and often 
books are not open. There are certainly no inspections and there 
are no subsidies, of course, to parents. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, we on this side of the House are of the view 
that your government’s central thrust in the area of child care 
should be on concentrating on improving and  
  



 
May 13, 1988 

 

1334 
 

expanding quality, affordable day care that is offered through 
licensed centres that are non-profit and parent-controlled. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: when you do introduce 
your new day-care Act, can you ensure us that the licensing of 
spaces will be limited to non-profit groups and to 
parent-controlled groups over and above the current family 
day-care homes? 
 
In other words, can you assure us that the day-care centres will 
be limited to parent-controlled centres and to non-profit 
centres? Because it is our view, Mr. Minister, that only the 
parent-controlled, non-profit model will ensure that children’s 
needs will be put first rather than the needs of a private operator 
running a centre for profit. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, no, I cannot give him 
that assurance. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, is it your plan, then, to open the 
door in your new legislation to profit day care? Can you answer 
that question, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know what a 
profit day care is. We’re looking at a new day-care Act that will 
allow people that qualify to run a day care and meet the 
requirements to run a day care. And whether the . . . I could 
probably require that they not make a profit. But it’s hard to tell 
whether someone is making wages or where they are making a 
profit. And so I can give them no assurance that people will be 
paid only in wages and not in profits. 
 
Day-care centres will be licensed. They will have to meet the 
provincial standards as now, and they will have to meet the 
future standards. And in addition, there will be more of them; 
there will be more day-care spaces. In addition, parents will 
have a choice as to which day care they want to send them to. 
There’s no choice now because there aren’t enough spaces to 
make a choice. You’re lucky if you can get in, and that’s 
because we have still a continuation of the NDP’s system of 
restricting the number of day-care spaces. 
 
So I give them no assurance that there won’t be changes when 
we bring in a day-care Act. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, I want to ask you specifically in 
this budget: where you’ve only allocated some additional 
$600,000 to the creation of new spaces this year, these are — as 
my colleague, the member for Saskatoon Nutana, pointed out 
earlier — these are simply spaces that were committed in the 
previous fiscal year and were not delivered in that year and now 
are being, I understand, put into effect in the year 1988-89 fiscal 
budget. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, my question to you is why you’ve not 
responded to the federal government initiative to create many 
new spaces? In effect, you’re only putting in $300,000 of 
additional moneys for the creation of new spaces in this 
province when we have a situation in Saskatchewan where only 
11 per cent of children who need child care are in licensed 
spaces. 
 

So my question to you, Mr. Minister, is why you haven’t 
responded to the federal initiative to create new spaces in this 
budget? All we see is an additional $300,000 of provincial 
money, and that is even before inflation is taken into account. 
Because when inflation is taken into account, it in fact reduces 
the increase even further. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I answered most 
of these questions a day or two ago. Since we’ve become 
government, we have increased the number of day-care spaces 
by 2,086, which is a 58 per cent increase in the number of 
spaces. In addition, we have increased the budgetary 
expenditure on day care by 113 per cent since we became 
government. I would ask the member opposite to acknowledge 
that 113 per cent is increasing day-care spaces a lot faster than 
inflation and certainly a lot faster than the budgetary income of 
this government. 
 
So we, in conjunction with the federal government, will 
continue to make improvements in day care. With respect to the 
federal government, they have raised the amount you can 
deduct from your income tax from 2,000 per child to 4,000 per 
child. I was in error the other day. I said there was an $8,000 
family limit. There is no family limit; $4,000 per child is the 
limit. 
 
We will make more spaces available as a result of the program 
that the federal government has brought in. I just announced last 
week in your city, in the city of Saskatoon, 30 new spaces in a 
Lutheran housing project, and you acknowledge that. I am 
pleased you acknowledged that. I said to your colleague, I will 
be announcing many more spaces in both urban and rural 
Saskatchewan, and so you will see in the next while many more 
spaces being announced. 
 
And I answered the other day, that last year’s announcements of 
openings were delayed due to figuring out what the federal 
government is doing and to putting that together into our 
day-care policy. I’ll be bringing in a day-care Act and we’ll be 
announcing more spaces. And I think you will see that the 
improvement we have had over the last five or six years, of an 
extra 2,086 or 58 per cent more spaces is a credible record. The 
increase in the budget of 113 per cent is a credible record. I 
suggest to you that that is fair and reasonable. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, I just have four or five other 
questions before we finish up your budget estimates, and I’ll try 
to keep my questions brief, and perhaps we can try to be 
finished around 1 o’clock with the adjournment of the 
Assembly at that time. 
 
I want to ask you a brief question with respect to staffing in the 
day-care division. I noticed that there is again this year two 
more staff positions that have been deleted in the day-care 
branch. I wonder if you can tell me what the responsibilities of 
those staff are. Are we looking at the deletion of people who 
have responsibility from monitoring the day-care centres and 
doing developmental work with the parent boards in terms of 
trying to improve services that can be offered by day-care 
centres? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to staff, we 
haven’t decreased the number of staff — some people  
  



 
May 13, 1988 

 

1335 
 

are doing different jobs right now — but we have four people in 
Regina, two in Saskatoon, one in Prince Albert, one in La 
Ronge that are still out consulting and providing services to the 
people in the field. 
 
In addition, I have in my budget this year, over last year’s 
actual expenditure, 7.9 per cent, and I intend to spend that 
before the year is out in additional day-care spaces. 
 
(1245) 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, your budget shows clearly, 
reduction of two staff positions. If my memory serves me 
correctly, from 28 and a half to 26 and a half. Can you confirm 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — My officials advise that these are two 
typists who have moved to a different subvote. They are still 
typing day-care work, sort of thing. It’s more of a sharing of 
staff there. They’re still doing the day-care work, but they’re 
under a different vote. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for clarifying that. I 
have a question with respect to the appeal mechanism that your 
department offers social assistance recipients which I think, Mr. 
Minister, that the appeal procedure is in real need of 
amendment. 
 
As you may know, there’s no such thing as a precedent in social 
service appeal board proceedings. A recipient can go before the 
appeal committee to ask for a resumption of social assistance 
payments based on a certain set of circumstances and win that 
appeal, and then a week later an identical set of circumstances 
can be brought to the appeal board and the ruling can go in 
favour of the department. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is: don’t you think there’s something 
wrong with that kind of system, and would you not look at 
introducing a system that reflected some kind of consistency 
with precedent setting cases that apply to other similar cases? I 
think, Mr. Minister, that that would have some real merit. 
 
I also want to suggest to you that I note your appeal boards and 
appeal committees are made up primarily of lay people, and we 
think it’s a good idea to have lay people on the appeal 
committees, but we’d also urge you to look at having some 
people with social services experience, a social work 
background, on those appeal committees. The regulations and 
the policy manual have become very complex, and I think 
there’d be some real merit to having some professionals on 
those appeal committees as well as lay people, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the process on appeals at 
social services has not changed during the course of our 
government. I doubt if it’s changed very much since 1966 when 
the Canada assistance plan was brought in. 
 
As a matter of fact the process is that you appeal locally, and if 
you’re not satisfied you can appeal to the provincial appeal 
board. It is almost like going to a Court of Queen’s Bench, and 
if you’re not satisfied you can appeal to the Court of Appeal in 
Regina. 
 

And I might say that the equivalent of the Chief Justice of that 
provincial appeal is Margaret Cuddington, who has service in 
that position since 1966. She is now asking to retire, and she’s 
asking to retire because she’s served for 22 years. And over 22 
years she has seen just about everything and has learned an 
awful lot about the system and the nature of the appeals, to the 
extent that over the time I’ve been minister she’s been giving 
me advice on changes that could be made, or procedures or 
policies that could be changed, and I’ve followed up on that 
advice on many occasions. 
 
So I don’t believe that we need any experts when we have a 
person in charge there who has been there for 22 years, under a 
Liberal government, an NDP government, and a Conservative 
government. She’s now asking for retirement from that 
position, has agreed to stay on at my request, and has stayed on 
for an additional six months. And she’s been doing an excellent 
job. 
 
In addition, this is not like courts. You can reapply for welfare 
and you can get a new appeal. So it’s more like the America 
system of law where you can have several appeals on one case. 
In a court system you only get one appeal. Here, yes, you get 
one appeal and a review of your appeal by the provincial body, 
but you could reapply and then you can appeal all over again, 
and this goes on and on that way. 
 
In addition, people do appeal and they do make complaints to 
the Ombudsman, and so they have another remedy there. And 
the Ombudsman does contact our office and intervene on their 
behalf where their office feels that we have been unreasonable 
in the application of the policies, and we try to adjust things. 
 
And I can tell you that I have had social services recipients 
write to me personally and say that they felt they weren’t being 
treated fairly. And I’ve intervened with my department in many 
cases where these people have written in. And where I felt 
maybe that we were being a little too strict, I’ve asked the 
department to reconsider. And in some of those cases, those 
people have had fair consideration from me personally as the 
minister. 
 
So I know that you’re going to say political interference. No, I 
don’t know what politics these people have. If somebody writes 
me a letter at Social Services, I read it. If I’m concerned about 
what they are saying, if I think that they have a legitimate 
complaint, I ask my department to review it. So it’s not always 
necessary to appeal. In some cases we review just on the basis 
of internal situations and even information that comes to my 
office. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, I just have three remaining 
questions. One is with respect to the matter of social assistance 
recipients who are prescribed medications by their doctor and 
yet the Department of Social Services is not covering those 
medications. I’ve had several instances brought to my attention 
where a social assistance recipient will require five, six, seven 
medications and yet the department may only fund three or four 
of them, when these medications have been prescribed by their 
MD. 
 
  



 
May 13, 1988 

 

1336 
 

My question, Mr. Minister, simply is: why is the department not 
covering these medications and will you change your policy so 
that medications that are being prescribed by a family doctor to 
that family, will be paid for by the Department of Social 
Services either through your plan I, under which people pay $2 
a prescription fee, or your plan II, under which no payment is 
made by the recipient. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the member 
opposite for pointing out that we have special drug 
considerations for people on social services. And yes, he is 
correct that everyone who’s on social services pays a 
prescription fee of $2 for their drugs. And if their doctor feels 
that that $2 is a hardship because of maybe the repetitive nature 
of the prescription, than their doctor can contact us or make a 
recommendation, and then we can, in step two, waive even the 
payment of the $2, and they pay absolutely nothing for their 
drugs. 
 
And that’s contrary to what the members opposite say about 
how the drug plan’s affecting the poor or the changes in the 
drug plan. Here we have for those people who are on welfare, a 
$2 drug charge, and zero if their doctor feels that they have a 
very repetitive prescription and that they would have to pay the 
$2 too often. 
 
So I want to point out, and I know the member acknowledges 
that that has not changed and that is a fair system of doing it. So 
if even under this system people are still having special 
problems, I have the power, as the minister, to authorize special 
needs. And if there are an isolated case here or there where 
there’s a special need that even this system doesn’t cover, I’m 
prepared to examine them on a case by case basis. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, the point here is that there 
are more and more medications by your department that people 
are coming to us and saying, despite the fact that they’re on 
social assistance, they won’t . . . they can’t get covered by the 
Department of Social Services even when their doctor 
recommends it, the point being, Mr. Minister, that some of 
these people have drug bills of 30 or 40 or $50 a month that 
they simply have a great deal of difficulty paying out of your 
skimpy social assistance rates. So I’d be grateful if you would 
look at that. 
 
I have two other issues I want to briefly raise with you. One is a 
real concern I have, Mr. Minister, about the very inadequate 
resources that are available to 16- and 18-year-olds in this 
province. Where there is a crisis in the family, the young 
person, in many cases, may have to leave the family. If you’re a 
ward of the minister, they’re in a . . . they find themselves in a 
situation where, as I understand it now, your department will 
only cover their educational costs, Mr. Minister, if they sign an 
agreement with you prior to their 16th birthday. My 
understanding that after their 16th birthday it’s not possible for 
them to get their educational costs covered if they sign an 
agreement with you after their 16th birthday. 
 
And this is just one example, Mr. Minister, of the hardship that 
16- to 18-year-olds who are no longer living at home and have 
become a ward under the state face, Mr. Minister, and I am 
wondering if you would look at changing that policy. 
 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I have a double problem 
here and it’s hard to resolve this. It’s almost like King 
Solomon’s problem in that I have people coming to me saying, 
you can’t allow people to run away from home and have them 
go on welfare simply because they can’t get along with their 
parents; they’re not listening to their parents. We’ve tried to 
stop that kind of a situation. And the parents phone us and say, 
why are you supporting my child? I will support your child; 
send him or her home; there’s a home for them. 
 
On the other hand, we have some instances where these — and 
these aren’t children; these are adolescents — where these 
adolescents can’t live at home. So I’ll give you the policy as it 
exists: the department does not provide assistance to 16- and 
17-year-old children unless there’s evidence of serious family 
problems and/or they have been rejected by their family. 
 
When a youth applies for social assistance eligibility, the 
assessment is as follows: number one, the question is, is the 
youth attending school, living with parents, or other 
arrangements made by parents? The policy is, we consider the 
youth’s family as dependent and refuse assistance if that person 
is living in a situation where the parents agree to it or have 
made that arrangement and the parents can afford to support 
that child. And these are adolescents, I might say. 
 
Secondly, where the youth is not attending school but living 
with the parents, we refer to family services if there are serious 
family or protection concerns. We consider the youth a 
dependant and refuse assistance where that youth is living with 
the family and there is no danger to the youth in staying there. 
 
Where the youth leaves the family and it would not be in the 
interest of that youth to go back to that family, we support that 
youth. And we do assist them with school where they have a 
reason for not living with their family. If they simply don’t 
want to live with their family, then we do not support them, 
they have to support themselves. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, I want to say, in 
conclusion on this matter, that there is just a chronic shortage of 
community resources for young people in the 16- to 18-year age 
group, and that is of great concern to members on this side of 
the House. 
 
It seems that if there . . . that those under 16 are able to at least 
access some resources through your department who will pay 
for placement in group homes and provide assistance with other 
payment through other community resources that exist. But for 
those over 16 there’s a real chronic shortage of resources in this 
province, almost bordering, I would say, on crisis proportions, 
Mr. Minister. I hope that your department will act in the next 
year to resolve that very serious situation. 
 
And I want to ask you, in concluding, as I see that our time is 
basically up, if you can give me your assurance that the written 
questions that I have sent over to you will be answered within 
the next week to 10 days. Could I have that assurance that all 
the written questions that I have submitted to you will receive a 
prompt answer from your  
  



 
May 13, 1988 

 

1337 
 

department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, yesterday at 4:07 the 
member opposite gave me a list of 21 questions he wanted 
answered. He has added to that list a twenty-second question. 
We will try to answer those questions wherever possible and 
wherever appropriate. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I’d just like to thank the officials who’ve been 
here this morning for their co-operation and assistance. We on 
this side of the House, obviously, strongly disagree with many 
of the directions that are being taken in the Department of 
Social Services, but we do appreciate the co-operation and 
assistance of the officials, both yesterday and today. And we 
want to express our thanks to them and wish them a fine 
weekend. 
 
Vote 36 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, in conclusion I would 
also like to thank, not only the officials of my department, but 
all of the approximately 2,000 employees in this department for 
the co-operation they have given us in the past year while they 
have gone through many changes, and while we have 
reorganized the department in many ways. 
 
And the management team you see here is one that I am truly 
proud of and that this government is truly proud of. They’ve 
distinguished themselves in paying respect and heed to the 
budget. They have tried to bring the department in within the 
budget. They have done that for the first time in many, many 
years, so that now a budget is a budget of the Department of 
Social Services, even though we do not have control over the 
expenditures because a lot of them are tied to society. 
 
These people have working long, long hours in trying to 
simplify a very complicated system. There are many changes. 
The staff has been very good. All of the 2,000 staff are trying to 
co-operate. These people are very conscientious, very 
concerned, very caring, and just an excellent team to work with. 
They have made my job so much easier over the past few 
months that I hope that they can repeat that performance in the 
coming year. and I thank them very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Supplementary Estimates (No. 2) 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Social Services 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 36 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 36 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I would also like to thank the minister and 
his officials. 
 

The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:04 p.m. 
 


