


















































June 23, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 23, 1988 
 

2449 
 

AFTERNOON SITTING 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Saxinger: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, and 
through you to the members of this Assembly, two guests. We 
have Frank Orosz from Prud’homme, and Morris Trischuk from 
Saskatchewan. They both are members of the Wakaw school 
board. They’re here on business, and I hope they enjoy the 
question period. And I would ask everybody to help me welcome 
them to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to, 
through you, draw your attention and the members’ attention to a 
group of 53 students in the east gallery from Stewart Russell 
School in Regina. I’m going to be meeting with them later. 
They’re here with their teachers Mrs. Dorgan and Mr. Podavin — 
I’m sure I mispronounced it and will have to get it corrected later. 
 
But I would like to welcome this group of students here today. I 
know that it is the end of the school year and they’re looking 
forward to their holiday, and I hope that their experience here will 
lead them into the holiday in a very good way. So I ask members 
to join me in extending our greetings to those students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to also 
introduce to you, and through you to the rest of the Assembly, 
some 35 students from Stockholm School, Stockholm, 
Saskatchewan. They’re grade 4s and 5s and they’re in the west 
gallery. They travelled in here today to attend the legislature, and I 
hope you’re going to go home with some view of how this place 
works. I’m going to have the pleasure of meeting with you later on 
for drinks and some questions. 
 
They’re here today with their teachers, if I may introduce them, 
Mrs. Laurie Johanson, Mrs. Violet Seman, Mrs. Phyllis Ecklund 
and Elsie Jones; and of course they have to have a bus driver, and 
he’s a great guy called Richard Thievan. We wish you a safe trip 
back home this evening to your respective homes. In the 
meantime, would everybody help me welcome them in the usual 
manner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Drought Assistance Program 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question today is to the hon. Minister of Agriculture, the Premier, 
member from Estevan, and it pertains to the serious, and obviously 
growing to be even more serious with every passing day, drought 
situation in the province of Saskatchewan — for that matter the 
whole prairie basin of North America. 
 
Mr. Premier, news reports today indicate that the 
 

government’s minister in charge of the crop insurance plan says 
publicly that the government, your government, has developed a 
drought assistance program for cattlemen and that you’re just 
awaiting the federal government’s approval amendment or 
rejection of it. At the same time, other news reports, particularly 
from Mr. Bill Yeast, who is the president of the Saskatchewan 
Stock Growers Association, indicate that the federal government 
has had this program of yours for drought relief for now nearly 
two weeks, but apparently has not come to a conclusion or made a 
decision on it. 
 
Mr. Premier, my question to you is this: are these reports true, and 
if they are true, will you be kind enough to tell the House what it is 
that you intend to do to force or assist your federal colleagues in 
coming about in announcing a proper and necessary drought relief 
program in this area? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, the reports largely summarized the 
state of events as we find them today. We have provided 
proposals, along with Alberta and Manitoba and British Columbia, 
to the federal government on what we are prepared to do and be 
partners in with respect to crop insurance changes and payments to 
farmers and green feed programs and cash. 
 
We understand that the proposals have been to a committee of the 
federal cabinet and they have been accepted. They go on to a full 
committee of cabinet, as I understand it now, either Friday or the 
beginning of next week. Now what I expect you would see is that 
if we can make the announcements with respect to a green feed 
program through crop insurance, that it could be announced either 
Friday or the first of next week. Subsequent to that, in the next 
couple or three days, and I would suspect certainly by the end of 
next week, the announcements on the program I described to you 
earlier, cash to farmers and what it would be, to move cattle or 
feed or others. 
 
And then you follow up that in early July as we did before, any 
programs with respect to what you could do with spring seeded 
crops. That is, you could cut it for crop insurance or you can 
provide it feed for livestock, and then additional crop insurance 
changes on top of that. 
 
I expected the announcement in the latter part of June. I think 
everybody is watching with anticipation even though it’s rained, 
and particularly in Alberta. We find the drought is not only 
isolated to here and Manitoba, it’s now into Ontario and Quebec, 
and as you mention, right through the United States into Ohio and 
other places, so that obviously the markets are reflecting upward 
limits on a daily basis. So I would expect some announcements by 
the end of this week, some next week, and some the week after. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. I 
think we’re all heartened by the suggestion that there’s likely to be 
an announcement by the next week or so, the end of the month. 
 
Mr. Yeast was quoted on the radio also as saying today 
   



 
June 23, 1988 

 

2450 
 

that it’s getting time that the governments, as I understand the 
report, had their programs in order and that the announcement 
should be made in the immediate future. As the Premier will 
know, we on this side have been calling for an announcement 
which we think has long been past overdue. 
 
Mr. Premier, my questions to you are twofold. May I suggest to 
you that you would table to the members of the legislature, as soon 
as possible, either the details of the program that your government 
and the other western provinces want submitted and approved by 
Ottawa, to detail those programs to this Legislative Assembly 
while it’s still sitting; if that’s impossible, at least the principles of 
such a program so that we may take a look at it. 
 
And having done so, my second part of the question is: would you 
be prepared to entertain some form of an all-party resolution by 
this House — on the assumption that the details and the principles 
of those plans are okay and satisfactory — an all-party resolution 
urging the federal government to come to a speedy and 
satisfactory resolution of the crisis. 
 
In this way we might be able to handle the problem in as a 
non-partisan a fashion as is possible, given the nature of political 
life, with the objective being that the farmers in the communities 
of Saskatchewan can get some immediate relief. How about those 
two suggestions, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I wouldn’t rule them out. I would 
certainly be able to share with you everything that’s in the 
program if they can announce it. The House may be sitting and it 
may not be. If it’s announced in Ottawa while the House is sitting, 
all the better, because I believe then we could go through it. 
 
I’m not so sure that the federal cabinet would want us to go 
through all the details as they’re deliberating on it, and I guess 
again, in a non-partisan sense, I wouldn’t want to jeopardize their 
review of it by passing it out to everybody as they’re in the final 
hours of going through it. Now I say that, in that we want them to 
move as quickly and as expediently as possible. 
 
With respect to an all-party resolution to ask the federal 
government to move as quickly as possible, I would certainly want 
that to be seen in a non-partisan sense if we did do it, because we 
do want them obviously to be prepared to spend money and direct 
it to farmers in a very concrete and forthright fashion. 
 
So I wouldn’t rule them out, but I am expecting announcements 
any day, and I would rather have them announced and shared, as 
opposed to leading with bits and pieces of it while they’re making 
up their mind. 
 

Greenhouse Effect 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier in 
a related area, but slightly different subject matter — same subject 
matter, different area, I suppose is the best way to put it. 

Today the newspaper reports — I have not seen the report myself 
— but the newspaper reports are very disturbing indeed about the 
situation with respect to the drought. I refer to The Globe and 
Mail, and even the Leader-Post has a story dealing with the 
greenhouse effect. The report that I have on paragraph 2 says that 
this is a report from Environment Canada: 
 

. . . which deals only with Saskatchewan, analyses the “worst 
case scenario,” and projects the loss of thousands of jobs, 
yield reductions and a loss to the provincial economy of 
hundreds of millions of dollars (by virtue of long-term 
greenhouse effect). 

 
Now I suspect that none of us in this House are expert enough in 
the science of climatology to know what exactly is happening 
here, but I think all of us would agree, Mr. Premier, that the nature 
of the report certainly raises an extremely dangerous, worrisome 
thing for the prairie west. 
 
My question to you is this, Mr. Premier. It’s obvious that we need 
to, as Canadians and western Canadians, get on with the job of 
development of a long-range approach to the question of 
environment and climate as it relates to drought and farming. I 
assume that your government will have given some thought to this 
on a long-term basis; certainly in 1985 the federal government 
made a commitment. 
 
How about a suggestion which I make to you, and that is the 
establishment of an all-party committee — again members of the 
government and members of the opposition — to look at the 
studies which are before us and around us on this very sensitive 
and important area to determine whether or not we can come up 
with, at least, the broad guide-lines of a political response in the 
small piece sense of this potentially dangerous, devastating impact 
of the greenhouse effect. It might also be able to expand itself 
under a consideration of a longer-term policy with respect to 
drought and disaster relief. 
 
Would the Premier be prepared to entertain that suggestion, and 
would he be in a position to tell me this afternoon, with some 
degree of specificity — if I may use an expression of the Minister 
of External Affairs — when a timetable for the implementation of 
such an all-party committee might be established if, of course, he 
views it favourably? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well certainly, Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t rule 
out the possibility of an all-party committee. That is something 
that usually House Leaders will get together and talk about and 
review to see if it’s a possibility. 
 
I would point out to the hon. member a couple of things: one is 
that we have a caucus committee looking at this very topic, that 
looks at . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — All party, Mr. Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — . . . a government committee, I   



 
June 23, 1988 

 

2451 
 

mean, not to be partisan, but the government does look at things in 
advance, and we try to forecast and we get research and we have a 
committee that’s looking at it. 
 
Our efforts to expand water management and irrigation are well 
known, and again, in a non-partisan sense, we have been pushing 
irrigation and the rural gas program to allow irrigation, and trying 
to conserve water and trying to build dams, trying to have better 
reforestation and water management because of some of the 
environmental concerns. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in the light of the magnitude of the problem and 
the seriousness of sustained drought, if that happens to be the case 
— and I do note that the authors of this greenhouse research say 
that their crystal ball isn’t foolproof and a lot more research needs 
to be done. They’re saying that it’s really only a guess right now, 
so we certainly would not want to panic. But on the other hand, in 
the event that we had sustained droughts, obviously it could have a 
serious impact, not only on Saskatchewan but the whole middle of 
North America. 
 

Resumé Update of SMDC Personnel 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister 
responsible for Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation, 
and it concerns another one of your government’s hollow 
promises that privatization will not cost Saskatchewan workers 
their jobs. 
 
Will you confirm that all personnel of SMDC (Saskatchewan 
Mining Development Corporation) have been instructed to update 
their resumés and submit them to a committee of SMDC and 
Eldorado officials? And can you explain any reason for this, other 
than to force these employees to reapply for their jobs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I can’t confirm that, Mr. Speaker. My 
guess is that management — and it’s their job to run the company 
— my guess is that management, for whatever reason, has decided 
that in a new, merged company they would likely want to have, 
Mr. Speaker, the information as it relates to individual employees 
and the resumés on file. 
 
You can rest assured, Mr. Speaker, that the people who work at 
SMDC today will be working there in the new merged uranium 
company as well. That was a commitment that was given by this 
government and SMDC, and that will be a commitment that is 
delivered, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, a new question. Every time a 
worker’s job and their families are on the . . . and their families are 
affected by . . . the minister can never confirm anything. 
 
Mr. Minister, isn’t it the fact that the executive of Eldorado 
Nuclear, who are moving to Saskatchewan as a result of your 
merger, are unwilling to give up their jobs, and as a result 
Saskatchewan people are going to be forced to compete with these 
people for the limited amount of jobs. 
 
Isn’t this the reason why SMDC workers have to resubmit 
resumés? Why are you trying to squeeze out 
 

Saskatchewan workers, and how does this square with your 
statement in June 9? You said: 
 

The new company will provide all (all) of its employees with 
benefits and terms and conditions comparable to those that 
they currently enjoy. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — He’s answered his own question, Mr. 
Speaker. I said then, and I say now, that all SMDC employees will 
be employed in the new merged company. 
 
I don’t know what he’s griping about, Mr. Speaker. What’s 
happening is more jobs are coming to Saskatchewan, more jobs 
coming to Saskatchewan from central Canada. With the new 
merged company, Mr. Speaker, jobs are going to increase in 
Saskatoon, right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Compare that, Mr. Speaker, with what those folks would do. They 
would close down Key Lake, they would close down Amok, they 
would close down Rabbit Lake. Those people will be working in 
northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And if those people had 
their way, every mine in northern Saskatchewan would be closed. 
What a bunch of hypocrites, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, last question. Every time there is a 
job loss in this province, and every time this province . . . this 
government puts people out of work, we will raise it at every stage 
of the . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Minister, every time you announce a 
privatization scheme, you tell us the employees’ jobs are safe and 
in fact they will profit under the new regime. But that never, never 
turns out to be the case. 
 
When are you going to stop this privatization scheme and madness 
and get to work on the major job of creating the jobs right here in 
Saskatchewan rather than destroying them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I want to thank the member, Mr. Speaker, 
for the question, because I want to talk about the lost jobs at . . . 
What’s that computer company? WESTBRIDGE. How many lost 
jobs were there there, Mr. Speaker? Fifty-two new jobs at 
WESTBRIDGE already because of that privatization — 52, I 
think. 
 
Let’s talk about Meadow Lake Sawmill. Ten Indian bands in 
partnership with the employees and about $100 million of capital 
investment coming into that deal. How many lost jobs in Meadow 
Lake? Four hundred new jobs coming into Meadow Lake. 
 
How many lost jobs at Weyerhaeuser? Can anybody tell me how 
many lost jobs? A $350 million paper mill going into Prince 
Albert. How many lost jobs because of that   



 
June 23, 1988 

 

2452 
 

privatization, Mr. Speaker? 
 
How many lost jobs at Saskoil because of the divestiture of 
SaskPower gas resource, because of that resource being sold to 
Saskoil? How many lost jobs there? Well already Saskoil has 
hired 50 additional people, Mr. Speaker, and to drill the 7 or 800 
wells necessary to develop that resource, I dare say there would be 
a thousand or more jobs in the field, Mr. Speaker. 
 
How many lost jobs because of the privatization exercise of this 
government, Mr. Speaker? None. In fact there are more and more 
and more jobs coming to Saskatchewan all the time, Mr. Speaker, 
because of the efforts of my colleague, the minister responsible for 
Public Participation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — One final question, Mr. Speaker. This government 
has lost jobs where they promised they wouldn’t be lost. In the 
dental plan there was 400 jobs lost. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — In the privatization scheme on Sask Minerals jobs 
were lost. In the privatization scheme in forestry, many jobs were 
lost. We couldn’t even get the contracts over there. Highway 
workers — hundreds of jobs were lost. In Saskoil, 25 per cent. Mr. 
Speaker, in regards to the minister, what can you state now, very 
clearly, in regards to the SMDC jobs for the future? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I will tell you what we will 
do at SMDC. I’ll tell you what we will do with SMDC. We will, 
Mr. Speaker, we will, on closing with SMDC with Eldorado and 
we have this new energy company in Saskatchewan, what we will 
do is we will operate the mines in northern Saskatchewan. We will 
operate uranium mines, we will operate gold mines, we will 
operate maybe some limestone mines, maybe . . . all kinds of 
mines, Mr. Speaker, all kinds of mines. Every one of those mines, 
Mr. Speaker, will employ people. 
 
What we will not do, Mr. Speaker, we will not close down Key 
Lake. We will not close down Cluff Lake. We will not close down 
Rabbit Lake like the NDP want us to do, like the NDP would do. 
They’ve said they would do it if they ever got back into office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, consistent . . . Except the member from Buffalo 
Narrows, Mr. Speaker; he’s the only one over there with any sense 
about what the North is all about, Mr. Speaker, a reasonable and a 
fair man. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The only flaw in his character, Mr. 
Speaker, is that he hasn’t chosen to sit on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the best 
employment record in western Canada and the second best in 
Canada — the second best in Canada. We have Weyerhaeuser, we 
have SMDC, we have Saskoil, we have . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Meadow Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Meadow Lake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Day Care at Woodland Campus 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, for the good of the students at Woodland 
Campus in Prince Albert, and indeed for the reputation of the 
Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology, I’m 
going to ask you to intervene in a dispute between two of your 
ministers. 
 
At Woodland Institute there is a very good training facility for day 
care. It’s in place and the students are very anxious to use it, but 
the problem is that your Minister of Social Services is 
philosophically opposed to publicly owned day cares and operated 
day cares. 
 
Your Minister of Education thinks it’s a good idea; in fact, he built 
it and equipped the building, but he can’t get the licence in place. 
Now it has resulted, Mr. Premier, in a broken promise of the 
Minister of Education. 
 
Would you intervene in this dispute, please, and would you get 
this day care in position? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, it pleases me that the 
members opposite have finally agreed to innovative day care. We 
have a Bill before this Assembly that will provide for innovative 
day care, and I have said publicly that if the Bill is held up here 
and is not passed, that we would be prepared to change 
regulations. 
 
I’ve been criticized for that by people who don’t know the facts, 
that we now don’t have a day care Act in Saskatchewan. We have 
one section of The Family Services Act, section 87, that provides 
for regulations whereby cabinet makes all of the rules for day care. 
 
I have been up front and introduced a Bill before this Assembly. 
The members opposite have made press statements opposed to 
innovative day care. This Bill will provide for innovative day care, 
and then we will be able to solve the problem in Prince Albert. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier. I think it’s going to 
be up to you to intervene. This member has refused, has refused to 
license a day care for over a year and a half. The Minister of 
Education has been trying to procreate for over nine months, but 
he has been unable to deliver, and I hate to see him sit there so 
impotently. 
 
Mr. Premier, you could do the right thing. 
  



 
June 23, 1988 

 

2453 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — You could do the right thing by putting that 
program fully in place. You have to get the Minister of Social 
Services away from his dinosaur-like, narrow-minded approach 
about day care. Do the right thing, Mr. Premier, and put the 
program in place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have 
been opposed to innovation in day care. They accuse us of being 
dinosaurs, and they don’t want to change the regulations that they 
put in place. 
 
They also know that the regulations now only require co-operative 
day cares; that we are trying to introduce innovative regulations to 
allow for teen parent centres, for flexible, rural day cares; to allow 
parents to have a choice in the cities as to what type of day care 
they want to send their children to; that we have to make these 
changes before we can finalize the Prince Albert day care situated 
in an institution called a school. 
 

Lay-offs at Wascana Campus of SIAST 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Education who has had difficulty keeping his word, not only in 
day care but his word on the prevention of lay-offs to employees 
of Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology. 
 
Mr. Minister, last Thursday you took notice of a question from me 
regarding the permanent lay-off notice given to 18 employees of 
Wascana Campus of SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology). You said at that time that you didn’t 
know anything about it, which is really quite an amazing statement 
from the Minister of Education. 
 
You’ve had a week to do your homework, Mr. Minister, and I ask 
you now, will you bring that information to this House. Why are 
those 18 people being given their notice for lay-off contrary to 
your commitment that this would never happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve raised this issue with 
the officials at SIAST. I think this question underlines again that 
the NDP don’t understand that no longer is the Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology, or indeed our 
technical institutes, no longer are they a part of the Department of 
Education. We have given them their own autonomy, not unlike 
the university. 
 
Having said all of that, however, I asked my officials to 
correspond with them, and the information I have is that . . . and 
the questions were, as I recall the questions were: why have 16 
instructors and two clerical persons been given lay-off notices at 
Wascana Campus? What can staff at the other three institutes 
expect? 
 
The facts are, Mr. Speaker, as I have them, eight instructors have 
received temporary lay-off notices; no clerical staff have been laid 
off. And these are employees 
 

in the adult basic education, and English as a second language 
areas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Pertinently, all of these instructors were hired on term contracts 
subject to renewal annually, according to the ebb and flow of 
federal funding for the programs they are hired to teach. 
 
The practice has been to give individuals notice of contract 
renewal in the time period May 25 to June 30. This is the reason 
for giving them temporary lay-off notice at the present time. There 
is every expectation that certainly some will be re-hired again next 
fall, Mr. Speaker. This is not an unusual practice over the summer 
and because of the season nature, if you like. That’s why they’re 
on contracts in the first place. 
 
I would underline that these are not position abolishments, but 
rather the established contractual arrangement for instructors in 
these federally funded programs. 
 
The second question related to what the other campuses could 
expect. The other three campuses in SIAST are also impacted by 
the reduction of federal funding, but have fortunately been in a 
situation where they are able to redeploy the instructors who 
would otherwise have had to be laid off. At this time further 
lay-offs of term contract instructors is not planned at the other 
campuses, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask for leave of the 
Assembly to present the report of the Special Committee on 
Regulations at this time. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Special Committee on Regulations 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I present the first report of the 
Special Committee on Regulations. The report, which I now lay 
on the Table, will be printed in today’s Votes and Proceedings. I 
move, seconded by the member from Biggar: 
 

That the first report of the Special Committee on Regulations 
be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on his feet? Why is the 
member from Riversdale on his feet? 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I beg 
leave of the Assembly to introduce a group of students. 
 
  



 
June 23, 1988 

 

2454 
 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Merci, Monsieur le Président. Monsieur le 
Président, je voudrais présenter aux membres de l’Assemblée, 30 
étudiants de l’École Française de Saskatoon qui sont ici 
aujourd’hui. Ces étudiants sont accompagnés de deux adultes. Ils 
ont choisi une bonne journée pour leur visite, et j’invite tous les 
membres à les accueillir chaleureusement. Et maintenant, en 
Anglais . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman . . . 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I should really do it in Ukrainian to be really 
comfortable. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to 
introduce to you a group of very fine students from grades 5 and 6 
of the Saskatoon French School in Saskatoon, and that’s why my 
attempt at French. 
 
The tour is doing what the students do when they visit the 
Assembly — get a feeling of the question period. I think this 
group missed this question period, but some of the artefacts and 
history surrounding the building. 
 
They are accompanied by Jean Duperreault et John Cathcart. Am I 
correct on that? Okay, good. Jean Duperreault and John Cathcart. I 
guess I have an opportunity to meet with them at 3 p.m. for 
pictures on the stairs and then to answer questions in French at 
3:05. Please welcome the students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 1 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for 
recognizing me. Mr. Chairman, I wish to pursue with the minister 
for a little while the questions pertaining to the drought situation in 
Saskatchewan and western Canada, that we raised in question 
period today. 
 
I want to preface my remarks with a little bit of a backgrounder, 
and then make a specific request of the Premier. And in order to 
get the Premier and his officials to consider what I have in mind in 
a little more detail, I’d ask that one of the pages, if you would, 
please, just forward this to the Premier for his consideration in the 
course of my remarks. 
 
Now I think, Mr. Chairman, that all the members of the 
Legislative Assembly understand all too well, as the public of 
Saskatchewan understands all too well, the gravity of the crisis 
which we are now struggling with and which is upon us. That is 
the very serious problem of 
 

drought. In some ways experts have been telling us that this has 
been ongoing now for the last several years, perhaps the last two 
or three years. But undoubtedly this spring so far, and now we’re 
into the summer months, it is a reality which is being impacted 
upon everybody. The cattlemen, the farmers, of course, are the 
first to understand this because weather is so important to them 
and to their business operations. 
 
For people living in the communities, larger communities, perhaps 
it becomes a little slower thing to understand, although even there 
the economic activity is certainly declining and slowing down, not 
only because of the drought. There is the debt situation, there is 
the entire international crisis in agriculture dealing with subsidies 
and the like — a whole gamut of problems. 
 
(1445) 
 
But the reality is that now everybody in Saskatchewan, I think 
really knows how serious the situation is. And you hear in coffee 
talk some rather pessimistic scenarios being discussed. It’s not our 
job as legislators to dwell on the pessimism. It’s our job to cope 
with the reality and look to an optimistic approach, if we can at all 
devise one, on behalf of the province and on behalf of Canadians 
outside of this province. 
 
The Premier, as Minister of Agriculture, and his officials have 
been working on this. We know this to be the case. We know, for 
example, that there was a western premiers’ conference just a few 
weeks ago, actually a month ago approximately, May 18 to May 
21, called the Parksville, British Columbia conference. 
 
And set out there under communiqué number one, which I assume 
was chosen to be number one for very legitimate reasons, headed, 
“Agriculture is the drought situation,” and the argument of a need 
for an immediate ministerial meeting. And then the provisions 
there calling for continuing action with respect to the drought, 
urgent action, particularly as it relates to the livestock industry. 
I’m just speed reading the approach to the communiqué to save 
some time of this committee, but the point is, the premiers met, 
reviewed this in detail, and came out emphasizing for all 
Canadians the urgency of this thing. 
 
I think it’s correct to say that a province can do only so much. A 
program has been announced by the hon. Premier. Alberta has 
announced its own program. The federal government has 
announced a $12 million program. 
 
Members will know that we have felt that the $12 million 
program, talking now for the moment of the federal approach, is 
inadequate. Given the larger public purse from which it has to 
draw, upon which it has to draw, and given some of its other 
projected expenditures, $12 million for drought on something 
which might be a more permanent — at least in the next couple of 
months or years — situation, certainly is inadequate. 
 
There have been statements by the Premier himself, speaking to 
this situation to the stockgrowers’ annual convention, annual 
meeting, 75th annual meeting in Moose Jaw, two or three weeks 
ago. The Premier outlined   



 
June 23, 1988 

 

2455 
 

the gravity of the situation. If you look at the newspaper report, 
there were competing views as to how a drought program should 
be implemented, but it should await a little bit of unfolding of the 
climatic events before some specific policies are announced. And I 
think that that’s right. We don’t want to — as one of their 
participants is reported as saying; I think it’s the Premier — we 
don’t want to wind up wrecking good programs. 
 
But the headline of that story, I think, Mr. Chairman, tells the 
point that I’m trying to make in chronological order. After 
Parksville, B.C., the Premier speaking on a major occasion 
outlines the problem, and the headline says, “Devine expects 
words soon on drought aid for livestock.” That is on or about the 
30th. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — No, the point of order is not relevant here 
because I’m not referring to the hon. member in debate by name. 
I’m referring to a document where the member’s name is referred 
to, and I think that is perfectly in order. 
 
So the Premier sees some urgency and in that context there is 
again the pressure of time mounting before us. 
 
I might say that from my party’s point of view, we have 
announced, and its function has now been completed, a committee 
of several of our MLAs headed by my agricultural critic, our 
caucus’s agricultural critic, the member from Humboldt. Also 
other members such as the former member from Shaunavon, now 
a member from Elphinstone, and others, toured actually a pretty 
big area of the drought area going from Regina all the way to 
Swift Current, all the way up to Lloydminster via Rosetown and 
Kindersley and points in between, as time would permit, to take a 
first-hand look at how bad it was. They report to me that it’s bad. 
 
And I know first hand that it’s bad, because I’ve had occasion to 
be in the Shaunavon-Gull Lake-Swift Current area myself in the 
course of doing some strictly political work, and it’s a frightening 
thing. I was born and raised on the prairies, members may not 
believe this, but post-the Dirty Thirties, and it’s true. I’ve never 
witnessed what the old-timers tell me took place in the Dirty 
Thirties. But if the memories and the stories of the of the Dirty 
Thirties are accurate, then judging by what I observed by that 
two-day foray into the Swift Current area . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Just as bad. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — My colleague says just as bad. No, I’d say 
even worse. It is really something to see those spectacles of the dry 
tunnels, wind tunnels, with the dust and what you would think is 
cloud and turns out to be nothing but dirt; in Saskatoon, in fact, 
ending up in mud rain in one of these circumstance. So while I’m 
not here to give a graphic description, I’m trying to say that it’s a 
serious problem. 
 
And I’m having farm people phone me now, of all political 
persuasions, I don’t mean to say large numbers, but farmers 
phoning from the Melfort-Tisdale area — this was as of about 
three or four days ago — telling me that 
 

the crop there is 10 days or two weeks away. If they don’t get a 
good rain by that time, then there is a major problem. 
 
What I’m trying to paint here — and I don’t do this in any partisan 
terms — what I’m trying to paint here is an immediate short-run 
problem where we have cattle and what we do with cattle, and to 
make sure that they don’t sell off the basic herds, and how do we 
provide feed and get the cattle to water, and how we can preserve 
that industry. 
 
We have the question also of the crops, crop insurance, seeding or 
not to seed, what is declared a disaster, whether it’s seven bushels 
or higher, or less — a matrix of problems in this very complicated 
agricultural area which needs to be sorted out. 
 
And I endorse the Premier when he says that we’ve got to do this 
in a thoughtful, reasonable way. It is our job, in opposition — 
perhaps he might think unfairly, but I don’t believe unfairly — I 
think it’s our job to continue to press every government, regardless 
of ideology, in these kinds of circumstances to do all that it can as 
quickly as it can. 
 
So if the Premier expresses frustration at our questions about when 
is your policy coming forward, I think that’s a normal question 
and perhaps a normal response by him, given the dynamic of us 
wanting to move ahead and him obviously wanting to move ahead 
too, given the complexity of the provincial-federal situation. 
 
Which brings us to another development. After my caucus’s 
committee drought tour, the leader of my party, the Hon. Ed 
Broadbent, was in Saskatchewan and spent two days, one day in 
full, touring the south-west area. It’s too bad that time couldn’t 
permit him to get to the other areas, such as Tisdale that I’ve 
referred to, and Melfort. But in any event, he had a bit of a flavour 
of it on a first-hand basis. 
 
And the result of that tour was a press conference calling, from our 
side, to the provincial government and to the federal government, 
at least an immediate relief program which would be three 
components in principle. These can be worked out in details by the 
minister’s officials or by the federal department officials. 
 
First, a special pay-out program with respect to those farmers who 
may not have seeded because of the climatic soil conditions there 
and the extension of the crop year. I’m not familiar with the 
extension of the crop year . . . crop insurance year has been made 
yet. Has the Premier announced that? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — No announcement on it. Well perhaps the 
minister could clarify that for me. As I understand it, the deadline 
is June 20, and I’m not sure whether there was an announcement 
of an extension. 
 
But in any event, our suggestion was, as a minimum, an extension, 
it would buy more time. But more is needed now, and that is the 
idea for payment for the situation where the farmer who goes out 
in his field, takes a look at   



 
June 23, 1988 

 

2456 
 

the soil conditions, and says, look, it’s more dangerous to do 
anything with this soil. But if I don’t do something with this soil, I 
don’t get compensated. Doesn’t make sense. Can we get a change 
in the rules under those special circumstances where I get 
compensation either way. It shouldn’t be any additional funds on 
the purse because if he goes out and seeds, he’s likely to get a crop 
failure; it looks that way unfortunately, and the money will come 
to him in any event. I don’t pretend to say that that’s an answer; 
there may be a need for refinement of that idea. I advance it to the 
Premier as an idea. It comes from our caucus committee on 
drought. 
 
The other one is the one-time payment to cattle producers. Take 
the figure, 80 to $100 per head. I think it’s the stock growers, Mr. 
Premier, who recommended $90 a head. Again the numbers are 
less important; what is important is the principle, to be able to get 
some certainty in the financial planning for our cattle people, for 
our farmers who have cattle, and perhaps some program to help 
the system with respect to the maintenance of the herd. 
 
And then of course the third proposal which was advocated by Mr. 
Broadbent and myself . . . I don’t take proprietary claim in this; 
these ideas are a collection of community views and government 
views. A third idea is a tax holiday for three years, or a tax 
deferral. I hate that term “holiday” — but a tax deferral which 
would allow farmers who have sold off their herds to avoid paying 
tax on the income garnered there and give them some time to get 
back in. If they do get back in, it’s kind of a forgiveness of the tax. 
If they don’t, then there would be an obligation to pay the income 
on that tax. Again this is something which can be worked on. 
 
And of course this is not unusual to farming because they’ve had 
five-year block averaging programs in tax matters, and variations 
of that can be of assistance. 
 
Then of course on a longer basis, the question of a long-term 
drought control program taking into account soil conservation, 
taking into account water resource management, taking into 
account the need for a safety net for farmers, has got to be put into 
place. 
 
I don’t mean this in any partisan political terms. I really don’t. We 
know that in 1985 the federal minister — I not refer here to our 
minister — made a commitment on behalf of the federal 
government to launch such a detailed study of a comprehensive 
program. Maybe such work has been carried out. I have a sense, 
however — no evidence, I admit — but I have a sense that 
perhaps what’s happened in Ottawa is what happens with many of 
us in our day-to-day and governmental lives. If you get a bit of a 
better year, the next year you tend to put the problem on the shelf, 
and then all of a sudden in comes 1988 and here we are without 
any plans into place. Maybe there are some detailed plans into 
place, I don’t know. Maybe the Premier’s department, or the 
minister’s department, has developed these long-term plans. 
 
And this is not a comprehensive list, Mr. Chairman. The water 
table is down generally. My colleague from the North, 
Cumberland, was telling me about the tables of some of the lakes 
being down — how many feet would 
 

you say, or metres? — but noticeably down, you were telling me 
the other day . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Quite a bit down. So 
the water situation in the North is serious. 
 
I had occasion to fly in a small aircraft the other day, Monday, 
from Saskatoon to Regina, and I do all the driving all the time, not 
like the good old days. You can see it close on the ground, but 
flying in a single-engine aircraft real low — that wasn’t the 
purpose of the trip, to fly real low, but it was so hot and bumpy he 
found a right altitude — to take a look at the various creeks and 
various sloughs and just the brown parched earth that is there 
between Saskatoon and Regina, is scary. Putting it bluntly, it’s 
scary. 
 
You understand it, but until you visually see it again, you 
understand how serious the doggone problem really is. So we have 
a problem here which is beyond farmers and cattleman; we’ve got 
a problem here which is also pertaining to villages and towns and 
water tables. 
 
We have a problem in the city of Saskatoon where the river is very 
low, Mr. Premier, in Saskatoon. I won’t belabour this here. Please 
don’t get distracted on this comment. We can discuss it when 
executive estimates come up, Executive Council estimate comes 
up, but there is some discussion on some report — I don’t say it’s 
government policy — about the diversion of the South 
Saskatchewan River with respect to the Shand, Alameda, Rafferty 
projects. As I say, don’t get diverted for the Agriculture estimates 
on that. If we want to pursue it, we can do it later. 
 
But given the low level of the South Saskatchewan River — you’ll 
know this, knowing your Saskatoon commitments, and so will 
your deputy minister — people are talking about this. And when 
Saskatoon city and Regina city have got to cut back on watering of 
lawns, then we know we have the complete package. It now has 
embraced everybody. 
 
And now here it is, June 24, 1988, and we need to have some 
action. I say this as a western Canadian, I say it as a 
Saskatchewanian, I say it as a person who was born, raised, and 
bred here, whose livelihood and future involvements, both 
politically or otherwise, depends on the integration and the 
healthiness of the community at large, same as the Premier. We 
need action. 
 
Now which brings me . . . And I’ll come right to the point of my 
submission. Sorry to be so long-winded, but I think it’s important 
to set out the details of this. 
 
I think that it would be worthwhile for this legislature to pass a 
unanimous resolution urging the federal government to deal 
immediately with this problem. I have tried to draft, but I take no 
pride in authorship in this, Mr. Minister, tried to draft a motion 
which I may or may not move, depending upon the Premier’s 
response, which tries in neutral terms — neutral to this extent, that 
if the western premiers’ policy on drought falls far short of what 
we think is the case, it would reserve to us the right subsequently 
to make further suggestions or even criticisms. 
 
  



 
June 23, 1988 

 

2457 
 

We don’t have that, and the Premier says we’re not likely to have 
it because he doesn’t want a jeopardy of the federal government’s 
consideration. I think that’s a very responsible response, if I may 
say so. So I’ve tried to draft this neutrally in that context. 
 
But the intent of this would be, if it’s enacted by this Assembly, to 
give a little extra pressure from Saskatchewan in a non-partisan 
way, because I think every one of us knows the impact of drought 
on the prairies. Everybody lives with the spectre, the fear, the 
haunt of a drought. 
 
The Dirty Thirties stories and what that meant to political 
organizations and social reorganization and economic 
reorganization is probably the single most important event in the 
history of this province, if not western Canada. I don’t think we 
want that to happen again to this province, regardless of the 
ideology of the government in power, of the day. 
 
(1500) 
 
What we want, rather, is whatever mankind can do in the face of 
some pretty tough odds by nature. And what we can do is we can 
put a little voice out of this legislature unanimously saying to the 
federal government, please do it now. And we should be frank 
about this. We know that the length of the Legislative Assembly is 
now measured in days, we expect, barring any unforeseen 
developments. We should speak on this and we should have a 
discussion on this, and we should have a motion passed to this 
extent. 
 
I will read the motion, and as I read it, I’ll then sit down and invite 
the Premier to make a comment with respect to the suggestion that 
I make. If he agrees, I’m prepared to reverse the motions. If the 
motion would like to be made by the hon. the Premier in the first 
instance, and seconded by myself, I left a copy mailed to you 
blank. I’m prepared to take it that way. If you want to make the 
motion in my name and seconded by you — there may be some 
forum problem, from your point of view, I have no problems 
there. If you think there needs to be some word changes, we’re 
prepared to consider them, clearly. 
 
The motion that I’ve drafted is something along these lines, Mr. 
Chairman, and I won’t move it formally because the Premier may 
wish to move it and give me the chance to second it, and that 
would be a good show of unanimity. 
 
The motion, however, reads as follows: 
 

That the Assembly’s Committee of Finance (because that’s 
where we’re at), representing all legislative members, (we 
could add the words “of Saskatchewan”), urges the 
Government of Canada to announce and implement 
immediately in full co-operation with the provinces . . . 

 
May I stop there to say that’s the wording that I felt was the 
neutral wording in the absence of a formal information package 
from you, sir, as to what the four provinces have in mind on the 
detailed drought, but it also implies co-operation and implies 
consideration of your package. 

. . . in full co-operation with the provinces, a comprehensive 
drought relief program to respond to the severe drought 
conditions affecting Saskatchewan and other parts of Canada, 
and threatening Saskatchewan farmers and rural 
communities. 

 
It doesn’t detail the ideas because there may be some arguments 
about it, but the Premier says he’s got his package before the 
federal minister and the cabinet and the Prime Minister. Now is 
the time for us to do something really positive and united and 
good for the people of Saskatchewan and for western Canada, and 
to put it bluntly, not in any political terms, turn up the heat a little 
bit on the people in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I think that the background and the rationale for 
this is explained fully. I will not move this at this point; I will 
await the Premier’s response to the suggestion and then see where 
we proceed from there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, just a couple of things in 
response to the Hon. Leader of the Opposition. There is a 
comprehensive mechanism now before the federal government, 
and one that is in place, frankly, across Canada. It certainly wasn’t 
here in the 1930s. 
 
We can look at a drought-proofing mechanism that the federal 
government, along with the provinces, have agreed to implement 
that is ninety-seven and a half million dollars — 75 million from 
the federal government and 7.5 that they just announced and an 
additional twelve and a half million dollars — and that’s ongoing 
expenditures that we have topped up, and Alberta has topped up 
with about another 40 to $50 million. That’s the first. 
 
The second part is, as the hon. member mentions, we’re waiting 
almost hourly and daily for the combination of announcements 
coming out from the federal government on cash payments, and 
that could be anywhere from 50 to $100 million. 
 
And then we have the ongoing mechanism of crop insurance 
which I’m advised has a coverage alone in Saskatchewan of $1.5 
billion, that is total coverage that has been insured by the farmers. 
And the various kinds of things that we can do to top that up, and 
the long-run mechanism to beef up crop insurance is in place as a 
result of the last crop failure, where if we have the back-to-back 
drought situations, in fact, that crop insurance can be topped up in 
the neighbourhood of an additional 10 per cent. 
 
So the hon. member said that he had a three-point policy that he 
could put forward. I will say that much of what he has been 
suggesting either has been announced or will be announced or can 
be announced as we go through the summer to the end of June, 
and the first week in July, and the second week in July, and see 
how it goes. But clearly we look at from 500 million to 1 billion, 
to, in fact, could be in excess of a billion dollars that will be there. 
It may not be enough. Maybe we have to watch that. 
  



 
June 23, 1988 

 

2458 
 

But these are ongoing mechanisms that are now triggered ready to 
spend money and provide comprehensive coverage. I will add as 
well with respect to the long-run effect of drought, obviously 
water management makes a big difference. The city of Saskatoon 
has water because we can manage that Saskatchewan river. And if 
we didn’t manage it as well, it could be even more serious. The 
fact that we have Gardiner Dam and Diefenbaker Lake means that 
we have the capacity to draw water. 
 
And you’re right, we have diverted water from Diefenbaker Lake 
to Regina, and people are glad to have that water, because if it was 
just left to Buffalo (Pound) Lake, there wouldn’t be nearly the 
supply or the quality. So the management of water in an area like 
Saskatchewan is extremely important for cities like Saskatoon, 
Moose Jaw, and Regina, where: (1) we maintain the supply; and in 
fact yes, we do divert so that we can have access to fresh, 
high-quality water on an ongoing basis because of pipelines and 
because of water management. 
 
With respect to the suggestion that we have a motion of the 
finance committee to the federal government, I would say that as 
the federal government is considering this, I would like to allow 
them the luxury of that decision and that announcement, and I 
expect it, as I said to the hon. member, as the House is sitting. And 
I would not want to confound them with anything else or 
jeopardize the fact that they may make a very positive 
announcement in the near future. 
 
I say to the hon. member, I’m encouraged by his spirit of 
co-operation and indeed the fact that we jointly recognize the 
potential damaging effect of dry weather across Saskatchewan, 
and indeed across the Prairies and frankly across North America. 
We have to be geared up to deal with it, and we certainly have 
taken the suggestions of people across the province and yourselves 
into the consideration and the proposals that we’ve put forward. 
 
Mr. Gerich: — Mr. Chairman, could I get leave to introduce 
some guests? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Gerich: — Mr. Chairman, on behalf of my colleague, the 
member from Bengough-Milestone, I would like to introduce a 
group of 17 students, grades 7 and 8, from St. Olivier School at 
Radville. 
 
They’re accompanied by their teacher Lorne Weigel, chaperons 
Mr. and Mrs. Maurice Riviere and Mr. and Mrs. Raymond Riviere 
and Mrs. Oliver Dionne. 
 
I hope that they find this afternoon’s estimates interesting and 
entertaining and I will be meeting with them after out on the lawn. 
Please welcome our guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Agriculture 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 1 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ll make just a 
brief response with respect to the Premier’s comment to say that 
while I understand his reasoning, I must say that I am disappointed 
in the decision by the government at this time, because as I see this 
motion, it really ought not to irritate anybody from the Prime 
Minister down, or any bureaucrat down. It uses no words of 
condemnation, it mentions nothing with respect to any specific 
program which might be offensive or bureaucratically too 
complicated to implement. What it really would have done is 
shown to the people of Saskatchewan the resolve and the unity of 
the chamber on this non-partisan issue. Goodness knows, we have 
a lot of other partisan issues which will divide the Premier and 
myself and the opposite sides, of members opposite. 
 
I just don’t see why a basically neutral motion in the terms of the 
policy, the program, should be turned down when the real thrust of 
this thing is to sort of say, we’re all behind the people of the 
province and their desire to get the problem resolved. I don’t think 
I can move this in committee, because it’s a substantive motion, 
without the leave and the consent unanimously to waive the rule of 
the committee to do it, and with the Premier’s refusal to do it, then 
I’m checkmated at this stage of the game, as I see it. 
 
And I don’t want to introduce it in any event from my side, 
because it would destroy the spirit of what I was trying to 
accomplish here, which was a bipartisan operation. The Premier’s 
turned me down; then I say, I think we’re checkmated and there’s 
nothing we can do with this for the time being. And I think that 
that, if I may say so, is unfortunate. 
 
I do want to make one other point before I take my place, because 
I know that some other colleagues have some few more questions 
in Agriculture. We’ve been at this for quite some time, the 
Department of Agriculture, and I think the committee is anxious to 
move along. 
 
It still is on this pressing problem of the drought, and the Premier 
will know that in question period, of course, we raised the second 
suggestion, which is the suggestion of perhaps an all-party 
committee of this Assembly to talk about the long-term programs 
necessary with respect to long-term drought and/or disaster 
programs. Again the premier was very encouraging in question 
period by saying that he would not reject such a suggestion, just as 
he said he would not reject the first motion. 
 
I would like to discuss this for a moment, because I think that the 
necessity for a long-term policy is obviously blindingly clear, too. 
Everybody would agree to that. 
 
In opposition we do not have privy to government documents, and 
I don’t think we can rightfully make a claim to have privy to all 
government documents. But I do think that there are some matters 
which transcend partisanship. This is one of them, and if the 
government does have a long-term idea, a set of principles or 
forms   



 
June 23, 1988 

 

2459 
 

with respect to long-term drought, then I think what we ought to 
do is take a look at them and see what we can do to assist in the 
promotion of them. I don’t ask the Premier here to give me the 
details of that at this particular occasion. 
 
And since this is not the proper forum in order to pass a resolution 
to mandate an all-party committee to study a long-term drought 
relief and assistance program, I can’t move the motion formally. 
 
What I have drafted is this, and then I’ll ask the Premier a 
question. I’m sorry I don’t have an extra copy; the officials in my 
office did not make a copy to forward to you. I’ll simply have to 
read it to you. The draft that I have — again looking at the 
sensitivities politically which exist around here — the draft is 
neutral, but I think conveys the message. 
 
It would go something like this: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly establish immediately an 
all-party committee of members to make recommendations 
to the Government of Saskatchewan regarding necessary 
drought relief and assistance measures of both a short-term 
and long-term nature. 

 
I think that’s straightforward and yet important. 
 
My question to the Premier is, picking up on his answer in 
question period that he would be prepared to consider it, more 
specifically, would the Premier consider giving me an assurance in 
committee, in agriculture, in drought, in estimates, that he would 
designate the Deputy Premier, who is the House Leader, on his 
behalf. I will designate my House Leader, the member from North 
East, or perhaps even more appropriately in the sense of 
agriculture, the agricultural critic. I think we can be flexible on this 
because it may be more management of the House. Would he be 
prepared to designate someone — I will do the same if he agrees 
— to work up a terms of reference for an all-party committee and 
to get this motion and terms of reference passed and enacted in 
this Assembly before we adjourn or prorogue or whatever we do 
at this current time. 
 
I don’t want to write here the terms of reference, because that 
would defeat the purpose of the discussions, but I don’t envisage 
here, Premier, a committee which is on a great big tour of the 
province of Saskatchewan. Although I think we need to listen to 
the people, who have all kinds of ideas, as you know — some of 
them are very innovative — but I’m thinking about a working 
committee, right here in Regina; the proposals, which could be 
tabled and analysed, we could get some perhaps outside expertise 
from your former college at the University of Saskatchewan, 
department of agriculture, perhaps even go outside the province 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Dissect the Saskatchewan Research 
Council, my colleague from Quill Lakes suggest. And we would 
develop what we think are the principles of some joint 
federal-provincial, long-term drought assistance program. 
 
I think that would be a good piece of work for us, all of us, 
 

a real good piece of work. And we’d do it with urgency. We won’t 
be able to help this current crisis because this motion, which did 
not go, I think speaks to the current immediate crisis, but this one 
could do it on a longer-term basis, and it would keep some 
political pressure on, again in a non-partisan fashion, on the 
federal people to accept it. 
 
(1515) 
 
I think it’s a good idea, obviously, because I’m making the 
suggestion, but I don’t see where the failings or the faults or the 
difficulties are in this kind of an approach. And the reason that I 
say that, and I’ll take my place, is because that very frequently 
issues that are before us are so philosophically diverse that it’s 
impossible to have an all-party committee which can do anything 
but divide itself along the philosophical basis of the parties. 
 
But this is an issue which is beyond PC or New Democrat or 
Liberal. This is an issue, if you judge by that Canada Environment 
report, which is going to have major implications for our children 
and their children. I think, therefore, it’s an important 
consideration. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, I’ll give you a copy of this so you can have it 
before you to take a look at it. I wouldn’t mind receiving it back 
some time before agricultural estimates are done. 
 
My specific question to you, sir, is: will you nominate the House 
Leader or someone on your behalf with authority to look at the 
terms of reference — I’ll do the same on my side — with a view 
to introducing an all-party committee, properly manned and 
staffed, to work up a Saskatchewan version of what a long-term 
drought and disaster program might look like, and do whatever’s 
necessary in the consequence thereof, and at this session? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as the hon. member 
mentioned with respect to the motion that he suggested and to an 
all-party committee, I won’t rule out the possibility of committees 
or motions in the House as ways of extending messages to the 
federal government or doing some research. 
 
But I would say to the hon. member at this time, that — as I did in 
question period — the House Leaders can always explore this 
possibility. Right now I know that the interprovincial committees 
in western Canada, along with the federal government and PFRA 
(Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration) and the livestock 
associations and farm organizations, have had hours and hours and 
hours of research. And we’ve got the specialists in from crop 
science and other places, and we have before us much of the 
information that is needed. And we have made very specific 
recommendations to the federal government and to PFRA and to 
our provincial counterparts, so that now the proposals are before 
cabinet and we expect announcements. I think it’s fair to say that 
with . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Long term? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Both short run and long run. What it’s fair 
to say is that the minister of crop insurance should   



 
June 23, 1988 

 

2460 
 

be in a position to make announcements later today or tomorrow, 
hopefully by tomorrow. There should be further announcements, I 
expect, the first part of the week, if not the weekend, and then 
subsequent announces after that. 
 
Now I expect the House will be sitting at least till Friday, if not 
Saturday, and maybe Monday and maybe Tuesday, I don’t know. 
But in any event, as those things are announced, we will certainly 
be able to share and go through them in a considerable amount of 
detail. 
 
So what I’m trying to say to the hon. member is that — and I 
appreciate his co-operation and the spirit in which he’s offered this 
— that we have spent many, many hours co-operatively with other 
provinces and the federal government and specialists in science 
and in water and in research, putting together proposals for 
cabinet’s consideration. It has passed our cabinet with our 
blessing, and it is before the federal cabinet, and I expect it to be 
announced very, very soon. 
 
And in that event, then we can go through it all in some detail, 
which will announce the drought-proofing, announce the cash, and 
then announce some of the longer-run changes that can be made 
without hurting, without jeopardizing crop insurance and other 
things, that will allow us to handle these difficult situations into 
the future. 
 
So I appreciate the offer by the hon. member. I’ve not ruled it out. 
We’d certainly have our House Leader explore this and other 
things. 
 
I will give him this assurance. If we don’t get response from our 
counterparts at the national level, then at a minimum this is the 
kind of thing that we would be doing to raise the temperature a 
little bit, as he puts it, with respect to the cash and with respect to 
changes in various kinds of ongoing programs that we have. 
 
So I thank him for his suggestions. I won’t rule them out. They 
may be useful in something that we can do. But as I said, I expect 
crop insurance to be able to make, in co-operation with the federal 
government, announcements as early as tomorrow, and the federal 
government by next week. And certainly we’ll be prepared to 
jointly piggyback on those in the days ahead, and certainly within 
the weeks ahead. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, with your permission this will 
be my last intervention. I’ll make it very brief, in the light of the 
previous response. 
 
I guess the reason why I propose this is essentially threefold. First 
of all, as the Premier points out, depending upon the time frame, 
we’re not likely to be here as legislators for too much longer, 
whenever that date is, unless some unforeseen development takes 
place. 
 
And we don’t have a mechanism in place if we do have some 
inclination to accept an all-party committee unless there’s a 
mandate of this legislature to so direct the job to a body. The 
moment we adjourn from here, then it is in the hands inclusively 
of the Executive Council. I don’t mean that in the sense that we 
can’t trust the Executive 
 

Council on this issue, I mean it in the sense that if we’re going to 
elevate it for urgency so that all the members understand it, we 
need an all-party committee. Point number one. 
 
Point number two, I do not intend that this committee be asked to 
reinvent the wheel. None of us are experts on crop management or 
soil management or the studies of climate or the research council 
work, but I do think that as lay people all of us can bring common 
sense and experience, and our academic background and expertise, 
to an assessment of how commonsensical these documents and 
reports are. I think that’s another advantage of an all-party group 
for what might be, by the way, an ongoing difficulty. God forbid 
that it is! I hope it isn’t, but the drought situation may be ongoing, 
and we’re either going to be looking at this thing now or looking 
at it some time in the near future. 
 
And finally, and this is the last point that I want to make, Premier, 
and it’s up to you if you want to respond. If you don’t, then I will 
understand what your words are. I think it needs something more 
than the suggestion that the House leaders will meet in the 
ordinary course of events and talk about this thing. 
 
In my years of experience in government, it needs to have 
somebody with authority, like yourself as the Premier, to mandate 
somebody with authority to get the job done if the idea has merit. I 
don’t have much authority as Leader of the Opposition, and 
goodness knows, in this crowd I have almost no authority. But 
whatever authority I have, I would designate the same. 
 
What I’m saying is that I think it needs a positive act forward to 
designate some body or bodies to get on with the job of setting it 
up — not to reinvent the wheel — have an ongoing mechanism 
after the session’s over and do this in the one area where we can 
unite. And I understand your argument and if you don’t respond to 
this because of the arguments, and I know that the reasons stand 
the same, but I guess it’s one last, final pitch to the Premier in this 
regard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I was almost tempted 
to get into the crowd, but I will not. Mr. Chairman, I will say to the 
hon. member that certainly my House Leader will be instructed to 
share information as we receive it with you and your agricultural 
critics and others with respect to the programs that are being 
designed and announced and implemented. 
 
And so, on an ongoing basis, if the House leaders feel that they 
need more information or they need briefing, or you and your 
caucus colleagues need more and more information with respect to 
the impacts of some of the environmental changes that are going 
on that may cause some of the drought, the research that we’re 
receiving from the federal government, environmentalists, and 
others, we will certainly endeavour, and I will give you that 
assurance, to share that information with you and your colleagues 
and on . . . If conditions worsen on into the summer and into the 
fall and you want more information, we would be prepared to 
share more information with you. And we have members of our 
agriculture caucus and legislative secretaries and   



 
June 23, 1988 

 

2461 
 

ministers of Crop Insurance and others and Environment that have 
access to information, that would be more than willing to share 
with you. 
 
So I would give you that assurance so that our House leaders can 
meet, certainly. From our House Leader’s point of view, I will say 
that he’s prepared to discuss this with your House Leader at any 
time that you feel that you need more information. And we can 
provide it as we receive it and give you the kinds of things that all 
the public will be interested in as we face very difficult 
circumstances. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, Mr. 
Premier, we have seen in years gone by, as in 1985, that drought 
comes and goes. And the problem that we have is that as it comes 
and goes it appears that there is no long-term definitive 
mechanism in place that we can address — not just drought, but 
any disasters that may come along in Saskatchewan. 
 
We have today, June 23, this side of the House has been asking, 
where’s the program, where’s the policy? Your government has 
been saying, yes, it’s coming. Phase one was your announcement 
for water. We are still waiting for other announcements. 
 
The problem that I have is that the time that’s elapsed has involved 
a number of very critical decisions having to be made by those 
farmers who are out there in rural Saskatchewan who, one, maybe 
didn’t have the money to make some of those decisions in a way 
that would benefit themselves in the industry; and number two, 
that when making those decisions, their options were limited 
because they didn’t know what the government was going to do. 
 
We had your assurance that they could do whatever they wanted 
and we’re going to take care of it. But in light of the record of the 
government, I’m not so sure that that was very consoling to those 
people who had to make management decisions, decisions that 
whereby they could stay in the industry and yet have their cattle 
fed and watered in order that they could stay in the industry. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I guess my question is, first of all, why has the 
process taken so long? Why have you not come forward as . . . In 
1985 you and the federal government indicated you would have a 
long-term program. We have seen nothing to date in terms of a 
long-term program. We are in a situation in the Midwest United 
States and in Canada, and as you indicated yourself, it’s spreading 
to other parts, that this drought is certainly going to be something 
that we have to address in the long term, especially in light of the 
fact that the trend could continue. 
 
Mr. Minister, why has your government not acted sooner? Why all 
the delays? You indicated in ’85 you were going to have a 
program. It’s June of 1988. Farmers have had to make important 
decisions and they know not where they stand with regards to the 
government’s position. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it is always the 
obligation of the government and the administration of the day, 
and certainly I suppose this legislature, to 
 

provide as much assurance in cash and program capacity as 
possible to farmers or others when they face difficult situations. 
 
As I mentioned to the Leader of the Opposition, generally all 
political parties across Canada over the last 50 years have made 
significant strides towards drought-proofing and providing disaster 
mechanisms to assist farmers and ranchers and others that face 
difficult circumstances. 
 
I will remind the hon. member that we have a magnificent crop 
insurance mechanism in place now in this country, probably the 
best system in the world. It’s not perfect, and we make it better all 
the time. But it’s there and it’s triggered automatically, and it’s 
long run. It’s fundamentally sound; it’s there with farmers and 
provinces, and the federal government participating. It is very 
good insurance up to $1.5 billion in cash that’s available for 
coverage as a result of modifications that we have made. 
 
Perhaps you have made some suggestions, and others have over 
the years — or your party — to make it a stronger and stronger 
mechanism for farmers and ranchers to use for soil conservation, 
for cash flow, for protection against some of these disasters. 
 
Now we can top that up. And as a result of the ’85 disaster here, 
we have legislation, and in place, rules that will allow us to top up 
crop insurance so that people can go back to higher coverage and 
receive a better benefit. 
 
What I’m suggesting today is that you will hear more 
announcements on changes in crop insurance, what to do with 
respect to summer seeding and green feed, what we can do with 
respect to spring-seeded crops, what to do under special 
circumstances where perhaps you don’t want to touch your land 
and yet you want full coverage. Some cases you may want to, as I 
have described, or some of our caucus members have described, 
you want to go and cultivate it just to keep it from blowing. We 
have to accommodate those in a very long-run sense as we deal 
with these short-run programs. 
 
Now it’s a lot of money, and I’m sure you’re familiar with that, 
that it’s a billion and half, and easily could be 500, 600, $700 
million spent in this province a year, out of crop insurance, that is 
guaranteed, backed up by the public sector, and the farmer knows 
that. Now it’s not enough, but it’s a very, very good mechanism, 
and it is long run, with the capacity to adjust in the short run. 
That’s important. 
 
(1530) 
 
Secondly, all the programs that we are designing with people’s 
help and community’s help to provide water management is 
extremely important. And I won’t get into it in a long way, but 
reservoir management, the diversion of water, pumping of water, 
the dams, the irrigation, the assistance and incentives to drill for 
water, pumping water, to make sure that we have access to water 
in this province under very difficult circumstances, when it doesn’t 
rain or snow or just precipitation is not there. 
 
The combination of programs between the federal   



 
June 23, 1988 

 

2462 
 

government and ourselves through ERDA (Economic and 
Regional Development Agreement) and PFRA and water 
corporation is tens of millions of dollars. And I can think of 97.5 
under the federal program, and we’ve added 8 or $9 million. 
Alberta’s added 25 or $30 million to catch up to us, and 
Manitoba’s doing some of the same. 
 
Those are long-run projects, and certainly water projects. Again, 
not to inflame the situation, but water projects where we build the 
dam and we save the water, or we provide diversion pipelines like 
from Diefenbaker Lake to Buffalo Lake into Regina, are long-run 
programs. And they’re not short run; they’re very long run. If we 
don’t do them, then you face those perpetual short-run 
circumstances. 
 
Finally, I will agree with the hon. member that we have been 
working on a program to announce cash into people’s pockets as 
quickly as we can, that is cash to farmers and ranchers to move 
cattle or move feed or move water. And I suspect that’ll run in the 
neighbourhood — and I’m just guessing here — from 50 to $100 
million between the provinces and the federal government. 
 
And I expect the federal cabinet to, from information that I have, 
to give final approval to that package in general in the next few 
days. I’ve been in touch and my officials have been in touch with 
the federal counterparts, and they are advising me that it goes 
before the full cabinet very, very soon. Now we expected it in late 
June, and obviously it’s getting into late June, and the timing is 
about appropriate. 
 
The stock growers, I’ll say and then I’ll take my place, have 
advised us that we should be careful and watch that we design a 
program that is appropriate. They’ve received an awful lot of rain 
in Alberta, and where they were looking at an $80 million 
problem, it’s down to about a $25 million problem. In our case, 
it’s got dryer so we’ve moved from maybe a 25 or $30 million 
problem up to a $40 million problem, and so we’re watching that 
very carefully. 
 
It’s obviously moved into Manitoba, into Ontario, Quebec, Ohio, 
Illinois, Arkansas, Kansas, Oklahoma, right down to Texas and all 
the way up to almost the Peace River country. So we have a huge 
area of North America that is suffering from this. Governments 
will have to respond. 
 
There will be more access to cash, if you will, as a result of rain in 
Alberta, but obviously with the drought moving into Ontario and 
Quebec, it gets more severe, so I think most governments, all 
governments indeed, will provide the money where there is the 
need, and that’s the thing that we will be encouraging our 
counterparts to do. So we appreciate your suggestions and your 
advice. 
 
The long-run stuff through crop insurance is important; that we 
can modify, as we all agree, certain things, but not hurt the basic 
fundamental soundness of the crop insurance program because 
farmers and ranchers really rely on it. So we can make appropriate 
changes, but still have that actuarially sound so that farmers can 
continue to buy and have access to very good crop insurance. 

Mr. Chairman: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Could I have leave to introduce some guests, 
please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It’s a pleasure 
for me to introduce in Mr. Speaker’s gallery some ladies who are 
visitors here to Saskatchewan. They’re with their spouses. They 
are with the board of directors for crop insurance for the four 
western provinces — B.C., Alberta, Manitoba, and of course 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Also visiting, or here visiting with them also is a couple of 
members from Quebec who are visitors at our conference. They’re 
here with their husbands. Their husbands are now meeting a board 
meeting right now looking at what the Premier was talking about 
here — long-term planning for crop insurance; how the four 
provinces can work together to have better and long-term 
planning. 
 
They didn’t realize last night as we were talking to them that 
Saskatchewan has 43 per cent of the agricultural land in Canada 
here in Saskatchewan, and how important crop insurance is to us 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So I ask the members to welcome these ladies here today. I’m sure 
they’ll have the . . . find this visit to our Assembly informative. I 
also wish them a safe journey back to their provinces. I do hope 
they enjoy our province; it’s a great one. And do come back again. 
And ask all members to join with me in welcoming you here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 1 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Chairman, I too would like to join with the 
minister to welcome the ladies here today. I’m sure their husbands 
are doing very good work in this important area of crop insurance 
to ensure that farmers in western Canada have some sort of a 
program whereby they . . . that they can rely on to maintain their 
livelihood. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, unfortunately your response didn’t answer my 
question. And I don’t suppose if I asked again I’ll get an answer 
either. But the problem is that you’ve waited so long. You’re 
dragging your feet on the programs. 
 
Farmers, a month . . . or eight weeks ago, some of them had to 
make decisions on what to do with their livestock. They didn’t 
know what the government was going to do. They had no program 
whereby they could set out   



 
June 23, 1988 

 

2463 
 

guide-lines, if they should move some of their cattle or sell some 
of them, or what the implications would be. They just didn’t 
know. 
 
And that’s the message that they’re conveying to me; we don’t 
know what our limits will be; how do we maintain our herds; how 
do we maintain the industry in Saskatchewan when we don’t 
know what support there will be — especially in light of the huge 
debt that’s hanging over many of those same people who are grain 
producers and livestock producers. 
 
So I just say that I don’t understand why you’re taking so long. 
The farmers out there don’t understand why you’re taking so long. 
In 1985 you said there was going to be a program. We haven’t 
seen one. It just doesn’t make good sense for you to be in the 
middle of June or end of June without a program. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, with regards to crop insurance, will you be 
putting forward a presentation that would include having crop 
insurance based on the actual dollar per bushel that farmers 
receive, including the subsidy? When farmers go out to . . . when 
they do their budgeting, they budget on stabilization. They know 
approximately what they’re going to get; they hope for deficiency 
payments. And when it comes to crop insurance pay-backs, they 
don’t have the actual dollars or 70 per cent of the actual dollars 
that they would have received. 
 
Will your presentation to the federal government include 
increasing the dollar coverage on crop insurance to reflect the 
subsidized price the farmers are getting now, roughly 4.50 a 
bushel per wheat, and down on others? 
 
And the other thing is that in many areas where farmers have 
collected crop insurance or where they’ve had hail or something, 
they’re down to 70 per cent of the 70 per cent pay back. So that’s a 
very low figure when it comes to . . . in a year where they are 
strapped for cash and they don’t have enough money to cover their 
inputs. So, Mr. Minister, will you consider that change to crop 
insurance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I believe that the 
situation that the hon. member raises is tied to the — if he allows 
me — more the market price of wheat. When the price is going 
down, the crop insurance payments were based on prices higher 
than the market, and when the prices are down and then moving 
up, it’s vice versa. 
 
I believe the recommendations we have made are to tie them as 
closely to reality as possible, so that, in fact, your insurance 
reflects what’s going on in that market-place. You don’t want to 
be paying too much, and obviously you want your fair share in 
case you have to collect crop insurance. So it’s . . . sometimes it’s 
half a dozen one way, and the next day it’s six the other. 
 
So my officials advise me that the suggestions to the crop 
insurance people is to tie it as close as they can to the market. Now 
you will find, I would suspect, and as you know, the market has 
gone up virtually the limit or almost the limit on a daily basis. As 
we go into the next crop year, you’re probably going to see higher 
initial prices, and you’re going to see a reflection in that in terms 
of your 
 

insurance. 
 
You can never be right on, but you try to get it as close as possible, 
so that, in fact, if the market is going to reflect, say 4.50 wheat, 
and it could now because they’re even talking — what is it? — 
beans in the teens, 13, $14 soy beans now in the United States, and 
obviously more expensive wheat, then your crop insurance is 
going to be reflected in that. 
 
So it’s always behind, I suppose is the thing, because you can’t be 
ahead of the market; it changes on a daily basis. And we go back 
and look at the initial payments which the wheat board announces 
at the beginning of the crop year. It’ll probably reflect it in this if 
we can keep it as timely as possible; certainly that seems to make 
sense. 
 
The other thing I could add is that when you have changes in the 
deficiency payment, they are reflected in changes in subsidies 
other places and changes in the market. So you would have to 
have a very complicated and very timely adjustment in subsidies 
and insurance and wheat board prices and premiums to reflect that 
all the time on a really accurate basis. 
 
So I think, and my officials have advised me that, get as close as 
we can and follow it closely, and we’ll certainly advise them to do 
that. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well I understand, Mr. Minister, the process, but 
the problem is that despite the fact that grain prices are increasing, 
that won’t be reflected till next year. And the problem that we’re 
running into is based on $2.65 wheat to the current year, when in 
real terms the value is about $4.50, if that’s the figure I may use 
generally. That current crop insurance value does not reflect the 
value that the farmer expects to get when all his payments are in, 
and he’s budgeting on that maximum, including western grains 
stabilization and the special grains program. 
 
And when it comes to crop loss and to crop insurance, the dollars 
he’s getting is not reflecting what he’s been budgeting upon. And 
what I’m saying is that crop insurance should take into account 
that total dollar per bushel value, and then when there’s a crop 
loss, the reason that subsidy is there is because it has to be there to 
cover his cost of production, plus hopefully maintain him on that 
land. But the way crop insurance is right now, the world price 70 
per cent of the average of that doesn’t come anywhere near what 
he has to have to maintain his livelihood. 
 
So I would ask you again, will you put that solution forward? Will 
you put forward to your counterparts in western Canada and the 
federal government that crop insurance should reflect the total 
dollar per bushel income that farmers will be budgeting on in the 
next few years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, let me just try this again. 
When the farmer buys his crop insurance, he knows what he can 
buy, so he’s not buying a pig in a poke; he knows exactly what it 
is, and he can cover full coverage or part coverage, summer fallow 
and stubble, and he makes that decision. 
  



 
June 23, 1988 

 

2464 
 

Let me also make the other point. You have production insurance, 
which is loss of insurance against crop failure, and then you, on 
the other hand, you have market insurance, which is western grain 
stabilization on the price side. And you could insure for both, but 
you don’t link the two of them, so that you have production 
because of crop failures that you can buy insurance for, and then 
you can do the same thing on the market side. And that’s why, 
over the years, your dad, my folks, and others over the years have 
designed these parallel systems to handle the insurance that you 
want to buy as a farmer. 
 
Now I will grant you that when you put some sort of value when 
you have to buy the insurance, you have to pick something, so 
they pick the wheat board initial price and they follow that and 
say, well, this is what we’ll base the production on. They have to 
have a bench-mark. Sometimes it’s too high. 
 
And I remind you that, you know, they’ve paid for insurance that 
was 4.08 a bushel and the price that they were getting in the 
market was maybe three and a quarter. They paid for too much. 
Now it’s going the other way and it’s too little. But it is production 
insurance, so all you need is the guide-line there, but you try to be 
as close as you can and follow the wheat board’s chain. 
 
On the market side, you can buy insurance for that as well. And 
we have the parallel systems great systems, I think the rest of the 
world, certainly Americans and Europeans, have looked at our 
parallel system because they are not so much support on the 
commodity but the support on income, which I think is pretty fair. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier and Mr. 
Minister, I have two or three questions to ask related to the same 
subject matter that you’ve been questioned about already this 
afternoon and then one or two new areas that I would like to raise 
with you. 
 
First of all, with respect to the specific questions about crop 
insurance that you have just been addressing. I would like to put to 
you a couple of questions that are just a little bit different; the 
questions that I have received from a significant number of 
farmers in Saskatchewan where I think your opinion in the present 
state of affairs would be very helpful. 
 
(1545) 
 
First of all on this issue of limited coverage after a number of 
years of successive losses, some farmers ask the question that the 
crop insurance program is different from most other insurances 
that one might think of in this respect. Because if you’re buying 
some other insurance policy to insure some physical asset, if you 
have some losses, the risk factor goes up and you can still buy 
your insurance but you pay a higher premium; you can still buy 
100 per cent coverage. 
 
With respect to crop insurance: according to the rules, after a 
number of losses and a number of years, of course, as you know, 
you go down to 70 per cent coverage and then down to 70 per cent 
of 70 per cent, and the arithmetic gets pretty frustrating for the 
farmer who 
 

wonders if it’s worth the purchase. 
 
I wonder if you are considering partially, in relation to this year’s 
problems, but more particularly for the long term, if you are 
considering an adjustment in that part of crop insurance so that a 
farmer can always buy 100 per cent coverage. It would affect his 
premiums, of course, but he would always be in a position to buy 
to that coverage if he wanted that level of coverage. 
 
And if I could ask a second question at the same time, Mr. 
Premier, having to do with this price that is worked into the 
formula in terms of the value of what the farmer is buying. as you 
have pointed out, some years it’s too high, like a couple of years 
ago, where the going price in the world for grain was substantially 
lower than the crop insurance guarantee, and now we have the flip 
side of that where the price is what? somewhere around $3 or a 
little bit better than that, and there’s been a rising market for grain, 
and the world price is higher than the crop insurance price. 
 
If it’s not possible to take into account all the other programs that 
bear upon that situation like grain stabilization and special grains 
and so forth, would it be possible to include in the crop insurance 
system a formula whereby that price that you, by definition, have 
to pick well before the crop year starts — is there a way to work 
into the system a formula whereby that price picked in advance 
can be adjusted later on to reflect changes, most particularly in 
world market conditions, so that farmers could benefit from the 
rising price when we’re in an improving market. Again that would 
have some retroactive effect on premiums that would have to be 
taken into account. 
 
But I wonder if that kind of flexibility could not be worked into 
the program. And overall, with these two matters that I’ve raised 
with you, keep the crop insurance an attractive form of protection 
for farmers to have because it has proven in the past to be a very 
valuable program. We always want to make it as good as it 
possibly can be. I wonder if those suggestions could go before you 
for consideration for the future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can certainly discuss 
these possibilities with the minister of crop insurance and review 
it. I just throw out a couple of things to the hon. member. From my 
recollection — an my officials tell me that’s likely the case — 
with the co-operations of members of the legislature and farmers 
and communities and others, we’ve designed the individual 
coverage so that in fact a farmer can buy up to always 80 per cent 
of the coverage of his 10-year average. So that even if he’s wiped 
right out and he wants to go back again, he has the capacity to get 
substantial insurance — not 70 per cent of 70 per cent, but 80 per 
cent of his 10-year, and he can keep it there. 
 
Now that also has some impact on your formula suggestion in 
your latter question, in terms of picking a price. It could get, I 
would think, and I’ll take it under advisement, I would think, very 
expensive to have an actuarially sound system that is ratchet one 
way only because nobody would buy the lower one. So you’d only 
change your mind if you’d get a higher price for the same   



 
June 23, 1988 

 

2465 
 

sum of money. 
 
Now to make that actuarially sound, I would think you’d need 
very high premiums because you’d never know, as the market 
responded, if you wanted to buy up and then cover it; I mean, it 
could cost people a lot of money because there’s never any sort of 
off-setting down side. 
 
But I’m willing to explore that, and I will share that with my 
colleague and maybe they have some information on it. We don’t 
have it here, but certainly I can suggest that you forward this and 
we’ll look at it and see what the pros and cons are, and maybe we 
can discuss it at another time. But it seems to me that the 
individual coverage covers a good part of limited coverage after 
successive crop failures. 
 
Another reason that perhaps we went to limited coverage — 
individual coverage, pardon me — is that obviously you don’t 
want to encourage people to farm for crop insurance. I don’t think 
you make money at it anyway, but maybe on very marginal land if 
you want to keep playing games, you might make more than if 
you just left it alone. 
 
By encouraging them to go to individual coverage, they have to 
look at their own productivity and base it against the rest of their 
peers, which seems to me pretty responsible. They can buy it. 
They can pay for it. As you mentioned, the premium would be 
there so they can get pretty good coverage. You could probably 
look at maybe modifying that to 85 per cent or 90 per cent, 
depending on what farmers might think is reasonable. 
 
To my recollection and from what my people tell me, the 
individual coverage probably addresses both of those, at least it 
has so far. Now it’s certainly not perfect. Maybe some of your 
suggestions could be taken further. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the Premier for being 
willing to take those things under consideration. 
 
Just one technical question, Mr. Premier, about the drought 
program that we’re anticipating for this year with announcements 
in the next very few days. I would ask you for some reassurance 
that one idea that I have heard emanating — not from this 
province, but from our sister province to the west, Alberta — that 
that suggestion is not going to appear in the announcements 
because I don’t think it’s a particularly useful one from 
Saskatchewan’s point of view. 
 
But I have heard it suggested from some sources in Alberta that 
one of their proposals might be a way to deal with this problem for 
this year, avoid this problem of drawing boundary lines, and 
defining drought areas. One of the suggestions from Alberta was 
apparently to simply put whatever extra money might be available 
federally and provincially into a topped-up version of the forage 
coverage under crop insurance. 
 
The statistics, I understand, would indicate that about 60 per cent 
of livestock producers in Alberta are covered by their forage 
coverage. It’s by no means that high in the province of 
Saskatchewan. As you know, we’ve had some difficulty getting a 
forage coverage system going in this province. 

So if that proposal from Alberta were to be accepted at a national 
level to simply top up the forage coverage under crop insurance, 
that might help 60 per cent of those in difficulty in Alberta, but it 
would leave out the vast majority in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I don’t ask you for a long comment on this subject, just some 
brief reassurance that, to your knowledge, that’s not the 
mechanism that is going to be used, because it wouldn’t be 
particularly helpful here in Saskatchewan if that turned out to be 
the formula. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I think the hon. member makes a valid 
observation. We have not got all of our producers, certainly, in a 
forage insurance mechanism. We’re encouraging them to 
participate. More people have participated in the Alberta pilot 
project, and it’s based on a per head insurance coverage, up to 
$150, and a large number have participated in that. 
 
So their situation is different than ours. So I would not see an 
awful lot of help for us, at least under the current circumstances, if 
we opted for . . . of if somebody opted for a program that was 
based on forage insurance. Certainly not here. So maybe some 
day, as we get more of them into it, it could be part of a 
comprehensive package. But I would agree with the hon. member 
that it wouldn’t do here, and that’s why we’ve opted for some 
other alternatives. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, again I appreciate that 
reassurance from the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, if I could move on to a different subject matter that’s 
not altogether unrelated, it has to do with your government’s great 
emphasis upon irrigation and some of the difficulties that have 
developed in respect of some areas in Saskatchewan where 
irrigation has been pursued. I am one of those who believes that 
irrigation is a very worthy objective to pursue, and that we should 
be pursuing it as long as we are absolutely sure that we’re doing it 
right. 
 
I think one of the things we’re discovering in that Outlook district, 
for example, is that some early mistakes were made, technological 
mistakes, and some serious problems are now beginning to appear. 
Some of the original canals are leaking rather badly. There’s still 
the old-fashioned flood system being used in some places. There’s 
soil saturation. The water table has come up. There’s salinity 
problems. There’s the difficulty with no original drainage system 
having been provided to get that excess water out of the soil and 
back into the river so it can go through the cycle again in the 
proper kind of way. 
 
So problems are emerging there, Mr. Premier, for farmers, for the 
rural municipalities, in trying to maintain their road systems; 
problems, generally, in terms of public policy relating to irrigation 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I wonder if you could tell us today if your government: number 
one, has any specific plans in mind to correct the technical and 
structural mistakes that were made in the first place; to repair or 
replace those original canals; to   



 
June 23, 1988 

 

2466 
 

transfer people over from the old flood system to a sprinkler 
system or a pivot system; to build in now a weeping tile structure, 
if I can call it that, to drain out some of that water that is being 
trapped in place and causing the soil to be saturated and the 
salinity problem to emerge. 
 
I guess in that district, if you’re fortunate enough to be the farmer 
on the highest land, these problems don’t affect you, but if you’re 
further down and closer to the river as the water flow moves 
through or under your property, you’ve got some difficulty. And I 
just wonder what the government’s plan might be to address these 
problems, for the specific purpose that the credibility of irrigation 
for the future of Saskatchewan can be maintained and not 
undermined by these sorts of difficulties. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well the hon. member does mention an area 
where — the Outlook area — there have been early pilot projects 
with respect to irrigation, and mistakes were made. On two of his 
observations I would concur that we are looking at corrective 
measures which would involve tiling some of those ditches where 
there has been seepage and the build-up of salts — should have 
been done right to start with, but it wasn’t. 
 
The second thing is that we are prepared, and have been for a little 
while, a few years, to help people convert or upgrade to better 
systems. And we will provide $100 an acre for people who want 
to go from flood to pivot irrigation and improve their situation, 
and as a result of that, I think, what we’ve learned over the past — 
the better equipment, the new technology, the kinds of pressure 
pipes that we’re into. 
 
And certainly in Luck Lake and the other things that we’re doing, 
I really believe we can avoid a lot of the problems, and obviously, 
hopefully we’ve learned from the past and can overcome some of 
the technological imperfections that were there at the outset. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Premier, I wonder if you could indicate a 
rough time frame in which you might anticipate some of this 
repair work and corrective work in the Outlook district to be 
forthcoming. I would be interested to know when you would 
anticipate some of that beginning to happen, because I think it’s an 
important thing to do quickly before that problem gets too much 
worse. 
 
And to save time, Mr. Premier, if I could, while I’m on my feet, 
simply ask you the last question that I’ll put to you this afternoon, 
and that has to do with a different subject matter altogether. 
 
The University of Saskatchewan Department of Agriculture and 
Economics conducted a study that I’m sure you’re aware of, in the 
early part of this year, entitled, “International Wheat Markets, the 
Options Available to Saskatchewan.” The study was authored by 
Professors Furtan, Gray, Schmitz and Ulrich, and it’s a very 
interesting analysis of the world grain market situation in which 
Saskatchewan finds itself rather severely disadvantaged at the 
present time because of what the 
 

Europeans and the United States and other countries are doing. 
 
This report makes the very interesting point, Mr. Premier, that 
fighting the trade subsidies of other countries is a fight that we 
need to fight. We have to persuade those other countries that their 
export policies in relation to grain are more than just 
wrong-headed, they’re utterly insane, and we’re the victims of 
most of the flack that flows from what those other countries are 
doing in terms of our depressed grain prices. 
 
But beyond that, the report points out that simply eliminating the 
subsidies is not going to automatically be a solution to the 
problem, and the grain price for our farmers in Saskatchewan 
won’t just automatically spring back up to decent levels once you 
get rid of the subsidies. You do have to get rid of the subsidies, but 
something more is required after you’ve removed the subsidies to 
get that grain price back up. 
 
I wonder what the Premier’s comment might be on that analysis 
by those agricultural economists at the University of 
Saskatchewan. And I wonder if the Premier would agree with me 
that beyond just working on that international subsidy problem 
that we’ve got, that it’s about time now for Canada to be taking the 
next step, which is talking to a number of our international grain 
trading partners — most particularly, the United States, Australia, 
and Argentina — to persuade at least those other three major grain 
exporters to join with Canada in a new exercise, namely, a new 
and effective negotiated international grains agreement to try to 
have some positive impact on that grain price and get it up to 
decent levels, to a level where those grain prices would be 
satisfactory from the point of view of our producers that would 
have to be at least double what it is today, if not triple. 
 
I wonder if the Premier would endorse that kind of activity on the 
part of the Government of Canada to go beyond just the fight 
against the subsidies. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well you’ve opened up a really interesting 
topic, and as I’m sure you can imagine, one that I have some fairly 
strong views on. 
 
I would just say very briefly that with respect to . . . And I just 
consulted with the Minister of Environment in water, when we 
could look at moving on the tiling and so forth. We are doing 
some work and some research now, and have been with the 
federal government, on how to tile and where and how best to start 
that. I’m advised that perhaps within about a year we will begin 
the process where you’ll start seeing the tiling in the corrective 
tile. We’re looking at the various kinds of, I guess, technology and 
where the problem is and where it’s the weakest and where it’s 
strongest and where to correct it and how to link it up to other 
ditches and several things. 
 
So they’re still finishing that research. I will say that we’re not 
going to leave it that way. We’re going to do something — and I 
guess I go back to your original comment — we want to do it 
right. And if we have to correct it, and it is expensive, at least what 
you do correct, make sure it is right so you can say, well, we’re 
making   



 
June 23, 1988 

 

2467 
 

progress and we’re not covering it over; we’re doing something 
that’s worthwhile. 
 
Secondly, with respect to the price of wheat, I would just make 
two observations. When we have more and more government 
subsidies, as you point out, it encourages people to produce 
something that the world does not need in that amount and you 
have surpluses. And with the stockpiles that have developed in 
Europe, and indeed in the United States, you would see prices go 
down. Now the more we subsidize, the more the surpluses and the 
lower the price. That’s been the case. 
 
There’s two things that can get the price back up — no, I suppose 
three, given your third suggestion. One is you back away from 
those subsidies which are expensive and you reduce the surpluses. 
And as the surpluses go down, market prices will go up. 
 
Secondly, you can experience a drought. Because what happens? 
The inventories go down, subsidies or not. And they say, well 
we’d have less now than a world’s supply of grain on hand, and 
that’s starting to have an impact on markets world-wide. 
 
So I agree with you. Subsidies have hurt us a great deal. Producers 
around the world, but particularly Saskatchewan producers that are 
very competitive on an international basis, have had to take on 
other treasuries that have encouraged their farmers to produce 
when they shouldn’t be producing. We used to sell canola and 
grain and barley to France and other places. And what happened? 
Now they don’t let it in. They subsidize their own and they take 
our markets world-wide and they frankly cheat. It’s cheating 
because they don’t play fair and they can’t compete on a level 
playing field, and that’s all we ask for. So I agree with you. 
 
If you’ll allow me just a sentence here, where the seven world 
leaders that were just meeting at the summit said this, and I just 
add the sentence: 
 

Our negotiators in Geneva must (must) develop a framework 
approach which includes short-term options in line with 
long-term goals concerning the reduction of all direct and 
indirect subsidies, and other measures affecting directly or 
indirectly agricultural trade. 

 
Now when that’s endorsed by François Mitterrand, the President 
of France, who is obviously guilty of subsidies, and the Chancellor 
of Germany, and the Italians, and the Brits, as well as the President 
of the United States, at least we’ve got them to say they must 
reduce the subsidies. That will help. No question about it. It costs 
us less money and there’s less inventories and therefore the prices 
will rise. 
 
But I add the second point, and I don’t mean to belabour it. An 
international high price set by producing countries is just as 
dangerous as the subsidies, because what happens is our customers 
turn into competitors. And if you set the price at $7 a bushel 
world-wide, those we are now selling to would say, I’m not going 
to produce rice or I’m not going to produce . . . I’m going to 
produce wheat, and I’m going to sell it at that price for somebody 
because 

obviously you’re prepared to pay it. You can run into the same 
problems. 
 
What we need in this country, because nobody can compete with 
us on a level playing field, is just that — a level playing field. Say 
you leave the subsidies alone, we will sell wheat and barley and 
canola any place in the world, with anybody else that you want to 
play with, as long as you stay out of it. Just leave it alone, because 
when you go back into it and either set the price too high and 
allow everybody to get in, then all of a sudden those we used to 
sell to no longer want to buy because they’d rather produce. 
They’ll convert acreages that have been into grass, into sugar cane, 
into rice, into all kinds of things, to produce $7 wheat. 
 
I just point out to you, because it’s very important at an 
international level for Canadians, whether they come from 
Assiniboia or Gravelbourg or Estevan or Moose Jaw or any place 
across western Canada particularly, we can compete with the very 
best as long as we can keep the big treasuries out from under it. 
 
Now if we do go to a price, an international price, then you’d have 
to play like OPEC (Organization of Petroleum Exporting 
Countries) and you’d have to say, all right, you can only produce 
so much and sell so much, and you can only produce so much. 
And surely in your political career you can remember LIFT (lower 
inventory for tomorrow) and you can remember other things when 
we’d come out and tell our farmers, you can only produce X and 
you can only produce Y, and you can’t sell any more, and I’ll pay 
you not to grow because we’ve got this international price. And it 
is dynamite. it’s just really difficult to get western Canadian dry 
land farmers particularly, not to grow. 
 
So I agree with you. I want the price up, want to get these other 
people out of it. The more monkey business we get involved with 
internationally in subsidies or artificially high prices where we 
have to lock countries into production, the more politics involved 
and the more difficult and the more expensive it is. 
 
So in my humble opinion I would say, or I would encourage them, 
get out of it. I mean, don’t get into something that you’re not very 
good at. Just leave it alone. We can produce wheat and grains and 
oil seeds better than anybody in the world, without subsidy, if 
they’d just let us compete. 
 
Well I would certainly be prepared to talk a long time on that in a 
lot of places because the alternatives are . . . We’ve been there, and 
they’re dangerous and politically they’re really difficult to sell. I 
concur with you, the price has to be higher. Clearly it does. 
Subsidies have to go. I have some pretty serious reservations, 
however, about an international agreement where others can also 
make money. You know, who do you sell to and who do you 
allow to produce? And that comes at some cost. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to address a 
few questions on a problem that is facing Saskatchewan people, 
and that is the drought. I want to say, Mr. Minister, that I guess it’s 
about three weeks ago that we did do a drought tour across the 
south of   



 
June 23, 1988 

 

2468 
 

Saskatchewan and down from Pangman to Gravelbourg, to 
Vanguard, to Ponteix, to Rosetown, to Kindersley, across to 
Lloydminster, to Battleford, and I can tell you that it was the most 
meaningful experience to see first-hand and to actually talk with 
the farmers and the business community, the bankers, the credit 
union managers, and to discuss the reality of the problems and the 
magnitude of the problem. 
 
I guess if there’s a disappointment, is while you indicated, go 
ahead and do what you have to do and it’s retroactive, I think the 
commitment, the time that it has taken to evolve a program that 
the farmers can make a decent and informed decision, certainly 
has been lacking. You’ve been all the way from the love boat in 
British Columbia meeting; you had a meeting over in Alberta; you 
ran to Ottawa with a meeting. And today you stand up and say, 
well it’s in the hands of the federal government and it may come 
down in a week or two weeks. Desperate people, desperately 
wanting to keep an industry alive, particularly the cattle people. 
And I think I’m terribly disappointed and I think the people of the 
province are concerned that there has been no announcements. 
 
This drought has been before us, and we have been trying to raise 
it in this legislature. We had tried to move a resolution, an 
emergency resolution, and we were denied . . . in order to discuss 
it in a meaningful way in this legislature, and it was denied by 
your government for opportunity of the members here to discuss 
it. 
 
We moved also with resolution 17, and that was ruled out of order, 
even though I think one of the greatest emergencies is the drought. 
And it, in my view, should have been discussed. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Premier, there are things that you could 
have moved on, and according . . . would have been of 
considerable assistance to the farmers who are searching for relief; 
that is, for pasture and for feed and for water. And I don’t think 
you have done it. 
 
And I want to ask you whether you have . . . And I know you will 
say that there is the ag reps and I know you will say they can 
phone the Saskatchewan Research Council for information or they 
can phone the Department of Agriculture. 
 
But one of the things that is lacking here, and it would not be a 
great inconvenience, if indeed you had an information bank, a 
central information bank which the farmers could phone in toll 
free in order to get information in respect to pastures that are 
available in other provinces. I think your government should have 
been co-ordinating that. 
 
I think you should . . . pastures in other parts of Saskatchewan. I 
think it should be . . . information should be made available in the 
desperation of seeking water. I go into Pangman, and they indicate 
that the information in regard to availability of water in deep wells 
is just not good enough. They say they go to the water corporation, 
and it’s so understaffed that they can’t get the proper information. 
These are the words of the farmers and the difficulties that they’re 
having. 
 

And so I ask you specifically two questions. I want to be clear and 
specific on this. Can you indicate what precisely the specific 
programs that you have to date announced to address the drought 
situation? That I want you to detail: the specific programs that you 
have announced, not the ones that are pending, but what the 
programs of benefit that you have announced to the cattlemen, 
who I want to address first of all; and secondly, would you 
consider having an information bank toll free; and a collection of 
that information and an assembly of that information so that the 
farmers in desperate situation could have ready access to it. I’d 
like you to answer those. 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the hon. 
member with respect to an information bank, I would have to say 
that we’ve taken his suggestion seriously some time ago. And for 
his information, I will give him the feed grain and forage listing 
service that I would have suspected that he could have provided 
his constituents. But perhaps . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Have they got a toll free information 
centre? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes. Mr. Chairman, if you’ll allow me to 
finish. As an MLA he might want to know and he can write this 
down. The feed grain and forage listing service which I provide to 
farmers for Saskatchewan residents, toll free, it’s 1-800-667-7564 
or 112-800-667-7564, and in the Creighton-Lloydminster area, 
you can call collect, 787-5951. 
 
And the various kinds of services that you can get by phoning that 
number are the following: truckers of feed grain and forage, 
pasture for grazing, contracting feed grain or forage production, 
winter feeding of livestock, custom baling, custom drying, and 
custom combining. 
 
And as a result of farmers coming to us, they’ve said the 
objectives of these programs should be to publicize for sellers of 
feed grain and forage so that they can link up with buyers and 
enable farmers to find out information, as the hon. member has 
pointed out — where I can take my cattle, where I can graze cattle, 
where I can find contracting for feed grain and forage production, 
winter feed for livestock, and the custom kind of services that you 
might need from time to time. 
 
And I will say that there are peak periods of the year when this 
was in use, and we have designed this system in some detail since 
1985. The peak year of use was in ’85-86, during the last difficult 
period — 2,718 listings offered 366,867 tonnes of feed in 
1986-87, and volumes have increased again this year as the result 
of telephone calls that have gone between farmers and ranchers. 
 
So more than twice the listings have been initiated as a result of 
this toll-free number, which is the feed grain and forage listing 
service in Saskatchewan that the farmers are familiar with. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Two questions that I had asked you in respect to 
the information bank, and I can tell you that using the numbers 
that you have available, what the   



 
June 23, 1988 

 

2469 
 

farmers are getting is, we have nothing available. And they are 
going out themselves and seeking information from other 
provinces. And we’ve talked to cattlemen that have done that, and 
they just say that the full inventory of information is not as 
complete as it might be. 
 
I know the desperation of the situation, and many of the normal 
community pastures and so on are decreased to 40 per cent of 
capacity, so there’s a major problem. But I can assure you that 
farmers are having some difficulty and they’re . . . and exactly the 
same with information as to availability of water, how deep you’d 
have to go to drill. In the area of Pangman they’re saying they 
don’t know whether the water is suitable if they bring it up, that a 
purification method would have to be . . . or desalting or 
demineralization of the water. And those are some things that, you 
know, have to be addressed. And what can a farmer do out there 
unless the government takes a lead to these important areas? 
 
But more particularly, what I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: could 
you be specific and just detail briefly what in fact you have 
announced so far in respect to the assistance to the cattlemen who 
desperately need a program, both short term and long term? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I will send over a copy of 
the Saskatchewan feed grain and forage listing service that is now 
in the R.M. offices so the hon. member will have it at his disposal, 
just so that he knows, and that the R.M. councillors know, and the 
R.M. offices; so that the public, the farmers and others who want 
information on all the feed supplies and forage and grazing and 
custom services. He can have a copy of this. Would you please 
give this to the member from Quill Lakes. 
 
With respect to the programs that the provincial government and 
the federal government are providing the public, I will say to the 
hon. member that there are three parts to it. The first part has been 
announced already and that has to do with water. And we’ve been 
talking about the water, where we will pick up half the costs of 
drilling for new wells. And that’s been very helpful and 
instrumental. 
 
I’m not sure how many new wells have been drilled, but I know in 
our area where we farm, there have been wells drilled all over the 
place, and very successfully, that have provided water to 
communities and farmers and ranchers and feedlot operators and 
hog operators and so forth. And so I agree with you. The 
government should take the initiative to say we will help and 
facilitate, and we have. 
 
We’ve announced our programs to transport water, to pump water, 
to drill for water, and to provide better water management. We’ve 
announced our programs for increased irrigation, and not to 
inflame it; it’s obviously announced programs to manage water 
better, and obviously now have the licensed capacity to put 
together a major water project in south-eastern Saskatchewan with 
Rafferty and Alameda, which will provide water for many, many 
tens of thousands of people for a long time to come. That’s the 
first part of a three-part announcement. 
 
The second part we expect any day, which is 
 

co-operation between the federal and provincial government on 
cash payments to farmers and ranchers. 
 
The third part has to do with ongoing programs. And there again 
we’ve already made announcements. We’ve announced the feed 
grain programs associated with winter or fall seeding of fall rye 
and winter wheat and so forth, that says that you can graze these, 
you can cut them, and still receive crop insurance. 
 
The minister of crop insurance will be announcing, I hope 
tomorrow, what we can do with respect to grain feed program and 
will subsequently be announcing how we can treat the spring 
seeded crops with respect to feed programs. From then on, we will 
be looking at any modifications that we might need to adjust crop 
insurance to handle the soil erosion programs, and obviously we 
will have a comprehensive, three-pronged approach. 
 
So over $100 million is in play already. We’re looking at from 50 
to $100 million, I would say, announced in terms of cash in the 
next few days, and we’re looking at at least 1.5 billion in total 
coverage in crop insurance. And all those are in play so that 
farmers and ranchers know that yes, we were there in ’84, ’5, and 
’6 with drought; we’ll be there again. We will build up and 
improve crop insurance where we believe it’s important, and 
provide cash and the combinations of programs, as I’ve offered the 
hon. member. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a couple of 
questions, Mr. Minister, on the proposed Babcock swine operation 
that is possibly going to be going into Saskatchewan. As I 
understand it, there is a large operation, Babcock from out of 
Minnesota, bringing American breeding stock into Canada, 
bending the rules on quarantine, looking for investors to set up a 
huge, huge couple of hog operations. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell me the numbers of hogs that are going 
to be brought in from the U.S., and who is spearheading the 
program in Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know how many 
animals will be involved in the breeding stock operation. I will tell 
the hon. member that there will be . . . and obviously there will be 
no rules bent with respect to quarantine. Any animals that come in 
here have to live under federal quarantine rules and regulations. 
 
What I am informed, however, is that the particular individuals 
may be prepared to set up a breeding operation that meets all our 
quarantine standards, which would be of benefit to western 
Canada because we don’t have that kind of quarantine station here, 
which obviously would be a benefit to us here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So the size of the operation will depend on the individuals 
involved and the farmers and the hog breeders. They will have to 
meet the quarantine standards, and if they do meet them, I 
understand they’re prepared to even set up a quarantine station or 
meet those qualifications so that in fact we have that kind of 
capacity here in western Canada. 
 
  



 
June 23, 1988 

 

2470 
 

Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, it was one Mr. Jim McPeak sort of 
organizing the operation in Canada, and could you give me his 
background? Could you also give me an estimation of the total 
cost of the project, and will any of the money be coming out of the 
new agricultural lending program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I recall attending university with Jim 
McPeak. Jim was an ag grad at the U. of S., and I’m not quite sure 
what small town he was from, but he was from, I believe, north of 
Saskatoon some place. 
 
After he graduated, I understand he moved into several provinces 
in Canada and then down into the United States. He’s been 
involved in a hog breeding program, and he wants to expand it 
back home in his home province. 
 
So he has explored the possibility of meeting the quarantine 
requirements of the federal government here in Canada, and he 
believes that he can and believes, as I understand it, that he would 
have a natural product that would be very acceptable to the 
Japanese. And as you saw recently, they have cut their tariff 
requirements on red meat, and particularly beef, and are looking 
towards and have favourably endorsed our free trade and trade 
liberalization schemes and arrangements with Americans and 
others. 
 
And he will get financing on a combination of ways — I suspect 
his own, the private sector, the farmers. And they have access to 
various kinds of programs that we have here in the province and 
certainly through the agricultural credit corporation. 
 
So with local farmers, with the private sector, with his own funds, 
they may establish and are trying to establish, as I understand it, a 
new breeding herd here with special kinds of product that would 
be very acceptable and is acceptable now to the Japanese market. 
And obviously it would make, if it’s successful, a brand-new 
quarantine station here in western Canada and right in the middle 
of Saskatchewan, that we don’t have now. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 14 — Statutory. 
 
Items 15 to 24 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 25 — Statutory. 
 
Items 26 and 27 agreed to. 
 
Vote 1 agreed to. 
 
(1630) 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture 

Capital Expenditure — Vote 2 
 
Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 

Vote 2 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture 

Agriculture Development Fund — Vote 61 
 
Items 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 61 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Agriculture 

Vote 146 
 
Item 1 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 146 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates (No. 2) 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Agriculture 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 1 

 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 1 agreed to. 
 

Heritage Fund 
Budgetary Expenditure (Agricultural Division) 

Agriculture 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 50 

 
Items 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 50 agreed to. 
 

Heritage Fund 
Loans, Advances and Investments (Agricultural Division) 

Agriculture 
Vote 62 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 62 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates (No. 2) 
Heritage Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments (Agricultural Division) 
Agriculture 

Vote 62 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 62 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister and his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I would just join you in 
thanking my officials for all their work, and those that are in the 
gallery that have provided back-up information in the Agriculture 
Credit Corporation and in Agriculture. 
 
I appreciate their advice and their diligence in providing   



 
June 23, 1988 

 

2471 
 

us with a great deal of information and service in an industry that 
is in some trouble. And they’ve rolled up their sleeves and frankly 
they stayed right with it, so I just want to publicly thank them for 
all their hard work. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — I would like to join the minister in thanking his 
officials for the information that they have provided for us during 
these estimates. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Executive Council 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 10 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I will introduce 
two, four, six individuals that are here for Executive Council. The 
acting deputy minister, Mr. Larry Martin; the Clerk of Executive 
Council, Mr. Ron Hewitt; the acting director of administration, 
Sheldon McLeod; the administrative officer, Bonita Heidt; and 
assistant to the acting deputy minister, Susan McLellan; and the 
principal secretary, Mr. Craig Dutton. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I thank 
the Premier for introducing the officials. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the estimates which we are about to undertake a 
review of today and maybe this evening as well — I suspect this 
evening, given the time — this review is very important because, 
as everybody in the legislature knows, and as I believe the people 
of Saskatchewan know, it’s the Premier’s department, Executive 
Council, that we’re studying, and as such it is probably in a sense 
the most important department of all the departments of 
government — the government department which is responsible 
for the overall policy, the overall direction of the government. 
 
This department is responsible for overseeing how a government 
implements its political philosophy. It’s also responsible for 
watching closely how those policies are impacting on the people 
of Saskatchewan. These are the roles, in essence — there are 
many, of course — but these are the roles of the Premier’s 
department and the Premier, and it is in that broad, general context 
that I’d like to discuss some specific, major issues during the 
course of these estimates. 
 
I suppose if I had to summarize what we have observed of this 
administration, I would say that the political philosophy and the 
specific policies of this government, this Premier, have radically 
changed the face of the province of Saskatchewan in ways which I 
find, and members on this side of the House find, and I would 
argue many people in Saskatchewan find, to be totally 
unacceptable. 
 
Let me name some of them. We’ve studied agriculture at length. 
This will perhaps come up in the course of the discussions, but in 
the interests of time, let me discuss others which we have already 
. . . that we have not 
 

discussed during the course of this legislature in detail. 
 
First is the question of free trade. This government, as the 
members of this Assembly know, has committed itself firmly, 
irrevocably, I would even submit, blindly to what I describe as the 
Mulroney-Reagan trade deal which sets up a North American free 
trade zone as we see it, a deal which will only see our province 
and our country become, through the effluxion and the passage of 
time, more and more of an economic colony. 
 
If this was a trade deal alone, then I think the arguments of the 
Premier and those proponents of it would be much stronger. But in 
effect what this is, as President Reagan has described it, it is the 
new North American economic constitution; it is the beginning of 
an economic union between the United States and Canada. 
 
Now we, on this side of the House, argue that Canadians don’t 
have to give up control over our economic and social policy 
decisions, or many of those economic and social decisions, in 
order to enjoy increased trade or in order to enjoy increased 
economic growth and opportunity. 
 
Moreover, we on this side of the House argue that by signing this 
deal we ought not to be placed in the position that we’ve been 
placed, namely, of limiting Canada’s economic and trade 
horizons, basically to what has been described as fortress North 
America. We believe that Saskatchewan people and Canadian 
people can and must compete with any nation on earth, and that 
we should be making those economic policies and choices to 
maintain our competitive advantage as best as we can throughout 
the world, with all of those nations; or in short, to keep our options 
open. 
 
By joining in a comprehensive named free trade deal, but in reality 
economic union with the United States, those options are severely 
curtailed — curtailed as other countries not privy to that 
arrangement, such as Japan and the Far East, express concern 
about the impact on them and their trading relationships with us; 
concerned about the fact that we have stepped that much closer to 
an irrevocable economic union with our friends, the United States 
of America. 
 
(1645) 
 
On this point therefore, Mr. Chairman, first, we on this side have a 
major difference of policy with the Premier and his government 
about the direction of the province of Saskatchewan. And it 
extends beyond Saskatchewan — the future of Canada, this 
province being a party and a part of that. And I’ll be exploring 
some detail in this particular area of this very important, perhaps 
over-arching issue of our countries. 
 
Another major policy area of concern, the second field which I 
wish to identify with the government and the New Democratic 
Party, members on this side are at odds, deals with the whole 
rubric of economic development and a sub-aspect of the question 
of economic development — initially the policy identified by the 
Premier in 1982, in the early months of the new administration as 
it then was, symbolized by the phrase “open for business,” and 
now,   



 
June 23, 1988 

 

2472 
 

having moved from open for business to the new thrust, since 
1986 and the election of the government in 1986, of privatization 
as the main engine of economic development. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we oppose what we’ve seen thus far in general 
because the way we analyse the historical development of the 
economy and the social and the political structures of this 
province, we see that history based on the development of a mixed 
economy. By that I think everybody understands an economy 
which has, in effect, three cylinders working to it — the private 
sector cylinder, the co-operative sector and that cylinder, and 
where necessary — I underline those words — the public sector, 
through public co-operation and public enterprise, working 
together to maximize economic growth and opportunities. 
 
Under this administration we have seen the elimination of the 
department of co-ops, albeit some functions are resident in lesser 
portions elsewhere in the government. For the first time since 
1944, the demise of the department of co-ops, and with that, I 
would argue, the heralding of a period of neglect, benign or 
otherwise, of one of the cylinders of that mixed economy. 
 
And with privatization, of course, we see the ideologically 
committed approach that the public sector, that public sector 
which is intermeshed with the other two cylinders, that that public 
sector should now be dismantled or disbanded. A variety of 
schemes have been tried by the government, some worse than 
others, but the general direction and thrust has been — make no 
mistake about it — a general thrust of either shutting down two of 
the three cylinders of economic growth, engines of economic 
growth; if not shutting down, greatly hindering the capacity of the 
mixed economy to perform. 
 
In our judgement, if we’re to overcome the many disadvantages 
that this region has, kind of the tough hand that was dealt to us — 
climate, distances, where we’re far away from large population 
centres, the problems of freight rates — if we’re to overcome the 
difficulties of a small population base and therefore small markets, 
a strictly market-place, market driven, economic development 
approach which is the essence, the core, the heart of this 
administration’s policies, is doomed to failure. 
 
Our pioneers and our forefathers and successive governments 
since that time, all the way from Douglas to Lloyd to Thatcher to 
Blakeney, sought, in response to the circumstances of the day, to 
make sure that those three cylinders of the private and the 
co-operative and the public sector were working as best as they 
could, flat out; to benefit the people of this province, to provide 
jobs, to provide opportunity to be able to create wealth in order to 
redistribute that wealth in order for us to have the finest in health 
care, the finest in education facilities, the finest in all the other 
amenities which we have grown to expect in this province, 
ranging from highways and roads to services perhaps too 
numerous to mention. 
 
This government has chosen the deliberate policy of turning its 
back on that history and tradition. It does so under the rhetoric of 
being futuristic, but in reality it has 
 

opted for a model which existed prior to the 1930s, but the 1930s 
drove home to us, as a model which was doomed to failure, and 
which prompted thereafter the mixed economy of which I talk. 
 
They want to go back to this kind of a model, notwithstanding the 
words, notwithstanding the rhetoric, notwithstanding the various 
. . . I don’t want to use the word “gimmicks” because it may be 
unnecessarily provocative to the Premier and I don’t intend to do 
that today, but the kinds of endeavours which the government has 
been involved in. However they spice it up or describe it, the truth 
is that we are turning our backs on the traditions and histories of 
this province. 
 
Sunday shopping on a wide-open basis is a commitment to the 
market-place. Free trade is a commitment to the market-place — it 
locks us, handcuffs us to the biggest engine of the United States of 
America, which is only driven by one cylinder, the private 
enterprise cylinder. There is no co-operative or public sector to 
speak of. 
 
This government is turning its back on this history. And I would 
argue, not even from an ideological basis necessarily, but from a 
pragmatic basis, that if we as Saskatchewan people ever are going 
to succeed continually in fighting the continual problems of 
climate and distance and drought and small population, the 
traditional laws of economics, the market-place principles simply 
can’t work. What is required is to build on those traditions and on 
those features in a positive way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — In its search to be different, in its search 
perhaps to buttress its genuinely held and firmly held, we know, 
belief on privatization, the government has cast far and wide to 
look for models which it seeks to import and transplant upon the 
Saskatchewan prairie basin — North American basin. It does not 
go to the United States of America. 
 
Privatization, while existing in some elements there, is not a 
feature of the United States because there’s not much to privatize 
other than municipal governments. Apart from Tennessee Valley 
Authority, and a few other of that, the basic delivery mechanism 
of economic growth in the United States is the private sector basis, 
whether it’s energy or telephones or big industry, or whether it’s 
the military complex or whatever. The privatization motivation 
does not find its genesis there. 
 
So it not only goes outside of Saskatchewan. Not only does it go 
outside of Canada, which has had up to now, too, a mixed 
economy — up to now, before the election of Mr. Mulroney and 
the Progressive conservatives federally. It not only goes outside 
the North American continent of the United States in its search for 
ideas and mechanisms and methodologies for the implementation 
of this policy, it goes across the Atlantic to the United Kingdom. It 
seeks to build this policy and apply this economic approach used 
there in entirely different circumstances and seeks to bring it back 
to a frontier, western Canadian, entrepreneurial, co-operative, 
public sector, mixed model, and graft on to this scheme a   



 
June 23, 1988 

 

2473 
 

mechanism which essentially is not only not consistent with our 
history and our tradition, but is foreign to what Saskatchewan and 
western Canadian people understand to be the growth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And this is, Mr. Chairman, not a minor piece 
of surgery; this is a radical piece of surgery — a radical piece of 
surgery for all of western Canada. 
 
Take for example, the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And, Mr. 
Chairman, I’m perfectly prepared to respond to the gibes of the 
member from Lloydminster and Cut Knife. If he wants to have 
this kind of a discussion of the estimates, believe me I’m perfectly 
prepared to do that on a second’s notice. 
 
So I think you have to make a decision, sir, whether you’re going 
to enter this debate responsibly and publicly, and I can at least hear 
your arguments and rebut them and you can rebut mine. Are you 
going to give me the courtesy to expand the views, as I hope that 
our side will give the Premier the courtesy to expand his views, 
because these are important issues? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And I want to say, Mr. Chairman, in this 
regard . . . I was about to say that this is a radical piece of direction 
in the economic political area that we’re talking about. 
 
In the days of the late premier Ross Thatcher, his number one goal 
was industrialization and diversification — get industry here. He 
was a free-enterpriser; his main emphasis was on the free 
enterprise model. I can understand the Premier following that. But 
he never articulated a policy of privatization which would kill one 
of the . . . (inaudible) . . . of the industry. Not even Mr. Thatcher 
went that far. 
 
When Peter Lougheed was the premier, a Conservative premier of 
Alberta, when Blakeney and Lougheed, as the two leaders from 
Alberta and Saskatchewan, sat around constitutional tables 
seeking additional constitutional powers, say over resources for 
the west, the purpose of that objective was to do what? — to give 
the region the power constitutionally and legally and economically 
to build the mixed economy model. 
 
Mr. Lougheed, with his experiments privatization took place, but 
even there the principles of privatization never took hold or root to 
the extent that they have here in the province of Saskatchewan, or 
to the extent that they are about to take hold, as we are to believe 
the minister of privatization. There never was a minister of 
privatization in the Lougheed government. There never was a 
minister of privatization, so far as I know, anywhere — maybe 
British Columbia and Mr. Vander Zalm. I don’t think that’s a very 
good model for the Premier to follow. But there wasn’t anybody in 
the western Canadian basin except this. 
 
I cite this not because I want to summons political opponents of 
mine in support of the proposition that I 
 

advanced, I cite this because I want to emphasize the point that we 
are, we members, we fellow Saskatchewanians, we are embarked 
on a radical and potentially dangerous economic thrust, a 
dangerous economic thrust which has not been tried heretofore. It 
flies, as I say, in the face of the economic reality, the climatic 
reality, the geographic reality of the province of Saskatchewan, if 
you will, the whole basin, including the United States. 
 
Go south to the 49th where there is only privatization of the 
private sector, and compare 500,000, 600,000 people directly 
south of us, compared to our million here. There’s got to be reason 
for that: because we were smarter. Whether we were Liberals or 
Progressive Conservatives or CCFers or New Democrats, we were 
smarter. 
 
We said that we were all in this boat together, overcoming these 
great obstacles, and we had to pull together and we needed all the 
oars that we could to get that boat moving, and that meant public 
and co-operative and private sector in a proper combination. We 
did not say foolishly that we would shut down two of the 
cylinders, and thereby depopulate our province to less than 
500,000, 600,000 people. We would be smarter. And we 
succeeded. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And we succeeded, Mr. Chairman. We 
succeeded. There have been failures, I admit that. There have been 
failures in the public enterprise sector, just like there have been 
failures in the co-operative sector, just like there have been failures 
in the private sector, but on balance we succeeded and we created 
wealth, and we redistributed that wealth to make the finest 
medicare and hospitalization program in Canada — no, I would 
say anywhere in North America, if not the world — we have that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And we built well. We built schools and we 
built universities and we built roads and we built highways, and 
we tried opportunities. And there were periods where, whether it 
was Mr. Thatcher or Mr. Lloyd — and there are periods now 
under the current Premier where circumstances beyond our control 
— the drop in resources — always would impact on what was 
happening. But backing that always up, being as a safety net, was 
this mixed economy model, and today, Mr. Chairman — today, 
Mr. Chairman — we find an entirely different approach which is 
radical and major. 
 
It has meant that this policy, or no-policy, this reversal policy, 
generally it has meant the threat of loss of jobs. I can give 
examples of SED, the Fleet Aerospace takeover — some people 
say it’s small numbers at Sask Minerals. But Sask Minerals . . . 
one could go on. And we can discuss this in detail in a moment, as 
we discuss these section by section if the Premier will agree with 
me as I raise them. 
 
Today, more than ever, we need a reversal of this policy, based on 
a policy of co-operation. More than ever, Mr.   



 
June 23, 1988 

 

2474 
 

Chairman, we need a policy, economic policy, which is made in 
Saskatchewan, by Saskatchewan people, and for Saskatchewan 
people — more than ever, we need that today. 
 
(1700) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, there’s a third area. We have 
seen, as a result of all of these policies, free trade, privatization, the 
diminution of economic growth and generation — the loss of that 
not totally the Premier’s fault; there are international 
circumstances which affect it of course — but we have seen a 
shrinking economic pie. 
 
And with it we have seen the beginnings of the collapse of the 
infrastructure in rural Saskatchewan. Our towns, our villages are 
all struggling; our workers in the cities are struggling; we’re 
seeing small-business people up against the wall on the Sunday 
shopping hours situation. We are seeing the third area which I 
wish to discuss now, and that is the fiscal management and 
taxation policies and direction of the government in the 
management of the purse of the government. It’s part of the same 
policy. 
 
Here, Mr. Chairman, the government has at least been consistent 
with its megaproject approach, its continentalist approach, its 
private enterprise approach. Here, too, it’s consistent. We’ve seen 
the government’s budgets over the last six years clearly putting the 
heaviest burden on taxation, on fees, on utility charges, on average 
families. And truly, those who are able to pay more, pay a little 
less. 
 
We say on this side that the taxes and the utility charges on 
ordinary families need to be reduced. It can be done with better 
management and choices of government internally. But it can be 
done also by a genuine policy of tax reform, where those who are 
able to pay a little bit more, pay a little bit more; or, putting it 
another way, pay their fair share. That is a principle of democracy 
in government — fairness — fairness. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — If we could stimulate our economic growth, if 
we could get our private sector going again, our small private 
business sector — I don’t mean the big megaprojects that the 
government is so determined to attract; that may be important on 
occasion — but if we could, Mr. Chairman, just imagine, stimulate 
that mixed economy again to start getting wealth generation, and 
then put a principle of fairness in taxation in the policies, the 
utilities, the way they’re conducted, back into our system of 
government, Mr. chairman, I am confident that we would not have 
to have cut-backs in health care, to the drug plan or the dental 
plan. I’m confident that we wouldn’t have to see a massive 
deterioration of the highway program like we’ve seen — probably 
unparalleled in the history of the province of Saskatchewan. I’m 
confident that there would not have to be quotas for our university 
students, there would not have to be quotas with respect to our 
technical institutions. 
 

I’m confident that we would not have to lose 5,000 people, which 
we have already in the first three, four months of 1988, because 
we could devise programs which are based on compassion, 
security and fairness, as opposed to the current direction which we 
have taken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Being 5 o’clock, the committee will 
recess till 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


