


















































April 12, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 12, 1988 
 
 

 
499 

 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Collapse of Principal Group 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today 
is to the minister from Saskatoon, the minister in charge of 
Consumer Affairs, and it has to do with the rather shocking 
testimony in yesterday’s proceedings in Alberta from the 
president of the Principal Group of companies, Mr. Donald 
Cormie, pertaining to the 31st annual 1985 report of Principal, 
which I have here in front of me. This testimony by Mr. Cormie 
is to the effect that, quote, “This report could have been 
misleading to some investors.” 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is as follows, in light of the 
fact that your securities commission had the audited report of 
the Principal Group showing a loss of $25 million, and in view 
of the fact that Mr. Cormie himself admits yesterday that the 
information tabled by this report was misleading, my question 
to you, sir, is this: where in the world was your securities 
agencies and commission and your officials in protecting the 
interests of investors in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — A good start, minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Quite to the contrary, it’s not a very good 
start. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had this 
issue raised on numerous occasions already. We’ve indicated 
that the historical practice has been for other provincial 
jurisdictions to rely on the prime jurisdiction. That is the case, 
and I suggest to the hon. member that the point is one that has 
been raised by your numerous critics on this, some of which 
have been demoted and changed, I’ve noticed in the interim, 
and I suggest to the hon. member that the point is not new. The 
question as to the accuracy or the status or the effectiveness of 
the annual report is one that was early raised in this particular 
matter. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question. Now I’m 
really confused as to whether it should be directed to the 
Minister of Finance or to the Minister of Consumer Affairs or to 
the Premier — to the government, any one of the members of 
the government opposite who are in such great disarray, I will 
try one more time to the Minister of Consumer Affairs, Mr. 
Speaker, with your permission. 
 
The Minister of Finance has said that this matter has been raised 
on numerous occasions in the past, and he’s right. We have, on 
numerous occasions in the past, alleged that the audited 
statement by the Principal Group showed that the Principal 
Group was in dire financial straits, if not bankrupt, and yet it 
was entitled to do business in the province of Saskatchewan 
under the responsibility of the  

Minister of Consumer Affairs. My question to you, sir, being 
the new minister in charge of Consumer Affairs: have you 
investigated the actions of your regulatory agencies, and how is 
it, why is it now that it takes the admission of Donald Cormie 
that there was negligence, that even at this point in the game 
your government won’t admit that you were negligent in this 
affair? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The NDP opposition are upset that the 
Minister of Finance is answering the questions. I note that the 
opposition Consumer Affairs critic doesn’t ask the questions. 
So I, unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, cannot give a short answer 
because the hon. Leader of the Opposition raised a couple of 
matters, the first, as to his own confusion. And the confusion 
that the hon. member has shown over French language, has 
shown over free trade — we shouldn’t be at all surprised with 
his confusion over this particular issue. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the issue as to the accuracy of the 
information that was given to regulatory agencies is one of the 
initial questions that was asked during this Principal matter. I 
think it fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve now had an inquiry 
in the province of Alberta that’s gone over, I believe, some six 
months, and to duplicate that, as the Leader of the Opposition in 
the New Democratic Party, would have been a horrendous 
waste of the public’s money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question. I want to 
make it clear to the ministers, the several of them who may 
want to take responsibility for this fiasco, that at this point I’m 
not asking for a new inquiry in Saskatchewan. We have in the 
past; we might in the future, but for today’s question period that 
is not the answer that I’m looking for as I ask the Minister of 
Finance or the Minister of Consumer Affairs. 
 
My question to the minister is as follows: in view of the fact 
that Donald Cormie, the president of Principal Trust, admits 
under oath that the reports of 1985 are misleading, misleading 
to investors for a whole period until this fiasco finally came 
crashing to a halt; in view of the fact that you had the audited 
statements which would have shown to you and your 
government that they ought not to have continued to do 
business — that is new information — what is the explanation 
of you, sir, or your government for not having shut down 
Principal earlier? And more importantly, why not give some 
compensation to the innocent investors in Saskatchewan as a 
result of this scam? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, let me make it clear to the . . . 
not the NDP can yell; let me make it clear to the Leader of the 
Opposition that the issue as to the actions of the Principal 
Group of companies plus their principals and their sales people, 
have been fundamental to the inquiry and to the issue and to the 
loss that many investors have incurred. Having said that, Mr. 
Speaker, the very  
  



 
April 12, 1988 

 

500 
 

question as to the accuracy of information, be it by sales people 
or information given by the companies, is old allegations, Mr. 
Speaker, and give cause to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and 
give cause to, if the hon. member would listen, to the inquiry 
that’s going on in the province of Alberta. 
 
I further indicated on numerous occasions to the opposition — I 
would hope they would pay attention — that the debate that’s 
going on in the province of Alberta certainly is proof that we 
did not need such an investigation here. And secondly, that we 
rely on, and have historically relied on, the information being 
given to the prime jurisdiction, and that information being given 
to the individual provinces. 
 
And let me indicate finally, to the final point made by the 
Leader of the Opposition, that he has fallen into the trap again, 
Mr. Speaker, that they complained about the government 
bailing out Saskatchewan people and Pioneer, but when an 
Alberta company goes into financial trouble he stands up in this 
House and has just demanded another bail-out. The answer is 
no, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to . . . I guess it 
will have to be the Minister of Finance, since the Minister of 
Consumer Affairs persists in shirking his duty to the people of 
Saskatoon and the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — So my question . . . my new question will 
be therefore to the Minister of Finance. Does he admit on behalf 
of the Government of Saskatchewan, the securities agency, and 
the Premier of Saskatchewan, that there was receipt of an 
audited statement showing a $25 million loss by Principal 
Trust? 
 
And does he now admit to the sworn evidence of Mr. Donald 
Cormie that the report of 1985 which was circulated was 
misleading to investors? Does he admit both of those facts, that 
you were in possession of both of those facts? And if you do, 
what is your explanation for not having acted earlier? That’s my 
question to you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I find it rather amusing as the Leader of the 
Opposition is critical of who is answering for the government, 
but he doesn’t let the opposition critic answer the questions. Is 
there a lack of confidence in the hon. member? In both critics 
that he’s now had — he lost confidence in the last one. Is that 
. . . to just simply turn his arguments back to him. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the question as to the accuracy of the 
information being given by the prime jurisdiction — in this case 
the province of Alberta — to other provinces, including the 
province of Saskatchewan and the province of British 
Columbia, for example, will be very much an issue raised at the 
inquiry. 
 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, we have been entitled, and the 
historical practice has been for all provinces to rely on the 
information being given by the prime jurisdiction — in this case 
the province of Alberta. As I have indicated on numerous 
occasions, we relied on that information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have one new, last 
question in this area. My question, I guess, has to be to the 
Minister of Finance. It is clear that the government does not 
read its own information but continually relies on somebody 
else’s — its own information which shows a $25 million loss 
and allowed the innocent investor to be taken as a result of this 
negligence. 
 
My question to the . . . actually it should go to the Minister of 
Justice. We’ll see whether he answers this question or not. You 
claimed last year that an investigation was being launched by 
the RCMP into this matter, including — that was your 
justification for not having a judicial inquiry in Saskatchewan 
about the activities of the Securities Commission — including 
the activities of the Securities Commission, or inactivity of the 
Securities Commission. My question, therefore, is as follows: 
who headed that investigation for the RCMP? Has the report 
been completed, and if so, will the minister undertake to table 
the report? And when are the decisions being taken whether or 
not charges will or will not be laid in this regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member asks a 
question with regards to an RCMP investigation. No charges 
have been laid. The RCMP have conducted an investigation. No 
charges have been laid to my knowledge with regard to any 
individuals. I have not been made aware of any criminal 
charges being offered. 
 
Now if the hon. member would ask that I check with the 
RCMP, find out who is the investigating RCMP officer, etc., I 
think as a former attorney general, he would find that probably, 
he should find that as somewhat inappropriate as for an attorney 
general to find out the investigating officer in any case by an 
RCMP officer. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I must beg leave of yourself 
and the House for a new question. Again, I’m not sure whether 
it’s the Minister of Justice or the Minister of Finance — it’s for 
sure not the Minister of Consumer Affairs. 
 
May I say as a short preface to the question, Mr. Speaker, that I 
acknowledge that under normal circumstances the release of 
RCMP reports into investigations of criminal matters ought not 
to be made public. I share that sentiment with them. But this is a 
case where not only do we not have the RCMP report made 
public, but we’ve got a stonewalling by the government 
opposite as to setting up an inquiry into the entire activities in 
Saskatchewan. So we have nothing from that side of the 
information either, thus the call for making the report public. 
Either way it’s a stonewalling. 
 
Now I say this question to the minister, whichever wants to 
speak; in view of the fact that there are thousands of families — 
hundreds for sure — families in Saskatchewan, something that 
this government tries to  
  



 
April 12, 1988 

 

501 
 

portray itself as being a defender of, will the government 
indicate whether or not it is prepared to, in the light of Mr. 
Cormie’s damning admission about one public statement upon 
which investors made their decisions, as opposed to the reality 
which they would not have made their investments — will the 
government undertake now to consider compensation for those 
innocent people and families in Saskatchewan who got stung by 
your negligence? Will you undertake that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m frankly appalled, Mr. Speaker, that a 
former attorney general would advocate that the public have 
released police reports. And he says . . . as he says, in normal 
circumstances that wouldn’t happen, Mr. Speaker, under this 
government. Under no circumstances does that happen, Mr. 
Speaker, and if that was the practice . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If that was the practice of that individual 
when he was attorney general, Mr. Speaker, I am shocked, as a 
former holder of that office. Having said that, let me reiterate 
the position that we took last fall which is: we have not ruled 
out an inquiry, Mr. Speaker, we have made it clear. We are 
awaiting the inquiry in the province of Alberta; we’ve made 
that abundantly clear right through this whole process. I think 
the wisdom of this government awaiting the Alberta inquiry and 
the tremendous cost and the time involved, I think, is becoming 
more clear all the time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With regard to compensation, again I find the New Democratic 
Party’s position being restated by their new leader that this 
government should not, or I should not, bail out Saskatchewan 
people with Pioneer, but that we should bail out Saskatchewan 
people when an Alberta company goes into receivership, Mr. 
Speaker. There is something wrong in the New Democratic 
Party position, a very unfair position, Mr. Speaker, and a highly 
contradictory one. I’m frankly surprised at their position being 
restated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Heavy Oil Upgrader in Lloydminster 
 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Energy. Can the minister confirm that she will 
be in Lloydminster on Thursday to discuss the latest proposals 
from the federal Alberta, and Saskatchewan governments for 
the Husky heavy oil upgrader, and can she confirm that these 
new proposals include large loan guarantees from all three 
governments, as well as other incentives designed to entice 
more private oil companies to invest in the project? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can confirm that 
indeed I will be in Lloydminster on Thursday, but not for any 
discussions on Husky. I’m not sure where the member gets his 
information from. 
 
I will be meeting with a group of oil people, the member should 
be aware of, to discuss some of the options that are  

open for incentives in terms of heavy oil in that area. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — New question, Mr. Speaker. The three PC 
governments — to the same minister — in Ottawa, Alberta, and 
in Regina have given up on the idea, according to reports, of 
taking an equity position in this heavy oil project. According to 
reports, you are proposing loan guarantees of hundreds of 
millions of dollars, which are a claim against the average 
taxpayer. 
 
Can you explain why taxpayers should take all the risk but get 
none of the gain if this major industrial project goes ahead and 
is successful? And why have you given up on the idea of 
getting some of the profits from this huge project for the 
taxpayers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, nothing has been finalized 
with the federal government, the Alberta government, and 
Husky oil company. Negotiations are still going on. There has 
been no one position taken, whether it’s loan guarantee or 
equity position. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, I might add, differs from that, 
and if there’s one thing we have not given up on, it is that oil 
for Saskatchewan is indeed our future, and that’s heavy oil. 
Hence we have the NewGrade, the Co-op upgrader in Regina 
— something they couldn’t do, Mr. Speaker, in 40 years of 
power, virtually impossible. 
 
We are working very hard on the Husky negotiations. There has 
been not one set position taken, but discussions are still going 
on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — New question, Mr. Speaker. This 
government, the government that you represent, has a 
representative in Lloydminster. You have a Conservative MLA 
from Cut Knife-Lloydminster representing the eastern half of 
that constituency. You have a Conservative MLA, representing 
the western part of Lloydminster, from Alberta. You have two 
provincial Conservative governments. You have the Deputy 
Prime Minister, Mr. Mazankowski representing the west side of 
Lloydminster, and you’ve got another minister, Mr. McKnight, 
representing the east side of Lloydminster. 
 
On many occasions all of you have promised to deliver this 
heavy oil upgrader project, Madam Minister, and you have been 
as equally successful in delivering the project as you have been 
in delivering your tax cuts to the people of this province. 
 
Considering all of the power that you have and the people of 
Lloydminster have, in this legislature and other legislatures 
across the country, how and when is this upgrader going to be 
delivered? Because if you can’t deliver it, I don’t think the 
people of Lloydminster should be voting for your ever again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I would only ask that the 
member from Regina North West reserve his  
  



 
April 12, 1988 

 

502 
 

judgement until the final word is brought in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — I took notice of a question from the 
Leader of the Opposition with respect to an Agricultural Credit 
Corporation’s agreement with a client, and I just wanted to 
make two or three very brief observations. 
 
The first is that my initial reaction was correct, and the fact is 
that the settlement agreement between ACS (Agricultural Credit 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) and the client pertains only to 
ACS loan programs. It does not impact on the client’s ability to 
access other government programs. 
 
ACS will entertain loan settlement proposals from clients who 
are existing farmers. As part of the settlement, ACS does not 
. . . agrees not to initiate further action to collect the money 
owed to them. However, ACS will not provide further loans to 
the client as long as the balance of the debt remains 
outstanding. And, Mr. Speaker, if in future the client voluntarily 
approaches ACS and repays the outstanding balance of his debt, 
he would be eligible to participate in the ACS loan program. 
 
One final point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that under the farmstart 
program when the Leader of the Opposition, leader of the NDP, 
was deputy premier, their policy was that when you had a 
settlement like this, and I refer to article 5(2) of the farmstart 
legislation. It says that: 
 

At farmstart’s discretion any amounts owing to the 
Government of Saskatchewan and the balance will be 
distributed to the applicant. 

 
Meaning that under farmstart, Mr. Speaker, that when the 
farmer cut a deal and settled, he couldn’t get access to loans 
anywhere in government under our administration. It’s just for 
the agriculture credit society. 
 
So I make that point so that the hon. member knows that we’re 
much more lenient than he was when he was in power. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Standardized Testing for Students 
 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. My 
question is to the Minister of Education. Mr. Minister, my 
question is in regard to your continual undermining of the 
teaching professionals in the province. Last week, Mr. Minister, 
while you were speaking at the Easter council, you said to the 
teachers that you wanted to bring in standardized exams. In fact 
you said there is a desire for a higher standard of academic 
attainment. 
 
Mr. Minister, the clear implication that you left was that you 
don’t trust the teachers of this province in providing high 
quality education in this province. And instead, you’re asking 
the parents to place their trust in machine-scored final exams. 
 

Mr. Minister, why don’t you place a higher trust in the teachers 
of this province in the high quality of education that they are 
providing, and why do you ask them to place a trust in 
machine-scored final exams instead? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, the issue of assessments 
and standardization, and what I said at the teachers’ federation 
meeting, in fact was virtually identical, if not identical, to the 
remarks I made in this House in the throne speech debate 10 
days or more ago. And somehow when I made it in this House 
in the context which was identical to that speech — in fact it 
was the same text, Mr. Speaker — it was not an issue. 
Somehow today, all of a sudden the hon. member sees it as an 
issue. And I think he used the word undermining. 
 
Well what did I say in this legislature some several days ago, 
and what did I say at the teachers’ federation meeting? When it 
comes to the issue of higher standards and the whole question 
of standardized exams, that very complex issue of assessment, 
what I said is this: it’s an issue we must look at. I did not say 
I’m in favour of it or against it. What I said is the public clearly 
believes that we should examine that question, and to that end, 
Mr. Speaker, we have put together a ministerial committee with 
the teachers’ federation involved, the Saskatchewan school 
trustees involved, LEADS (League of Educational 
Administrators, Directors and Superintendents), and my 
departmental officials to examine that question and others. And 
that’s all I have asked, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s what the 
public expects is for us to examine the question reasonably, 
intelligently and humanely, and not with some “survival of the 
fittest” mentality, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the minister that 
he told the teaching profession that he sensed a general unease 
among parents about teaching methods. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you were going to stand before the teaching 
professionals in this province and make accusations against 
them, don’t you think that you should base that on something 
that’s a little bit stronger than an unsubstantiated sense of 
unease? The teachers in this province have always been 
regarded as giving a high quality of education, and I think it is 
incumbent upon you to base your arguments more . . . on 
something stronger than simply an unsubstantiated sense of 
unease, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I just want to pick up on that 
point, Mr. Speaker, and where are the observations, what are 
the observations, both seen and felt on the points that I raised at 
the teachers’ federation, and indeed in this legislature. 
 
I’ll tell you what the basis is for my sense, Mr. Speaker. It is 
this. Over the last year, year and a half, given that I am not an 
educator, and I suppose my only claim to fame as Education 
minister is that I have two children in school myself, over this 
last year, year and a half, I have  
  



 
April 12, 1988 

 

503 
 

essentially been using one day a week, Mr. Speaker, to go into 
the schools across this province. And when I am there, I do 
three things, Mr. Speaker; I meet with the teachers in the staff 
room, and I must say they have been most generous in their 
hospitality. We answer . . . I answer, at least attempt to answer, 
their questions. I meet with the teachers. I spend probably 
one-half to one hour — one-half of an hour to an hour with the 
students, taking their questions, and as well I meet with the 
boards. 
 
And over this last year, Mr. Speaker, I’ve probably met now 
with 1,000 teachers in that setting; probably 8 or 9,000 young 
people, Mr. Speaker; and as well, something in the order of one 
in seven boards. 
 
Now that certainly does not qualify me to be an expert in 
anything, nor have I ever pretended to be. But I’ll tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, I have had a chance to get a very good sense in my 
mind of what is happening in our schools, and I say this: I just 
wish all the people in Saskatchewan could see what I have seen 
over the last year and a half. That’s what I think is going on, 
Mr. Speaker, lots of very fine things. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

CORRECTION MADE BY MEMBER 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — This is a minor thing, Mr. Speaker, but 
a correction in Hansard on page 451, where it says: 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 

Then it goes on to say: 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I think at this time I’d just like to 
make this comment, that unfortunately I have seen in the 
past and now, as a matter of fact, where a minister will 
comment on a question at some length and then say he’ll 
take notice of it. I’m not sure if that’s the way we want to 
take notice. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to put on the record that that comment 
was attributed to me in Hansard, and I would never say a thing 
like that, Mr. Speaker. I think it should have properly been 
attributed to Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Point well taken. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement 
 

Mr. Gardner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure to bring this debate to the Assembly today, and 
particularly to provide members opposite an opportunity to 
become acquainted with some of the facts of the free trade 
agreement between Canada and the United States. 
 
The most serious charge, Mr. Speaker, and I would say the most 
dishonourable charge that has been made against the free trade 
agreement has been the charge that after it is implemented, 
Canada will cease to exist as a nation. This charge is made by 
certain individuals, Mr. Speaker,  

because they claim signing the agreement will reduce Canada’s 
sovereignty. I must ask the member for Riversdale to comment 
on the effect of our sovereignty, of the General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade, the GATT. I ask him to comment on that, 
Mr. Speaker, because his position and that of his party is that 
we should use the GATT exclusively as our tool to develop 
international trade. Therefore, if there are significant impacts 
upon our sovereignty from that source, then he should alert us 
to them up front. 
 
I raise that because, after all, it is the GATT trade officials who 
have recently overturned a purely domestic policy regarding our 
brewing industry — a policy set in this province for this 
province. And that policy is to be changed at the behest of the 
GATT people. Compare that, Mr. Speaker, to the free trade 
agreement with the U.S. We obtained a full exemption for our 
breweries in that agreement, and in fact if sovereignty was in 
fact affected, then I suggest that the U.S. certainly surrendered 
more than their share. But to claim because two countries are 
able to agree upon a dispute settlement mechanism and to agree 
not to harass one another’s trade, to claim that this constitutes a 
surrender of sovereignty is ridiculous. To claim that we cannot 
exist as an independent nation without tariff barriers blocking 
us into our own little economy, this is political posturing of the 
worst sort. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the agreement do not need to 
use such reprehensible scare tactics to win their case. They’re 
not needed, because simple objective facts support free trade 
without the imperative of frightening people. Consider the 
projections for a decline in the consumer price index. 
Depending upon which economist you ask, the inflation rate is 
predicted to drop between 2 and 6 per cent, and even looking at 
the low end, the 2 per cent, we find that free trade will provide 
every Canadian with the equivalent of a 2 per cent wage 
increase. That’s the kind of evidence that supports this 
agreement, Mr. Speaker. If you look into the specific categories, 
you find that the costs of many sectors will be reduced as a 
direct result of the agreement, and those cost savings will be 
passed on to consumers. 
 
My colleague, the member from Regina Wascana, just recently 
spoke to the Mechanical Contractors Association, and in 
preparing for that engagement he discovered that those people, 
the people that are involved in the electrical and mechanical 
industry in this province, that the free trade agreement will 
mean declines in the cost of the various tools and equipment 
that they use in their industry, ranging from somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of 9 to 12 per cent. A 12 per cent saving — it’s 
better than having a year-round sale at your favourite hardware 
store with a 12 per cent saving year round, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The free trade agreement will prove a direct benefit to all the 
people of our province. Even the Leader of the Opposition has 
hinted that he understands this to some degree. For example, he 
said in this House that the agreement would be good for the red 
meat sector but, he pondered, will our producers be able to deal 
with the Texans? How will they get by with those Texans, he 
wanted to know. Well the stock growers’ association, the 
cattlemen of this province, they have assured us that  
  



 
April 12, 1988 

 

504 
 

they’ll get by just fine with the Texans, Mr. Speaker. They tell 
me that they’re eager to compete with the Texans and anyone 
else in the U.S. 
 
The member from Riversdale has also been arguing that the 
deal will not help our grain sector, although that flies in the face 
of everything the professionals tell, and the real professionals, 
Mr. Speaker, the farm families of Saskatchewan. 
 
And let’s look at what’s going on in the U.S. right now. In 
Friday’s Leader-Post there is an article headlined, “U.S. durum 
farmers upset at Canada.” And what that article is all about, Mr. 
Speaker, is that Saskatchewan has been increasing its share of 
the U.S. high quality wheat market. And let me just explain for 
the city boys across the floor what durum wheat is. Well durum 
wheat is a high quality wheat that has extremely good milling 
properties, Mr. Speaker. And so far, we’ve obtained about 7 per 
cent of the U.S. market. 
 
Now with the durum growers in the U.S., they want the 
Congress to refuse the agreement. Well if it’s all that bad for us, 
why would the U.S. farmers want it not to go ahead, Mr. 
Speaker? And the reason they want that to happen is that, once 
this agreement is in place, they’ll not be able to use political 
pressure to shut out our wheat. And they’d like to be able to 
shut out our wheat, and they’re grateful to the allies they have 
across the floor who would also like to see our wheat shut out 
from the U.S. market. But you know, Mr. Speaker, as well as I 
that market is becoming increasingly important indeed to this 
province, and also to this country. 
 
Right now the U.S. is our third-largest buyer of durum wheat — 
number three — a market that we not only want to keep, but the 
free trade agreement will give us every expectation of 
increasing that. And quite frankly, I can’t understand why the 
NDP want to keep Saskatchewan wheat out of the U.S. It’s a 
form of madness that says, if we sell them more wheat, we 
somehow won’t be a nation any more. After all, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we’ve been selling a lot of wheat to the Russians for a 
lot of years, and we haven’t all become communists. 
 
The government wants our farm families to have the 
opportunity presented to us by selling to the U.S. And you 
know the blindness over there, Mr. Speaker, as exemplified by 
one of the propaganda pieces the NDP was handing out. It said 
the U.S. already has too much wheat, so why would we think 
that we could sell them any more. That’s just the kind of 
thinking that those people have. They’ve missed the whole 
point. 
 
And quite frankly, it’s so simple, yet the NDP seem to insist on 
not understanding the way trade works. For example, the United 
States has more than enough automobiles. Thousands and 
thousands of them are manufactured in that country every year. 
Yet the NDP say we should scrap the auto pact because the U.S. 
has enough cars. After all, Ontario exports billions of dollars 
worth of autos and parts to the U.S. each year. We can export to 
any market where we can compete with the domestic producer. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our farm families are the  

most efficient in the world, bar none. They’re the most efficient 
even . . . or I should say they’re more efficient even than those 
fine people south of the border, the Texans that the NDP say 
that we’re afraid to deal with. And the proof of that lies in the 
kinds of subsidization that has to occur just to keep their farms 
afloat. 
 
I read in one article that for some U.S. farmers 75 per cent of 
their income comes directly from farm subsidies, directly from 
the government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now that is not what I 
would call, or what any of us would call, efficient agriculture. 
 
The free trade agreement also presents some significant 
opportunities to our energy industry. That includes oil, gas, 
coal, and of course, uranium. And here again we have the NDP 
opposition that just can’t seem to come to grips with reality. 
They say that we should stop exports of uranium to the U.S. 
because they say it’s a necessary component in nuclear 
weapons, and therefore it could end up contributing to the U.S. 
military program. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know they 
also have copper and steel and petroleum products that have to 
go into nuclear missiles. Are we going to stop exporting all of 
those things too? 
 
And the NDP say, well we won’t really close the existing 
mines. We will just refuse to allow any new ones to be opened 
and wait for the current ones to exhaust their one bodies. What 
absurdity. If they really believe that Saskatchewan uranium is 
going to contribute to the end of the world, then surely they 
have an obligation to stop the exports now, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, immediately, no discussion, no matter what the cost — 
stop them now. After all, isn’t the survival of the world more 
important than a few thousand jobs? 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s a good position. 
‘ 
Mr. Gardner: — And I hear one of the members from his seat 
across the hall saying it’s a good position. Well I guess it’s nice 
that at least some of us have a position, rather than just being on 
the fence, Mr. Speaker. After all, isn’t the survival of the world 
more important than just those few thousand jobs? But we can 
be like the member says, not take a position, just sit back and 
wait and see what happens. 
 
If they don’t believe that Saskatchewan uranium will contribute 
to the end of the world, and that’s what they say they aren’t in a 
hurry to see, then why close down the industry at all? Why not 
do as we are doing — encourage exploration and development 
and the creation of new mines with new jobs to secure a stable 
market under a free trade agreement? Why wouldn’t they do 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
Well, because they just really don’t believe in trade. They say 
they do, and they then do everything possible to disrupt trade, to 
stop trade, to make Canadians afraid of trade. What silliness 
comes out of their mouths sometimes, Mr. Speaker, silliness 
like the claim of an NDP friend, Sheila Copps, who said free 
trade will mean more surrogate mothers; silliness like . . . well it 
is, pardon me . . . silliness like from the Leader of the 
Opposition that the Americans have enough wheat, or that we 
should be  
  



 
April 12, 1988 

 

505 
 

frightened by Texas cows; silliness like from the gentleman 
from Edmonton who has built his entire business with 
taxpayers’ money and now tells us he’s afraid that free trade 
might mean the government won't keep paying the bills. 
 
Unfortunately, the government probably will keep paying his 
bills, but the failure to do so could hardly be called an unhappy 
prospect. Maybe Mr. Hurtig ought to learn how to earn a living 
like our farm families and he might not be so worried about us 
all becoming un-Canadian. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the free trade agreement will give new 
impetus to our high-tech sector. It will continue the growth in 
our red meat sector, with particularly good prospects for the hog 
industry. It will open access for our grain markets. It will help 
our farm machinery sector, through the elimination of tariffs on 
certain parts that are presently penalized. It will help consumers 
reduce production costs, reduce the cost of living, bring 
expansion to our energy industry, allow us to compete fairly in 
services, and provide a framework for the fair settlement of 
disputes. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the opposition lies to say that 
proponents only talk about the positive aspects, and being a 
proponent, that should not be too surprising. 
 
So let me turn it around on them. Instead of always talking 
about these imaginary problems, like sovereignty, why don’t 
you people discuss the positive impact of the agreement? I’m 
sure there will be some adjustments, Mr. Speaker. Nothing 
worth having is ever given over without some effort. And the 
adjustments that will occur, happily will occur mostly in 
Ontario, which is why the Liberal-NDP coalition against free 
trade exists. 
 
And I say to the Leader of the Opposition, Ontario is big 
enough to protect itself; it doesn’t need your help. Why don’t 
you try standing up for Saskatchewan for a change instead of 
fighting for the union bosses in Toronto? Bob White will do just 
fine without your help. Shirley Carr has the entire CLC 
(Canadian Labour Congress), and she doesn’t need you. So 
support your own province and get behind this deal on behalf of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — I certainly know where the people of Pelly 
constituency stand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they expect me to 
stand with them. And it is for that reason that I’m proud to 
move, seconded by the member of Shaunavon: 
 

That this Assembly acknowledge its support for the free 
trade agreement’s objectives and goals, including the 
federal government’s initiatives to enhance trade with 
Canada’s largest trading partner, the reduction of tariffs 
and non-tariff barriers, and the implementation of a 
dispute settlement mechanism. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1445) 

Mr. Gleim: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure to be here in the House today to second the motion that 
the member from Pelly has brought forth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the subject of free trade is a vital one for the 
province of Saskatchewan, and I appreciate the opportunity to 
put forward my views from the people of Saskatchewan, and 
indeed, more important, to put forward my views from the 
people of Shaunavon constituency. 
 
My friend from Pelly has outlined many of the benefits of the 
free trade agreement, Mr. Speaker. In particular, he noted that 
there were . . . been many estimates of reduction in the cost of 
living from 2 to 6 per cent. It is not surprising, Mr. Speaker, that 
the Consumers’ Association of Canada is in favour of this 
agreement. Now, Mr. Speaker, you know that the NDP want to 
say that anyone and everyone who supports free trade 
agreement is just another friend of the Tories. They say so. So 
you’ve got your friends behind the deal; so what? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s nice to know that the NDP think the 
Consumers’ Association of Canada is composed of a bunch of 
my friends, but if they are simply honest with themselves, they 
can get some reassurance. You see, Mr. Speaker, you don’t 
have to be a Tory to support free trade. You just have to think 
and think and be a thinking person — along with a little 
common sense. 
 
Margaret Crowley, Mr. Speaker, the vice-president of 
Saskatchewan chapter of Consumers’ Association of Canada, is 
a thinking person, and she testifies that, and I quote here: 
“There would be increased competition and a greater selection 
of choice of consumer goods.” She continues that: “Although 
75 per cent of our trade with U.S. is tariff free, the highest 
tariffs tend to be consumers’ products.” 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, even in the areas where the Leader 
of the Opposition likes to try to frighten people, areas where 
there is potential for some adjustment pressures, professionals 
are not convinced. Take the example of poultry. The member 
from Riversdale is telling our poultry producers that they will 
be wiped out, just wiped out. He, of course, neglects to tell 
them what we have maintained — that we have maintained our 
quotas, the entire supply and management system. I guess you 
call that misleading. 
 
But interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, before the agreement 
was signed, the details known, some experts were analyzing 
free trade as a total package. What would have happened to our 
poultry industry, they were asking, if our supply and 
management system were given up. We had total free trade in 
poultry with the U.S. Andy Schmitz, the agricultural economist 
at the University of Saskatchewan says, and I quote the 
Leader-Post: 
 

Canadian poultry, dairy, eggs producers may do better 
than speculation has indicated. No one has compared how 
much it costs to produce a chicken in Canada compared 
with the ones in United states. 

 
  



 
April 12, 1988 

 

506 
 

So even under more sweeping, radical agreement there was 
some expert opinion out there that the poultry industry, with the 
eggs and dairy industries, might not do that bad. How much 
better it must be under the protection afforded by actual 
agreement that results. 
 
I would like to bring another economist into the debate, Mr. 
Speaker, one named Richard Lipsey. Now Mr. Lipsey is not 
some wild-eyed economic spouting rhetoric. In fact, he is one 
of the most respected economists in the country, so respected in 
fact that, along with two other gentlemen, wrote a university 
text — Lipsey, (Sparks) and Steiner — and that text is used to 
teach economic rights here in the University of Regina. Surely 
the University of Regina cannot be characterized as a red-hot 
bed of right-wingers out to sacrifice our sovereignty. 
 
And what was an eminent economist testimony of hearing in 
Ottawa, Mr. Speaker? He said that this trade agreement is good 
for Canada. This agreement has no effect on our sovereignty. 
And this agreement, Mr. Speaker, is in tune with the ability of 
Canada . . . Canadian economy to compete and to grow. 
 
He has made one specific point that I thought was very worthy. 
He pointed out, first, that over a very long history we have been 
reducing trade barriers between the two countries, and this has 
not imaged our sovereignty. Then he made this challenge. I 
quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The burden of proof lies on those who say that a 
Canadian-American free trade pact will unfold in 
dramatically different fashion than has the past history of 
Canadian tariff reductions, or than have similar pacts 
around the world. 

 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, anybody can do as the Leader of 
the Opposition does — just open his mouth and spew out 
accusations and claims. And because we are talking about a 
future development, it is hard to do more than just repeat that he 
is mistaken. 
 
But the point is there, Mr. Speaker, and it is very powerful that 
in the entire history of this country and the history of the world, 
tariff reductions and free trade agreements have never resulted 
in terrible things he claims it will. 
 
Given the only evidence, given the only evidence available, Mr. 
Lipsey says to the member from Riversdale, okay, you’ve made 
your accusations, now prove them. It’s not good enough to say, 
just disregard hundreds of years of history. You have to offer 
some evidence that has least legal weight to this history. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, he hasn’t done that because he 
cannot do that. Surely he can continue to try to scare people to 
claim our country will cease to exist. He will never explain on 
what basis. 
 
Let’s examine the possibilities for him. Could it be on the basis 
of tariff reduction? Well no, because we have already reduced 
tariffs so much that the vast majority of our trade is tariff free, 
and we are still a nation, so it cannot be that. 
 
Is it the basis that we will sit down with the Americans to  

harmonize our trade rules to set common standards on tariff 
practices? Well no, because we already do that, and not just 
with the U.S. In fact, one of the fundamental objects of nation is 
to try to get the trading nations of the entire world to come to 
such an agreement. 
 
We have in fact harmonized many standards and many rules 
through the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) 
and according to other treaties across, covering everything from 
health care to human rights — we still have our country. 
 
So could it be on the basis then that we will have a binational, 
binding tribunal of arbitration to settle trade disputes between 
nationals and our two countries. Well no, not that either, 
because we already submit such process where we do not even 
have an equal voice. The trade panels on GATT, in fact, as 
many colleagues have pointed out — should say, as my 
colleagues have pointed out — the GATT committee have even 
recently ruled out against us. But I hope the member from 
Riversdale would agree, we still are a country. 
 
Well on what possible basis would the Leader of the Opposition 
and NDP argue that we will cease to be a country? On what 
possible basis? They surely cannot believe that trade 
agreements will force Canadians to watch more American 
television, and besides, they watch as much as they want now 
without an agreement. They can’t argue that the agreement will 
put their friends, Mel Hurtig, out of business, although even if it 
did, I’m sure Canada could survive his absence. They can’t 
agree — then can’t argue . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. The member’s time has 
elapsed. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad 
to participate in this debate today, and I’m only sorry that I only 
have 10 minutes to do it. I want to spend a few of those minutes 
dealing with the document filed yesterday by the Premier, 
which is entitled, Saskatchewan and Canada: International 
Trade. 
 
First of all I want to say that, although the document is 14 years 
old, there is just — it is perfectly consistent with the position 
that our party has taken in every one of those years since then, 
including down to the present time. 
 
The document is not at all what the Premier represented to this 
House that it was. The document, rather, is a document 
prepared by Saskatchewan to assist Canada in GATT 
negotiations, for which this country was then preparing itself. It 
is a strong statement in favour of the multilateral reduction of 
tariffs on a world-wide basis. It makes the case, in very 
powerful terms, how some of the tariffs and other barriers 
erected by Japan and the European Economic Community are 
interfering with the flow of agricultural goods going from 
Canada to those countries, and makes a powerful case that a 
particular effort should be made to reduce those tariffs. This is a 
position which our party has always favoured, and which we 
continue to favour here in this House today. 
 
We’ve been arguing again and again that one of the problems 
with this agreement was that it only addressed  
  



 
April 12, 1988 

 

507 
 

problems of trade with the United States, whereas we thought a 
more appropriate position for Canada was to try on an 
international basis to deal with all of the barriers to trade that 
affect the trade from this province and from this country. 
 
It is the Conservative Party, Mr. Speaker, from the time of Sir 
John A. Macdonald, who have always been in favour of a high 
tariff policy. That’s where tariffs started, the national policy of 
Sir John A. It is the New Democrats, and before us the CCF in 
this country for the last 50 years, who have been pressing 
unrelentingly for the reduction of tariffs, and we continue to do 
that. And if this agreement, this free trade agreement were only 
a tariff agreement, Mr. Speaker, we would support it. I repeat 
again for the benefit of members opposite that it is not the tariff 
provisions of this agreement that are objectionable to us. What 
is objectionable to us is the wholesale loss of sovereignty that 
occurs as a result of the provisions of this agreement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — It is our inability to deal with questions such 
as foreign investment in this country, the control and 
management of our energy resources, and the control over our 
service sector for the rest of our life as a nation, Mr. Speaker, 
that are an issue in this agreement. 
 
Now I also think it really incredible that the Premier would try 
and present this document to the House in the way that he did 
yesterday. It is a pathetic effort, a pathetic effort from a 
desperate politician, made desperate because they’re beginning 
to get the results from their first polling in Elphinstone and 
Eastview, and they don’t like what they’re seeing at all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — And what they’re trying to do is to 
desperately divert attention away from the issues that are 
moving the voters in those constituencies — issues of health 
care, issues of government competence, issues of employment, 
issues of housing; desperately trying to divert public attention 
from those issues to anything else that might reflect 
embarrassment upon anybody connected with the New 
Democratic Party. 
 
I also want to mention, before putting this document down, a 
couple of observations with respect to the press treatment 
yesterday and this morning with respect to that document. Some 
of the journalists reporting on this document dealt with it very 
well. The political columnist for the Regina Leader-Post, for 
example, obviously read the document before he wrote his 
column. 
 
I can’t say with respect to some of the other media, and I think 
particularly of the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation). I 
know that broadcasting . . . the B stands for broadcasting and 
the C stands for corporation. I am not sure today what the C 
stands for. I thought it stood for Canadian — perhaps it doesn’t. 
 
But in any event, it would have been helpful if that reporter had 
read this document, and gone through it, and  

seen the fact that the document was not what the Premier 
represented it to be. The document, in fact, is a document that is 
entirely consistent with our position over all the years, and 
continues to be our position today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I might also observe that in those reports 
there was no attempt to balance the reporting. There was no 
attempt to elicit from the people on this side of the House what 
the reaction was to the Premier’s statements, or to the document 
which he filed with this House. 
 
Now I want to turn, in the time available, to some of the 
statements made by the mover and the seconder of this motion. 
You know, they talk about the consumers’ association as 
though that association were supporting this agreement. That is 
not, that is not the reality. I, myself, have met with the 
Saskatchewan section of the consumers’ association, and what 
they say is simply not the reality. 
 
The fact of the matter is — and it’s substantiated in interviews 
with leading executives of department stores in this country — 
the fact of the matter is that this free trade agreement is not 
going to result in any savings in the stores for our consumers. 
The Globe and Mail sent out . . . the Toronto Globe and Mail 
sent out a reporter to speak to the most senior people of The 
Bay and Sears, and the reporter asked those gentlemen, what 
would be the effect of this agreement upon prices in your 
stores? 
 
They got the same answer from both of those companies. The 
answer was, consumers ought not to expect to see any decrease 
in the price of goods in the department stores. They said two 
things. First of all, the amount of the tariff that is being reduced 
is a small amount indeed, and the tariff is being taken off over a 
period of ten years. And as a result, our consumers ought not to 
expect to see any reduction in the prices in the stores. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, that is the reality. The fantasy is what we hear from 
the other side of the House and from other proponents of the 
deal, as though Canadian consumers were going to be making 
money out of this agreement. That is not the case; in fact, the 
contrary is the case. 
 
The member from Shaunavon asked a number of questions 
about why the New Democratic Party is opposed to this 
agreement, and I want to put it to him in a nutshell. The fact of 
the matter is that Canada is being hosed on this agreement; 
Canada is being hosed. I mentioned these points in the House 
the other day, but I’ll reiterate them again. 
 
First of all, we are losing complete control over foreign 
investment moving into this country. I’m not one to argue that 
foreign investment should be excluded; there are many 
situations in which we need foreign capital in order to go ahead 
with developments in this country. But we have for years 
retained the right to screen those investments. This is an 
important thing because we ought to retain the capacity at any 
time to say no, or to say yes, but . . . and attach conditions to 
foreign investment. 
 
  



 
April 12, 1988 

 

508 
 

Under this agreement we are opening up our economy to 
purchases from Americans without any kind of a screening 
mechanism being in place. This is an unacceptable loss of 
sovereignty for our country. It is totally unacceptable to divest 
ourselves of the power to protect our economy from 
unacceptable levels of foreign ownership. 
 
Thirty-six per cent of our economy is now owned by 
non-Canadians. This compares to countries in the European 
economic community where the average level is something just 
over 1 per cent. We in Canada are facing a crisis. It’s a crisis 
that’s been growing for years, and yet instead of taking steps to 
ensure that we retain the capacity to protect ourself, we are 
going in exactly the opposite direction. We are opening up our 
economy. We’re saying, come on in, boys, you can buy 
anything you like; we don’t care; we’ll take no steps to protect 
ourselves at all. 
 
And so it goes through other parts of this agreement, Mr. 
Speaker. The energy section, the section on services, the 
provisions relating to culture, the provisions respecting 
government contracting, and many, many others — in all of 
these cases, Canada is just giving up the ghost. 
 
This agreement gives up on the idea of Canada. This agreement 
surrenders the notion that we can develop here a strong 
independent country, a country where our children and our 
grandchildren will grow up to be Canadians, and grow up to be 
proud of it. Instead, attempts are being made to lead us into a 
regime under this agreement where government ceases to have 
any active role in the management of our affairs, ceases to be 
able to protect ourselves from any number of ills that can 
happen down the road. Rather, government is consigned to a 
corner of the room to sit passively by in a chair, watching the 
scene develop before it, hoping upon hope that someone in the 
private sector might do the right thing, might do something that 
will benefit our children and our grandchildren and take care of 
the things in our society that need caring for. 
 
We’ve done a lot of things in this country, Mr. Speaker, and 
we’ve done them in a partnership between the private sector and 
the public sector. We’ve built, for example, the great national 
railways; we have a national airline; we have regional 
development programs; we have all kinds of regional 
development. These things could not . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a privilege to 
participate in this debate today. 
 
I would like to remark, first of all, in comments from the 
member from Fairview in Saskatoon who talked about 
American investments, somehow or other it’s a bad word out 
here in western Canada for the NDP. Somehow or other it’s 
okay for the General Motors and Ford and Chrysler to invest $6 
billion in Oshawa — that is the riding for Mr. Broadbent, the 
head of the NDP; and also vice-president of the NDP, Bob 
White, who is the head of  

the auto workers’ union. I can’t quite understand how it’s all 
right for the Americans to invest $6 billion in the Oshawa area 
for Mr. Broadbent and for Mr. White, and it’s not all right for 
them to invest any money out here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I point out to them also that recently a Canadian . . . We don’t, 
in western Canada, we don’t . . . we’re not concerned about 
American investment hurting us in any respect. We can do as 
well with the Americans as they can with do us. Just recently a 
Canadian became the largest holder of retail stores in the United 
States — a Canadian in United States. Americans aren’t too 
happy about it, but that’s the way it is. 
 
At any rate, Mr. Speaker, I had the honour on Friday of 
speaking to the electrical and mechanical contractors’ 
association and, not surprisingly, one of the things that they 
were most interested in was the subject of the free trade 
agreement with the United States. 
 
Now these people, electrical and mechanical contractors, are 
builders. They earn their living by building with their hands and 
building with their minds, and they have a very important role 
to play in the building of this province. They’re also a part of 
our effort at nation building, and more particularly province 
building. To build this province we need tools, just as each of 
these contractors must have tools for their particular projects 
which they undertake. 
 
Of course, when you’re talking about building Saskatchewan, 
the tools become broader and less easily defined in most 
circumstances. They include things such as a willing, educated, 
and energetic population that wants to build. They include the 
proper fiscal and monetary structures, sound financial 
institutions, a functioning infrastructure, and many other things. 
 
But perhaps the most important tool of all to build any nation, 
and certainly to build this province, is a structure that allows 
stable and open access to markets for the products and services 
that its people create. Mr. Speaker, without a buyer for all of the 
things that we produce, all of the education, all of the energy, 
and all of the willingness will go for nothing. This province 
must have access to the supplies it must obtain externally, and it 
must have access to the fairest and most stable terms possible. 
 
These facts are the main reason why for over 100 years the 
leaders of . . . western Canadian leaders and other leaders across 
this country have called for free trade with the United States. As 
a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, back in 1984 the current 
government of the day, the NDP, supported free trade. 
 
Yesterday the Premier introduced some research concerning 
free trade — a research document prepared by the NDP in 1974. 
And the current Leader of the Opposition, the member from 
Riversdale, at that time was of course the deputy premier and 
also, I’m sure, part of the planning and priorities organization at 
that time, so he would have been a big part of the preparation of 
that document. 
 
His government prepared a document in favour of free  
  



 
April 12, 1988 

 

509 
 

trade with the United States, and yet today they are opposing it. 
And we heard just moments ago that the member from Fairview 
was trying to deny that fact, trying to soften the impact of that 
research yesterday that hit them so hard. 
 
So I’d like to quote from yesterday’s Hansard, if I may. In the 
area where the Premier was speaking, on page 475 (457), that 
document prepared by the NDP in 1974 stated: 
 

Saskatchewan is generally recognized as one of Canada’s 
disadvantaged provinces (as a result of high tariffs). 
Employment opportunities have grown at slow or negative 
rates; incomes have become depressed in Canadian terms. 
The province’s fiscal capacity has, over the long (haul), 
been below the national average (as a result of higher 
tariffs and tariff constraints). 

 
On page 22 it says: 
 

Saskatchewan is interested in seeing the major trading 
countries move towards free trade (— moving towards 
free trade). Saskatchewan would not endorse general 
increases or maintenance of protection, either at home or 
abroad. 

 
And then he goes on to say: 
 

Extensive trade liberalization at the international and 
domestic levels, such as will be recommended below, 
could result in savings to the Saskatchewan economy of 
more than $130 million annually . . . and to the grain 
industry, more than $50 million annually; to consumers, 
$80 million annually . . . 

 
If you put that $130 million into today’s terms, from 1972 to 
today’s terms, you get $335 million in today’s dollars. 
 
And now specifically for the member from Fairview who said 
that somehow or other that document that the Premier was 
talking about yesterday did not relate to United States but rather 
had broader terms, and I’m sure it did have broader terms, but it 
did state, specifically, free trade with the United States. 
 
It says on page 23, section 3(c): 
 

The reduction of United States tariffs on processed and 
manufactured forest, minerals and agriculture products 
would assist the Saskatchewan economy. 

 
That seems to me, Mr. Speaker, very clear. 
 
Interesting, however, that NDP document prepared in 1974 
which strongly endorsed free trade with the United States did 
not mention in any place in that document, sovereignty, culture, 
or marketing boards. So how is it that all of a sudden these are 
the big issues for free trade. They’re not even mentioned in 
1974. 
 
They oppose free trade today, at least they say they do, but they 
probably oppose it because our Premier was the  

biggest player, one of the biggest players in putting this deal 
together. That’s probably why they didn’t support it. 
 
But that’s not surprising because they didn’t support or help 
families when interest rates were 20 per cent. We did. They 
offered no help to farmers when they were losing their farms. 
We did. Oh, they offered to buy their farms and then take them 
back on as some kind of tenants, in some way going back to the 
old feudal system. 
 
But even last week they would not support the 18,000 students 
who faced the prospect of not being allowed to write their 
exams if we did not get some legislation through to get their 
teachers back to work up in Saskatoon. They did not support the 
government’s move in a non-partisan gesture, I might say, to 
solve the students’ dilemma, so how can we possibly expect 
them to have any clear idea of what free trade is about? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is yet to come a day when we would be able 
to construct — if I may just get back again to my original topic 
of free trade — we will never be able to construct a building as 
inexpensively as the user would like it to be, with the ultimate 
amount of safety, with wire capable of carrying any load but 
steel of an infinitely small gauge, requiring no maintenance for 
ever, perfectly beautiful, with air conditioning that always 
senses what temperature the user wants and never strays from 
that temperature, and so on and so on. Perfection is not a 
possibility in this life, and I will say right up front that the free 
trade agreement is not perfect — crafted with all the complexity 
and challenges of a difficult engineering project, it is not 
perfect. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it is a great piece of work. And I don’t mind 
saying that some pretty talented contractors worked on that 
project on our behalf, such that Saskatchewan will benefit 
perhaps more than any other region of the country if this free 
trade deal does go through. 
 
Let me go over some of the details with you. The first element 
of any building project, of course, is safety. In here, too, there 
are genuine trade-offs. For example, the safety, of course, of our 
nation lies in it retaining control over its sovereignty and its 
culture, and for Saskatchewan, protection of our agricultural 
marketing boards and security for our social programs is very 
important. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about cultural programs, 
something comes very quickly to my mind, something I used in 
a recent speech, and that is that if our cultural institutions and 
our culture is so weak that we have to be insulated from the 
influences of other countries, then our culture is really weak 
indeed, and we would never be able to save it from any kind of 
influences. 
 
If you look at Australia and New Zealand — are the New 
Zealanders any less Kiwi than they were before they had the 
first deal with the United States? Are the French any less 
French? Are the Greeks any less Greek? Are the great Britons 
any less English because of the free trade they have with the 
European Economic Council? I say not. I say that our culture, 
which is growing every day, our culture isn’t something that 
you can say today: this is our culture, and that’s the way it’s 
going to be. 
 
  



 
April 12, 1988 

 

510 
 

Every day our culture is growing. It’s getting stronger as new 
people come into our country. As more people become 
educated in this country and become more involved as a nation, 
our culture gets stronger. We’re getting stronger and stronger 
and stronger. And I say to you, and I say to the people of this 
province, that a free trade deal with the United States will have 
no influence whatsoever on our culture unless we want it to be. 
We’re a strong nation. 
 
(1515) 
 
Let me just talk for a moment . . . when I mentioned the other 
night, talking to the electrical contractors, I talked about some 
of the reductions that it meant to them. Let me give you a few 
specific examples of what it means to the contractors in the 
electrical mechanical field . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to be able to enter into this debate on free trade today. 
I’m surprised how naïve the members opposite are. I’m 
surprised they don’t give us some facts as how this trade deal is 
going to benefit our province. It’s all rhetoric with no 
substantiation by fact. 
 
I guess I’m also surprised at some of the coverage that was 
brought forward yesterday on the document that was tabled. I 
guess I was saddened a little bit by the fact that in its quest for 
popularizing print, the media sometimes has to do things that 
maybe they don’t want to do, maybe they don’t mean to do — 
or maybe they do, I’m not sure — to grab the attention of the 
reader. It saddened me a little bit, because I think this country 
these days is geared around the media. And I think they have a 
grave and great responsibility to be fair, to tell both sides of the 
story, no matter what the argument is, and to lay out the facts as 
they best can gather them. I don’t think we saw that in some 
cases yesterday, and I would hope that that would improve in 
the future, because it’s so important that the people of this 
province’s country get the message and get the facts out in the 
best way possible. 
 
I would like to now, Mr. Speaker, turn to some of the things in 
the free trade agreement that alarm me in agriculture. First of 
all, we see that we’re losing the two-price system for wheat. 
This two-price system brought in about $280 million. The 
thought was, or the commitment was, the message was, that we 
were going to see this $280 million come back in the form of a 
subsidy. 
 
But there’s still no commitment. We haven’t heard from the 
federal government that the farmers are going to get that money 
replaced in their pockets. So I think they’re thinking out there 
that maybe there isn’t going to be a replacement for the $280 
million they’re going to lose. 
 
I think that, also, the wheat board’s powers have been reduced 
because with no import licences, how do we control the 
movement of grain? What’s to stop two multinationals, one in 
the U.S. and one in Canada, maybe the same company, from 
promoting . . . having a sale if,  

for example, the U.S. have an embargo from some country, 
from stopping them from taking their grain up through our 
market, through a multinational corporation into the 
market-place. There’s nothing to stop that right now. The 
government has the option, but if they choose not to, it can go 
ahead. 
 
There’s no guarantees, Mr. Speaker, that our wheat board’s 
going to remain. And that’s another problem with this deal. The 
United States don’t like our wheat board. So little by little over 
the years other people have been chipping away at it, and this is 
another attack on the wheat board. 
 
The next point . . . and that’s documented in this book, in this 
Free Trade Agreement. The next point I’d like to make in the 
agreement is the fact of subsidies. In this agreement, if you 
want to look on page 106 you will find a list of subsidies — 
subsidies identified in Canada and in the United States. 
 
One of the subsidies identified in Canada is the Western Grain 
Transportation Act. And on page 79, article 701, it says: 
 

Canada shall exclude from the transport rates established 
under the Western Grain Transportation Act agricultural 
goods originating in Canada and shipped via west coast 
ports for consumption in the United States of America. 

 
Basically affecting canola-meal and oil. Mr. Speaker, this takes 
out of the pockets of prairie farmers in Alberta, $25 a tonne, 
and out of the pockets of farmers in Saskatchewan, $38 a tonne. 
And this government says it’s supporting agriculture by 
supporting the free trade agreement. That is wrong; that is false. 
They’re taking money out of the pockets of the farmers. 
 
Especially now, Mr. Speaker, since we now have what’s been 
accepted in the United States of the GRAS, or generally 
regarded as safe, the canola oil. I mean, we’re just breaking into 
the market, and then hopefully can expand that market because 
the United States government has seen fit that this product is 
good. And we could probably ship more there, but in order to 
do that we’re taking $38 a tonne out of the pockets of farmers. 
We’re subsidizing out of the pockets of farmers. And this 
government says that it’s going to support agriculture. Well it’s 
just not showing that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the last speaker said that supply management, our 
marketing boards, were protected. Well that is pure, outright 
garbage, because in this deal, supply and management for 
poultry, and it’s on page 84. It says: 
 

. . . the level of global quota on chicken . . . chicken 
products as defined in Annex 706 for any given year shall 
be no(t) less than 7.5 per cent of the previous year’s 
domestic production of chicken in Canada . . . 

 
That’s up from 6.3 per cent, so they’ve upped the amount of 
American chicken that can come in. But when we flip over to 
find our what the definition of chicken is, and we look on page 
119, we see that chicken is: 
 
  



 
April 12, 1988 

 

511 
 

Chicken and chicken products . . . chicken capons, live or 
eviscerated, chicken parts, whether breaded or battered . . . 
chicken products manufactured wholly . . . whether 
breaded or battered . . . 

 
But what’s not a chicken, and what’s not covered by this 
agreement? There’s a whole list, and I’ll just read some of 
them: all the processed product, and that’s the expanding part of 
our industry in Canada — it’s the processed. And they’re going 
to allow the American producers to put their chicken into our 
market in things like: 
 

. . . chicken cordon bleu, breaded breast of chicken cordon 
bleu, chicken Kiev, breaded breast of chicken Kiev, 
boneless Rock Cornish . . . stuffed Rock Cornish, boneless 
chicken with apples and almonds, chicken Romanoff 
Regell, (and it goes on) . . . chicken TV dinners . . . 

 
This is the chicken that’s not a chicken, because it’ll be allowed 
to come into Canada with no restrictions. And they say that 
they’re supporting supply management. Well that is such a false 
statement. And they expect the people of Saskatchewan to 
believe them when they say, this is a good deal. Utterly 
ludicrous. 
 
And I’ll just . . . and it goes the same for the egg industry. The 
egg industry in this province, one of the only 
supply-management industries that is not subsidized by 
anybody — they do it on their own backs, they’ve got an 
excellent system worked out, and now they’re going to up the 
imports of eggs. They’re going to add on to that what the peak 
consumption periods . . . like we buy and sell from the United 
States so that we don’t have to throw it away. We sell at a loss 
to us but we recoup in the good times. And then they add on to 
that, after they total those two together — the increase in the 
tariff and the increase in the peak periods — they add on to that 
again overall another amount which is a doubling of the peak 
period tariff. Now that is totally irresponsible, totally 
irresponsible when negotiating a deal for Canadian farmers and 
Saskatchewan farmers in particular. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn briefly to the red meat 
industry. The red meat industry in this province is very, very 
important to us. We have to take our beef products and move 
them. But we have basically free trade in red meats right now. 
And if the dollar goes up to 85 cents or so, we won’t have the 
advantage of the dollar, so they won’t come up and buy them. 
 
But I’ll make the example of hogs. In this book it says — if I 
can find it — it says hogs . . . or what constitutes meat. But 
hogs aren’t listed. Hogs aren’t listed as what constitutes meat. 
It’s beef, sheep, and veal. But hogs aren’t listed. Now did you 
hear one of those members stand up and say that hogs weren’t 
listed? Because they don’t like to tell the truth. In fact we still 
have a tariff on hogs, 4.4 cents per pound. 
 
And now I’ll just wind up, Mr. Speaker, by saying that some 
American farmers and farm groups do not agree with this deal. 
And let me tell you why they don’t agree with it. Tories will tell 
you they don’t agree with it  

because Canada got such a good deal. Well I’ll just tell you, in 
the brief moments I’ve had here I pointed out just a few, just a 
few of the things that are going to be detrimental to 
Saskatchewan agriculture, and these Tory boys are supporting 
it. 
 
The Americans, they say we still have a Wheat Board — that’s 
an unfair subsidy. They say we still have stabilization plans — 
that’s unfair. That’s why they don’t like the deal, not because 
we got a good deal, because they didn’t. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege for me 
to address the Assembly on an issue as important as this, and I 
have for the past year become more and more a believer that 
free trade is one of the best initiatives that this government, the 
Government of Canada have initiated. And I am more 
convinced today than I ever was before that what we are doing 
as it relates to free trade is important for the people of 
Saskatchewan, it’s important for the people of Canada, and it’s 
important in various kinds of ways and I’m going to point out 
some of them here today. 
 
Canada’s free trade agreement with the United States is good 
for all Canadians and especially for those in Saskatchewan. The 
motion before the Assembly here today calls on us to express 
our support and we’re going to take a look at some of the 
benefits. The position I believe, Mr. Speaker, that we ought to 
take as a legislature, and the people of Saskatchewan, is that 
this is indeed one of the most important things that we have 
ever done. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier needs to be 
congratulated for his efforts, he needs to be commended for the 
things that he has done. He has brought an international focus to 
the province of Saskatchewan that is unique, and that in itself is 
a very important trade opportunity. 
 
When you speak about the impact of Canada on the United 
States, when you go about a mile on the other side of the 
border, people don’t even know where Canada is. That is a 
recognition that is slowly fading away because of the 
involvement that we have had, not only by the Prime Minister 
of Canada, but the Premier of Saskatchewan. And I believe that 
we need to acknowledge that. 
 
Trade has been a part of Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan’s 
history. If you go back to the early times in Saskatchewan, trade 
was established by the natives who lived here. Trade was 
established by the fur traders who came and moved the furs 
from Saskatchewan across to the eastern part of Canada and 
into Europe. 
 
Trade has become a part of who we are and what we are, and 
how we handle trade is extremely important. Saskatchewan 
relies a lot on trade. Every job that we have, a quarter of that is 
initiated by the trade component, and we have to be able to 
recognize that, that it is an important part. 
 
Thirty-five per cent of all of the goods and services we  
  



 
April 12, 1988 

 

512 
 

produce are part of trade. Indeed, Saskatchewan is Canada’s 
largest per capita trader, and that, Mr. Speaker, is with 
Americans. And we have to be aware that these people in the 
United States who buy our products are people that could just as 
easily cut it off. And that so often, Mr. Speaker, is something 
that is not recognized by the NDP opposite. 
 
Since trade is every job . . . one in four jobs in Saskatchewan is 
a part of the trade sector, we are dependent on trade as an 
engine to drive the economy, and I believe that there are 
examples. In the grain industry, we trade internationally and are 
well respected in our international trade. 
 
And international doesn’t mean just over the water; 
international trade means across the border. When you take a 
look at what has happened in the oats, for example, this past 
year, the contracts that went down to Kentucky and Missouri to 
the racing industry, it was Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and 
Alberta oats that went down there to do that. It was not 
imported from Japan; it was not imported from Europe. It was 
contracts that were initiated by people of western Canada to 
deliver that product down there. It’s very important. 
 
(1530) 
 
Let’s take the potash industry. We’ve just gone through 
probably an historic time in the potash industry, and the 
Minister of Energy and Mines has done an excellent job in 
providing that liaison with the companies and with the United 
States Department of Commerce. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, 
that that is a part of why we ought to be more intense and 
driving the point home, that trade is one of the most important 
features in dealing with the economy of Saskatchewan. One in 
four jobs is related to that. 
 
The oil industry. So many times, Mr. Speaker, the people who 
do not understand the energy sector have said, this is a bad 
thing for Canada, the oil sector and the natural gas. Well I want 
to say to the people of Saskatchewan, to the people in the Morse 
constituency, because that is an extremely important issue in 
my constituency, that this is a very important item. The energy 
sector and the opportunity to market that anywhere in the world 
is extremely, extremely important. 
 
And I, Mr. Speaker, believe that it is to the benefit of the people 
of Saskatchewan, not only in my constituency — in the 
Shaunavon constituency, in the Maple Creek constituency, in 
the Kindersley constituency, in the Lloydminster constituency, 
and everyone in the province of Saskatchewan gets a benefit. 
 
Yesterday we heard the Premier say that $700 million in energy 
benefits flowed to the people of Saskatchewan because of the 
kinds of things that we do. And those are things that relate 
directly to schools, they relate to hospitals, they relate to 
seniors’ care. And those are the kinds of things that this trade 
package provides for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I believe it, and you just go and talk to the people in the energy 
sector who deal on an international basis, how they respond to 
this trade agreement. They believe in it,  

Mr. Speaker, and they think it is very, very important. 
 
Let’s take the energy sector in the uranium. Where were we 
going in uranium prior to October 4, 1987? We were down the 
tubes. Our mines were closed down, or about to be closed 
down, and we, Mr. Speaker, have the highest ore grade uranium 
in the world. We have the potential to deliver energy of that sort 
internationally to people all over the world. 
 
And who, Mr. Speaker, are the biggest buyers? They’re United 
States, France, and countries like that. These people need 
energy, and where are they going to get it? Where are they 
going to get it? They’re going to get it from oil, they’re going to 
get it from water, they’re going to get it from uranium. And, 
Mr. Speaker, this free trade agreement probably put more 
people to work at one single stroke of the pen than anything 
else that we have done since we’ve been elected. And I believe, 
Mr. Speaker, that it is very, very important. 
 
Now going to something else that I feel very strongly about is 
the livestock sector. Mr. Speaker, 70 per cent of the hogs in 
Manitoba go to the United States; 30 per cent of the hogs in 
Saskatchewan go to the United States. Is that going to impact 
on us positively or negatively if they would begin to close some 
of those borders off? 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that it is very, very important to the 
meat industry in Canada, and in Saskatchewan specifically, that 
we deal with this and deal with it accurately. Mr. Speaker, the 
meat producers in Saskatchewan believe that it is a very, very 
important thing to do, and I’ll tell you why. 
 
If, for example, you were to take and reduce exports by that 30 
per cent, and those people in Saskatchewan would be affected 
— let’s take hogs in Saskatchewan, 30 per cent of the hogs. 
What would that do to the chicken industry in Saskatchewan? It 
would go right down. What would happen to the beef industry? 
It would go down. Just think of the prices that we have today 
established in the beef industry. They are probably the highest 
that they have ever been in my history. 
 
And you take a look at last year, for example, in the last quarter, 
meat was trading 154 a hundred. Today it is between 145 and 
150. Mr. Speaker, that’s almost unprecedented in our history. 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is because we have an opportunity to 
trade on an international basis, and that is with the United 
States. International does not exclude the United States, and I 
believe that it is very important for us to address that. 
 
Our forest products is another particular part that we need to 
take a look at. What are we trading in our forest products where 
we could have a benefit? And I have studied a number of 
economic books on how this international trade impacts as it 
relates to the United States and to Canada. Forestry, for 
example, under the agreement that we had with Canada and 
United States, the forest industry had a very, very negative tax 
placed on it in 1986. Why? The same arguments that were dealt 
with in 1982, as it related to the forest industry, were the same 
guys to use it in 1986. 
 
  



 
April 12, 1988 

 

513 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Your time has expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
enter this debate about the supposed merits and the tremendous 
shortcomings of the proposed Canada-U.S. free trade 
agreement. 
 
Before commenting on the deal though, I want to make a very 
important point. No one in Saskatchewan, including New 
Democrats, are opposed to increased trade between Canada and 
the United States. Everyone knows that our province must trade 
to prosper. That is not the issue, and that has never been the 
issue. 
 
The issue is whether this particular deal, the Mulroney-Reagan 
trade deal, meets the needs of our province and our country. 
The issue is not our desire for more trade with the U.S. and the 
world, the issue is this particular deal. And I maintain that this 
agreement is not satisfactory because it goes well beyond the 
normal terms of a commercial trade deal and requires Canada to 
give up control of an important economic and social decision. 
 
The member from Pelly and the member from Regina Wascana 
falsely accused as of supporting the abolition of the auto pact. 
What they said is just not true, Mr. Speaker. In fact, the auto 
pact is a clear example of not being free trade; it is not a free 
trade arrangement. It is, in fact, an example of managed trade 
with production guarantees. And there is absolutely nothing 
wrong, or nothing free about that deal except that the freedom 
that it was bargained in. And under this agreement with 
Mulroney and Reagan’s agreement, the auto pact would never 
happen. 
 
The other comment I want to make, Mr. Speaker, before I get 
into some other relevant notes, is with regard to the Premier. 
Yesterday the Premier in this House was an unbelievable 
example of a man in desperation. He was a man exercising a 
desperate act. He’s faced with two by-elections in this province 
for May 4, in Saskatoon Eastview and Regina Elphinstone. He 
knows, Mr. Speaker, that the polls are not very good for the 
Conservatives. So here he is, he takes this little document from 
1974, a document which is 14 years old, which the NDP 
government had put together and commissioned to have it put 
together, which supported the importance of the GATT and 
supported and promoted a reduction of tariffs. 
 
And here’s a Premier using a document that’s 14 years old, but 
refused to table, and refuses still to table, any documents that 
this government in the last six years has put together on free 
trade and any statistics therefrom. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — What kind of a Premier is that, Mr. Speaker? 
It’s an act of clear desperation, in my view. His party’s in 
trouble, and I maintain that they’re very desperate to win these 
by-elections in Regina Elphinstone and Saskatoon Eastview, 
and they’ll try anything to win the by-elections. 
 

But that’s only part of it. The other part of it, Mr. Speaker, is 
the media. We’ve heard about the journalists previously. The 
CBC reported on this statement of the Premier almost verbatim. 
And it seems to me that the Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation, the way they’ve been reporting on the Premier 
lately, in particular from yesterday, should be named perhaps 
the Conservative Broadcasting Corporation. 
 
Whenever they want to get on the media, the Premier gets up 
there and he says a statement and they report it. And that 
wouldn’t be so bad if it was a balanced story, but the radio 
report I heard, Mr. Speaker, was totally almost verbatim from 
what the Premier had said. And everybody knows, everybody 
knows, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier has on many occasions 
made statements that require balanced reporting because on 
many occasions he stretched the truth so badly it’s nowhere 
resembling the truth. 
 
However, some media do report fairly and in the public interest 
on the free trade agreement, Mr. Speaker. A Toronto 
newspaper, I believe it was the Toronto Star, printed a leaked 
document, a government document, confirming that it has been 
the deliberate strategy of the Mulroney Conservatives in Ottawa 
not to inform Canadians of the details of this so-called free 
trade agreement. 
 
This is disturbing news, Mr. Speaker, coming from our 
government. It can only mean that the more you know about 
this deal, the less you will like it. And as one reads through this 
document, as one reads through the document, Mr. Speaker, 
Canadians like the deal less and less, because it means in some 
areas we have surrendered our country and our independence 
without so much as even a whimper or a battle. 
 
This agreement is far worse than a simple agreement to reduce 
tariffs. It deals with far more than just tariffs. It deals with 
things like the elimination of the two-price wheat, unfettered 
U.S. purchasing of the Canadian economy, American influence 
on whether certain public services can be offered to Canadians 
by Canadian governments, and of course our future ability to 
use our resources, in particular energy, to diversify our 
economy as we see fit. 
 
The U.S. want and wanted the removal of Canadian tariffs; they 
wanted guaranteed access to our energy supplies and the 
elimination of Canadian government involvement in our 
economy so that they could gain better access to Canadian 
markets. The U.S. got those objectives, Canada, on the other 
hand, wanted the removal of the U.S. trade remedy laws to gain 
better access to the U.S. market, and we did not obtain that. The 
U.S. got what they wanted; Canada did not. 
 
This deal will make the Canadian economy more like the U.S. 
market economy, I maintain, and will integrate the two 
economies eventually. Supporters of the deal, the Conservatives 
opposite, say the deal is good, because they know the U.S. 
market system allows the rich to get richer. 
 
Opponents, including the New Democrats, say the deal is  
  



 
April 12, 1988 

 

514 
 

bad, because they know the U.S. market system means more 
inequality, more poverty, less prosperity for ordinary farm 
families and working families, and fewer and weaker social 
programs, and of course, eventually, a significant loss of 
Canadian independence. In short, opponents say the deal is a 
sell-out to Canada. 
 
This agreement, with regard to energy, is about a continental 
energy policy which forces us to share our resources on a 
guaranteed basis with the United States. There are serious 
restrictions on our power to use one of our greatest assets, 
energy. 
 
Articles 902, 903 and 904 of the final agreement state clearly 
that Canada cannot discriminate against Americans with respect 
to the price of Canadian oil, natural gas, coal or hydro power. 
This suggests that Canadian governments can no longer offer 
special rebate programs which give farmers or small-business 
people a competitive edge on the price of energy. 
 
Cheap energy has always been Saskatchewan’s hope for 
economic diversification, diversification that would support a 
host of local Saskatchewan-based businesses, serving our needs 
and employing our people. Under this agreement, that hope is 
dashed, because we would no longer be able to sell our energy 
to ourselves, to Canadians, for less than we charge the 
Americans. 
 
In addition, if the agreement proceeds, there will be limitations 
on our power to drastically restrict energy reports and exports to 
the U.S. in times of shortage. During these times, whatever 
energy we have left must be rationed between Americans and 
Canadians in the same proportion as prior to any shortage. 
 
The fundamental ownership rights of being able to set the price 
of the product and the rate at which that product enters the 
market have been given up under this deal. They’ve been given 
up and surrendered, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to . . . don’t take my word for it, but I want to quote 
from one article in The Globe and Mail, January 22, 1988. And 
the title reads “Trade deal likely to hurt Canada on energy, (an) 
official says”. And I quote: 
 

The proposed free-trade deal would . . . force Canadians to 
pay more for oil, natural gas and electricity and make their 
supplies of these energy sources less secure, while giving 
them very little in return, a senior official in Ontario’s 
Energy Ministry said yesterday. 

 
And it was a report by an assistant deputy minister. He goes on 
to say: 
 

Producers who support the deal, which would reduce the 
ability of federal and provincial governments to regulate 
energy prices and supplies, “are . . . the same guys” that 
want government to stay out of their business when times 
are good, but demand help when market forces drive 
prices down. . . 

 
(1545) 

“They want to have it both ways.” The article continues, and I 
quote: 
 

I resent the double standard they’re presenting. They’re 
saying we don’t want the Government to regulate what we 
do with the energy (and), on the one hand, they’re the 
recipients of tremendous amounts of Canadian taxpayers’ 
(dollars and) incentives and encouragement to find the 
resources. 

 
So here we are, Mr. Speaker, a country and a province, in a 
western province like Alberta, providing millions and millions 
of dollars annually in terms of incentives for the oil industry, 
yet we can’t even determine the price of our product in Canada. 
 
So why are taxpayers subsidizing all of these incentive 
programs to seek new oil, to find new oil, to bring new oil 
reserves onto production, yet all we can do is export at one 
price — charge Canadians the same price. 
 
What we’ve done there, Mr. Speaker, is surrendered any 
economic advantage that we’ve been able to achieve over the 
years with the two-price oil system. And that, Mr. Speaker, I 
maintain, will hurt business in this province. It will hurt 
business and production in Canada, throughout this country. 
 
And as far as I’m concerned, Mr. Speaker, this deal is a sell-out 
to Canadians. It’s a sell-out and surrender of our independence, 
and I maintain that we should fight as much as we can to amend 
the deal so that some of these advantages that we’ve given away 
for nothing in return are straightened out for the benefit of 
Canadians. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Time has expired. Motions. 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to move to Motion 16. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, we are quite prepared to 
provide that leave, and we have discussed it with the 
government side previous to this, but on the understanding that 
we revert back to the normal business afterwards. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — That is the understanding as set out by 
the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 16 — Appreciation of Ducks Unlimited 
Canada 

 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure in bringing 
forward this resolution to the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan. My cousin, Dr. Ken Martin, is a past president 
of Ducks Unlimited. His father was a president of Ducks 
Unlimited, and as an outdoorsman, a conservationist, and as a 
person who’s concerned that we preserve our wetlands and our 
wildlife, I am most grateful  
  



 
April 12, 1988 

 

515 
 

to the dedicated people who make up the organization, Ducks 
Unlimited. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will take a moment to read the motion. 
 

That this Assembly extend to Ducks Unlimited Canada its 
congratulations upon the organization’s fiftieth 
anniversary and acknowledge the contribution made by 
Ducks Unlimited Canada toward the preservation of 
essential natural resources of this province, and for 
ensuring a more balanced and healthful natural 
environment. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, as an outdoorsman, a conservationist, and a 
person who is concerned that we preserve our wetlands and our 
wildlife, I’m most grateful to the dedicated people who make up 
the organization Ducks Unlimited. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ducks Unlimited is a major player in combating 
the effects of drought in our province. Every project that 
enhances the preservation of wetlands represents such a 
contribution. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, the preservation of our 
wetlands is done in such a way as to accomplish many 
worthwhile objectives, including flood control for local 
communities and, in some cases, the enhancement of water 
supply of such communities. 
 
Ducks Unlimited has completed about 500 wetland projects in 
Saskatchewan since 1938 in all parts of the province. I’d like to 
mention just one. That is one that is currently under 
construction, and that is Lucky Lake project near Lucky Lake 
on the South Saskatchewan River. This is part of a $20 million 
sprinkler irrigation project being developed by Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation and Ducks Unlimited, a 6,000 acre wetland 
that dries up every summer, but now will be blessing for 
farmers in the area and also for water-fowl — Agriculture and 
Ducks Unlimited working together. 
 
The work of Ducks Unlimited also contributes to the 
populations of many species of wildlife totally aside from 
water-fowl. Moose, beaver, muskrat, and many other 
fur-bearing animals; thousands of species of insects; and many 
fish and crayfish; thousands of species of plants, from the 
microscopic to towering grasses; and of course, the numerous 
song and shore birds that inhabit wetlands of the prairies — an 
ecological community unto itself, Mr. Speaker — all of these 
benefits from the work of Ducks Unlimited. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, that you were proud of the wildlife 
sanctuary in your constituency near Govan, the Last Mountain 
Wildlife Sanctuary. It’s the first sanctuary in Canada, which last 
year celebrated 100 years as a wildlife sanctuary. And while 
Ducks Unlimited had no part in that project, they have been 
active in this province since 1938, as I said, with the creation of 
some 500 projects. 
 
As the MLA for Regina Wascana, I’m proud of Wascana 
Waterfowl Park, again preserved since 1913 and a bird 
sanctuary since 1956. Ducks Unlimited was involved in the 
creation of this marvellous bird sanctuary, and indeed there is a 
cairn to honour that occasion on the shores of the lake. 
 

The organization of Ducks Unlimited, Mr. Speaker, also 
contributes significantly to the economic development of the 
province and of the country. To the end of 1987, Ducks 
Unlimited had invested $333 million in Canadian wetlands 
development. Of those hundreds of millions, Mr. Speaker, 70 
millions of dollars was invested right here in Saskatchewan. 
Seventy millions of dollars is a big chunk of change, a big 
investment, for which I want to say, thank you, on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan. And they will spend 7.5 million in 
Saskatchewan this year. 
 
Canadians, of course, are contributing an increasing amount of 
money to Ducks Unlimited Canada. Much of that money is 
raised through Ducks Unlimited dinners held in communities 
throughout Canada. In Saskatchewan alone there will be 35 
Ducks Unlimited dinners this year. These dinners are well 
attended and are a major source of income for Ducks Unlimited 
in Saskatchewan. They will raise nearly a million dollars in 
Saskatchewan this year alone from those 35 dinners. 
 
And you should know, Mr. Speaker, having just had a little 
debate on the free trade agreement, you should know that the 
vast majority of the funding that has come into Canada comes 
directly from contributions of individual citizens of the United 
States. 
 
Americans have been exporting investment to our province with 
their only return being the continual survival of our duck 
population. And I want to thank those American citizens with 
my motion as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The history of Ducks Unlimited is an impressive one. On this 
50th anniversary it is appropriate to reflect a little on that 
history. For example, the first Ducks Unlimited project in this 
province goes back to 1938. It was in that year that the 
organization undertook a project in the riding of my friend, the 
member from Kinistino, the development of Waterhen Marsh. 
 
As part of the organization’s celebrations there will be a special 
dedication at Waterhen Marsh this year, and I know the member 
for Kinistino is proud to have that marsh in his constituency. 
 
Ducks Unlimited was also involved in the development of 
Waterfowl Park, the Wascana Waterfowl Park, as I mentioned a 
few moments ago. 
 
From 1938, Ducks Unlimited in this province rapidly expanded, 
undertaking ever more and larger projects in every corner of the 
province. In its first 50 years, the organization has developed 
and maintains almost 500,000 acres of water-fowl habitat, 
500,000 acres of water-fowl habitat, half a million acres of 
wetlands and habitat, Mr. Speaker, and that is an impressive 
record indeed. 
 
They’ve grown from a small Regina operation to one where 
they now have 31 volunteer committees operating all over 
Saskatchewan, with over 4,000 individual financial 
contributors. To each member of those communities, and to 
each of the financial supporters of Ducks Unlimited, I say, 
thank you. 
 
  



 
April 12, 1988 

 

516 
 

I say, congratulations for just a super job, and with my motion 
invite all members of the Assembly to demonstrate unanimous 
support for this valuable and worthy organization. Indeed, Mr. 
Speaker, I would ask members to allow this item to come to a 
vote so that we can send Ducks Unlimited Canada a copy of a 
passed resolution, rather than just a debated one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Athabasca. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
gives me a great deal of pleasure to join with the hon. member 
from Wascana in seconding the motion congratulating Ducks 
Unlimited Canada on their 50th anniversary. 
 
As we know, Ducks Unlimited Canada plays a very important 
role in the conservation of our water-fowl in Canada, and it’s 
part of a larger continental or international organization made 
up of three countries. And I think it’s very important to point 
out, Mr. Speaker, that Ducks Unlimited Canada came into being 
50 years ago, and the United States was the first country to join, 
and they celebrated their 50th anniversary in 1987. 
 
Approximately 10 years ago, Mexico also joined Ducks 
Unlimited, so now we do have the formation of the three 
countries — Canada, the United States and Mexico. 
 
And the main reason for the formation of Ducks Unlimited, Mr. 
Speaker, was to monitor the breeding patterns of the water-fowl 
in the three countries — not only to monitor the water-fowl, the 
breeding patterns, but also to monitor and to improve the habitat 
for the water-fowl, and that has been done. And it’s very 
important today, Mr. Speaker, to protect that valuable 
water-fowl habitat as more and more of our valuable wetlands 
disappear for one reason or another, and a lot of it is due to the 
expansion of agriculture in our province. 
 
I want to turn to one project in particular in my constituency, 
and that is the Ross Lake project, which is in the community of 
Green Lake in my constituency. That project has been competed 
in the last two years, and is considered by Ducks Unlimited 
Canada as a success. It is proving that it is a worthwhile project. 
 
Also involved in the Ross Lake project is a committee that has 
been set up, a local management committee, and sitting on that 
local management committee is the president of the trappers’ 
association in the Green Lake area. And I think that is very 
important, Mr. Speaker, to have that type of local input. 
 
Not only — and the member alluded to that — not only does 
Ducks Unlimited improve the breeding grounds for water-fowl 
but it also enhances the commercial value of other types of 
animals, and especially the fur-bearing animals, and I speak in 
particular of the muskrats. Ducks Unlimited has created many 
ponds that have improved the muskrat trapping for residents 
who are in the fur industry. 
 
At one particular area on the border of Manitoba and  

Saskatchewan, a project that had not one rat house on it, after it 
was completed . . . and still has 7,000 rat houses. And I say to 
you, Mr. Speaker, that is an accomplishment in itself, because 
many rat houses will have 15 to 20 rats in each house. So this 
one particular project went from zero to 7,000 rat houses. 
 
Another important area in northern Saskatchewan is the 
Cumberland House delta. That is another project of Ducks 
Unlimited. So they improve not just the water-fowl but also the 
fur bearing animals. And when you have the fur bearing 
animals that are coming in, then you also have other animals 
such as the mink and the fox and the deer and the moose, as the 
member from Wascana alluded to. And we’re very proud of 
that. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
congratulate Ducks Unlimited Canada on 50 years of progress, 
and we sincerely wish them continued success in the years 
ahead. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, nemine contradicente. 
 
(1600) 
 

Resolution No. 2 — Handling of Farm Production Loan 
Program 

 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today in this legislature to impress upon the people of this 
province just how this government has betrayed the rural and 
farm families of Saskatchewan. In days gone by . . . and Mr. 
Speaker, I will at the end of my remarks be moving a motion 
that reads similar to this: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its betrayal of Saskatchewan farmers in 
its mishandling of the production loan program, and its 
decision to impose a new and unfair security provision 
encompassing a wide range of farm assets. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you’ll remember I was talking about the free 
trade agreement earlier today, and I just want to make one more 
point, if I can, for those members who may not have opened 
this agreement between Canada and the U.S. I want to make a 
point about the livestock industry, and I’ll show how this 
government, as my motion will read, has betrayed the farm 
population of this province, because they’re saying that this free 
trade agreement is going to be better for farmers. Now I say that 
they’re betraying them when they say that, as they have 
betrayed them in the past. I say that, because when they got up 
one by one, they give no factual information to this document. 
They’re saying . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Why is the member from . . . the 
Deputy Premier on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. There is 
a motion, I think, that’s going to be put. He alluded to the 
motion in his opening remarks that was dealing very 
specifically with the farm credit situation in the province, and 
all of a sudden he has drifted back into  
  



 
April 12, 1988 

 

517 
 

the previous debate, rule 16, dealing with the free trade 
agreement and I . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You don’t like that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I don’t mind at all. I’ve heard . . . I 
mean, I think it’s a great agreement. I think it’s just a wonderful 
agreement, but I’ve heard enough of it for one day. And I’d 
kind of like to hear a little bit about the farm production loan; I 
think that’s a great program too. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’ve listened to the hon. member’s point of 
order and considered it. It is a point of order well taken. And the 
hon. member who is speaking from Humboldt, I would ask him 
if he can relate directly what he’s referring now, then it’s 
acceptable, otherwise, he’s certainly off the topic. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I will. I will do this by 
stating that the production loan program ties in with every other 
aspect that the farmer has to put up with. I mean it ties into what 
his assets are now, if he has any; what his payments are to his 
creditors; what his prospective financial state will be in the 
years to come. And that’s why I have to use this one example, 
Mr. Speaker, and I hope you’ll accept that, because the 
production loan ties in to his financial charts for the future. And 
he has to be able to know why a government promotes a 
document or doesn’t promote a document or says what it does 
say. 
 
And for that reason I would just like to briefly return to this 
agreement on page 83 in article 704. Now this government’s 
saying that the farmer has to, through this agreement, will be 
able to increase production, have access to the U.S. market for 
livestock. And article 704 says, market access for meat, and it 
states that: 
 

Neither Party shall introduce, maintain or seek any 
quantitative import restriction(s) or any other measure 
having equivalent effect on meat goods originating in the 
territory of the Party except as otherwise provided in this 
Agreement. 

 
But when you turn over to the definitions it says, article 711: 
definitions for purposes of this chapter, and it states a number 
of things. One of the definitions is meat goods. And for those 
members who may have not read this: 
 

Meat goods means meat of cattle (including veal), goats, 
and sheep (except lambs), whether fresh . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. I do believe that after listening 
carefully to the hon. member that he is drawing a rather long 
bow between what he’s saying and the production loan, and I 
would ask him to get back to the production. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker, I will not tie it 
in. I was just about to do that. 
 
Because this farmer has a production loan to pay and has many 
other bills to pay, he has to know what his income will be in the 
future — or vaguely anyway. It’s very difficult these days. But 
this government says that this free trade agreement is going to 
give you access to the American market and therefore more 
money in your  

pocket possibly to pay off the production loan. 
 
And I say that is not true, because under the interpretations . . . 
and especially the hog farmer, and a lot of hog farmers have 
production loans. Under this agreement they are not . . . hogs 
are not included in the definition of meat products. And yet the 
government goes around saying, yes, hog farmers, you’re going 
to be able to produce many hogs and ship them to the United 
States with no cap on your production, and so you can take that 
money and pay your production loan possibly. 
 
But that’s false. Because there’s no mention, and I would invite 
any members opposite to show me where it says that there’s no 
restriction on hogs in this agreement, and yet in the rhetoric 
that’s what they’re saying. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had to make that point. And I 
would like to go on and on about this free trade agreement 
because there’s so many things, there’s so many things in there 
I could spend my whole time talking about it: how it betrays the 
people of this province, how it’s going to take money out of 
their pockets, and how it’s going to decrease, decrease the farm 
population — help to decrease the farm population, those 
farmers who have production loans that this government has to 
collect somehow. 
 
Now I’ll take you directly to the production loan, and I will 
wander off at times and relate other things to this production 
loan. On November 22, 1985 the Premier of this province 
unveiled the new production loan program. And he released the 
details — $25 per cultivated acre, it’s a cash operating loan at 6 
per cent interest, and an estimated $1.2 billion cost to the 
government. Then on December 2, 1985 the minister of 
Agriculture, the member for Weyburn, released further details 
— $25 per cultivated acre to be based on 1985-86 permit books. 
There was a cap of $100,000 for individual farmers and 
$200,000 for multiple farm operators and there was a deadline 
— deadline was July 31, 1986. Also application forms were 
made available to the country elevator managers. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a few things in there that I’d 
like to address. First of all, it was an election promise. The need 
was there — I give the members opposite credit — I knew the 
need was there, the farmers knew the need was there, and I 
guess they did at the time. Give them credit for that. 
 
I do not give them credit, however, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the 
process that they went through to put the money out. As much 
as it was to help the farmer at the time, it was that or even more 
to help reinstate the Tory government in Saskatchewan. 
 
And aside from that, there was no rules. You go to your 
elevator and you sign up a promissory note saying, here’s your 
money; pay it back over three years. 
 
Now I’m sure the thought went through many people’s minds. 
In fact some people didn’t take it for the fact that they said 
you’ll never, ever borrow yourself out of trouble. But that’s 
what this government’s solution was. They were going to lend 
the farmers out of trouble. When  
  



 
April 12, 1988 

 

518 
 

they knew all the indicators were saying the prices of wheat 
were going down, inputs were going up, the markets, the 
production in other countries were increasing, so therefore, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, they did not put any thought into an orderly 
method of distributing this loan. And that’s why they got 
themselves into the mess that they have today. 
 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s another thing I’d like 
to speak about and that is the deadline of July 31. I’ve had 
many, many people come to me saying, the way things are, my 
renter took the farm production loan. The next year he turned 
the land back to me because he couldn’t make any money on it. 
He said, look I just can’t do it. So he had to pay his production 
loan back. Fair enough. 
 
But then this farmer who is basically most of them were retired 
people, or trying to retire, they say, I’m discriminated against 
because I don’t get the advantage of that loan. And there was no 
thought put into that of how to use the $25 per acre to help the 
farmer if that’s what they wanted to do. Another indication of 
how they just didn’t think this thing through clearly. They just 
put it out there and all they wanted to do was buy themselves 
another election. That’s why there was no rules put on it — 6 
per cent, go to your elevator and get it. 
 
And we have to ensure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the farmers of this 
province took out that loan knowing they would have to pay it 
back at some point in time. But the government was trying to 
trick them. And boy did they ever trick them, and I’ll go into 
that a little bit later. 
 
The farmers signed a promissory note to repay the loan in three 
instalments. And everybody did that, about 57,000 — 6 per cent 
interest on one-third of the principal on the outstanding part 
during the previous year. So 6 per cent over the first year. 
 
Now on December 2 the Agriculture minister, the member for 
Weyburn, said this program is a direct response by our 
government to maintain the main . . . by our government to one 
of the main problems facing farmers — interest rates — as we 
said on December 2, 1985. The same day he called it the same 
. . . the minister called it “hassle-free cash.” 
 
Now at the time everybody said, fine, you know, that’s good. 
And during the election campaign in October ’85, or ’86 rather, 
because things were tightening up — the price of grain dropped 
20 per cent — they said we’ll only have to pay back the interest 
this year, and most of the farmers did that. I mean, they 
recognize that fact, and that was good, despite the fact that I 
didn’t believe it was set out properly in the first place. They 
postponed it because a 20 per cent drop in income, they knew 
the farmers couldn’t pay it back. You can’t get money out of 
people when they just don’t have it. 
 
But let’s look at the situation now. Last December ’87, they 
announced an extension to the production loan program. They 
had two options — option one, option two. Option one, to 
maintain the three-year pay-back period, 6 per cent. Option two, 
to extend it over 10 years at nine and three-quarters per cent 
interest averaged in  

and a tough security agreement. Didn’t say anything about the 
higher interest rate; in fact, just . . . in December of ’85 the 
minister was saying, we’re addressing the number one problem 
— interest rates. And then in December ’87, they upped the 
interest rates after two consecutive years of 20 per cent drops in 
price. 
 
That’s the response of this government to the farm crisis. And 
it’s beyond me. It’s beyond me to know why anybody who was 
put into power largely by the rural farm population — and I’m 
the first one to admit that — that why they would now turn on 
them, and expect them to have their support. It’s totally 
impossible, because the farm people out there know the true 
colours of this government right now, and I think maybe this 
government knows, but I think it’s void of ideas and just 
doesn’t know how to administer, handle, or promote new ideas 
and policies for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s the problem. They’re bankrupt of ideas. They’re either 
bankrupt of ideas or they’re following the Premier’s 
philosophy, back in 1970 or something, where he was going to 
reduce the number of farmers; 1977 again he says that 80 per 
cent of the productive farmers should go, or non-productive 
farmers. 
 
It’s a total betrayal of the farm population in this province. And 
I know that for a fact because I hear people — they’re calling 
me, and they’re saying, why are they doing these things? People 
say, why are they doing them? I supported them. 
 
(1615) 
 
And I said, I don’t know why. Because when there’s a crisis 
you have to have good management, you have to have good 
ideas, and you have to have good government. We have a crisis; 
we have poor management; we have poor ideas, and we have 
poor government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — And that’s what I tell the farmers out there. 
And they’re saying, yes, I think you’re right. 
 
Then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the nine and three-quarters per cent 
interest — upping of the interest when things are tough makes 
no sense. All they had to do was again postpone the principal 
payment and farmers wouldn’t have cared. 
 
That’s what makes me think that there’s an ulterior motive. The 
Grant . . . Sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier’s motive of 
moving people off the land because he likes to see corporate 
farms. I’ll give you an example of how he likes to see corporate 
farms. 
 
In the budget, $8 million to partnerships and corporations for 
livestock. When the people in the production loan program 
can’t pay it back and they’re forcing them to pay higher interest 
rates and take security, they’re giving corporations $8 million to 
promote livestock in this province. 
 
That’s their vision. They could care less. At the same time 
they’re cutting back the cash advances 25 per cent of  
  



 
April 12, 1988 

 

519 
 

what they were. I mean you sit back and you look at everything 
that’s happening in little bits and pieces, you know: $8 million 
over here for large operations; cutting back support programs 
for farmers by increasing their interest rates; by tough security 
agreements; by not having a farm land security border or calf 
program that has the power — they haven’t given it the power 
to do anything. In fact the calf program speeds up. 
 
That is what’s happening. When you sit back, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and when the farmers of this province sit back and just 
see how the puzzle is falling into place, I don’t have to scare 
them because they know the writing’s on the wall from this 
government saying that they are no longer needed. We can farm 
this country with a half a dozen or a dozen corporations. No 
problem. 
 
And we could, but that’s not the vision that I have of this 
province, and that’s not the vision of the majority and probably 
all of the rural people out there in this province, because we 
have a rural population base based on numbers of farms 
supporting local communities. 
 
And that’s the vision that we need out there. We don’t need the 
vision of large corporate production units. We don’t need that in 
this province. We have large feedlots now, and that’s okay, but 
I’ll tell you, very few are $8 million. I mean, this is an 
incredible amount of money. 
 
Now let me turn to another portion of this production loan 
program, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that is the part on the 
security. Now we have, in the early stages of the loan, a 
promissory note. You don’t have to . . . A lot of farmers were 
saying, and this is the Tory . . . this was the Tory buzz before 
the election: don’t worry about it; they’ll write off part of it. 
They’ll write off the first hundred. And they were propagating 
this out in the country, trying to again use the same program to 
buy some more votes. 
 
But then they turned around, drew the knife, and put an “X” on 
hundreds and hundreds of farmers out there. You’re gone. 
You’re gone unless you don’t sign the security agreement. 
You’re gone if you don’t pay back the loan. 
 
Now when we look at the security agreement, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, or Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt that when you’re 
giving out money that the institutions require security. But in 
this security agreement, in this security agreement, this 
government is saying that it will take every stitch from the 
farmer aside from real assets and even then. 
 
Now why would they do that? They’re taking . . . And not just 
now, but they’ll follow you till eternity, till the day you die, to 
get that money out of you. And they do that, they do that when 
the banking institutions themselves don’t have to do that. The 
banking institution comes under The Exemptions Act, Civil 
Liberties Act, and they . . . and also The Executions Act, and 
they are required, they are required to, you know, leave the 
farmer with something. 
 
But not the government. No, the government, it can say, you’re 
gone, we’ll take the chairs out of your living-room and the 
dishes out of your cupboard and the food off your  

table. I mean, that’s what that agreement says. 
 
Why would they not consider something less? I mean, they had 
an option. They didn’t have to say, you have to sign the security 
agreement which takes everything from you. Bankrupt of ideas, 
I think. So they went ahead and did it. I don’t understand it, and 
neither do the farmers of this province understand it, and that’s 
why the heat’s on this government over the production loan — 
just one thing; there’s many more that I’ll be getting into. 
 
And now we see that when there’s a new . . . on a quit claim, 
when you sign away, and I’ll just read from this article: 
 

The borrower understands and agrees that they will not in 
future be entitled to receive and shall not apply for any 
grant, loan, cash advance, guaranteed loan, financial 
assistance, or benefit whatsoever provided by ACS or its 
successor corporations under any Act of the legislature of 
Saskatchewan or the regulations thereunder. 

 
And that includes . . . ACS includes most, or the large part, of 
the programs of assistance to farmers. But if they’ve got no 
money and they have to leave the land and sign a quit claim, 
they’re signing away their right to farm. And let’s just look at 
that for a minute. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They’re broke. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — That’s right; the member says, they’re broke. 
But who are those people? Are they retiring, 55? Not for the 
most part. For the most part they’re the young, productive 
element of our agricultural economy, and this government is 
going to have them sign away their right to farm again. 
 
Even if he does go broke and goes and gets a job in the city or 
somewhere else, but a couple of years later his uncle has a farm 
that he wants to give him — because he loves to farm; he wants 
to get back at’er — this agreement says this guy can’t use any 
of the agriculture . . . ACS or its future corporations, he can’t be 
a recipient of those programs. So they’ve cut him out. Why 
would anybody do that? They don’t have to have this. They 
have options; they have options. They know in these tough 
times people are going to go under. People can’t afford to make 
their payments. But they’re not satisfied with that. And this is 
worth another chip, another block of the puzzle — get that guy 
off of there so we can get the large corporation operations in 
this province. It’s so clear, so clear in my mind. 
 
The young farmer, that’s the one who’s going to be hardest hit. 
And another thing, one mistake. Let’s say he bought a machine, 
tractor, combine, or a piece of land at the wrong time — paid 
too much. We were all doing it. Or I shouldn’t say we were all 
— a lot of farmers were doing it because of the advice we were 
getting and because they thought things were rolling along 
pretty well. And it was just a snowball effect, and people are 
going to get caught. But for many of these farmers who are 
going under now, it was one mistake, Mr. Speaker, one mistake. 
And this government’s saying, you’re not allowed one mistake, 
fellow; you’re gone and you won’t  
  



 
April 12, 1988 

 

520 
 

come back. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, putting the young farmers of this province 
off the land and not allowing them a chance to get back on is 
not my idea of building a rural economy in this province. And 
it’s very, very clear right now that the Tory government has no 
policy, has no policy how to keep farmers on the land, because 
we’re seeing more and more and more foreclosure actions 
started. It has no policy to see how to keep farmers on the land, 
but, Mr. Speaker, they have a policy to keep them off the land. 
And that to me is a total betrayal of every man, woman and 
child in rural Saskatchewan, and that’s what’s coming out of 
this government. 
 
And I repeat, they have options and they don’t exercise them, 
because the puzzle is falling into place, and it’s falling into 
place faster and faster, I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker. And I know 
that they think it has to, because come next election, if they 
don’t have all the puzzle pieces in place, they won’t have a 
chance to continue doing that, because the farmers of this 
province will be betrayed only once. 
 
Now The Exemptions Act, The Executions Act, and the Civil 
Liberties Act. I want to turn back to that just for a second. Now 
The Exemptions Act, and I’ll just read from the Western 
Producer article of June 4, 1987: 
 

The Exemptions Act prevents lenders from seizing a broad 
range of goods debtors need to feed and shelter their 
families and to carry out their trades and plant the next 
crop. 
 
It protects ordinary clothing and furnishings, farm produce 
needed to support the family until the next harvest and 
plant the crop, equipment and seed needed for the next 
crop, and a house or trailer. It also provides some 
protection for the homestead. 
 
But Saskatoon lawyer Audrey Brent says she has had 
several cases which ACC has taken the position that it 
isn’t bound by The Exemptions Act. In one case, she said, 
ACC used the argument to seize a vehicle that was the 
farmer’s only form of transportation. 

 
Now this is what’s happening. The banks have to play by the 
rules, the credit unions have to play by the rules, as do other 
lending institutions. But because of the government’s master 
plan, they exempt themselves from playing by normal, natural 
rules, because the power is in the hand of this government, and 
they exercise their power much to the detriment of rural farm 
families. 
 
And I’ll just go on to say: 
 

Now that they have a court saying this (and that’s, that 
they can seize anything), I imagine no farmer is safe from 
ACC, Brent said. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is why I introduced my private 
member’s Bill a few days ago. It amazes me that the 
government wouldn’t do it automatically to make themselves an 
equal player in the game. So I introduced a  

private member’s Bill to bring the government to play by the 
same rules as all the other lending institutions. And what did 
they do with it, and what will they do with it? They’ll bury it. 
They’ll bury it because they don’t want to help the people of 
this province, or rural families; they’ve got their plan. 
 
I just don’t understand, Mr. Speaker, I don’t understand, again, 
why anyone in their position would turn around and knife the 
farm families of this province. What is it that they would even 
think about; why would they think about doing that unless they 
have a master plan? 
 
I give them credit for very few plans, but I think they have a 
master plan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the production loan has another aspect of it. 
We have people like Peter Pocklington . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Thank you, Mr. Deputy Premier . . . who was 
given $21 million in guarantees, and $10 million of that a gift, a 
“givee” — 10 million — 21 in total. 
 
Now this government is saying, come on in, Peter; we’ll give 
you 21 million bucks, help you out. We’re going to get the hog 
industry moving in this province, so we’re going to have a 
great, huge hog plant up in North Battleford in maybe the year 
2050, or maybe 2250, or maybe never. But anyway, we’re 
going to have this big hog operation, and we’re going to give 
the farmers 8 million . . . or the corporations $8 million to 
produce these hogs — taxpayers’ money, at a low interest rate 
— but just to heck with the farmers out there who are on six, 
eight quarter farms, hog operations, who will put thousands of 
dollars into pig barns, thousands of dollars into feed mills, and 
this government saying, uh uh, you don’t count any more. 
 
But they give it to Pocklington; they give it to corporations; 
they take away. Their plan is not family farms. This is why it’s 
so hypocritical — they talk about the family farm; they talk 
about families and compassion and priorities. Well I’ll tell you, 
they have no compassion. Their priorities are all screwed up, 
and it’s killing the family farm in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Another example, the farm families are paying 
nine and three-quarter per cent interest on their production loan 
program right now, and the government has a program whereby 
people in this province can have $10,000 at 6 per cent interest 
to buy their hot tubs. 
 
Did the hot tub money go up to nine and three-quarter per cent? 
I ask, why not? When many of those people, and I’m 
generalizing, have far higher income, more secure positions of 
job than the farmer does . . . I’m not taking away from them, 
but this government takes away from the farmer. And why 
would they do that, I ask again? 
 
And here’s the classic example, Mr. Speaker — Weyerhaeuser, 
Weyerhaeuser comes into this province and is given a 248 . . . 
for $248 million the Prince Albert  
  



 
April 12, 1988 

 

521 
 

pulp mill, and many others. Just said, come on in boys, it’s a 
fire sale price, take it away. It was losing $90,000 a day. The 
only reason, Mr. Speaker, it was losing $90,000 a day is 
because this government couldn’t run a telephone booth, as 
someone said today. But they bring Weyerhaeuser in, give them 
a sweetheart deal, and they say, Mr. Farmer, you’ll pay nine and 
three-quarters per cent on your production loan whether you 
make a profit or not . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Or Mrs. Farmer. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Or Mrs. Farmer. 
 
But Weyerhaeuser, you can make a substantial profit, and 
before you hit that level you don’t have to make any payments 
to us. There’s another chip of the old puzzle, isn’t it, falling 
back into place now. Where’s the support. And they come back 
and they say, we support family farms, we have morals and 
priorities. That is so, so low when on one hand you’re talking 
about morals and priorities, and the other hand you’re knifing 
the farmers of this province. 
 
That is disgusting, and the people of this province know that, 
and that’s why the slip in the country is beginning to come. 
That’s why the slip is coming, because they know they have no 
ideas. 
 
So Weyerhaeuser’s up in the North farming the trees. The 
farmers are down in the South, or in other parts of the province, 
farming their land, farming the grain. Weyerhaeuser doesn’t 
make a profit; they don’t pay anything. Farmer doesn’t make a 
profit; he pays anyway. A double standard. The double standard 
comes out again. 
 
That’s why this province is going the direction it is. It’s giving 
away money to those people who don’t need it. It’s giving away 
assets that would generate a profit for the people in this 
province who need it. And if they built on that, as was done in 
the past, they could give the production loan away and we’d 
still be better off. But they choose not to do that because they 
are in line, they’re geared up with the large, corporate 
multinational. People who are their friends, they line them up, 
give them this and give them that, and take away from the 
working, taxpaying people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I honestly don’t understand that. Maybe I’m 
naïve, but in the way that I view things, it doesn’t work for 
Saskatchewan. I may work somewhere else, I don’t know, but it 
doesn’t work for Saskatchewan because we have a tradition and 
a history in this province where we’ve built up our operations 
on the farm, where we’ve built up our small businesses, where 
we’ve built up, where necessary, corporations, public and 
private. 
 
Why does this government believe that they have to tear it all 
down? Where do they think the tax money is going to come 
from with their tax structure of reducing taxes to corporations? 
The squeeze is on the people who are paying taxes. The squeeze 
is on the people, the farmers of this province who, when they up 
their production loan, they up their taxes. 
 
We have health care institutions now coming out and  

asking for money, to the farmers who can’t pay back their 
production loan, but they have to decide . . . well, I mean, we 
need hospitals and if the government won’t run them, the 
money has to come from somewhere, so they’re putting out that 
way too. 
 
And they’re saying: I have a production loan to pay, if I’m a 
dairy producer or a livestock producer, and I have to go and get 
my feed tested in Saskatoon — they cut that. And out of his 
pocket, the same pocket that the production loan has to come 
from, the same pocket that all the other costs have to come 
from, this government cuts the program, because they’re giving 
it to Pocklington; they’re giving it to empty office space in 
Regina; they’re giving it to those people who don’t need it, and 
taking it from the people who can’t afford it. 
 
And I can give more examples. Like last year, 25 per cent of the 
agricultural budget cut; 25 per cent, after a 20 per cent decrease 
in income from grain — the price of grain fell 20 per cent. Like, 
what kind of a commitment is that? That’s where their rhetoric 
annoys me, because they’re standing there talking out of both 
sides of their mouth. I’d like to just have one of those members 
stand up and tell me why, tell me why it’s a good thing that the 
production loan program is up to nine and three-quarters per 
cent interest. I mean, I want one reason why the interest rate 
went up. I want one reason why they needed to take security of 
everything. I want one reason why they should treat 
Weyerhaeuser and Pocklington with one set of easy rules and 
the farmers of this province with one set of hard, hard rules. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the farmer’s pocket only 
runs so long. I’ll give you another example of how this 
government dips into the farmer’s pocket, and this example is 
very clear of how this government operates, and that’s the one 
of the community pastures. 
 
Those farmers with livestock in the community pastures had a 
policy dropped on them with no forewarning, with no 
consultation. At the same time they were saying, we meet with 
all the people of this province and we consult. With no 
consultation, a policy that costs the farmers more money for a 
program that was breaking even, a good program, one thing the 
Tories hadn’t messed up until last year. No, they messed that 
one up too. 
 
So taking more money out of the farmers’ pocket, taking away 
a bull program so that in seeding time when the farmers have to 
move their animals to community pastures, they are busy trying 
to look for bulls and get organized with neighbours and set up 
organizations to possibly buy bulls; more money out of their 
own pocket — take away the insurance plan, up the fees for 
tagging, no services at the community pasture gate. 
 
So these farmers, who have to worry about repaying their 
production loan of nine and three-quarters per cent interest and 
wondering what their banker is going to say about their 
operating capital in the spring, have to now go out and buy a 
bull. And only for extreme pressure put on by those cattle 
people. 
 
  



 
April 12, 1988 

 

522 
 

They came in and they saw me and they said, what can we do to 
make these people change their mind. And I said, well all we 
can do is highlight the issue in the media and let people know 
what they are doing. So we did that. And then they started to 
back-pedal because those people over there can feel it slipping 
and they have to back-pedal. 
 
But it’s sad, Mr. Speaker, it’s sad when people out in the rural 
part of this province have to take time off from their work to 
come in and beg a government to leave something alone that 
was working. What a sorrowful statement for an operation of a 
government — what a sorrowful statement. 
 
And then they’re not satisfied with that, they said, well next 
year we’ll consult with you. Next year’s too late, Mr. Speaker. 
Next year’s too late for many people in this province. And do 
they care? Obviously not. 
 
The security agreement is going to be too late for many people, 
because the people out in rural Saskatchewan who now have an 
agreement with ACS for the production loan again had to pick 
up the issue and we had to fight like mad, saying look, you take 
the security, the bankers are saying they’re not going to give 
you operating capital. Great forethought put into that one. I 
mean I don’t understand how any government would put in a 
policy, a program in place, without thinking it through clearly, 
without weighing all the options. 
 
Anyway, set that aside. So the government says, goes to the 
bankers and says, we have to have an agreement because, you 
know, farmers are saying that you may not give them their 
operating capital. And the bank says, yes, that’s right in some 
cases, because I mean things are tough out there, we can’t 
extend any more than we are now, we have to have some 
security and you got all that security. 
 
So they worked out a little deal. So you have the farmer right 
here with a deal with ACS, an agreement; you have the ACS 
and the bankers with an agreement; but you have the farmer and 
the banker with no agreement because they didn’t finish the 
triangle. And I’ll tell you, that triangle will not be finished until 
it comes time when a farmer’s foreclosed upon and the banking 
institution says no, no, you said we could get first security in 
this case. And this is another thing, it’s going to be a 
case-by-case basis. And the government says well no, no, we 
didn’t say that, we want some money out of this too. So what’s 
going to happen? The triangle won’t be completed until the 
farmer goes broke, when it’s too late for him to know what his 
role in this triangle was. 
 
This is how clearly these people think things out. They don’t 
have any idea, they don’t have any idea how to go about putting 
in place a policy that will help farmers out. I see nothing that 
they do that’s preventing farmers from going off this land, and I 
can say that in all sincerity. I mean, they have little programs 
here and there, but it’s not stopping the accumulation of farmers 
going off the land, and the production loan is just another 
example of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government . . . I’m sad to say, because I  

have many, many friends out in rural Saskatchewan who tell me 
they don’t know even now if they’re going to be here this fall. 
They have families; they contribute to the community; they 
have wives and themselves with jobs, trying to support the 
farm. They’re doing their utmost — those farm families are 
doing their utmost to stay on the land. And this government is 
not helping them one stitch; in fact, it’s driving them off the 
land. 
 
That’s compassion? That’s priorities? That’s morals? That’s 
garbage, is what it is, and the farmers are telling me that. And 
this government knows that, but they’ve got nowhere to go. The 
cupboards are bare. They’ve worked themselves into a hole, and 
all I can say is, thank God, because next time they’ll be out and 
there’ll be a good New Democratic government in this province 
to help farmers. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I sit down I would like to 
move, seconded by the member for The Battlefords: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its betrayal of Saskatchewan farmers in 
its mishandling of the production loan program and its 
decision to impose a new and unfair security provision 
encompassing a wide range of farm assets. 

 
I so move. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
second the motion put forward this afternoon by the . . . the 
resolution actually, by the member from Humboldt: 
 

That the Assembly condemns the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its betrayal of Saskatchewan farmers in 
its mishandling of the production loan program, and its 
decision to impose a new and unfair security provision 
encompassing a wide range of farm assets. 

 
Now by seconding this resolution, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
express on behalf of not only our colleagues on this side of the 
House, but on behalf of many Saskatchewan farmers, their total 
disgust with the government in terms of how they’ve handled 
this program that was offered in the beginning as a helping 
hand, some hassle-free assistance to Saskatchewan farmers who 
were having a difficult time in the face of the agricultural crisis. 
And it offered some hope for operating capital that many 
farmers didn’t know where they would be receiving it from. 
 
(1645) 
 
And I must say, it was a very popular program at the time. It 
was well received by Saskatchewan farmers, and it was 
announced back on November 22, 1985 by the Premier of the 
province, and I think showing some importance of the program 
and the dire circumstances that farmers were facing. It was the 
Premier instead of the Minister of Agriculture that announced 
this program — the production loan program. 
 
And the Premier of that time, I would summarize by saying that 
he stated three things: first off, that the money  
  



 
April 12, 1988 

 

523 
 

would be repayable as a cash operating loan and that they 
would receive $25 per cultivated acre; secondly, that the loans 
would carry a 6 per cent interest rate, an annual rate of 6 per 
cent; and thirdly, that the program would be estimated to put 
into the economy in the province some $1.2 billion — a very 
large sum of money. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, back on December 2, about a week or 
so later, December 2, 1985, the minister of Agriculture, the hon. 
member from Weyburn at the time who was minister of 
Agriculture, released some further details on the program: the 
$25 per cultivated acre would be based on the 1985-86 permit 
books; secondly, that there would be a cap on the production 
loan program of $100,000 per individual producer and 
$200,000 for multiple-operated farms; thirdly, that the deadline 
for applications was July 31 of 1986; and fourthly, that the 
application forms would be made available through country 
elevator systems throughout the province. And the term 
“hassle-free cash” was correct, and many farmers appreciated 
that they didn’t have to go through a long, complicated 
procedure to get the money. 
 
And at that time, I think that the program was fairly well 
thought out. And one of the reasons it was fairly well thought 
out — there was a political strategy, but it was also thought out 
well in terms of a program to assist Saskatchewan farmers — 
and the reason for that was that we had a full-time minister of 
Agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan. The member from 
Weyburn, who’s now the Minister of Education, was the 
minister of Agriculture, and he devoted full time as being 
minister of Agriculture. 
 
The difference is, now with the changes that have come in the 
production loan programs, we have a part-time Minister of 
Agriculture. Something that we’ve never seen in the province of 
Saskatchewan before, is that we have the member from Estevan 
living on Albert Street South, being a part-time Minister of 
Agriculture. If it’s not a full enough time job being the Premier 
of the province, he must not be doing a good job as Premier — 
and many people in Saskatchewan will tell you that — but yet 
he adds on the responsibility as being Minister of Agriculture. 
 
And farm groups, individual farmers, but especially farm 
groups, tell us time and time again, they can’t get to meet with 
the Minister of Agriculture. They might meet with a committee 
or they might meet with a Legislative Secretary, but they can’t 
get to meet, when they need to meet, with the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
And so I would question, if I was a back-bencher on the other 
side of the House with an agricultural background — they must 
have, Mr. Speaker, 14 or 16 farmers over there. I see many 
members in the back bench that are farmers, or at least have 
farm experience. What is wrong with their ability? Do none of 
those members over there have the capability of performing the 
role, the very important role, as minister of Agriculture in the 
province of Saskatchewan? Because obviously the present 
Minister of Agriculture is not paying the attention that 
agricultural issues and programs deserve in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

And so I say to the back-benchers opposite: ask your Premier 
why you’re not qualified to sit in the cabinet; why is there not a 
full-time Minister of Agriculture in the province of 
Saskatchewan? There definitely should be, and you should 
wonder as to why at least one of you has not been appointed to 
the cabinet to act in that very important capacity in our great 
province, when agriculture is our number one industry — 
always will be our number one industry. 
 
But it’s hard to recognize it as being the most important 
industry in Saskatchewan, because of the lack of emphasis that 
the government opposite is putting on the planning and the 
programs in the very serious situation that we have now. 
They’ve attempted to put a band-aid here, a band-aid there — 
very popular at some points in time because of the infusions of 
cash, but certainly offering no planned direction for agriculture 
in the province. 
 
In the farm production loan program itself, Mr. Speaker, some 
57,474 farmers in the province took advantage of the 
production loan program, and the Agricultural Credit 
Corporation — or ACS as it’s more commonly become known 
— would administer the production loan program in the 
province. 
 
Now farmers signed a promissory note — they all agree to that 
— and that they would repay the money in three instalments 
over the following three years of having signed the promissory 
note and received their money for the operating capital they 
needed so badly. And the payments would be due either on or 
before the anniversary date of the loan, and payments would 
amount to one-third of the principal plus the 6 per cent interest 
on the outstanding balance during the previous year. 
 
Now in a news release by the minister of Agriculture, currently 
the Minister of Education, it said that this program is a direct 
response by our government to one of the main problems facing 
farmers today — interest rates. 
 
And during that same time, as they were bringing in legislation 
into this Chamber to approve the production loan, they referred 
to it, and I’ll say this again, as hassle-free cash — that there was 
no hassle being put up. All the farmer had to do was go to the 
elevator, get the application form, send it in, and you’d get back 
$25 per cultivated acre to help you through the difficult times. 
 
But then as time went on, it drew closer to election time and the 
hype of this hassle-free cash lingered on, and in fact during the 
election campaign in October 1986, the Conservatives 
announced that those producers with production loans could 
keep their loans current by paying only the interest. And again, 
it was very popular. A vast majority of farmers involved with 
the production loan program opted for that, and they would pay 
the interest and the principal would be set aside for yet another 
year. 
 
Well that was during the election campaign, and it was popular 
not only in terms of relieving some financial stress on our 
farming population but it also translated, in some areas at least 
where some people looked at it in a  
  



 
April 12, 1988 

 

524 
 

very short-term way, it was reflected in the ballot boxes in 
many places in Saskatchewan. 
 
But then what happened? The situation now has changed very 
dramatically, Mr. Speaker. In December 1987 the government 
announced the extension of repayments, in which they called it 
Option 11 under the production loan program. Now what was 
Option 11? A dramatic change from what farmers have been 
told during the hassle-free cash period. 
 
First off, that the loans would be repaid over 10 years instead of 
three years. Well that sounds not too bad, only you’re extending 
your debt for an extra seven years, extending that debt on some 
of our most efficient, youngest, brightest farmers. So they 
thought, well maybe that would be okay. 
 
But what else happened? They changed the interest rate, Mr. 
Speaker. They went from 6 per cent to nine and three-quarters 
per cent — increased the interest rate. And so when you 
increase the interest rate and put it over a longer period of time 
it compounds the problem. And what this government is doing 
now is they’re giving farmers more indebtedness, that they’re 
having less ability to pay because of the falling commodity 
prices. 
 
In addition, the . . . I should say, for example, Mr. Speaker, the 
interest charges on an $18,000 loan under Option 1, the original 
hassle-free cash, the interest on that would have totalled $2,160 
over a three-year period. Under Option 11, a farmer with that 
same $18,000 under the production loan program, will pay in 
interest $8,302 — an additional $6.100 in interest that they have 
to pay now to the Government of Saskatchewan, to the 
Agricultural Credit Corporation. On top of that, there’s 
administration fees and a fee, I believe, to change from Option 
1 to Option 11, and again increasing the indebtedness. 
 
And what else happened under Option 11, Mr. Speaker? Well 
the security agreement — the security agreement I could hardly 
believe. And I want to read from the form, from the 
Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan, section D(5). 
It says: 
 

To secure payment of my existing Production Loan my 
Extended Production Loan and any future loans under the 
Production Loan Program that may be granted to me by 
ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation, Mr. Speaker), I 
hereby grant to ACS a present and continuing security 
interest in all of my present and after-acquired personal 
property of whatsoever nature and kind, whether tangible 
or intangible, and all proceeds derived therefrom, 
including without restriction any interest whatsoever I may 
have in goods, chattels, livestock, livestock products, 
fixtures, machinery, equipment, vehicles, supplies and 
inventory, now owned or hereafter acquired and 
wheresoever situate. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I can hardly believe that the government 
would impose such a strict security arrangement on 
Saskatchewan farmers when prior to the last election everything 
was hassle free. And now it seems what the government wants 
to do is to drive our brightest,  

youngest, best educated, most able and productive farmers off 
of the family farms in Saskatchewan. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, also, Mr. Speaker, is that it seems by 
what they’re doing is that if there’s a quick settlement of some 
kind with the provincial government or their financing arm, 
agricultural credit corporation, that they want to never allow 
those people back into farming again. So that if I was to be on 
the farm, have a quick settlement for my indebtedness, leave the 
farm, go out and earn some money, farming turns better again 
and I want to get back into farming — if I get back into farming 
I have to do it without any help whatsoever from the 
government opposite. And to me that tells me they’re going the 
big agri-business, the big corporate farm direction, and 
changing the face of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I heard one of the members opposite — let me get into this, I 
think was the expression I heard over there. We’d like some of 
you to stand up and participate in this debate because you’re 
ruining the face of rural Saskatchewan. You have an obligation 
to stand up in this House and tell Saskatchewan farmers why it 
is you’re doing this to them at the present time. 
 
When things were bad, they gave money. When things get 
worse and farmers don’t have the ability to repay in many 
situations, they want to take the farm away — take the farm 
away, drive them off the land. 
 
Many of the things that have been said in this House are 
certainly, Mr. Speaker, contrary to the facts. The facts are not 
substantiated by what comes out of the mouths of the members 
opposite — statements that are contrary to the facts. 
 
I think that farmers in Saskatchewan should have the ear of the 
Minister of Agriculture, because what are they asking? They’re 
asking, why was a promissory note all right prior to the last 
election, and now you want to secure everything that I have on 
my farm? Why is it like that? And do you know, the pity of the 
whole thing, Mr. Speaker, is that the agricultural credit 
corporation is not subject to The Exemptions Act in the 
province of Saskatchewan. They can seize anything they want 
from the family farm. The Exemptions Act, Mr. Speaker, is set 
out to prevent lenders from seizing a broad range of goods . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. It being 5 o’clock, this House 
now stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


	ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
	Heavy Oil Upgrader in Lloydminster
	Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan
	Standardized Testing for Students
	CORRECTION MADE BY MEMBER
	ORDERS OF THE DAY
	MOTIONS
	Resolution No. 16 — Appreciation of Ducks Unlimited Canada
	Resolution No. 2 — Handling of Farm Production Loan Program

