


















































May 17, 1988 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 May 17, 1988 
 

1409 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 
 

Return No. 2 
 
Ms. Smart: — After a few remarks, I want to move a motion of 
return asking the government to give us a list of all the reports, 
the studies, the investigations, or the projects awarded to external 
consultants by each government department, agency, and Crown 
corporation. And I’ll be speaking a little bit about the details that 
we want. But it’s obvious that when we ask for reports of external 
consultants that we’re very interested in getting more 
information about the work that is contracted out by this 
government to outside people, and we want to know exactly what 
is being done in this regard and who is doing it. 
 
We want the name and the purpose of the report because these 
reports are funded by government money, by the taxpayers’ 
money, and they have a right to know what’s being done, and the 
names and the purposes of these reports, studies, investigations, 
or projects. 
 
Obviously we also want to know the total cost of them because, 
again, it’s taxpayers’ money and we need to know how much is 
being spent. We want to know the method by which the work 
was awarded because we want to know whether it was tendered 
or whether it was just a little invitation under the table to do some 
work for the PC Party. We would hope that it would have been 
awarded properly, but if you bring forth the information, we can 
decide that ourselves and the public can decide it as well. 
 
We need the name of the external consultants who performed the 
work, and finally, the recommendations or the analysis provided 
to the government. This is also extremely important in terms of 
information. It gives us information not only in what the 
government is doing and who they’re contracting with, but also 
what information they’ve gathered in the process of funding 
these external consultants’ reports and studies and investigations 
and projects. 
 
We believe that there’s quite a lot of work involved here through 
external consultants and that the taxpayers have a right to know 
about that work since they’re paying for it. And so we’re asking 
the government to bring forward the details of these projects. 
And the resolution that I’m moving asks for us to do this from 
the period of September of ’87 to the date of the return that this 
was ordered. 
 
We really need to be able to be up front with the taxpayers in this 
province, because they are spending a lot of money supporting 
this government and the work that the government’s doing, and I 
think they deserve to know who is doing the work as external 
consultants with the government and just exactly what 
information or what recommendations or what analysis was 
brought forward as a result of the external reports. 
 
I hope that the Deputy Premier will take my request seriously. 
Because the freedom of information in a  

democracy has got to be one of the corner-stones of what we’re 
working on in this government here in Saskatchewan. And it’s 
certainly an issue that we pushed you hard on in many different 
ways, from bringing in the public accounts to all sorts of 
information about the deals that you have been making with 
selling off our Crown corporations and giving away the resources 
of the province of Saskatchewan. In terms of the information that 
we want regarding SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation) and other projects, this may seem like small 
potatoes, but external consultants can take a lot of money and the 
reports can be very important. 
 
And so I would like to move the following motion of return, 
seconded by the member from Regina Lakeview. I am moving 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 2 showing: 
 

For the period September 8, 1987 to the date this return was 
ordered, list of all the reports, studies, investigations, or 
projects awarded to external consultants by each 
government department, agency, and Crown corporation, 
including in each case: (1) the name and purpose of the 
report, study, investigation, or project; (2) the total cost; (3) 
the method by which the work was awarded; (4) the name 
of the external consultants who performed the work; and (5) 
the recommendations or analysis provided to the 
government. 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to propose an 
amendment which will bring this question into line with the way 
that it’s been asked in previous years. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
going to bring it into line with the way it was asked last year. And 
I’m going to give you an example, Mr. Speaker — and I’m going 
back to 1979, when I had a motion on the order paper for a return 
showing: 
 

. . . any consultants (since March 1, 1979) or consulting 
firms (that) have been awarded a contract with the 
Department of Health . . . (and) the nature of the contract or 
contracts, the name and address of each consultant or 
consulting firm, the value of the contract, and the purpose 
of the contract; (b) in each instance, whether the contract 
was advertised, or awarded without advertising. 

 
The amendment that was offered at that time, Mr. Speaker, was 
offered by the then attorney general, now Leader of the 
Opposition, and seconded by Mr. Cowley. And he said. 
 

. . . I’m going to propose an amendment which will bring 
this question into line with the way it’s been asked in 
previous years. In 1976 and 1977 and other years, when this 
form of question has taken place in the legislature, we 
produced amendments which gave the names of all reports 
and studies commissioned by the department, (in this case 
the Department of Health) of external consultants during 
the period of March 1, 1979 to March 25, 1980 — the names 
of these consultants  

  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1410 
 

and the final costs. This is information which has been 
tendered in the past (Mr. Speaker) and that’s been the 
wording the House has adopted. Therefore (he says), I 
move, seconded by (Mr. Cowley) the Provincial Secretary 
that all the words after “showing” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 

 
(1) The names of all reports and studies commissioned by 
the Department of Health to external consultants during 
. . . (this period and) the names of the consultants and the 
final costs. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re prepared to do that as well, and for 
those reasons, Mr. Speaker, I propose the following amendment, 
seconded by the Minister of Justice: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all words after the 
word “ordered” and substituting therefor the words (and 
this is considerably broader than the amendments offered 
by previous governments): 

 
The names of all reports, studies, investigations, or projects 
awarded to external consultants by each government 
department, agency, or Crown corporation, the name of the 
consultant and the final cost. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Just for the record, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
record what the minister has indeed left out here, which is 
unfortunate. 
 
In his amendment he will only provide the name of the consultant 
and the cost. What the motion was asking for was the name and 
the purpose of the report, the study, or the investigation, or the 
project. Surely it is not out of line or unusual for the government 
to provide to the public the purpose of a report which a so-called 
consultant may have been hired to do. 
 
I don’t know what it is that the government would think that’s 
something that’s not in the public interest. I just want to put that 
on the record because it’s another example of trying to conceal 
some information. 
 
If all that the opposition gets is the name of the consultant and 
the cost, and no one ever knows what the consultant was hired to 
do, what’s the purpose of it all? So I . . . It really is beyond me to 
understand why the government is afraid to provide that 
information. 
 
And finally, the other thing that is being left out here is the 
recommendation or analysis provided to the government. When 
the public pays, for example, 500-and-some-40-thousand dollars 
to the Local Government Finance Commission — which is not 
quite in line with this, but it is to some degree — over half a 
million dollars of public money, the public ought to be able to 
know what they paid for. And so there are some 
recommendations. 
 
It is my submission to you, sir, that that’s information that should 
be normally provided to the legislature and to the  

public. We’re going to oppose the amendment because we think 
that the minister’s amendment restricts this request, this order for 
return, in a very severe way, unnecessarily. There can be no 
possible justification for it. 
 
He may talk about the past. Well I’m not interested in the past. 
I’m talking about today. And that’s fine. If the government wants 
to conceal this information, that’s their business. But the public 
business is to know that they concealed that information, and it 
is my job and the job of my colleagues to make sure that the 
public knows, and I can assure you they will. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Ms. Smart: — I just want to register my disappointment of the 
fact that this resolution is being cut back by the government 
opposite. The way the main motion stands asks us for the details. 
And it’s wrong to say that the amendment would have cut it back 
to what it was asked last year because I recall the motions last 
year asking for these kinds of details. 
 
The taxpayer has a right to know and we need to know the 
purpose and the reasons for the reports and studies that you’ve 
done. The main motion should stand. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 4 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Speaker, after a few comments — very brief 
comments, I want to assure the people that I will be moving the 
motion. Simply, Mr. Speaker, in this particular motion we want 
to assure the public that the airplanes, which are bought at public 
expense, are used for the purpose which they were intended, that 
is for government business and not for personal members of the 
family or for personal businesses or for flights outside the 
province for, again, personal affairs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will with those few words, move than an order of 
the Assembly do issue for a return showing: 
 

For the period September 15, 1987, to the date this return 
was ordered, a detailed list of the flights taken by the 
Government of Saskatchewan’s executive aircraft, 
including in each instance: (1) the purpose of the flight and 
the minister who authorized it; (2) the date of the flight; (3) 
all destination points of the flight; (4) to which department, 
agency, or corporation the cost of the flight was charged, 
and the amount of that charge; (5) the name of each MLA 
on the flight; (6) the name of each government employee on 
the flight; (7) the number of family members of MLAs on 
each flight; and (8) the total number of persons on each 
flight. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move, seconded by the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Thank you . . . (inaudible  
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1411 
 

interjection) . . . Okay, Mr. Speaker, I confess again to making a 
mistake last time and offering an amendment to this particular 
type of return in the last session that made it very, very difficult 
for the property management corporation to provide the 
information in the way that we asked for it. So I want to offer an 
amendment that will allow property management corporation to 
provide the information that’s consistent with the way that they 
keep the records, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I move, seconded by the Minister of Justice: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word “instance” and by substituting therefor the words: 

 
(1) the date of the flight and flight number; (2) the 
destination of the flight; (3) who authorized the flight; (4) 
senior official on board the flight; and (5) the number of 
passengers on the flight. 

 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I had not intended to take so 
much time in these orders for return, but as we proceed through 
the agenda here, it becomes so blatantly obvious what the 
government opposite is up to. 
 
The orders for return as drafted for this year, Mr. Speaker, by this 
side of the House, were deliberately done in the same way as they 
were ordered by the House last year, as amended by the 
government. We did that quite deliberately, Mr. Speaker, so that 
we could deal with these questions expeditiously and get them 
ordered and get the answers. 
 
Now the minister stands up, and even though he had amended it 
in a certain way last year as we are proposing them this year, now 
brings in further amendments and uses, I might say, arguments 
that are dead wrong. He says that the questions as ordered last 
year, the returns as ordered last year, have made it very difficult 
for the departments to find the answers. That’s not true. It’s 
absolutely not true. Because, Mr. Speaker, in the Public Accounts 
Committee in February at least two departments — one of them 
which I believe was the property management corporation — 
was in fact asked to provide this exact same information in this 
form, and in less than three weeks had the information to all of 
the members of the Public Accounts Committee. So for the 
minister to stand up and say that it’s difficult to answer these 
questions, is simply, Mr. Speaker, misleading, and inaccurate, 
and untrue. 
 
And it seems to me, because the questions we’re asking here 
happen to involve some information which may be embarrassing 
to some of the members opposite who are less careful with the 
way they spend the public’s money than others, they now have 
discovered that in providing those answers in the orders for return 
which they have yet to table — which you ordered last year — 
there may be some embarrassment, and now in the new orders 
for return they’re trying to cover it up. That’s unfortunate. The 
government’s got a majority. They’re going to vote for their 
amendment and they’re going to have their way. I recognize that. 
I don’t like it; I don’t think the public like it; and the people in 
Eastview and Elphinstone said that they didn’t like it. 
 

And one would have hoped that the lesson had been learned, but 
instead of the lesson being learned, they’re going quicker than 
ever the other way. Be it at their own peril — their own political 
peril — the public will be the ultimate judge, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 5 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, from time to time members of 
the government have been know to take planes, airplane rides, 
not only on the government aircraft, but also on aircrafts that 
have been chartered. And these flights are most often used for 
purposes of getting from Regina to place A or B in rather quick 
order. But occasionally from time to time we have found that a 
minister has taken along his or her family or has taken an 
excessive number of trips or perhaps has taken trips to perhaps a 
family wedding or something like that. And we rather think that 
there should be public disclosure of these items. 
 
I think that the former minister of Highways, Jim Garner, will 
attest that, that there should be disclosure. I think the present 
Minister of Justice will likely attest to that as well. 
 
So it is for that reason, Mr. Speaker, that I move, seconded by the 
member from Saskatoon Eastview, that on order of the Assembly 
do issue for return showing that: 
 

For the period September 15, 1987 to the date this return 
was ordered, a detailed list of the aircraft chartered by each 
department, agency, or Crown corporation of the 
Government of Saskatchewan, including in each instance: 
(1) the purpose of the charter and the minister who 
authorized it; (2) the name of the individual or company 
who provided the charter service; (3) the total cost of the 
charter and the name of the department, agency, or Crown 
corporation to which it was charged; (4) the date of the 
flight; (5) all destinations on the flight; (6) the name of each 
MLA or government employee on the flight; (7) the number 
of family members of MLAs on each flight; and (8) the total 
number of passengers on each flight. 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the same or at least similar 
argument applies to this one. So I simply move, seconded by the 
Minister of Health: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting the word 
“detailed”, further by deleting all words after the word 
“instance,” and by substituting therefor the words: 
 

(1) the date of the flight; (2) the charter company; (3) the 
number of passengers on the flight; (4) the destination of 
the flight; (5) the minister who authorized the flight. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1412 
 

Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 7 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — This is one of those short motions that I’m sure 
that the Government House Leader or Deputy Premier will agree 
with — setting a record for agreeing with motions twice in one 
night. It just simply asks for names, titles and remuneration of all 
staff employed in the offices of ministers, or assigned to 
ministers, apart from the clerical staff. And I think that’s plain 
enough. 
 
So I would move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member from 
Saskatoon Westmount, that an order of the Assembly do issue for 
a return no. 7 showing: 
 

The names, titles, and remuneration of all non-clerical staff 
employed in or assigned to the ministers of the Government 
of Saskatchewan for the period September 15, 1987 to the 
date this return was ordered. 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, this is the way it was 
ordered last time as well and I, once again, want to make it a little 
easier to answer the questions more quickly. 
 
The difficulty I have here is “assigned to.” The assigned to . . . 
Let me give you an example, Mr. Speaker. From time to time the 
Minister of Justice may have a lawyer assigned to him for a 
specific project or a specific issue that might only be a matter of 
a couple of days. In my case, at this very moment, I have a person 
assigned to me from CMB (Crown Management Board of 
Saskatchewan) that will have been there about a week in his . . . 
he goes back to his regular position at CMB after his current task 
is completed. And that happens in various ministers’ offices at 
various times for various reasons. 
 
So rather than give you the lengthy, lengthy list that would 
accommodate the order as it is written, Mr. Speaker, I move, 
seconded by the Minister of Health: 
 

That the motion be amended by removing the words, “or 
assigned to,” and substituting therefor the words, “the 
offices of.” 

 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, what is 
happening here once again. What this really allows for the 
government to do now is that they can now hire their political 
staffs within the department proper, pay them in the department 
proper, then assign those political staff to the minister and never 
have to divulge that information. That happens in the government 
all the time. The minister is really setting it up, Mr. Speaker, to 
be able to do this without ever having to get the information 
public. 
 
This question was asked in the last session. This question will be 
answered hopefully some time soon because of the order that was 
made in the last session. There is no reason why it can’t be done 
again in this order. The only reason is that the government 
obviously wants to hide the concealing of political staff in 
departments and agencies so that the public never has to know, 
and then simply assign him to the minister, and under this 
amendment, they don’t ever have to tell anybody. 
 

Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 8 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of my brief 
remarks, I will move item 15, which is an order of the Assembly, 
return no. 8, showing out-of-province trips by ministers, and 
destination, purpose and costs, and other details. 
 
This information should be routinely available, Mr. Speaker, and 
I expect the Deputy Premier will almost have this information at 
hand and be prepared to submit it. 
 
I might say, while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, that the 
timeliness of information is of some consequence to us as 
legislators and to the people of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers. If 
information is requested and ordered, it should be provided in a 
timely fashion because the delay of providing information to 
members of the Assembly and, consequently, to the public of 
Saskatchewan, destroys the effectiveness of the information 
which is proffered. 
 
So therefore I would urge upon the minister the importance of 
providing this information as soon as possible, being fully aware 
of the fact that there was information requested by returns that 
were ordered last October and still have not be provided to this 
House. 
 
(1930) 
 
And I can only say in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, that the 
information, as I recall, has been made available to members of 
the Assembly in the past and we shall see no reasons why it 
shouldn’t be now. 
 
Therefore I move that an order of the Assembly to issue for a 
return no. 8 showing: 
 

For the period September 8, 1987, to the date this return was 
ordered: (1) the total number of out-of-province trips made 
by each minister of the government; (2) in each case, the 
destination and purpose of the trip; (3) in each case, the 
names and positions of those who accompanied the minister 
at government expense; (4) in each case, the amount 
charged on behalf of each person travelling at government 
expense; (5) in each case, the total cost of the trip separated 
according to costs incurred for: (a) air fares, (b) hotels, (c) 
ground transportation, (d) meals, (e) entertainment 
expenses. 

 
This is seconded by the member for Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, in order to accommodate 
the member in his desire for timely returns, and before the 
information outlives its usefulness, I will offer the following 
amendment so that the information can be provided based on the 
accounting forms that exist within the various departments. I 
therefore move, Mr.  
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1413 
 

Speaker: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word “government” in clause 1, and substituting 
therefor the words: 

 
(2) the destination of the trip; and (3) the total cost of the 
air fare. 

 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Briefly, once again, Mr. Speaker, I think 
that this is an unfortunate amendment by the House Leader for 
the government side. It’s an attempt to conceal information — 
obviously the lesson that they should have learned with the 
member from Kindersley, the Minister of Justice, last year, who 
got into difficulty because of misuse of government aircraft in his 
little junket to Calgary to go to a family wedding, which is not an 
appropriate use of taxpayers’ money. 
 
Once again, here’s what has been deleted. I want this to be on the 
record, Mr. Speaker. It’s been deleted that in each case this 
information will be provided: in each case the names and 
positions of those who accompany the minister at government 
expense; in each case the amount charged on behalf of each 
person travelling at government expense. 
 
What the minister is saying to this House is that in this period of 
time, between September 8, 1987 until the day of the ordering of 
this return, which is today, there are really quite likely some 
possibilities in which there were more of those kinds of trips, 
which the government does not want to own up to. That’s for the 
record, Mr. Speaker. That’s what the public knows. And there is 
no other conceivable reason why the member opposite would 
make this amendment unless they’re trying cover up some more 
embarrassment and don’t want the public to know. 
 
Now that’s once again, the majority will carry the day, but, Mr. 
Speaker, those viewers who may be watching this legislature 
tonight should know that day after day after day, motion after 
motion after motion, the government refuses to give information 
which it ought to give, and here is just another example. We’re 
going to oppose this amendment; it’s a wrong amendment; it’s 
an amendment made by a secret government ashamed of its own 
actions to the extent that it won’t even admit to some of the things 
that it’s doing. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 9 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Speaker, this particular order for a return 
is very important to the public inasmuch as they are entitled to 
know what this government is spending in terms of public funds 
on political polling. The public will know that this government 
has polled to prop itself up into office to an unprecedented extent. 
 
This is really a government that lives by the polls and dies by the 
polls, as we’ve seen most recently in Eastview and Elphinstone. 
And in spite of that final poll, which is most  

important, namely that done by the electorate itself, this 
government persists in unprecedented polling to prop itself up 
into office. This has an opportunity for patronage, contracting; 
it’s done at public expense; it’s for very narrow political benefit. 
And if it isn’t done for narrow political benefit, then this order 
for return would also demonstrate that, and demonstrate how the 
government might, in fact, have acted in the public interest. 
 
And, therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member 
for Prince Albert, that an order of the Assembly do issue for 
return no. 9 showing: 
 

For the period September 8, 1987, to the date this return was 
ordered, the number of public opinion polls and market 
research projects ordered, performed, or commissioned by 
or for each government department, agency, and Crown 
corporation, including in each case: (1) the purpose of the 
poll or the project; (2) the total cost of the poll or project; 
(3) the method by which the work was awarded; (4) the 
names of the individuals or organizations who performed 
the work; (5) the results and analysis provided to the 
government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think this motion for return would serve the 
government’s purposes if they are legitimate. If they aren’t 
legitimate, it would give a full public accounting. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Does the member have a seconder? I may have 
missed it. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Yes, I said, seconded by the member for 
Regina North West. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, in order to be consistent 
with past practices and the form of the questions that have been 
adopted by this House back in 1979 and previously, I would 
move, seconded by the member for Weyburn, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all words after the 
figure “(1)” and substituting therefor the words: 

 
a brief description of the purpose of the poll or project; 
the total cost of the poll or project; the name of the 
individual or company conducting the poll or the project. 

 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I take exception to 
that amendment. I think that it shows that the government is 
hiding behind the skirts of secrecy and that this is just totally out 
of order when it comes to the public business. I think the public 
is entitled to know the information originally requested in this 
motion for return. 
 
I said if the poll conducted was legitimate government business 
and it can stand the test of the light of day, so be it. If it can’t then 
the government ought to be censored for conducting such private 
political business and public expense. 
 
I think the public is entitled to know that and I speak against the 
amendment. 
 
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1414 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I just rise on a point of order. 
I want to hear the amendment read, please. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’ll read you the amendment. 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all words after the 
figure “(1)” and substituting therefor the words: 

 
a brief description of the purpose of the poll or project; 
(2) the total cost of the poll or project; and (3) the name 
of the individual or company conducting the poll or 
project. 

 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I take objection to the 
amendment as well. This government has said many times that 
there’s not enough money to go around, that there’s places in this 
government where they have to cut back. 
 
The interesting point is, Mr. Speaker, that this government has a 
misplaced sense of priorities when it comes to cutting back. If 
there’s one area in this government where cut-backs can be 
practised, it’s in the area of taking polls and doing research 
projects under various names, which really turn out to be political 
in nature and to support the government politically. 
 
Here is an area where the government can save all kinds of 
taxpayers’ dollars, running into the millions of dollars every year. 
What this amendment has done is to follow the government’s 
policy of restricting access to information, which is totally 
contrary to the promises this government made when it was in 
opposition about being open — running an open government for 
the people of Saskatchewan. This is secrecy, consistency with 
secrecy, as in other motions that were before us this evening. 
 
If the government has nothing to fear, it shouldn’t be offering 
amendments like this, because millions of dollars of taxpayers’ 
money can be saved if in fact these motions are carried in the 
manner in which they’re put forward so that we have full access 
to all the information. The government has not done that. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 10 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
motion for return is consistent with those that have gone before 
it. It’s a request for the government to table information pertinent 
to some of its private and secret dealings. 
 
In this particular instance, with respect to information pertaining 
to D-Mail Services Incorporated, this D-Mail Services 
Incorporated is run by one Dave Tkachuk, who just so happens 
to be a former principal secretary to none other than the Premier, 
someone who had the right hand of the Premier and extensive 
personal access to the privileges that pertain to that, now is 
running D-Mail Services and is securing contracts from the 
provincial  

government for information services. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that the public of Saskatchewan will 
well remember that it was immediately prior to the 1986 
provincial election that it was precisely this D-Mail Services that 
were providing the government with a blanketing of 
Saskatchewan, with propaganda pertaining to the Saskatchewan 
Pension Plan. And I think the people of Saskatchewan are 
entitled to know how their money was used to finance the 
Conservative election campaign prior to 1986, and how that is 
being perpetrated through D-Mail Services to the present time 
and therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the Assembly 
do issue for return no. 10 showing: 
 

With respect to D-Mail Services Inc., the contracts that this 
company received from September 15, 1987 to the date this 
return was ordered, from any departments, Crown 
corporations, boards, agencies, or commissions or the 
Government of Saskatchewan, including in each instance: 
(1) the amount of the original contract; (2) the amount of 
any contract cost overruns; (3) the purpose of the contract; 
(4) the work performed by the company; (5) whether or not 
the work in question was awarded by public tender. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, very briefly, this is information that the 
public is entitled to know. It has to do with patronage work, 
patronage work coming from the Premier’s office itself. 
 
And this motion is seconded by the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to offer an 
amendment here that will simply make this consistent with 
similar orders of last session. I move, seconded by the member 
for Weyburn: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after 
the word “Inc.,” (incorporated) and substituting therefor the 
words: 

 
all amounts paid to them by any department, Crown 
corporation, board, agency, or commission of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 11 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, after my remarks I will move, 
seconded by the member from Regina Lakeview, that: 
 

For the period September 15, 1987 to the date this return 
was ordered, a list of the executive motor vehicles 
purchased by the central vehicle agency, including in each 
instance: (1) the make, model, and cost of the vehicle; (2) 
the name and location of the dealership from which the 
vehicle was  

  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1415 
 

purchased; and (3) the name and position of the individual 
to whom each vehicle was assigned. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we think it’s important that the members have 
access to this kind of information. The public is interested in 
knowing what kind of vehicles the Executive Council of 
members opposite are riding around in, in this province, at public 
expense I would suggest. 
 
And it would seem to me that we have the Minister of Public 
Participation, the member from Indian Head-Wolseley, I suspect, 
running around in one of these executive motor vehicles. And 
since he’s interested in privatization, perhaps he would turn in 
his executive vehicle and start driving his own car. 
 
So I would move that an order of the Assembly do issue for a 
return no. 11 showing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that I’ve 
never been moved by a more compelling argument in my entire 
life, and I want to recommend to all members that they vote in 
favour of this return. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 12 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I will be moving a motion to issue 
a return and I certainly hope the Deputy Premier will be as 
co-operative with this as he was with the last motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s painfully obvious to people in Saskatchewan, 
all over this province, that this is a government very concerned 
about public relations. We heard in this House today that only 
this past weekend this government spent something in the order 
of $200,000 to turn the sod at the Shand project in the Premier’s 
constituency — $200,000 to sponsor one event. 
 
It’s painfully obvious also, Mr. Speaker, that government 
advertising has grown and grown and grown under this 
government. We look in the print media and we know there must 
have been a very heavy demand on blue ink in the past months 
and years. Painfully obvious to the people of Saskatchewan that 
this government spends a lot of money on government 
advertising; at the same time, raising taxes; at the same time, 
cutting services. 
 
And so this motion for return, Mr. Speaker, asks for some very 
specific information about the expenditures of public money on 
government ads. And so therefore I move an order of the 
Assembly do issue for a return showing: 
 

For the period September 15, 1987 to the date this return 
was ordered: (1) the amounts paid to the firm of Roberts and 
Poole advertising corporation by each department, board, 
commission, Crown corporation, and agency of the 
Government of Saskatchewan; (2) in each case, the nature 
of the work performed. 

 
And this motion is seconded by the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 13 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the conclusion of 
my remarks, I would move that an order of the Assembly do issue 
for a return no. 13 showing: 
 

For the period September 15, 1987 to the date this return 
was ordered: (1) the amounts paid to the firms of Dome 
Advertising Limited and Dome Media Buying Services 
Limited by each department, board, commission, Crown 
corporation, and agency of the Government of 
Saskatchewan; (2) in each case, the nature of the work 
performed. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what we have in this government opposite is an 
uncaring government. We have a government that is riddled with 
mismanagement and incompetence, and they use advertising 
agencies such as Dome Advertising to try and prop them up in 
circumstances that they have nothing to fall back on. 
 
We have seen this government being propped up by Dome 
Advertising — which, by the way, one of the principal owners is 
the former badly defeated candidate in the federal election who 
ran in the Regina West federal constituency, Mr. Spence Bozak. 
And ever since that defeat he has been on the take from the 
government through Dome Advertising: they have been getting 
millions and millions of dollars every year from this 
Conservative government. And in my view, Mr. Speaker, that is 
a decision that the people of this province will make, in terms of 
how they view that wild expenditure and a totally unaccountable 
way to spend taxpayers’ money. 
 
Dome Advertising, as we know, is an ad agency which has never 
bid on a contract with the government. They have always been 
appointed by the Conservatives opposite to undertake 
extravagant, and in many cases, advertising campaigns that they 
were handsomely paid for, and indeed, the taxpayers of this 
province receive nothing in return for that, except in some cases 
some smoke and mirrors. 
 
But I’d like to ask all members of this Assembly to support this 
motion, Mr. Speaker, in particular when we’re looking at this 
government’s spending about 22 or $24 million a year on 
advertising. They set that as a priority because they get 
significant contributions from this firm and individuals within 
the firm. 
 
And as well, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that the people of 
Saskatchewan get an understanding of how this government 
could save money, perhaps. They have saved, in their own 
rhetoric — they’re telling the people of Saskatchewan — 
$500,000 annually by gutting the dental program. They’ve laid 
off 411 dental therapists, and thousands of children around this 
province will be suffering as a result of that mistake, that real 
serious mistake on the part of the government with respect to 
gutting the dental program. 
 
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1416 
 

Yet they continue to spend somewhere in the vicinity of 20 to 
$24 million a year. All they had to do to save the dental program, 
Mr. Speaker, was to stop advertising for one or two weeks out of 
the 52 weeks of the year. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, I think that we have to expose the government 
for what it really is. They spent all of these millions of taxpayers’ 
dollars to tell the people of Saskatchewan what a wonderful job 
they’re doing — what a wonderful job they’re doing in terms of 
running up our deficit to $3.7 billion on operating deficit; running 
up our Crown corporation deficit from $2 billion to $7.7 billion; 
what a wonderful job they’re doing with respect to our health 
care program; what a wonderful job they’re doing advertising the 
prescription drug plan that they’ve created, that has been gutted 
and privatized in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by my colleague, the 
member from Prince Albert, that an order of the Assembly do 
issue for return no. 13 showing: 
 

For the period September 15, 1987, to the date this return 
was ordered: (1) the amounts paid to the firms of Dome 
Advertising Limited and Dome Media Buying Services 
Limited by each department, board, commission, Crown 
corporation, and agency of the Government of 
Saskatchewan; (2) in each case, the nature of the work 
performed. 

 
Motion agreed to on division. 
 

Return No. 14 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, in all likelihood I’m going 
to be ruled out of order, but I am prepared to move the remaining 
one, two, three, four without amendment, if we can possibly do 
that without the member in his seat. I don’t know if we can. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Since these are private members’ motions, the 
problem with the hon. member’s suggestion is that some of them 
are not here and therefore we can only deal with the motions of 
those members who are present. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — In order to assist the process then, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to stand 21, 22, and 24, and we’ll deal with 
23. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Okay, those motions will be deemed to have 
been stood. 
 

Return No. 23 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise because I 
want to move this order for return regarding the cost of printing 
the 1987 SaskTel annual report. We have had some debate in this 
House this afternoon and again this evening on the wasteful 
expenditures of the government, a lot of which they don’t want 
to make public or make known. When this report of SaskTel was 
tabled, it struck me that I have never, in my memory, seen a more 
glossy and more expensive report in this Assembly in the times 
that I can remember. 
 

Now I want to tell you, Mr. Chairman, that there are more 
pictures, in this book of an expensive nature than there is 
information. Clearly somebody’s ego — and I don’t know 
whether it’s the minister’s ego or somebody in senior 
management — got a little carried away, and there are more 
pictures, pictures of ministers and senior management people 
here, than there is information. 
 
I submit to you, sir, that that money would have been far better 
spent providing services to senior citizens who were promised 
free telephones in 1982 in the election promise by the members 
opposite — a promise which has been broken. So in order to be 
able to accommodate their high flying, high living ways, they say 
to senior citizens, we’re not going to keep our promises; we’re 
going to spend our money in frivolous ways like extremely 
expensive annual reports. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I think that we should know and the 
public should know how much this annual report cost. 
 
And so I move that an order of the Assembly do issue for return 
no. 23 showing, which states: 
 

The total cost of preparing and printing the 1987 SaskTel 
annual report. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(2000) 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 6 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of 
The Regional Colleges Act and The Institute Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this House passed 
two Bills which will lead to significant advances, have led to 
significant advances in the delivery of post-secondary education 
in Saskatchewan. Those Bills, Mr. Speaker, became An Act 
respecting The Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology and The Regional Colleges Act. To accommodate 
the enactment of these two historic Bills, some housekeeping 
amendments are required to other established Acts. 
 
By and large, the seven changes involve the substitution of the 
words “Regional Colleges Act,” in the place of “The Community 
College Act,” and includes references to the new institute where 
it is applicable. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 6, 
An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments to Certain 
Acts resulting from the enactment of The Regional Colleges Act 
and The Institute Act. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I will provide additional 
information to what the minister has talked about with respect to 
the provisions in this Bill. This Bill has one part in it that is 
objectionable to members on this side of the  
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1417 
 

House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In most cases, when you’re dealing with a consequential Bill, 
there is usually not any controversy associated with it. In this 
particular case, this consequential Bill actually does have 
consequences; it is not an inconsequential consequential Bill. 
 
The provision that I want to talk about — and I want to spend a 
little time dealing with the original Bills because this Bill does 
exactly, in this one particular part, what the original Bills did, and 
that is, it takes power away from some people that could be 
involved in education at the local area, and it gives power to the 
minister. And in this case it gives the minister power in one 
particular instance where the power should properly be vested in 
the employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to reiterate a couple of the objections 
that we had to the Bill in the first place, to the original Bill — 
that is Bill 46, which was passed in this House last year during 
the last session. I mentioned that the Bill 46 had given the 
minister extraordinary powers and extraordinary provisions and 
that this Bill adds to that. 
 
I would like to put some of the things on record that that 
particular Bill did. When it amalgamated the four institutes with 
the technical institutes — that is the technical institutes with the 
community colleges in the four cities in Saskatoon, Regina, 
Prince Albert, and Moose Jaw — it gave the minister some 
powers, some of which I want to bring to light now. 
 
One of the powers is that the institute shall comply with any 
directions or requirements given or made by the minister within 
any period that the minister may require. Now the minister set up 
a board to oversee this particular college, this particular institute, 
the new Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology; he set up a board. And that board has to report to 
the minister, and while he set up the board, the minister himself 
took more powers than he gave the board. He has given the board 
overriding powers, and he does the same thing, Mr. Minister, in 
this consequential Act — gives himself an overriding power over 
the employees, in one instance. 
 
The minister gives himself the power to . . . gave himself the 
power in the original Bill, Bill 46, to review the budget submitted 
by the board of SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology) and to revise all or any part of the 
budget in any manner that he considered appropriate. It was the 
minister that gave himself power to appoint the board of directors 
in the first place. So the entire board really is at the beck and call 
of the minister. It becomes very much a puppet board. 
 
There are a couple of other provisions that happened here in that 
particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, and that was, the minister gave 
himself powers to establish policies in consultation with the 
institute and to give directions for post-secondary education and 
training. So there again the board is powerless. 
 
In another place in the Act, the minister gave himself power to 
give directions to the institute on programs, on  

courses, on functions, and activities, to be provided or undertaken 
or to be continued in the institute. So really what happens is a 
board which appears to be at arm’s length only becomes half at 
arm’s length. 
 
Now at the same time, while the minister gave himself those 
powers that I’ve mentioned and others, he took away powers or 
rights that the employees had by forcing them to take a vote as to 
what type of an association they wanted. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, a point of order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — What is the member’s point of order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is very 
specific and is a Bill that is consequential to two other pieces of 
legislation. 
 
The hon. member is raising issues that have nothing to do with 
this Bill, nor make any reference to the remarks I made in second 
reading on this Bill, Mr. Speaker. He is, in fact, as I heard him 
talking, talking about votes that were held, powers of the board 
or powers of the minister. I see absolutely no reference in the Bill 
anywhere to any of that, Mr. Speaker, nor do I see its relevance 
in this debate based on remarks I made in second reading, Mr. 
Speaker. So I would ask that you rule the member out of order 
based on those considerations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Speaking to the point of order, Mr. 
Speaker. On the contrary to what the minister says, what the 
member is saying has got absolute relevance to the Bill that is 
before us. Because if you listen carefully, Mr. Speaker, as I know 
you have, you will note that the powers which these so-called 
consequential amendments are giving the minister. And all the 
member is doing is indicating that he is doing once again what 
he did in previous legislation to which this Bill is consequential. 
 
So he is making the analogy and making the references, and 
therefore, Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that he is in order. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I have listened to the hon. member’s point of 
order and I have considered his objections, and as long as the 
hon. member who is from Prince Albert makes his remarks 
relevant to the issue under discussion, the debate may proceed. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I will continue to 
keep my remarks relevant to this particular Bill. 
 
I’m indicating to the minister the reason for our objection to this 
particular Bill based on the fact that he’s asking for more powers. 
This Bill makes provision for more powers to be given to the 
minister, just the same way as the Bill 46 of last year did. 
 
And I was bringing in some analogies, Mr. Minister . . . or Mr. 
Speaker, just before the minister interrupted me, I was about to 
say that the minister in the previous Bill forced the employees to 
go through a vote, to choose as to whether they were going to 
belong or be represented by a  
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1418 
 

faculty association or by SGEU (Saskatchewan Government 
Employees’ Union). 
 
Now they already had the power to make that decision for 
themselves if at any time that they wanted to choose. And now 
we find that the minister, we find that the minister, who may be 
smarting because as a result of his forced order — he found that 
they decided to go back with SGEU — now asks in this Bill that 
he have the right to determine or to choose according to his 
opinion who it is that should represent the employees for one 
particular appointment. 
 
Now I think that that’s blatantly wrong. I feel that if there is going 
to be a representative chosen to represent the employees, that it’s 
the employee association that should make that choice, and it’s 
the employee association that should make that representation. 
And it shouldn’t matter a darn . . . shouldn’t matter at all what 
the opinion of the minister is. 
 
I don’t want to go any further on that in this regard tonight, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to let this pass into committee where we will be 
proposing an amendment to this particular Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 12 — An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act, 

1981 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to explain these amendments to The 
Medical Profession Act, 1981, which deal with the manner in 
which physicians are able to lodge an appeal against disciplinary 
action by the College of Physicians and Surgeons. 
 
Under the existing Act, Mr. Speaker, appeals are heard as a trial 
de novo, or new trial, by a three-member appeal tribunal. These 
tribunals consist of a judge of the Court of Queen’s Bench, as 
chairman; one member appointed by the University of 
Saskatchewan, usually but not necessarily a physician, I add; and 
a lay person appointed by the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the trial de novo appeal before these tribunals is not 
an appropriate or effective way for such matters to be handled. It 
runs counter to the basic principle of our health profession’s 
legislation, namely that the people best able to assess matters of 
professional competence and conduct are the members of the 
profession itself. 
 
By the time a physician’s licence has been revoked or suspended, 
his competence or conduct have been reviewed thoroughly by 15 
or more of his professional peers. It is not appropriate for this 
entire process to be repeated by a tribunal which includes only 
one physician and two individuals with no medical expertise. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, the present process contributes to 
lengthy delays in having appeals heard. Time is needed to obtain 
names for the three members and then to arrange a hearing date 
suitable for all the individuals involved. The result is that appeals 
tend to be  

heard a long time after the actions which initially prompted the 
disciplinary action. 
 
The proposed amendments, Mr. Speaker, will replace the current 
appeal process with the right of appeal directly to the Court of 
Queen’s Bench. Either party may also request leave for a further 
appeal to the Court of Appeal on a point of law. 
 
Let me emphasize a number of points, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First, the College of Physicians and Surgeons has been fully 
consulted about these amendments and believes that they 
effectively address the concerns it had raised about the existing 
provisions, and that’s a long-time process that’s been going on 
for about a year now. 
 
Second, Mr. Speaker, there is no other province in this country 
in which medical legislation provides for appeals such as those 
now in place here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And third, apart from four other health professions which are 
based on the medical model, no other professional group in 
Saskatchewan has this kind of appeal. And I might add that those 
other four will be dealt with in just a few moments in four other 
Bills. 
 
So in other words, Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments are 
neither unusual nor radical but are, in fact, fully in keeping with 
the most common way of handling appeals by professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, public awareness and expectations with respect to 
quality medical care have been steadily rising. The College of 
Physicians and Surgeons is attempting to effectively fulfil its 
responsibility to protect the public by enforcing high standards 
of competence and professional conduct. The proposed 
amendments will assist the college in this respect while still 
giving physicians the same kind of protection, through appeal, as 
is available to other professions in our province and across this 
country. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to move second reading of Bill 
No. 12, An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act, 1981. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill 12 does eliminate 
the trial de novo, or the second trial, in the disciplinary process 
undergone by doctors who have been charged by the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons. 
 
This provision, I should point out, was in The Medical Profession 
Act many, many years ago in a somewhat different form. It was 
then repealed, I believe, during the Thatcher years, and a trial de 
novo was reinstituted some time in the ’70s in a form which made 
the trial de novo mandatory. 
 
(2015) 
 
It is alleged that the trial de novo has caused unnecessary delays 
and is unnecessarily expensive because it involves the second 
hearing. And I’m familiar with some of the delays which are 
caused in the disciplinary process before the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons. But I also believe that there are many 
things that cause these delays,  
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1419 
 

not just the trial de novo, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Concern has been expressed to us by some members of the 
medical profession that the amendment removes a protection that 
is there now for doctors and which doctors have experience for 
some years now. And that when we are removing someone from 
their occupation, or preventing them from practising their 
occupation, it’s a very serious matter, and therefore they should 
be given the full benefit of the justice system. 
 
The amendments then purport to remove rights that the doctors 
have been enjoying over a period of a number of years, and there 
is concern expressed to us by some members of the medical 
profession in that regard. 
 
So we have a situation here, Mr. Speaker, where we have to 
balance the concern of these doctors for a fair and complete 
process in front of the governing body of the medical profession, 
and so on. And we have to balance that concern with the need to 
streamline the process and make the procedure more efficient 
from the point of view of those who are charged with the 
responsibility of monitoring the medical profession. 
 
I am very familiar with the serious responsibilities that the 
college has in monitoring the medical profession and their desire 
to fulfil these responsibilities as best possible. However the fact 
of the matter is, is that the amendments do remove a right the 
doctors have been enjoying over the years, and they have 
expressed concern to us about this, or at least some members of 
the medical profession have expressed concern. 
 
Therefore it’s important for me to review the minister’s 
comments and weigh them in view of these competing concerns. 
Therefore I would like to adjourn debate on this Bill in order to 
comment further on it at a later date. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill No. 11 — An Act to amend The Ophthalmic Dispenser 

Act 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 11, this Bill is 
largely consequential to the amendments to the appeal provisions 
of The Medical Profession Act, 1981, which we have just dealt 
with. The appeal provisions for ophthalmic dispensers were 
modelled directly on those for physicians, and they include cost 
references to The Medical Profession Act, 1981. 
 
There’s one additional amendment, Mr. Speaker, which involves 
the board of examiners required to be established under the Act. 
The Act states that this board must include an ophthalmologist 
and a non-dispensing optometrist. However there are few, if any, 
optometrists in the province who do not dispense as part of their 
practice and some difficulty has arisen in finding a qualified 
individual to serve on the board. 
 
The proposal is to remove the statutory reference to the 
composition of the board and to have the composition defined 
instead by by-law under the Act. This move will provide greater 
flexibility and eliminate the potential for the registration process 
to be stalled because of inability  

to establish a valid board of examiners. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m please to move second reading of Bill No. 
11, An Act to amend The Ophthalmic Dispensers Act. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I would like to point 
out at this time that I have consulted with the Saskatchewan 
Ophthalmic Dispensers Association, Mr. Minister, and I am 
advised that they were not aware these particular amendments 
were coming forward at this point in time. 
 
I think that in light of that, and in light of the fact that we’ve 
adjourned debate on The Medical Profession Act, and because 
these amendments follow upon the amendments to The Medical 
Profession Act, we should also adjourn the debate on second 
reading on these proposed amendments as well. And in the 
interim I hope that the minister, if he hasn’t already done so 
today, will consult further with the ophthalmic dispensers 
association, because it’s today I spoke to them. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 13 — An Act to amend The Denturists Act 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill No. 13 is simply 
consequential to the amendments of The Medical Profession Act, 
1981, which we have been dealing with. The appeal provisions 
for denturists were modelled directly on those for physicians, and 
they include cross-references to The Medical Profession Act, 
1981. The amendments are intended to maintain this consistency 
of approach and to keep the cross-references accurate. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 13, An Act 
to amend The Denturists Act. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Because these 
amendments follow upon the amendments to The Medical 
Profession Act, I would like to adjourn the debate and pick up 
my comments later on this. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill No. 14 — An Act to amend The Dental Profession Act, 

1978 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is also 
consequential to the amendments of The Medical Profession Act, 
1981. The appeal provisions for dentists were modelled directly 
on those for physicians, and they include cross-references to The 
Medical Profession Act, 1981. The amendments are intended to 
maintain this consistency of approach and keep the 
cross-references accurate. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 14, An Act 
to amend The Dental Profession Act, 1978. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, because 
these amendments to The Dental Profession Act follow upon the 
amendments to The Medical Profession Act, I would like to 
adjourn the debate on second reading  
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1420 
 

for further comment. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 15 — An Act to amend The Optometry Act, 1985 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill is also largely 
consequential to the amendments to the appeal provision of The 
Medical Profession Act, 1981. The appeal provisions for 
optometrists were modelled directly on those for physicians, and 
they included cross-references to The Medical Profession Act, 
1981. 
 
The additional amendments in this Act, Mr. Speaker, are 
intended to allow the association flexibility in filling vacancies 
on their council and in determining the forms that are to be used 
for registering members. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with those very few short remarks, I move 
second reading of Bill No. 15, An Act to amend The Optometry 
Act. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In view of the fact 
these amendments are consequential upon amendments to The 
Medical Profession Act, I would beg leave to adjourn debate on 
this matter for further comment. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 17 — An Act respecting the Inspection of Gas 
Installations and Gas Equipment for Consumers 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. 
member, the Department of Environment and Public Safety 
currently administers gas licensing and the inspection of natural 
and propane gas installations under The Gas Inspection and 
Licensing Act. Our government proposes to repeal this Act and 
replace it with a gas licensing Act and a gas inspection Act. This 
division of activity will allow us to move the inspection to 
SaskPower corporation where they can be integrated with the 
corporation’s own field service activities and with their own 
computerized accounting and control system. 
 
This Bill I’m speaking about at this time is The Gas Licensing 
Act, which will be administered and enforced by the Department 
of Environment and Public Safety. The Gas Licensing Act 
provides for the licensing of gas installations, contractors, 
propane distributors who store and retail propane gas, and supply 
houses with wholesale gas equipment. This new Bill 
complements The Gas Inspection Act in that definitions, issuance 
of orders, appeal procedures, penalties, and the coming into force 
are very similar. Propane distributors have been defined as well 
as clarifying licence classifications and the requirements for 
in-province and out-of-province propane distributors. Search and 
seizure provisions have been included to meld with provisions of 
the charter of rights. Refusals to issue a licence have been 
extended to include the case where the licence is already under 
suspension. 
 
A procedure to allow a person to be heard before his licence is 
suspended has been added. The reverse onus procedure has been 
removed so that it is no longer  

incumbent upon a licence holder to prove he is a licence holder, 
this can now be certified by the director. Appeal procedures for 
a person aggrieved by a decision have been included. Penalties 
have been increased to reflect current values. Limitations for 
prosecution has been lowered from six years to three years. 
 
This Bill is a progressive step in removing some of the repressive 
clauses that existed in the old Act, and along with its companion 
document, The Gas Inspection Act, paved the way for improved 
and more efficient methods of inspection and licensing of the gas 
industry. 
 
I move second reading of Bill No. 17, An Act respecting the 
Inspection of Gas Installations and Gas Equipment for 
Consumers. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a few remarks 
in response to Bill 17. I listened carefully as the Deputy Premier 
spoke on behalf of the Minister of Environment and Public Safety 
tonight. I heard him say one of the two essential elements of this 
Bill in terms of changes being made to the process of the 
inspection of gas installations in our province. He pointed out 
correctly that this Bill moves that responsibility for the 
appointment of inspectors from the Department of the 
Environment and Public Safety over to SaskPower. But what he 
did not indicate clearly in his remarks, and what I believe the 
public of Saskatchewan and the consumers of Saskatchewan 
need to be fully aware of in this change, is that this Bill proposes, 
at least opens the possibility, to the privatization of the inspection 
of gas installations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if passed, this Bill will permit private contractors to 
inspect the work of other private contractors. That’s what this 
Bill, in essence, will do. 
 
That’s contrary, Mr. Speaker, to the current practice of 
inspections being conducted by inspectors who are in the employ 
of the province of Saskatchewan; inspectors who are therefore 
totally independent of the contracting industry, which guarantees 
as much as it’s possible to guarantee an objectivity and a fairness 
in those inspections. 
 
Public inspectors in the employ of the province have only one 
interest, Mr. Speaker, just one interest and that’s public safety. 
And it’s just as important, I think, that in the public perception 
these inspectors have only one interest, and that’s public safety. 
They are perceived today by the people of Saskatchewan, by the 
consumers of Saskatchewan, as being fair and objective, and they 
enjoy the confidence of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Now what this Bill proposes to do is to privatize the inspection 
process; that is, to enable private contractors to inspect the work 
of other private contractors. And I guess, Mr. Speaker, I feel that 
Saskatchewan people need to be asked if they feel that the same 
kind of objectivity can be guaranteed in this new system of one 
private contractor inspecting the work of another private 
contractor. I guess I feel Saskatchewan people need to be 
consulted to see if they feel they will enjoy the same level of 
confidence in the kind of inspection procedures that will go on 
under this new privatized system. 
 
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1421 
 

(2030) 
 
Consumers in Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan public need 
to be asked if they’re willing to entrust their safety — indeed in 
some cases their lives and the lives of their families — if they’re 
willing to entrust their safety to this new kind of privatized 
inspection. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my judgement this Bill opens the possibility — 
not the certainty, Mr. Speaker, but the possibility — of certain 
favouritism, of certain deal making going on between 
contractors. It opens the possibility of a decline in the quality of 
gas inspection. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I believe it opens as well the possibility 
of patronage in the naming of which contractor will serve as an 
inspector. We’ve seen some evidence with this government that 
patronage is not an unheard-of commodity with them. This Bill 
opens that possibility. 
 
And I think to be frank, Mr. Speaker, and to be fair, this Bill 
opens the possibility of sort of tainting the whole inspection 
process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that Saskatchewan consumers and the 
Saskatchewan public should have opportunity to consider the 
implications of the privatization of inspections in our province 
and to enable that kind of discussion and thought and 
consideration to go on. I would move that debate on Bill 17 now 
be adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

 
Bill No. 18 — An Act respecting the Inspection of Electrical 

Equipment, Installation and Material 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — On behalf of the hon. member, Mr. 
Speaker, members will be aware that the Department of 
Environment and Public Safety is currently administering 
electrical licensing and inspection of electrical installations under 
The Electrical Inspection and Licensing Act. 
 
Our government proposes to repeal this Act and replace it with 
two separate Acts: The Electrical Licensing Act, and The 
Electrical Inspection Act. This separation will allow the 
government to move the inspection to SaskPower Corporation 
where they can be integrated with the corporation’s own field 
activities and their own computerized accounting and control 
systems. 
 
The Bill I’m speaking to is The Electrical Licensing Act which 
will be administered and enforced by the Department of 
Environment and Public Safety. This Act provides for the 
licensing of electrical installations, contractors, distributors, and 
supply houses who wholesale electrical equipment. This new Bill 
complements The Electrical Inspection Act and the definition, 
issuance of orders, appeal procedures, penalties, and coming into 
force are very similar. 
 
The provisions of this Bill with respect to appeals, licensing of 
contractors and tradesmen, search and seizure, the reverse onus 
clauses, its penalties and limitations for prosecution, are very 
similar to The Gas  

Licensing Act. 
 
This Bill is part of a package we’ve put together to improve 
efficiency in the inspection of electrical installations. Moreover 
it provides for the improvement of licensing procedures and 
removes some of the more repressive clauses of the old Act. 
 
I therefore, Mr. Speaker, move second reading of Bill No. 18, An 
Act respecting the Inspection of Electrical Equipment, 
Installation and Material. I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again with Bill 18 we 
see a similar move on the part of this government, first of all to 
move the process, this time of electrical inspections, away from 
the Department of the Environment and Public Safety and over 
to SaskPower. 
 
And again in this Bill — and again the Deputy Premier did not 
mention this — the Bill opens the possibility to the privatization, 
this time, of electrical inspections, Mr. Speaker, the concerns that 
I have with the privatization of gas inspections again apply to the 
privatization of electrical inspections, with one private contractor 
inspecting the work of another private contractor. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I believe this Act, this Bill, opens the 
possibilities — not the certainty, but the possibility — of 
favouritism and deal making, the possibility of patronage in the 
appointments, and the possibility that the confidence 
Saskatchewan people have today in their inspectors will be 
somehow tainted. 
 
Again I think, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan consumers, 
Saskatchewan people, ought to have time to consider the 
implications of this change in public safety and in the inspection, 
in this case, of electrical installations. And so I would again move 
that debate adjourn on Bill 18. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 21 — An Act to amend The Cost of Credit 
Disclosure Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, The Cost of Credit 
Disclosure Act requires lenders and seller to disclose credit 
charges in writing. 
 
The Act covers provincially-regulated lenders such as credit 
unions and trust and loan companies. It also covers sellers such 
as department stores of farm implement dealers who finance 
purchases. These are sometimes referred to as line lenders. 
 
Broadly speaking, the proposed amendment, Mr. Speaker, will 
make the law, which is technical and complex, easier to 
administer and to change in future. 
 
Hon. members will appreciate that the market-place changes 
rapidly, especially where lending and borrowing are involved. 
The proposed amendments will permit regulation which is more 
responsive to these rapid, ongoing changes. 
 
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1422 
 

To enhance flexibility, the proposed amendment would allow 
lenders or borrowers to be exempt from all or portions of the Act. 
Under the existing statute only exemptions from all of the Act 
are possible. This makes any change to address specific problems 
or circumstances very difficult, very slow, and unnecessarily 
complicated. 
 
Some sections of the current Act are simply unnecessary or out 
of date. For example, consumer demand for financial products 
with variable load rates is substantial; such rates expand 
consumer choice in financing. The Saskatchewan lending 
industry has also requested that we recognize this market-place 
reality and provide basic elements of government regulation in 
this area. The Act provides for fundamental elements of 
disclosure regarding variable rate loans. The Bill covers 
disclosure at the time the contract is signed, upon change in the 
rate, and upon request of the borrower. Additional disclosure 
requirements will be discussed with industry and with other 
governments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, cost of credit disclosure is also an area where we 
are working with other jurisdictions to achieve national 
uniformity. It is therefore very likely that more uniformity will 
be gradually worked out through our consultation with other 
governments and implemented under the new regulatory powers 
of this Act. 
 
The proposed amendments do not affect the civil rights of 
Saskatchewan citizens. No additional administrative or other 
public costs are required. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Cost of Credit 
Disclosure Amendment Act, 1988. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This legislation, the 
Act to amend The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act, purports to deal, 
as its name might suggest, with the disclosure of the cost of 
credit, and it comes from the Minister of Consumer Affairs. In 
reality, Mr. Speaker, I think this is legislation which does not 
serve the interests of Saskatchewan consumers. It is legislation 
that serves, more particularly, the lending institutions under 
provincial jurisdiction. 
 
My objection to this legislation basically revolves around the 
central concern, Mr. Speaker, that it does not effect what it 
purports to do, namely to effect the disclosure of the cost of 
credit. It doesn’t matter whether it’s in writing or posting as this 
legislation suggests, the provision is still inadequate. 
 
For the minister to suggest that it provides for fundamental 
disclosure simply is not true. I think the minister has a good point 
when he talks about the need for uniformity with respect to cost 
of credit disclosure and other financial legislation. But in this 
case, especially given the fact that the House of Commons is 
looking at section 201 of the federal Bank Act, and has a finance 
committee investigating these concerns, I think it behoves us as 
responsible legislators to look very carefully at this legislation 
and not to relegate the concerns of consumers simply to the 
regulations, but to ensure that the legislation itself adequately 
effects disclosure. 
 

This legislation really does not do that, and I will have further 
comments to make on it at a later date. But I would like to move 
that debate be adjourned on Bill No. 21, to amend The Cost of 
Credit Disclosure Act. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 22 — An Act to amend The Wakamow Valley 
Authority Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise tonight to 
move second reading of a Bill, Bill No. 22, a Bill to amend The 
Wakamow Valley Authority Act. 
 
Two amendments are proposed in this Bill. The first will limit 
payments required by statute to be made by the participating 
parties in Wakamow Valley authority for the 1987 and ’88, 
’88-89 fiscal years to the same amount as those paid in the 
1986-87 fiscal year. 
 
This amendment implements a decision announced previously in 
the budget for last year whereby a measure of financial restraint 
would be applied to all four of the urban parks funded by Urban 
Affairs. The authorities will not experience a decline in their 
funding but will be held at the same level as was provided in the 
1986-87 year. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re proud of that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Sure, I’m proud of it. Should the city of 
Moose Jaw and the two rural municipalities participating in 
Wakamow wish to voluntarily contribute more financial 
assistance to Wakamow, as they have done in recent years, they 
will continue to be free to do so under this amendment. 
 
The second amendment, Mr. Speaker, extends existing legal 
protection given by the Act to the authorities, participating 
parties, and to members, officers, or employees of the authority 
to also cover the authority’s architect, planner, and committees 
appointed by the authority. Wakamow and the other urban park 
authorities have made extensive use of committees to carry out 
various responsibilities and the legislation anticipates this. This 
amendment will simply provide them with the same protection. 
Similar changes are being made for Wascana and Meewasin 
authorities. 
 
I would encourage all members of this House to support the Bill, 
and now move second reading of Bill No. 22, An Act to amend 
The Wakamow Valley Authority Act. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
few remarks about this Bill to amend The Wakamow Valley 
Authority Act. 
 
Let me say at the very outset, Mr. Speaker, that I will and we will 
be opposing this Bill, but we do not wish to hold the Bill’s 
progress up, and so we’ll be willing to let it go to committee and 
we’ll not be moving an adjournment. 
 
I want to be clear that I and we oppose this Bill, Mr. Speaker. It 
essentially has two parts, the second part being an amendment to 
section 65 to tighten up the liability provisions to cover the 
boards appointed by Wakamow  
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1423 
 

and other individuals, and if the Bill was just that we’d be glad 
to support it. I know that has been requested by the Wakamow 
people, and we’re happy to see that going into the Act. 
 
But the first part of this amendment is not of the same nature at 
all, Mr. Speaker. In fact it flies in the face of a variety of requests 
that have gone to this minister and gone to this government 
concerning funding for Wakamow. 
 
(2045) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have to admit, straight off, right at the outset, that 
I have some personal interest in this matter in that when I sit and 
eat my breakfast in the morning I look out of our kitchen window 
over the Wakamow Valley, or the valley being developed by the 
authority. Mr. Speaker, I and my family have been privileged to 
participate in some of the development through the president’s 
club, and I must say we very regularly access Wakamow 
facilities and enjoy the programs and the activities and the beauty 
of the Wakamow Valley. And it’s a very important development 
in the constituency I represent and in the city that I am privileged 
to be a part of, and indeed in the area surrounding Moose Jaw. 
It’s a development that is a place of enjoyment for many, many, 
many Moose Jaw people, and I might say many visitors to our 
city, and as the development grows, indeed visitors and tourists 
to our province. So I have some personal interest in this and I 
admit that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What this Bill does, in essence, Mr. Speaker, is to freeze the 
funding to Wakamow at 1986-1987 levels for two more years, 
those years being ’87-88 and then the year ahead of us, ’88-89. 
We’re freezing the funding. Not only are we freezing the funding 
in the case of Wakamow, as we’re doing to the other valley 
authorities, but in the case of Wakamow we’re freezing an 
inequity in funding that has been permitted to exist for some 
number of years now, an inequity in funding that I want to 
discuss tonight, Mr. Speaker, because this has been discussed 
with the minister. And I had hoped that in this session we might 
have seen that inequity dealt with, but instead we’ve seen that 
inequity frozen for yet another two funding years. 
 
Just for your information, Mr. Speaker, and information of the 
members present, let me just go back a little about some of the 
history of the Wakamow development. When this Wakamow 
Valley Authority was established in 1981 under a New 
Democratic government, the funding level was set at a level 
equalling 2 city mills, sixty per cent of the funding to be provided 
locally, 40 per cent to come from the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that compares with the funding level at that 
time of 5 city mills for the other two existing authorities, being 
Meewasin and Wascana. Initially the funding was set at 2 city 
mills. But let’s be clear, Mr. Speaker, that that was set as a 
minimum funding level. The full intention was, Mr. Speaker, that 
in those early developmental days the funding would be set at 2 
mills, and once operational — once operational, the funding 
would be raised. That was the intention, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It was widely known until 1982, and along came this  

group of men and women into government. And that intention to 
raise the funding for the Wakamow Valley Authority somehow 
got forgotten or lost or, dare I say, purposely fixed. So we’ve 
never seen that increase in funding, even though Wakamow has 
proceeded with their development, have grown. There’s been no 
increase in funding from 1981. 
 
Even worse, Mr. Speaker, even worse, in 1981 this government 
slashed the funding — cut the funding by 20 per cent. They did 
it across the board to all the valley authorities existing at that time 
— the three of them, Wakamow, Meewasin, and Wascana. They 
slashed the funding another 20 per cent. 
 
And so after 1983, now Wakamow is funded at 1.6 mills. That’s 
the level of funding after the cut in 1983. And I don’t think I need 
to remind you, Mr. Speaker, that in 1983 we enjoyed the highest 
oil prices we’ve ever know. It was before this government had a 
chance to run up its massive deficits. So those were the good 
years, Mr. Speaker. In the good years they slashed funding to the 
valley authorities by 20 per cent, which somehow indicates their 
commitment to our parks and valleys. 
 
Since then the inequity has gone on, Meewasin and Wascana 
being funded at four city mills, Wakamow, in Moose Jaw, being 
funded at a level of 1.6 city mills. Now the minister, in his 
remarks, indicated that the city of Moose Jaw indeed has come 
through and added additional support. They’ve maintained their 
60 per cent share of the initial agreement of 2 mills, and 
Wakamow is grateful for that. And the city of Moose Jaw realizes 
the importance of Wakamow to our community. 
 
There are other inequities, Mr. Speaker, regarding Wakamow. As 
opposed to Meewasin and Wascana, Wakamow in Moose Jaw 
lacks a third party partner, that being a university. Both 
Meewasin and Wascana enjoy the support of a third party in the 
university campus; Wakamow does not. 
 
Again to further the inequity for Wakamow of the valley 
authorities existing in our province, Wakamow is the only one 
that must fund its landscape maintenance out of its statutory 
funding. So as the development has grown, understandably the 
funds required for maintenance and landscape maintenance have 
grown, until now we’re devoting more and more of that money 
for landscape maintenance and there’s less and less left for future 
developments. 
 
Now since 1983, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen the beginning of 
another like authority in our province, the Chinook Parkway in 
Swift Current. And I think it’s noteworthy to say that the newest 
kid on the block gets a better funding deal than Wakamow in 
Moose Jaw. The Swift Current authority gets 1.8 city mills as 
their level of funding, and the split is not 60 per cent locally, 40 
per cent from the province; it’s 50-50. The province contributes 
matching dollar for dollar to the city of Swift Current. Moose Jaw 
is left with a lower level of funding. Moose Jaw is left with a 
lower provincial support. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the board of Wakamow has written this 
minister and has written other ministers and has  
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1424 
 

written this government. They’ve lobbied this government. 
People who support Wakamow in Moose Jaw have written this 
minister and lobbied this government, all to no avail. The 
inequity in the funding goes on, and tonight we have a Bill that 
would even fix that inequity for another two years. 
 
I’m beginning to believe, Mr. Speaker, that the only way we’re 
ever going to deal with this problem in terms of the Wakamow 
Valley in Moose Jaw is to change the government. Now 
lobbying, persuasion, all of that doesn’t seem to work. So I guess 
the only opportunity we have left now is to just get rid of this 
government. 
 
Now let me say, Mr. Speaker, there’s one other point I think in 
regard to this Bill that needs to be made. When Wakamow was 
established, it was stated as one of Wakamow’s objectives, goals, 
the effort would be given to involve community organizations, to 
involve businesses and corporate interests in a provision of 
non-government support. In some ways it was, and it remains, a 
unique concept for an urban park, a partnership between the 
private and the public sector. It was innovative when it was 
designed and it remains so today. And indeed many of the 
developments we’ve seen in Moose Jaw and the Wakamow 
Valley have come about because of this partnership, because of 
the support we’ve enjoyed from the community, from volunteers, 
from the business sector, from service clubs, from the corporate 
sector. 
 
It becomes absolutely clear, Mr. Speaker, if Wakamow is to 
continue to enjoy that support from the community, from the 
business sector, from the service clubs, from the corporate sector, 
this government needs to begin to start showing its support. This 
government needs to begin to show that it, in fact, shares the 
objectives of this partnership, and recognize the local efforts that 
have gone on, and recognize the contribution made by others and 
match that contribution. 
 
But I say rather than recognizing the hard work that’s gone on, I 
think this government just sees that hard work as a way to escape 
its own responsibilities, and that’s a shame. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think this government could have come to this 
House, at a very minimum, with the goal of re-establishing the 
initial level of funding at 2 city mills — could have come and at 
least done that. It did not. This government could have come to 
the House and said, we’re going to start narrowing that gap, get 
an equity between the Wakamow Valley Authority and other 
valley authorities in this province — but not this government. It 
could have come to the House and said, we recognize the worth 
and we recognize the value of the local contribution and the 
volunteer contribution, and showed some movement on this 
funding issue — but not this government. It could have come to 
this House and introduced an amendment that would have 
changed the funding to be a match with the city and the local 
funding from the RMs and the city, a 50-50 split. It could have 
come and done that — it did not. 
 
Instead what we have, Mr. Speaker, is the minority partner in this 
arrangement, the minority partner in the  

funding, setting all the rules, with no regard for the local concerns 
or inputs. We have a government here that will not listen to 
repeated requests. We have a Bill, in fact, that freezes the funding 
and freezes the inequity. 
 
And so, on this basis, Mr. Speaker, we vote against this Bill. I 
will vote against it and we will vote against it. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 
referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 23 — An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise tonight to 
move second reading of Bill No. 23, a Bill to amend The 
Wascana Centre Act. 
 
The amendments proposed in this Bill cover four areas. Section 
3 will permit Wascana Centre Authority to appoint committees 
to advise it or assist it in various responsibilities. These would be 
in addition to the architectural and engineering advisory 
committees which are specifically provided for in the Act. It is 
anticipated that this addition will permit the authority to place 
greater emphasis on consultation in matters such as heritage or 
conservation, for example. 
 
In section 4 of the Bill, the Wascana Centre Authority is given 
authority to regulate or prohibit, for a temporary period, 
vehicular or pedestrian traffic within Wascana Centre on roads, 
streets, or other vehicular areas. This would not be extended to 
parking lots or provincial highways crossing through Wascana. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment will provide Wascana Centre with 
improved authority and management flexibility to ensure that 
uses incompatible with the intent of the centre do not continue, 
and to safely accommodate special events or other public 
gatherings. 
 
I trust the members of the legislature recognize that this authority 
is being given to Wascana Centre and not just to any one of its 
three participating parties; in other words, the centre as a whole. 
 
The third area covered by this Bill is financial. The amendment 
in section 5 will, as for Wakamow and Meewasin Valley 
authorities, limit payments required by statute, pursuant to 
section 53 of the Act, to be made by the participating parties in 
Wascana Centre for the 1987-88, and ’88-89 fiscal years to the 
same amounts that were paid in 1986-87. 
 
This amendment implements the government’s budgetary 
decision announced last year to hold funding provided to the 
urban parks to the same level as in ’86-87 for the time being. 
Extensive consultations with Wascana Centre and the other 
participating parties have occurred regarding this matter, and all 
are in agreement. 
 
The last amendment introduced in this Bill in section 6 extends 
existing legal protection given by the Act to the authority’s 
members, officers, and employees. It covers other positions and 
committees established by the legislation, plus the participating 
parties. This parallels  
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1425 
 

provisions being provided for all three urban park authorities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have to add as well that, as chairman of the 
Wascana Centre Authority, I can tell you that many meetings and 
negotiations have taken place between the three parties, the 
government, the university, the city of Regina. All of us are in 
agreement as to the level of funding. There’s been no particular 
problem with it, and as a matter of fact I’m pleased to tell you 
that last year, and this year as well, Wascana Centre Authority 
has been able to operate and have a surplus. 
 
So that as a result, this measure of restraint that is being practised 
by all three participating parties is a welcome relief to the parties, 
and is having obviously having no effect at all on any of the 
long-term plans at Wascana Centre, nor is it having any effect at 
all on the people that enjoy Wascana Centre, its beauty, and its 
nature. 
 
As a result, Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of Bill No. 
23, a Bill to amend The Wascana Centre Act. And I would 
encourage, in view of my remarks, that all members of this House 
support this Bill. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We find two 
provisions of this Bill objectionable. I want to begin with the 
section which is of a less . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Three, 
I’m reminded by my colleagues. One is the minister who moves 
it. 
 
On a more serious vein though, we have two objections to this. 
One is the section which provides that no member of the 
Authority is liable for anything done unless it was not done in 
good faith — whatever that might mean. I see no reason why 
members of the Authority should not be responsible for the 
consequences of their action, the same as anyone else is, and I 
see no reason why there should be a special case made for this 
Authority. Any member of the public who is injured through the 
negligence of some member of the Authority ought to have the 
normal redress. The employees do not, of course, pay it 
themselves; it’s paid by insurance companies, and I frankly think 
this section simply can not be justified — nor did the minister 
attempt to. 
 
He told me less in his comments than were in the . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well I regret that my remarks have not found 
instant favour with the Minister of Urban Affairs, but I see no 
reason why the members of the public should not be compensated 
for negligent actions done by the members of this Authority, the 
same as any other. 
 
A far more substantial objection is the freeze on the funding. Mr. 
Speaker, the minister stated that the level of maintenance, the 
quality of the centre, had not deteriorated. Mr. Minister, all 
you’ve got to do is walk or drive through that centre in the last 
couple of years to see how badly the Wascana Centre has 
deteriorated. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How come you let your dog run loose 
there? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I have not noted that the member from  

Wascana has been running loose, and I take no responsibility for 
the member of Wascana slipping his leash. I take no 
responsibility for the member of Wascana slipping off his leash. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all one has to do is walk through these grounds to 
see how they’ve deteriorated. The lawn is full of weeds. Last year 
the grounds out in front of this building were frankly an 
embarrassment. There’s more weeds than grass out there. This 
year, I say to the member from Saskatoon who . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I would say, well that’s strange, my remarks are 
not finding favour across the way. I’m heart-broken. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite you, during the next noon hour or so, to take 
a walk around this park and have a look at the lawns. They 
certainly are not what they used to be. 
 
This year — and this may have something to do with an 
impending drought, which the Minister of Urban Affairs may 
recognize, although the Minister of Environment stoutly 
maintains doesn’t exist — the grass is dried. It has not been 
properly looked after. Mr. Speaker, this centre is not being 
maintained the way it once was; it is no longer the object of 
beauty that it once was. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill represents another one of the good ideas, 
which have been in this province for some time which we can 
simply consign to the dustbin of history. And I can think of a 
number of them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Since we have the Minister of Urban Affairs proudly touting this 
Bill, let me use, as an example, revenue sharing. We once used 
to have revenue sharing in this province; we don’t any more. It 
just doesn’t exist; it has been legislated away so long and so many 
years that the program just has ceased to exist in anything but 
name. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we once used to have a funding formula for the 
Wascana Centre, which lay at the base of making this area the 
great centre of beauty it once was. This government has 
legislated that away often enough that I don’t think that basis 
exists any more either. I think now Wascana Centre gets 
whatever this government decides to give it. 
 
The formula which we once had, Mr. Speaker, for funding the 
Wascana Centre, whereby in effect the Wascana Centre, after 
consultation with the various parties, stated its needs and the 
three levels of government anteed up — the first year this 
government unilaterally cut its level of funding. Now we see the 
level of funding being frozen. 
 
I don’t know whether the others agreed to it or not, but I tell you 
one thing, Mr. Speaker: I don’t agree with it. Every time I walk 
through that park and look at the weeds and the dead grass, I say 
that this centre has deteriorated badly, as have so many other 
aspects of life in Saskatchewan. There are so many things which 
used to make this province special — and this centre was one of 
them — which have simply deteriorated under the auspices of 
this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly there ought to be further discussion of this. 
Notwithstanding the minister’s bull-headedness, I get the 
impression he’s thinking better of some of his other  
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1426 
 

poppycock ideas such as the ward system. I get the impression 
the minister is not going to move with that. Maybe, just maybe, 
Mr. Speaker, the minister can be talked out of this as well. I 
therefore beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 26 — An Act to amend The Oil and Gas 
Conservation Act 

 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this evening 
on second reading of Bill No. 26, An Act to amend The Oil and 
Gas Conservation Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Oil and Gas Conservation Act was first 
introduced in this province in this Assembly in approximately 
1952, and it has been amended on various occasions since that 
time, most recently in 1983. 
 
The basic purposes of the Act, Mr. Speaker, are to first of all 
regulate the production of the oil and gas to ensure several things: 
first of all, the ultimate recovery of the resources, to prevent 
waste, and to protect the rights of each owner, and also to protect 
the environment and generally to develop the province’s oil and 
gas resources for the benefit of the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are five main elements of the Bill: number 
one, the requirements to fully implement recent provincial 
natural gas deregulation initiatives; two, the introduction of an 
oil and gas environmental fund; three, a means to address 
problems which can occur in the absence of an oil and gas 
conservation board; number four, the need to regulate waste oil 
processing facilities; and last but not least, Mr. Speaker, there are 
several housekeeping amendments which are required to clarify 
and update various sections of The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, consistent with the national natural gas 
deregulation initiatives, our government announced a two-phase 
approach for deregulating the natural gas market in 
Saskatchewan last year. In accordance with the announcements 
of natural gas deregulation, incidental amendments to the oil and 
gas conservation are required. 
 
The amendments are necessary to provide a clearer legislative 
authority to authorize removal of gas outside of the province and 
to provide for the repeal of regulated pricing provisions 
retroactive to January 1, 1987. Amendments are also required to 
ensure natural gas producers submit all of their required 
information necessary for monitoring the effects and 
developments of deregulation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this year’s budget address the Finance minister 
indicated that the province would be establishing an oil and gas 
environmental fund to replace the outdated well deposit system. 
The Bill before us makes provision for the establishment and 
operation of such a fund. The environmental fund will provide a 
cost-effective means of abandoning non-productive wells in the 
event of financial failure by the operator, and ensuring that the 
surface lease is restored to the satisfaction of the landowner. 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker,  

the fund will allow the government to respond to a major 
environmental problem if liability for the problem could not 
immediately be ascertained. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to make it clear that this new fund, like the 
current well deposit system, does not limit the ultimate 
responsibility of any company to properly abandon and clean up 
oil and gas facilities. The fund will be used as a means of last 
resort once all other avenues of recourse to the government have 
been exhausted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill also includes amendments which will 
address certain problems — problems which occur in the absence 
of an oil and gas conservation board. A board has not been in 
existence in this province for more than 10 years, Mr. Speaker. 
Unfortunately, the lack of a board can present some procedural 
problems in executing the full intent of the Act. The Bill before 
us will allow pooling orders and unit operation order 
amendments to be executed upon the recommendation of either 
such a board, Mr. Speaker, or the Department of Energy and 
Mines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the last few years facilities have been 
established in this province to process waste oil and related 
substances which can be generated through normal oilfield 
activity or operations. And while the Act allows the minister and 
department to regulate wells and facilities directly related to the 
production of oil and gas, that authority does not extend to waste 
processing facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to ensure that these facilities are operated in a safe 
manner, amendments to the Act have been made to provide the 
power to make regulations governing the construction and the 
operation of waste oil processing facilities. These regulations 
will incorporate the general operating guide-lines, which the 
department has attempted to enforce in recent years, without 
having full legislative authority to do so. 
 
And lastly, Mr. Speaker, a number of housekeeping amendments 
have also been included in this Bill to clarify and update the 
intent of the Act. While I will not — and the member from 
Regina Centre will be pleased to hear that — identify all items of 
housekeeping nature at this time, I would like to make note of 
one small but important amendment to the purpose section of this 
Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Although environmental protection has always been considered 
to be a purpose of the Act, it has never been expressly stated in 
the Act. And I am pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that this is now 
contained within the Bill which I presented before the Legislative 
Assembly. With those few comments, Mr. Speaker, I move 
second reading of Bill 26, An Act to amend The Oil and Gas 
Conservation Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 
Energy and Mines has spoken at great length about Bill No. 26, 
An Act to amend The Oil and Gas Conservation Act. She’s 
outlined a plethora of amendments which are wide-sweeping in 
nature. Mr. Speaker, the opposition,  
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1427 
 

and in particular the critic for Energy and Mines, would require 
a considerable amount of time to review the minister’s remarks 
and, perhaps, get back and return to the debate. Therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, I would move that we adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 27 — An Act to adopt the Model Law on 
International Commercial Arbitration 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move today 
second reading of The International Commercial Arbitration Act. 
This Act is being introduced to ensure the effective functioning 
of arbitral proceedings for use between a Saskatchewan 
corporation and a corporation of another jurisdiction. 
 
The new Act implements the model law of international 
commercial arbitration as adopted by the United Nations 
commission on international trade law, effective June 21, 1985. 
This is an international consensus that the model law constitutes 
a modern practical code of procedures and a common means of 
arbitrating commercial disputes. The Act is based on the United 
Nations Model Act and is consistent with the commitment to free 
trade, and it is our belief that it will be well received by the 
business community. Saskatchewan and Ontario, Mr. Speaker, 
are the only two provinces in Canada left to introduce this Bill. 
 
The Act provides that if an action is brought before a court and 
the matter is subject to an arbitration agreement, the court shall, 
upon request of one of the parties to the agreement, refer the 
matter to arbitration. The proposed Act will provide grounds to 
refuse to recognize or to enforce the award of arbitrational 
tribunals. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an Act that was lobbied on us by the various 
body of the Canadian Bar Association now involved in 
commercial transactions involved with arbitration. As I indicated 
in the text, only Saskatchewan and Ontario have not yet 
introduced it. I’m advised that Ontario is also about to introduce 
this legislation. That would mean all provinces in Canada would 
now have this model law with regard to arbitration. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I must begin, Mr. Speaker, by admitting I 
don’t totally understand this Bill. However, I’m relieved to hear 
that the minister doesn’t understand it at all. I think that’s the 
conclusion to be drawn from his speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is apparent that the legislation is being introduced 
in concert with other provinces and the national government as 
part of a nation-wide effort to facilitate arbitration between 
corporations which work internationally. So I say, I don’t 
understand, the minister didn’t either, but I’m prepared to trust 
other provinces and the federal government who presumably 
have taken the lead on the thing. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend The Matrimonial Property 
Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — This particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, is a 
minor amendment to The Matrimonial Property Act, and the 
prime rationale of this particular amendment is as follows: that 
under the changes to the Canada Pension Plan the legislation put 
forward in parliament would equally divide up, in the event of a 
marriage breakdown, the pension benefits 50-50. 
 
What this legislation would allow for, Mr. Speaker, is to 
accommodate agreements between separating spouses in order to 
deal with the pension benefits in the same manner they might 
deal with other property. It seems like an appropriate Bill to move 
a minor amendment. I would hope all parties of this Assembly 
would support this legislation. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, I say to the Assembly, we don’t have 
any objection to this Bill and will not be opposing it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 29 — An Act respecting the Convention Between 
Canada and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 

Northern Ireland providing for the Reciprocal Recognition 
and Enforcement of Judgements in Civil and Commercial 

Matters 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, this Act is being introduced 
to insure implementation of the 1984 Canada-United Kingdom 
judgements convention. The new Act adopts the Canada-U.K. 
judgement convention which applies to the recognition and 
enforcement of normal, civil, and commercial money 
judgements. The convention has no application to matters of 
family law, taxation, legal status, succession law, and 
bankruptcy. 
 
It states grounds for refusing to recognize a judgement, and 
circumstances in which the court rendering the judgement shall 
be regarded as having jurisdiction. The Act protects 
Saskatchewan residents with assets in Great Britain from having 
a foreign judgement enforced against their assets abroad. The Act 
is uniform across Canadian jurisdictions and was drafted by the 
Uniform Law Conference of Canada. Four other provinces have 
already enacted the legislation, and the convention is now 
operative in those provinces. 
 
Provision of the convention reflects the principle of existing 
British and Canadian law in this area, which means that the Act 
represents consolidation of the law and not a fundamental change 
in the law. 
 
With that, I move second reading. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — This time I’ll give the minister a bit of credit; 
I think he may have understood this one. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, follows the normal precepts of international 
law and the practice of countries in the western world. We’re not 
going to oppose it. 
 
  



 
May 17, 1988 

 

1428 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? Order, 
order. Order. The member from Regina Centre has just had an 
opportunity to make his remarks, and now I’d like his 
co-operation. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:20 p.m. 
 
 


