


















































June 6, 1988 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 6, 1988 
 

1867 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 55 — An Act to establish the Public Participation 
Program (continued) 

 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, before supper break I was 
talking about some of the examples of privatization on the part 
of this government, and I mentioned that the minister of 
privatization, the other day in his remarks, referred to a couple 
of examples of privatization. 
 
I was talking about the privatization of PAPCO (Prince Albert 
Pulp Company) to Weyerhaeuser and how, in fact, the 
Government of Saskatchewan had entered into a deal with 
Weyerhaeuser to sell, to Weyerhaeuser, PAPCO for the amount 
of $248 million. And when the minister made his 
announcement a few weeks ago, we learned that because of a 
re-evaluation of assets, apparently, the deal wasn’t really a $248 
million deal but a $236 million deal — another gift to 
Weyerhaeuser. 
 
And I also mentioned previously that the member from Indian 
Head-Wolseley, the minister of privatization, did not, in his 
remarks, refer to the fact that Weyerhaeuser received PAPCO at 
a below market value price, that the provincial government 
guaranteed a $248 million loan to PAPCO, and they also 
guaranteed a further loan of $83 million for PAPCO — some 
privatization deal. 
 
Then I went on to talk about the sell-off of the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation drag-line to Manalta Coal of Alberta. And 
here we have another example of privatization gone awry. A 
$45 million drag-line was sold to Manalta Coal of Alberta and 
we, in fact, lent Manalta the money to finance the deal. This 
deal goes on because the Progressive Conservative government 
sold the Saskatchewan Power Poplar River coal mine when, in 
fact, the assessed value of the assets was some $129 million; 
they sold it for $102 million, and the province lent Manalta 
Coal a further $89 million. On top of all of that, we entered into 
a 30-year contract with Manalta for coal supply to repurchase 
all of the coal that we already owned. 
 
And I know, Mr. Speaker, that the minister likes to talk about 
his privatization goals of encouraging more Saskatchewan 
ownership of Saskatchewan public assets. And I will therefore 
await with some interest his explanation of why in this case PC 
privatization meant taking an asset that was totally owned by 
the people of this province and selling it off at a fire sale price 
to an out-of-province corporation, a private corporation in 
which not one single Saskatchewan person owns a single share. 
And it’s no wonder, Mr. Speaker, that when people consider 
that particular example of privatization — the sell-off of the 
drag-line and the Poplar River coal mine — they quickly 
conclude that Manalta Coal got the coal mine and we got the 
shaft. 
 
I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that the PC back-benchers noticed that 
the minister did not try to justify the PC privatization of Saskoil 
as one of his success stories — and no wonder.  

And I’d like you to consider the following facts. From the 
outset, Saskoil was an excellent example of the practical 
approach to the Saskatchewan mixed economy. It was a 
made-in-Saskatchewan solution. It was developed here in 
Saskatchewan, by Saskatchewan people. It was our initiative, it 
was our risk, and it was our accomplishment — and it was 
indeed a proud and successful accomplishment. From the two 
years prior to PC privatization of Saskoil, Saskoil made profits 
of $85 million — $85 million in profits in just two years. And 
every single dollar of profit was available for the people of 
Saskatchewan to help finance public services like health and 
education. 
 
But then along came the PC privatization of Saskoil and in the 
two years since then, that privatized corporation has not paid 
one single dollar of earnings to the Saskatchewan treasury. 
Private shareholders have received some handsome dividends, 
even though most of them live outside of Saskatchewan — but 
not one single dollar from Saskoil to the provincial treasury. Or 
perhaps the minister would like to justify how his slogan of 
public participation meant that three-quarters of the privately 
owned shares of Saskoil are now held by people outside of 
Saskatchewan. Or maybe the minister of privatization could 
explain how this particular privatization meant job loss for 
Saskatchewan people. Within a few months after the 
privatization of Saskoil, 25 per cent of the jobs in Saskoil were 
lost. Yet this company, this privatized Saskoil, has chosen to 
spend some $66 million to purchase an Alberta oil company. 
Alberta jobs, but not Saskatchewan jobs — that’s what PC 
privatization of Saskoil has meant. 
 
And let me cite another example of the PC government’s 
privatization, and that’s the privatization of SED Systems in 
Saskatoon. This was a proud and unique Saskatchewan 
high-tech company, initially established on the campus of the 
University of Saskatchewan and based on research and 
development funded by the public sector. It quickly became 
successful and sought equity investment from the university 
itself and from the province of Saskatchewan. But then the PC 
privatization ideology claimed yet another victim. The PC 
government sold its shares, or should I say exchanged its shares 
in SED Systems — and took a loss — to an out-of-province 
corporation by the name of Fleet Aerospace from Ontario. 
 
And what was the result of this particular PC privatization? 
Seventy jobs were lost in the city of Saskatoon when the new 
Ontario owners forced lay-offs. And what else happened? This 
Ontario company blackmailed the provincial government, and 
they blackmailed the provincial government in February of this 
year. The chairman of Fleet Aerospace in Ontario stated quite 
bluntly that he was insisting on still more financial assistance 
from the Saskatchewan taxpayers. In an interview in the 
Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, he was remarkably candid and he 
stated, and I quote: 
 

The message to the government is, we better get some 
financial help and some help quick. If we don’t have help, 
we’ll cut it right back again and again, and we may even 
move it if we have to. 

  



 
June 6, 1988 

1868 
 

The PC government still had not learned the painful lesson from 
this example of privatization, so they came through with a 
further $10 million for Fleet Aerospace of Ontario at the 
expense of Saskatchewan taxpayers. That’s what PC 
privatization has produced in this case — a sell-off of a 
successful Saskatchewan-based, high-tech company to Ontario 
investors. It has meant job loss in Saskatchewan, it has meant 
loss of control over the high-tech industry in our province, and 
it has also meant blackmail. 
 
Well let’s talk about another privatization. I’d like the minister 
of privatization to explain a little more about his privatization of 
Saskatchewan Minerals. Here was a highly successful 
Saskatchewan resource company, producing steady profits for 
more than 40 years, and it’s suddenly sold to two 
out-of-province corporations, one from Ontario and one from 
Quebec. 
 
The minister likes to talk about his public participation and 
opportunities for Saskatchewan ownership of public assets. But 
was there any consultation with the communities or the workers 
affected? The answer is no. Did he advertise those assets for 
sale to give local businesses, Saskatchewan businesses, a 
chance to bid on them? The answer is no. Can he explain why 
he has sold off these Saskatchewan assets, privatized them so 
they are no longer owned or controlled in our province, so that 
any future profits from those assets will go to people living 
outside of our province? 
 
I’d like the minister of privatization to explain that. The 
minister of privatization can’t because the minister of 
privatization does not have an explanation. 
 
Then I noted that in his remarks on the Bill, Mr. Speaker, the 
minister mentioned with some apparent pride his sell-off of 
Saskatchewan COMP and a major portion of SaskTel assets. 
But I was wondering why the minister did not tell the whole 
story, Mr. Speaker. Why did he fail to mention that this deal 
was cooked up in secret with no opportunity for other 
Saskatchewan businesses to participate from the beginning? 
Why did he fail to explain the intimate involvement of Urban 
Donlevy of Saskatoon through Mercury Graphics? Why did he 
fail to explain the cosy relationship between the Minister of 
Finance and his law partner, Peter Whitmore, who practised 
under the firm name of Lane & Whitmore? And why did he fail 
to explain the cosy involvement of Regina realtor Gavin Koyl 
or the PC business man from Yorkton, Ray Malinowski, whose 
PC political connections are well-known? The minister of 
privatization didn’t explain those issues whatsoever. 
 
The PC privatization of SaskCOMP, Mr. Speaker, has thus far 
been a shameful story of PC private deals. These have been in 
private, they’re secret deals, and they are secret. If the minister 
of privatization chooses to deny that allegation, I invite him to 
table today, in this legislature, all of the documents and 
agreements associated with this deal. 
 
Now let me turn for a moment, Mr. Speaker, to some additional 
examples that the minister does not want to address in his 
discussion of privatization — examples of what has happened 
when the PC government has  

privatized public services. 
 
We all know in this province that four or five years ago they 
privatized the Highways operations. They liberated the workers 
to go to the private sector — so claimed the former member 
from Wilkie, Mr. Garner. This was the callous and ineloquent 
way the PC minister described it. But what about the quality of 
public services and what about the quality of our highways? 
Will the Minister of privatization or will any of his rural 
back-benchers dare to stand in their place in this Assembly and 
try to pretend that PC privatization has somehow improved our 
highway system? They dare not even try, for PC privatization of 
highways has meant not only lost jobs but also reduced services 
and poor highways — highways that have never been seen like 
this in the history of the province. 
 
Or will the minister of privatization try to justify his 
privatization of the provincial park services, which has been a 
disaster for his government and for Saskatchewan people? PC 
privatization of provincial park services has meant private 
profits for a few investors, some of whom are Conservative 
friends — they have not been tendered on many occasions — 
lost jobs for Saskatchewan men and women, and reduced park 
services and higher costs for families. All you have to do is go 
into any park, anywhere; go into any ski hill anywhere; and you 
can see what PC privatization has meant. It has meant a 
reduction in park services at higher prices for Saskatchewan 
families. 
 
I particularly noted that the minister did not even try to use the 
example of PC privatization of the children’s school-based 
dental plan to justify his ideology, to explain his policy, and to 
sell his privatization efforts. And it’s not surprising, it’s really 
not surprising that he wouldn’t, for the PC government’s attack 
on medicare, their attack on the prescription drug plan, and their 
elimination of the highly successful school-based children’s 
dental plan, are the single most striking examples of their 
privatization at work. 
 
Let’s just consider the facts for a moment, Mr. Speaker, and I 
especially invite the PC back-benchers opposite to consider 
these facts. The children’s school-based dental plan was a 
popular and successful Saskatchewan medicare program. It was 
particularly important for rural families and rural communities. 
It was a unique, made-in-Saskatchewan, medicare solution. We 
were the people that created the program. We created the 
program under the auspices of medicare for Saskatchewan 
families. 
 
(1915) 
 
And was there any public participation before this program was 
eliminated? No, there wasn’t. And was there any significant 
economic or cost-saving reasons for its elimination? No. And 
has there been so-called public participation or increased 
individual ownership since the dental plan was eliminated? No. 
And has the service improved? Absolutely not; it has not 
improved, not at all. And did this example of PC privatization 
create any new jobs, Mr. Minister of privatization? It lost 411 
jobs, and it hurt Saskatchewan families and it hurt 
Saskatchewan  
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1869 
 

working women. 
 
And in short, Mr. Speaker, I’m not surprised that the minister of 
privatization is embarrassed to admit this elimination of the 
dental plan as the most outstanding example of his PC 
privatization. For he should, and he should be indeed 
embarrassed and ashamed. For in this case, privatization has 
meant an attack on important medicare service, it has meant 
reduced services to rural families in rural Saskatchewan, and the 
sudden and unjustified firing of more than 400 dedicated and 
professional dental plan workers. 
 
And for tens of thousands of Saskatchewan children, for 
thousands of Saskatchewan families, and for more than 300 
Saskatchewan communities and for more than 400 
Saskatchewan working people, Mr. Speaker, this will for ever 
be the single most striking and most telling example of PC 
privatization — the attack on medicare and the elimination of 
the children’s dental plan. 
 
And there are other examples of the PC privatization record, 
Mr. Speaker. And in the weeks and the months ahead, 
Saskatchewan people will be reminded of them and reminded of 
them often, for every time they hear this PC privatization 
minister and this PC government try desperately to sell their 
myth of privatization. 
 
I want to, for a moment, comment on the contents of the Bill 
itself, and I’d like us to consider, in a general way, in the 
second reading debate, the privatization Bill — the privatization 
omnibus Bill introduced by the minister of privatization. It is 
indeed an omnibus Bill, and it is a very troubling and omnibus 
Bill, Mr. Speaker. For in this Bill, in this Bill the Minister of 
Public Participation, or privatization, and the government are 
seeking to give to themselves almost unprecedented, broad and 
sweeping powers to implement their privatization ideology. 
They give themselves the power to do whatever they want, 
whenever they want, however they want, to whomever they 
want, and for whomever they want. That’s what this PC 
privatization Bill does. 
 
This is about privatization deals in private. This is about 
privatization deals in secret. This is about privatization deals 
that are done in the dark, or done behind closed cabinet doors. It 
has to do with power. It has to do with corporate power. It has 
to do with the corporatization of the Saskatchewan economy, 
and it has to do with changing the structure of our economy for 
ever. That’s what this Bill is all about. 
 
Now the minister of privatization tries to explain away this 
privatization Bill by pretending it’s a nice, innocent, and not 
even really that necessary, but no one believes him. And I ask 
the minister of privatization these simple questions: why does 
he try to pretend that he somehow needed a special Bill in order 
to set up his department of privatization? No such Bill is 
necessary — Bill 5 gives you that authority, and it gave you that 
authority two months after you were elected in 1986. Why does 
this minister of privatization pretend that his Bill is necessary in 
order to deal with early retirement of workers whose jobs will 
be lost as a result of PC privatization? Over the past few years, 
the PC government has had several early retirement schemes 
and none of them required special  

legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, either this Bill does not give to the minister and 
the cabinet any additional powers which they do not already 
have, in which case this Bill is totally unnecessary and the 
minister should admit it and withdraw it — or, in the 
alternative, this Bill does indeed, as I submit, give to the 
minister and the cabinet more power, much more power, to 
implement their privatization ideology behind closed doors, 
without open scrutiny by the people of our province and 
without accountability to Saskatchewan people. The minister of 
privatization can’t have it both ways. Either this Bill gives him 
no new powers, in which case it should be withdrawn; or it does 
indeed give him a wide range of almost unlimited new powers 
to act in secret, arbitrarily, without debate in this legislature and 
without public scrutiny. 
 
It should also be pointed out, Mr. Speaker, that this 
privatization Bill purports to be all inclusive. It purports to 
cover the privatization of every single public facility and public 
asset in Saskatchewan, and every single public service now 
offered in Saskatchewan. Absolutely nothing is safe from this 
Tory privatization fad, this Tory privatization frenzy. 
 
I’d ask the minister to answer these questions. Does this Bill 
exclude hospitals, or the provincial laboratory, or the school for 
the deaf? The answer is no. The minister considers those to be 
fair targets for his privatization ideology. Does the Bill exclude 
hospitalization insurance, medicare insurance, and the 
prescription drug plan? No. They are clearly included under this 
privatization Bill because the PC government also considers 
them to be fair targets for privatization. 
 
Does this Bill exclude basic legal services, or the court system, 
or the land titles offices? No, Mr. Speaker. They are clearly 
included, for the PC government also considers them to be 
targets for the PC privatization. Or does this Bill exclude basic 
auto insurance services, or SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance), or basic telephone services, or the basic services 
offered by SaskPower, Mr. Speaker? No. They too are all 
clearly included under the purpose and scope of this Bill, for the 
PC government also considers them as well to be targets for PC 
privatization. 
 
What then is excluded from the scope of this sinister and 
alarming Bill? I would submit that absolutely nothing, nothing 
in this province, is excluded from its scope, Mr. Speaker, 
absolutely nothing. Every government department and agency 
and Crown corporation and public service and public asset is 
open for the government to privatize. Every single 
Saskatchewan publicly owned facility, every single 
Saskatchewan public service is a target, a victim of the PC 
privatization ideology. 
 
I would urge you, Mr. Speaker, to take great care, for even the 
official mace on the Table of this Assembly and even this 
Legislative Building in which we speak today are not excluded 
from the PC privatization Bill and they’re not excluded from 
the scope of this Bill. 
 
Now I fully expect that in his remarks to close this debate, 
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1870 
 

the minister will try to assert that I am exaggerating, and that’s 
fine. But let him prove it. Let him stand in his place in this 
Assembly and state clearly just exactly what facilities, what 
assets, and what services he considers to be outside the scope of 
this Bill. And I predict, Mr. Speaker, that when that minister 
stands in his place that he will not be able to name a single, 
solitary thing that’s held in the public sector — not whatsoever. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to turn just for a moment to what 
even the minister of privatization must recognize as a major 
weakness in his position, and that’s the actual record of PC 
privatization. I propose to consider that record very briefly 
under three headings: job loss, revenues lost, and the PC deficit. 
 
Now let’s first consider the jobs — lost jobs, lost job 
opportunities, lost job security. Now the minister may try to 
boast about new jobs he hopes to obtain, but that is no comfort 
for the many hundreds of families who’ve actually been 
victimized by this government’s fad of privatization. They’ve 
been victimized through job losses. 
 
The minister of privatization in his remarks the other day in 
second readings said, oh, but we’ve got 200 jobs — we’ve got 
150 jobs at Weyerhaeuser; we’ve got 50 jobs at SaskCOMP. I 
want to review for everyone what privatization has meant in 
this province. When they privatized SED Systems in Saskatoon, 
70 jobs were lost; when they privatized the Highways 
maintenance work, over 400 jobs were lost; and when they 
eliminated the school-based children’s dental plan, 411 people 
lost their jobs; and when they sold off Saskoil, within months, 
25 per cent of the Saskoil labour force lost their jobs. 
 
Then, of course, there have been jobs lost in parks when they 
moved to privatize parks across this province. And now still 
more Saskatchewan families are threatened by job loss because 
of the privatization Bill now before us. That’s what 
Saskatchewan people know, Mr. Speaker, when they try to tell 
the PC government that privatization isn’t working. The 
minister can talk about his 200 jobs, but they know that 
thousands of jobs have been lost in this province because of PC 
privatization. 
 
I want to talk about the revenues. There’s the issue of public 
revenues being lost, Mr. Speaker, and let’s just consider a 
couple of examples. Last year, Saskatchewan Mining and 
Development Corporation made a profit for the people of this 
province of over $60 million. Every single dollar of profit was 
available to pay for public services like health and education. 
This government will be introducing a Bill to sell off 
Saskatchewan Mining and Development Corporation. 
 
This government has acknowledged in Crown Corporations 
Committee that the long-term debt of over $300 million will be 
gone in a couple of years from Saskatchewan Mining and 
Development Corporation. With 85 per cent of the uranium 
contracted, the province of Saskatchewan, through 
Saskatchewan Mining and Development Corporation, the 
treasury of Saskatchewan stands to gain over $100 million in 
profits. That’s a tremendous amount of money to pay for health 
and education. When these people are done, when they  

privatize Saskatchewan Mining and Development Corporation, 
there will not be those kinds of revenues available to the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
In the two years before Saskatchewan Oil was privatized, it 
made a total profit of $85 million. Every single dollar of profit 
was available to be used for all of Saskatchewan people for 
important public services. But since the PC government 
privatized Saskoil, not one single dollar has been paid in 
dividends to the provincial treasury — not one single dollar. 
But dividends have been paid to the private investors, 75 per 
cent of whom live outside of Saskatchewan. Those investors 
have received dividends from a Saskatchewan-based, a former 
publicly owned company. And do they pay income tax on those 
dividends in Saskatchewan? No, they do not. 
 
Then the minister of privatization boasts about his sell-off of 
Sask Minerals to two non-Saskatchewan corporations for less 
than $16 million. But that’s how much profit Sask Minerals 
made in the last six years for the treasury, and any future profits 
Sask Minerals make will go out of province and not to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Over the past five years, SaskCOMP, which I referred to earlier, 
has made total profits of $16 million — all available for 
important public services. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, in 1987 the PAPCO assets, which the PC 
government privatized, earned profits of more than $62 million 
— $62 million in one year alone from those assets. That PC 
privatization has given away to an American corporation, and 
are those profits staying in Saskatchewan? No, they’re going to 
Tacoma, Washington. That’s money that our provincial treasury 
could have had to pay for home care and health care, and 
there’s no reason why we have hospital waiting lists in this 
province. There’s no reason why we have waiting lists for 
cancer treatment. And if there is any reason, it’s because this 
government is single handedly giving away all of our assets or 
selling off assets that could be making money to pay for 
important public programs like health care. And it’s absolutely 
irresponsible. 
 
And the list of these privatizations and the revenues that we’ve 
lost go on and on. But the central point of all of this is either we 
can use the profits from these public assets and facilities to help 
pay for public services like medicare and other programs, or the 
PC government can sell off these assets such that henceforward 
all profits will go only to a few private corporations and 
wealthy investors. In that case, Mr. Speaker, provincial 
government revenues will be substantially reduced, and the 
difference will have to be made up in higher taxes on 
Saskatchewan businesses and Saskatchewan families. And that, 
Mr. Speaker, is the price of PC privatization. Higher taxes — 
that will be the price. The people of Saskatchewan are trying to 
tell this government that the price is unacceptable. 
 
(1930) 
 
Let me turn, just for a moment, Mr. Speaker, to the problem of 
the PC deficit. Now the minister may try to pretend or to argue 
that his privatization policy has been designed to reduce the PC 
deficit, but as is so often the case with the minister’s argument, 
Mr. Speaker, the facts  
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1871 
 

are otherwise. 
 
In 1983 they privatized SaskPower assets, and their deficit 
increased. In 1984 they privatized Highways’ operations and 
more Saskatchewan Power Corporation assets, and their PC 
deficit increased again. In 1985 they privatized Saskoil, and 
their deficit increased. And in 1986 they privatized PAPCO, 
and the deficit went up again. And in 1987 they privatized SED 
Systems and the dental plan, and the PC deficit ballooned to 
more than $1 billion. And in 1988 they privatized Sask 
Minerals, SaskCOMP, and a major portion of SaskTel and a 
hug portion of SaskPower, and the PC deficit now amounts to 
more than $3.6 billion. 
 
The PC deficit, Mr. Speaker, has been caused by an 
incompetent, and it’s been caused by a mismanagement type of 
government. And their privatization policy has been part of the 
problem and not part of the solution. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take just a moment to comment 
on what the privatization minister has identified as his 
objectives, what he has set out is the criteria by which he thinks 
his privatization should be judged. The minister did so in his 
press release in March of this year. He cited as his criteria 
increased employment, individual ownership, and improved 
public services. 
 
And how is he doing, according to those criteria, according to 
those tests? With respect to the jobs tests, the minister has 
clearly been a failure and this government has been a failure. 
And with respect to the individual ownership test, he has failed 
as well. 
 
Time and time again, PC privatization has meant the sell-off of 
public assets to private corporations and a few wealthy 
investors, and not to Saskatchewan people. And with respect to 
improved public services, the minister and his privatization 
policy have also failed. There is no one in this province that 
believes public services have been enhanced since this 
provincial government has come into power in 1982. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are the minister’s own criteria, those are his 
tests, and in every single case, Mr. Speaker, privatization has 
failed. He has not created jobs, he has not created personal 
ownership in Saskatchewan, and he has not enhanced public 
services. The minister of privatization is a failure and the 
Government of Saskatchewan is a failure. 
 
Now in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, the privatization Bill before us 
today is a bad Bill. It’s based on bad policy, and it’s based on a 
silly and stupid ideology. And despite the minister’s gimmicky 
slogan, privatization is not the Saskatchewan way. On the 
contrary, PC privatization is a betrayal of the Saskatchewan 
experience; it’s a betrayal of the Saskatchewan tradition of the 
mixed economy; it is a betrayal of our traditions; and it is a 
betrayal of our history. 
 
PC privatization runs counter to the Saskatchewan way of doing 
things. It is based solely on a foreign and alien ideology 
imported by outside right-wing political advisers who have no 
roots in this province and no  

understanding of this province. The goal of PC privatization is 
to turn back the clock, to turn back the clock to the minister’s 
favourite decade, the 1890s, and to turn away from our history 
and our potential and our future. The goal of their privatization 
is to transform Saskatchewan into a mini New York Stock 
Exchange governed by greed and self-interest alone. Their 
privatization goal is to enable those who have much already to 
make further personal gain at public expense, and to provide 
nothing at all to those who have little. 
 
And the minister of Meadow Lake better listen, the minister 
from Meadow Lake better listen and quit chirping from his seat 
because that minister knows fully well what privatization has 
meant in our health care system. Privatization has meant the 
elimination of the dental plan; privatization has meant the 
destruction of a prescription drug plan; privatization has meant 
more than 11,000 people on a hospital waiting list in Saskatoon; 
and privatization has meant people waiting for cancer treatment. 
 
That Minister of Health is creating a two-tier health care system 
in this province. Those that have money have access to services 
and those that don’t, don’t. And the Minister of Health laughs 
and giggles in this legislature, and the Minister of Health better 
learn quickly that unless his government has revenues to pay for 
important public programs like health and education, that 
Minister of Health will soon become a teacher back in Meadow 
Lake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — As I said, Mr. Speaker, the goal of their 
privatization is to fulfil their promise of open for big business in 
order that foreign corporations and outside investors can come 
in here and buy out Saskatchewan at give-away prices. And, 
finally, Mr. Speaker, their privatization goal is to be free from 
public scrutiny, free from the necessity for public tendering, and 
free from public accountability in order that they may make 
privatization deals in private, behind closed cabinet doors — 
secret deals done in secret. 
 
And their privatization record is poor. Their privatization record 
is an embarrassment to them, and they are an embarrassment to 
the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — They are ashamed — and quite 
understandably so — of their privatization of the children’s 
dental plan. And they know that their privatization of PAPCO 
assets to Weyerhaeuser was unpopular. It remains unpopular, 
and has convinced the people that the major beneficiary of the 
deal was the Weyerhaeuser corporation itself, based in Tacoma, 
Washington. 
 
They are embarrassed and ashamed that, to date, every single 
example of privatization has meant one of three things. It has 
meant lost jobs, lost assets and revenues, lost ownership and 
control for Saskatchewan people. They know that the vast 
majority of the people of our province are opposed to the PC 
style of privatization. And they  
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1872 
 

know that those in favour of it include the inner circle of PC 
Party friends, PC big business associates, and PC political 
cronies. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, in order to minimize the political damage 
to the PC Party, in order to implement their PC privatization 
strategy and ideology in secret, away from public scrutiny, they 
now have introduced this alarming and sweeping privatization 
Bill now before us today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ideology on which this Bill is based is 
unsound. The PC policy on which the privatization Bill is based 
is unjustifiable. The privatization Bill itself is unacceptable. PC 
privatization is a sell-out of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
betrayal of Saskatchewan people. It may be a part of the PC 
Party past but it holds out absolutely no hope for 
Saskatchewan’s future. For those reasons, Mr. Speaker, my 
colleagues and I will be opposing this privatization deal. 
 
And I just want to say one final thing. In 1990 or in 1991, when 
we become the Government of Saskatchewan, I want to serve 
notice on the members opposite that we will be scrutinizing 
every solitary privatization deal that these people enter into. We 
will be looking over every privatization deal in order to ensure 
that Saskatchewan people have not been taken to the cleaners. 
And I want the members opposite to remember that. I want the 
members opposite to be aware of that. I want them to know that 
they better be careful. They better be careful. 
 
There are people in this province that think that there should be 
a public inquiry into their operations, there should be a public 
inquiry into the way they’ve misused the public purse. There 
are people who want to have a major public inquiry to see what 
sort of shenanigans have been done by the members opposite. 
And there are some people in this province that believe if they 
have misused government funds that they should be held 
accountable for it, and if necessary they should do a little bit of 
time. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a bad Bill; this is a bad Bill. It does 
nothing other than destroy the very foundation of the people of 
this province. It goes against our history. It goes against our 
tradition. It goes against our values. And for those reasons and 
because of all the privatization deals that have gone amok and 
gone astray, the members of our side of the legislature, and the 
members of the New Democratic Party, strongly oppose this 
legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — I would move that I adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 37 — An Act to Provide for Security for 
Saskatchewan Family Farms 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, in moving second reading 
of The Saskatchewan Farm Security act, I would like to first of 
all try to put in perspective the serious difficulties that are faced 
by the Saskatchewan farmer and by Saskatchewan agriculture 
today. 

The challenges that many farmers in this province face are 
challenges that are both of a . . . both by nature and by 
economics, Mr. Speaker. Obviously we all know and see on a 
daily basis today the impact that nature can have when it 
doesn’t rain in many parts of the province, when we find 
ourselves without rain and with very severe temperatures. 
Clearly, we have a problem in our agriculture industry and 
agriculture sector. One would hope that, one would hope that 
that cycle will soon part from us and we can see some solutions 
to that. 
 
In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, this government, through the 
various existing forms, whether it’s crop insurance or other 
programs announced by various ministers of this government, 
or programs to be announced in the very near future with regard 
to that particular problem, will be able to at least and in part 
offset some of the great damage that has come with that severe 
weather condition. 
 
The other problems are economic in nature, Mr. Speaker. And I 
think they fall in basically two categories: one is the world 
commodity prices for many of the products that we in this 
province produce and have traditionally produced for a long 
period of time; and number two is the question of farm debt. 
 
Let me turn first and briefly to the question of farm commodity 
prices and the world-wide collapse of farm commodity prices. 
What we have seen throughout the 1980s is a very significant, 
very dramatic drop in the commodity prices for wheat, oats, 
barley, and any other grains or cereal crops that are being 
produced in this province over a long period of time. Now I 
suppose there’s a large number of reasons one could advance 
for that drop in commodity prices. The long and the short has 
been that the world was encouraged, for a variety of reasons, to 
increase production. And the agriculture sector of the world has, 
in fact, increased its production and increased it significantly, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me put it into context of what we are talking about. The 
largest increase in production of wheat has come by the 
Europeans. If you were to compare the production levels . . . 
And you can take any year, but let’s go by comparison: 
1975-76, the Europeans have increased their wheat production 
from ’75-76 to this year, ’87-88, from 40 million tonnes to 72 
million tonnes. That is an increase of 32 million tonnes of grain, 
of wheat, being produced by the Europeans. If we put that into 
perspective, Canada during that same period of time increased 
their production from 17 million to 26 million tonnes of wheat. 
 
(1945) 
 
What we see, Mr. Speaker, is the following: the Europeans 
through their subsidy programs have increased the amount of 
wheat that they produce to a level . . . The increase in the last 19 
years is greater than the entire production of wheat in all of 
Canada. The Americans during that same period of time have 
remained relatively constant in their production at about 57 
million tonnes. Mr. Speaker, the Europeans have now surpassed 
. . . They have now surpassed Canada for some time; the 
Europeans have now surpassed the Americans as  
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1873 
 

larger producers of wheat than do the Americans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Europeans not 15 years ago were one of the 
largest markets for Canadian wheat. They are now probably our 
most difficult competitor that we have. Mr. Speaker, that has 
been done to a large degree by the advent of subsidies in 
Europe. Today, the European farmer receives a $170 a tonne 
subsidy where the Canadian farmer receives an $80 a tonne 
subsidy. That, Mr. Speaker, even though we have a significant 
amount of subsidy programs — significant amount of subsidy 
programs to our farmers and our farm community. Mr. Speaker, 
the European farmer now is receiving a guaranteed price, for all 
the grain he produces, in excess of $7.30 a bushel — $7.30 a 
bushel. And that, of course, creates a significant pressure on the 
European to grow more and more wheat. And I would ask and 
challenge all people, when they look at these numbers, to 
seriously look at where the increase has been, where the highest 
subsidies are, and therefore come to grips with that question. 
Mr. Speaker, the farmers of Saskatchewan obviously wish to 
see some progress on that front. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is our hope and the hope, I think, of most of the 
producers of much of the world, that that resolve itself in the 
near term. I suspect that that near term would at best be the end 
of this GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) round, 
which would end in 1990. And therefore between now and 
1990, we are going to have to, as Canadian and Saskatchewan 
farmers, face ongoing subsidies and ongoing subsidy battles 
between the Americans and the Europeans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the same time that prices for our agricultural 
commodities fell, we saw interest rates go up, and those interest 
rates went up to a level of almost 20 per cent. And many of the 
farmers who now face the farm debt question, prior to 1980, 
prior to 1980, did not have the type of problems that we see 
today. 
 
There is some concern now on the international scene, or at the 
national scene, that the Bank of Canada, along with the central 
banks of many other countries, are looking seriously at raising 
interest rates. The justification for it in this country is to 
somehow slow down the buoyant economy of Ontario and 
perhaps at the expense of others. So as grain prices fell, interest 
rates rose — factors over which the farmer and most Canadians 
had very little impact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during that same period of time, what we saw is, 
the value of land in the 1980s in Saskatchewan dropped in 
many areas as much as 100 per cent or more. And obviously 
that’s seriously eroded the equity base of many, many farmers. 
Retiring farmers, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
And the member opposite says we would . . . we would not be 
exaggerating. Mr. Speaker, in the area that I represent the price 
of land was selling for $1,200 an acre back in 1980; it now sells 
for, at best, $400 an acre. Mr. Speaker, that is far more than a 
100 per cent drop in the selling value of farm land. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what you see, then, is the farmer that looks to 
retire now has lost much of the base which he used for his 
retirement fund. Many of the young farmers are finding it 
difficult to obtain credit. Many of the existing  

farmers, Mr. Speaker, that traditionally had no problem 
financing in any given year, are now being called upon to lodge 
or mortgage more and more of their farm land just to obtain 
operating loans, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The farm debt in Saskatchewan has grown to a level of now in 
the range of $6.5 billion. Mr. Speaker, it will take a great deal 
of effort by the farm community, by the financial institutions, 
and by government, both at the local, at the provincial, and at 
the national level, to come to grips with the farm crisis that is 
now real and it is urgent. We cannot wait, Mr. Speaker, for this 
year to end or for the drought to end or for the prices to go up. 
Mr. Speaker, something must be done now. Mr. Speaker, let me 
say initially, Mr. Speaker, that the solution to the crisis, to the 
farm crisis lies beyond the borders of Saskatchewan and, in 
fact, lies beyond the borders of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, virtually everyone in the farming community 
believes that the solution lies in increasing the commodity 
prices, rising to a level that any farmer that can farm his land in 
a proper way should get a proper return for that dollar, Mr. 
Speaker, and that means the end of the subsidy wars if that is to 
come to grips with that question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to look at and go through the 
legislation, but before I do that, I would like to set out to the 
Assembly a solution that has been used in many other 
jurisdictions, including the United States, including the 
jurisdictions of Australia and New Zealand, and including some 
of the jurisdictions of Europe. It’s what is referred to, Mr. 
Speaker, as the chapter 12 solution, to deal with the farm-debt 
crisis. 
 
What the chapter 12 is, is a copy of the American bankruptcy 
law that allows farmers to file bankruptcy court, wherein the 
bankruptcy court can rewrite the value of that land and therefore 
rewrite the value of that mortgage down to its fair market value. 
We do not have the capacity or the power to do that in 
Saskatchewan. That power rests under our constitution with the 
federal government. We would encourage the federal 
government to look at ways by which they could come to that 
type of solution for the farmers of Canada and certainly for the 
farmers of Saskatchewan who face the biggest trouble and the 
biggest problem in this area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as anyone sets about to come to grips with the 
farm-debt question in this province, Mr. Speaker, you must look 
for a way to draw a proper balance, and that proper balance has 
to be in two forms, Mr. Speaker. On the one hand you see 
farmers faced with severe debt problems, farmers being taken to 
court by the various financial institutions, farmers facing the 
risk of losing their land. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if you are to look at the area of 
Saskatchewan and look where the largest number of those debts 
— the largest number of foreclosure actions taking place — 
they happen to have in the west-central part of Saskatchewan. 
There are many of those people that are faced with foreclosures 
are in fact people that I know, people that I have dealt with over 
a long period of time, both as a politician and prior to being a 
politician. And I  
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1874 
 

can assure you and I can assure all members of the House, 
because I’m sure everyone that has a farm riding faces the same 
type of situation, where that farmer comes to you and asks in a 
very, very serious, almost desperate way, what could be done to 
help him save that farm. 
 
Many, many times he will say, the problems are perhaps some 
of my doing. Perhaps I was the one that got caught up in the 
1970s where prices were rising for farm land, and I figured it 
was going to go forward, was going to continue to rise, and we 
had to expand. They boys were coming back home to farm and 
we took on some more land, Mr. Speaker, and then all of a 
sudden it changed around and changed around dramatically. 
 
That’s the type of situation, Mr. Speaker, that we find ourselves 
in today. And everyone, Mr. Speaker, has compassion to look 
out for that particular farmer and the farmers around that see the 
value of their assets diminishing. 
 
On the other hand, you talk to farmers and they say, yes, but if 
you go too far, as far as restricting foreclosures, you will have 
the effect of shutting off credit altogether to the agriculture 
sector, that is going to put further strain on the remaining farms. 
It’s going to create a situation where it becomes difficult to 
borrow money to operate your farm or borrow money should 
you want to buy land or start a new farming operation for the 
boys who are . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the type of balance that you must seek to 
come to grips with, with regards to the legislation we’re dealing 
with here today. Mr. Speaker, as I said, I would — and we as a 
government — would like to see the federal government come 
forward with a section 12 situation for Canada that we could 
work with in that process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me say this, though, to the federal government: 
as the federal government has come through with deficiency 
payments when they were desperately needed the last two years, 
Mr. Speaker, if the present environment continues, the federal 
government must continue with the level of support in those 
deficiency payments that we’ve seen in the last two years. They 
must continue those and stay step to step with the European and 
American governments, in their support to their farmers, 
otherwise our farmers do not have a chance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me deal with the central purpose of the Bill 
that we’re dealing with here today. The central theme of this 
Bill, Mr. Speaker, is to consolidate many of the existing laws 
and rules and regulations as it relates to foreclosure in 
Saskatchewan — many of those rules going back perhaps 40 
years when they were first brought in, and some even back 
farther than that. 
 
The central purpose of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is to create at 
least the workings of a new system by which farm debt is dealt 
with, primarily between the bank and the farmer. And this, Mr. 
Speaker, is in the form of mediation. This mediation we would 
hope, when it gets up and running, will be a forum by which the 
farmer and the banker can chose from a panel of well-trained, 
independent, Saskatchewan mediators who will be able to . . . 
who will  

be selected from the panel, by both sides, as someone that they 
would see as fair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and they would then bring the two sides together 
and say well, is there a way that we can make a resolve of this. 
Perhaps I will sell off a quarter of the farm land if I was the 
farmer; perhaps the bank will write off some of the debt that I 
owe. Perhaps that land then could be leased back to me. And 
many of these deals are being done today. This will create a 
forum and a vehicle by which that we believe that that will 
continue and work better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the two jurisdictions in the United States that 
faced, with some degree of success, the farm debt problem, 
have been the state of Minnesota and the state of Iowa. And 
their programs use a very, very similar program to this and it 
has worked very, very effective, Mr. Speaker, and we would 
hope that we would be able to do it as well. 
 
(2000) 
 
With regard to the other details of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, before 
a lender can apply for permission to begin foreclosure on farm 
land in Saskatchewan, he will have to give 150 days notice to 
the Farm Land Security Board and to the farmer. During that 
time there will be a 90-day period during which the financial 
analysis of the farmer’s affairs will be made by a representative 
of the board, and mediation will occur. Mediation will be 
conducted by a person who will have no connection to the 
board. They will be neutral as between the farmer and the 
lender, and will be given sufficient training to equip them to be 
first-class mediators. We expect that mediation of this nature, 
there will be increased confidence among the farmers and the 
lenders that equitable arrangements are being negotiated to 
resolve that debt. 
 
In the situation where either the lender or the farmer has not 
participated in that mediation in a good faith manner, the 
mediator will be able to file with the board, the Farm Land 
Security Board, a certificate containing his opinion to that 
effect, together with his reasons. That certificate, Mr. Speaker, 
ultimately will be placed before a judge who must take it into 
account in deciding whether or not to allow the foreclosure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we’ve heard from all sides — from the 
farmer saying, well, don’t just protect the guy that doesn’t even 
try; or some financial institutions that are prepared to go along 
and do what they can to help that farmer out. Others who want 
to take a very much of a collection service attitude and simply 
want to realize as much money as they possibly can and as fast 
as they can. Mr. Speaker, this is something that will be used, 
one would hope, by the mediators in a very guarded way so that 
when there is in fact that faith certificate issued, it in fact means 
bad faith, Mr. Speaker, on the part of either side. 
 
If the mediation is unsuccessful for any reason, the final 60 
days of the 150-day notice period will be used by the board to 
analyse the farmer’s financial affairs, hear the position of the 
farmers and lenders, and prepare a report for the court in which 
it will give the opinion on whether or not the lender should be 
allowed to foreclose. 
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1875 
 

The board will analyse the validity and the sincerity of the 
farmer. It will be noted whether or not the mediator has found 
bad faith in the part of either the farmer or the lender. It will 
comment on whether or not a homestead is involved in the 
application. As well, a number of other factors that will vary 
depending upon the circumstance of each particular case: if the 
lender has mediated in bad faith, the farmer may ask the court 
to adjourn the matter for a second round of the mediation; if the 
lender still has not mediated in good faith, then the court has the 
power to adjourn the application for the further six months. The 
board report will be primary evidence on which a judge will 
base his decision. He must presume that the farmer is viable and 
sincere, and if the lender cannot show otherwise, the judge must 
dismiss the lender’s application for a period of one year. 
 
This Act provides for considerable enhancement of the existing 
home-quarter protection. The current protection is retained. In 
addition, if foreclosure is currently permitted against a 
homestead, the mortgage on that homestead was entered into 
before this Act is passed, the farmer has sincerely tried to make 
his payments, then the judge must dismiss the application 
against the homestead for a period of three years. This applies 
to all mortgages in which a waiver of The Farm (Land) Security 
Act protection has been obtained, and it applies to the Farm 
Credit Corporation and to the Ag Credit Corporation. In other 
cases, if the land is a homestead, the final order of foreclosure 
will not have any effect until the farmer or his family no longer 
live there. 
 
We have been aware of the delicate balance between security of 
the homestead and availability of credit, and have ensured that 
financing can still be arranged in relation to the home quarter in 
the appropriate circumstances. Henceforth, any exemption after 
the passing of this Act will only be granted if that has been 
reviewed and okayed by the Farm Land Security Board. 
Protection of the home quarter, as well as deficiency protection 
and mediation, will apply fully to the Farm Credit Corporation, 
Ag Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan, as it does to private 
lenders. 
 
Farming corporations will also have full foreclosure and 
deficiency protection without the possibility of waiving it. Even 
if the court permits a lender to foreclose, it will not be possible 
to claim for a deficiency after the foreclosure if the mortgage 
was given to the purchase of land. When a final order of 
foreclosure does issue, or where the farmer has voluntarily 
transferred land to the creditor, the farmer will have a right, in a 
period of 30 days after the lender receives a bona fide offer, to 
meet that offer, to buy the land back at the same price as was 
contained in that offer — in other words, the right of first 
refusal. 
 
When the lender attempts to seize assets of a farmer other than 
land, such as machinery, the farmer will be protected as well. 
The provision of The Limitations of Civil Rights Act regarding 
claims for a deficiency after seizing farm property other than 
land will be continued so as to include both vendors and their 
assignees. The provision from the Act dealing with the 
procedures by which farm equipment can be seized will also be 
continued but altered to include mediation. 

When a lender completes the steps required to seize assets, the 
farmer may still claim certain assets exempt from seizure. The 
exemptions provided under The Exemptions Act have been 
carried forward into the new Act with certain minor 
clarifications. However, if there is a dispute between a lender 
and a farmer over whether or not something is truly 
 
The Exemptions Act have been carried forward into the new 
Act with certain minor clarifications. However, if there is a 
dispute between a lender and a farmer over whether or not 
something is truly exempt, an expeditious method has been 
provided by which a judge will decide the issue. The most 
significant change in this section is that the Ag Credit 
Corporation of Saskatchewan will be now subject to exemption 
laws. 
 
There has been considerable concern expressed in the farm 
community over the implications of guarantees. To address the 
issue, two significant changes have been introduced to the law 
of guarantees as it relates to farming. First, before signing a 
guarantee, a farmer or family member will have to be advised of 
the nature and the effect of the guarantee by an independent 
lawyer or notary. If this has been done . . . has not been done, a 
guarantee entered into after this Act is passed will not be 
enforceable. 
 
Second, from now on, guarantees will have to be specific as to 
the total indebtedness to which the guarantor could be exposed. 
Unlimited guarantees entered into after this Act coming into 
force will be of no force and will not be enforceable. 
 
What that is designed to do, Mr. Speaker, is to cover the 
following situation. You had the case where a young farmer 
went to the bank, perhaps had a half section, borrowed money 
to pay for the other half section, and now he has a section. The 
banker would say, well I think that’s probably enough security, 
but perhaps you would get your father to come in and we’d just 
get him to sign sort of a further protection for us, but it’ll never 
have to be exercised on because obviously the value of your 
land is there. That was at a time when land values were quite 
high, Mr. Speaker. Now some have sought not to worry about 
the hassle of simply going after the farmer, but simply to take 
the father perhaps who has no debt, and in some cases, Mr. 
Speaker, take his farm away. 
 
Finally, we want to remove some of the differences in the way 
residents of other provinces have been treated in relation to the 
Saskatchewan residents in the area of farm ownership. Farm 
ownership laws have been included in this Act with certain 
changes. The significant changes are as follows: after July 1, 
1988, Canadian residents, a resident of Canada will be able to 
own up to 320 acres of farm land — a half section, Mr. 
Speaker; two, non-agriculture corporations that are primarily 
Saskatchewan owned will also be allowed to buy up to 320 
acres. Non-farmers will be treated the same as farmers when 
they leave the province or transfer land to non-resident 
relatives. 
 
That is designed Mr. Speaker . . . In other provinces, you have a 
situation where perhaps one member of the family  
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1876 
 

stayed home to farm and the other member of the family went 
off to Ontario or B.C. or whatever. Finding themselves now in 
trouble on the home farm, the successful member of a family or 
close friend might say, well I’ve done well in my business and I 
would like to come back and buy that property to allow that 
individual to continue to farm, Mr. Speaker. The members 
opposite whine and squeal about that. That is a reality and there 
is a number of situations like that. If that was allowed, many 
farming operations would remain intact and that farmer could 
continue. 
 
These changes form a package that will reshape the farm 
security law in Saskatchewan. Much of this has been piecemeal 
legislation enacted from the time of the Depression up to 1984 
and has been consolidated into one package. And that was one 
of the recommendations of the Hardy report that reported earlier 
this spring. 
 
Every effort has been made to eliminate uncertainty and 
improve some of the cumbersome and outdated provision. 
Throughout the Act, we have sought to strike a balance between 
the need to stabilize the farm community as it faces growing 
debt, and the need to preserve access to the line of credit. Even 
as the impact of this Act is being felt across Saskatchewan, we 
will begin to work on developing, Mr. Speaker, a long-term 
plan as it relates to assisting farmers with regard to purchase 
and repurchase of their land. 
 
This piece of legislation is designed to protect family farms. It 
brings people together to help them solve their problems. It 
protects the home. It helps farmers understand their rights and 
obligations. It puts farmers and their families in a strong 
position to negotiate their future. It provides all the above 
without reducing the ability of the lender to advance credit, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s the balance that we must find. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to 
carefully review this legislation, Mr. Speaker — to carefully 
review this legislation. And I would ask for all members of this 
House to support this legislation, Mr. Speaker, even the 
members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what this does . . . what this does is a move, Mr. 
Speaker, to allow a balance between the farmer holding on to 
his farm and at the same time allowing credit to be available to 
the farmers of this province. Mr. Speaker, if we do not have that 
balance, we throw agriculture further out of whack. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this is a proper piece of legislation. I think 
it goes in the correct direction, and I think it deserves the 
support of all members of this House. With that, Mr. Speaker, I 
move second reading of an Act — The Saskatchewan Farm 
Security Act. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I rise tonight to say a few words about this Bill. It’s a 
very large Bill; it contains consolidation of numbers of 
legislation, and I don’t think that we want to be too hasty when 
considering this because as we have seen in the past, sometimes 
what we view on this surface and expect, is not always what the 
end result will bring. 

I think there are a number of interesting concepts being brought 
out in this Bill. Unfortunately, I also believe that this Bill does 
not address the farm-debt problem. It’s a bit of a band-aid 
possibly, in some respects, but before that we go into the whole 
debate on what this Bill may or may not do, Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to have further time to consider it and talk to farmers 
and other people involved. 
 
So therefore, at this time, I move we adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(2015) 
 
Bill No. 53 — And Act to amend The Provincial Mediation 

Board Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I understand that the 
members of the opposition are prepared to go along with this 
Bill, and I have been advised by staff that this Bill is, with 
leave, to be referred to the Non-Controversial Bills Committee. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill 
ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Non-Controversial Bills. 
 

Bill No. 54 — An Act to amend The Land Titles Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to read second 
reading of The Land Titles Amendment Act, 1988. The purpose 
of the majority of these amendments is to create certain 
efficiencies in the land titles system without reducing in service, 
that are intrinsically related to the functions of such a system. 
 
Among the most significant changes are reductions or 
elimination of checking functions by the registrar where those 
functions are required for non-land title purposes and for 
purposes of other programs or statutes. The major change in this 
regard is the repeal of the provisions of The Land Titles Act 
which places responsibility on the registrar of land titles in the 
municipal tax enforcement proceedings. 
 
Presently the registrar’s involvement in the assessing of the 
municipalities and the tax enforcement process is extensive. He 
is required to give instructions to the municipalities regarding 
whom to serve and how to go about that service. He checks for 
compliance with the instructions, and if satisfied that everyone 
has been duly served two times, he issues title to the 
municipality. 
 
The tax enforcement procedure will remain essentially 
unchanged and will now be dealt with completely in The Tax 
Enforcement Act. The new procedure will require the 
municipality to determine who is to serve, to be served, and 
ensure that the legislative requirements for service have been 
complied with. The proposal will not see a significant increase 
in the work-load for municipalities, but will result in an increase 
in responsibilities. This is consistent with other areas such as 
mortgages, and builders’ liens, where the party seeking to 
enforce the lien is required to perform the steps themself. 
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1877 
 

Another important amendment is the change to the function of 
land titles office respecting mines and minerals. The current 
practice is to issue a minerals certificate each time the minerals 
are dealt with, which involves a search back to the previous 
mineral certificate. This is time-consuming and not essential. 
The amendment provides that once a mineral certificate has 
been issued with respect to a particular mineral in a particular 
land, no further mineral certificate need to be issued respecting 
that mineral in that land. The need for a separate request for a 
mineral certificate, when required for the purpose of a 
disposition, creates unnecessary and additional documentation. 
The disposition will act as the request. Thus, the need for the 
request is being eliminated. 
 
Also eliminated is the requirement for the issuance of a mineral 
certificate where the transferee is the Crown. The Crown does 
not require such a certificate. 
 
In addition, the limit on the government liability for heirs with 
respect to mines and minerals is being removed. The limit, 
which is now $5,000, requires the mining industry to conduct 
extensive, time-consuming searches back to the original grant. 
The role of the land titles personnel in these searches also 
involves a significant amount of time. Increased claims 
resulting from this change are unlikely due to other safeguards 
in the system and will be offset by increased productivity in the 
private sector and the decreased overtime costs in the land titles 
system. 
 
Also included in these amendments is a change to the master of 
titles qualification. In the future, the masters of title shall be a 
barrister and solicitor of at least three years’ standing of any 
jurisdiction of Canada. Of course, the masters of titles will still 
be required to be a member of the Law Society of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Finally, the proposed Act also includes several less significant 
budget-related amendments, such amendments that are designed 
to clarify and improve the legislation, and a number of 
amendments that are housekeeping in nature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with that, I move second reading of The Land 
Titles Amendment Act of 1988. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I just want to speak to this very briefly, Mr. 
Speaker. There is nothing in this legislation that I think we 
would object to. I hope this is not widely reported — there are 
even some things I mildly approve of. And I’m sort of hoping 
nobody repeats that comment, because I don’t want it being 
known that I said something complimentary about a member 
opposite. But, in fact, there are some useful provisions in it. 
 
There are some things that need to be done, Mr. Speaker. We 
badly need to do away with homesteads on the property that is 
owned jointly as joint tenants. But that is not necessarily a 
potent criticism to suggest that we need something that’s not in 
the Bill. What is in the Bill I think is useful. We won’t be 
objecting to it. And I frankly doubt that I’ll have very many 
questions on Committee of the Whole. I thought it made sense. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred  

to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 73 — And Act respecting Wages, Hours of Work, 
Vacations, Parental Leave, and other Employment Benefits 

 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The members opposite seem to be 
practising for a chorus, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Employment Benefits Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I might 
say, has been reported in detail and with great accuracy in the 
Saturday Leader-Post. And I compliment that paper for 
understanding such a complicated topic and reporting it very 
accurately. 
 
Overall this legislation, Mr. Speaker, ensures that the labour 
relations and labour legislation of Saskatchewan will be 
appropriate for the 1990s. It provides protection for 
Saskatchewan employees, particularly those working part time. 
 
I notice the members opposite are shouting in a chorus, and I 
believe their problem is, Mr. Speaker, that they don’t like 
progressive legislation of this nature. It disappoints them that 
our government would make improvements on the legislation 
for the workers of Saskatchewan. But we feel, Mr. Speaker, that 
this is a fair and reasonable Bill and that it improves and tidies 
up the benefits for workers in Saskatchewan, primarily the 
non-union workers of Saskatchewan. 
 
In addition, this Bill brings in an employment standards board. 
We will have increased benefits for part-time employees in 
particular, and we will have an employment standards board. 
This type of board now exists in other provinces in Alberta, 
British Columbia, Manitoba, Ontario. As a matter of fact most 
people in Saskatchewan, when I ask them, do we have a labour 
board, they say, yes, we do. And they don’t mean the Labour 
Relations Board. They believe there is a board to which 
non-union employees can take their grievances. And we do not 
have such a board, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At present you can take your complaint to my department. My 
department tries to resolve the dispute. If it’s not possible to 
resolve it, then my department will prosecute the employer in 
court. But it’s not a dispute resolution method. It is simply a 
method in which case to collect wages but not to resolve the 
differences of parties. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Speaker, we will now have an employment 
standard board which will adjudicate disputes without having 
people go to the court system, although they may still choose 
the court system where possible. In addition, Mr. Speaker, this 
board will assume the responsibilities of the Minimum Wage 
Board and we will consolidate these . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . 
 
And the members opposite continue to shout, Mr. Speaker. And 
I really don’t understand why the members opposite, if they 
can’t listen, they can at least be quiet. We are trying to explain 
this Bill for the members of the Assembly and the members 
opposite hoot and holler and laugh. Now I don’t really know 
why they don’t wish to have progressive legislation in 
Saskatchewan. It could be that their politics is motivated only 
by winning and not  
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1878 
 

doing by what is correct, Mr. Speaker. So I ask the members 
opposite to restrain themselves, and if they can’t listen, at least 
be quiet. 
 
With respect to the employment standards board, Mr. Speaker, 
it will give employees an opportunity to quickly have their 
disputes heard. This board is prepared to travel to all parts of 
Saskatchewan, where practical, to hear these disputes. And this 
is something new, and we feel it’s quite progressive, and we 
feel that it will assist employees in having their disputes settled 
without a great deal of expense. They could still go to court as 
they can now, but we feel that this will give the employees for 
the smaller claims an opportunity to have their day before the 
board, you might say, without great expense. 
 
In addition, this Bill will recognize protection for unjust 
dismissal, particularly for employees who don’t have access to 
the courts because of the cost of taking an unjust dismissal 
action to court. This board will have the power to make awards 
for unjust dismissal up to 12 months wages or a maximum of 
$10,000. So anyone that would be claiming more than $10,000 
would still have to take the dispute to the court, where the 
smaller claims could be resolved by this board. Three other 
jurisdictions have this type of unjust dismissal: the federal 
government; Nova Scotia; and one of the territories, I believe. 
 
In addition, this unjust dismissal protection will require the 
employees to mitigate — that would be to look for another job 
— or would also be able to consider partial cause. I might point 
out, Mr. Speaker, that currently the courts in Saskatchewan, in 
unjust dismissal, are not considering partial cause. They’re 
going to an all or nothing type of a situation that we had many 
generations ago in negligence actions, and at that time the 
legislature had to bring in contributory negligence legislation so 
that the courts would then apportion negligence. It was an all or 
nothing prospect. 
 
Unfortunately, the courts in Saskatchewan have taken this view 
of unjust dismissal as being an all or nothing proposal. This 
legislation, with respect to the board, will ask the board to 
consider partial cause when considering unjust dismissal, and I 
would hope and encourage that the Saskatchewan court would 
follow this example as has been done in other provinces by 
other courts. 
 
With respect to sick leave, Mr. Speaker, this legislation will 
bring in new provisions that have never existed in 
Saskatchewan. And what you will have here is that a reasonable 
sick leave for employees of three months for illness not related 
to work injury and six months for treatment or rehabilitation 
under The Workers’ Compensation Act. Members opposite will 
say that’s not long enough, but I say to the members opposite 
that they were government for generations, and they did not 
have the nerve, they did not have the nerve to introduce this 
type of legislation for employees. So when the members 
opposite start their chorus of “it’s not enough, it’s not enough”, 
Mr. Speaker, I caution them to remember that they did not 
introduce any sick leave provisions of this nature for employees 
at any time in this province. 
 
To qualify for this sick leave, the employee would have to have 
continuous service for two years. The employee  

could also be returned to a different position, but the employer 
is not required to take back the employee after the sick leave if 
there is no employment available. For example, if other workers 
have been laid off for the winter, or those kind of a situations 
for lack of work, then the employee will not get their position 
back automatically. There has to be work available, but it can 
be the kind of the work that the employee is now able to do 
after recovering from the injury or the illness. 
 
In addition, this legislation will bring in parental leave of up to 
26 weeks for both natural and adoptive parents. This will be an 
unpaid leave. The mother will be able to, of course, qualify for 
unemployment insurance. This is an increase from six weeks 
for adoption and paternity, and it was the view of the 
government that it should be consistent 26 weeks for all parents 
including adoptive parents. 
 
It was the view of this government that the initial period of 
retraining that the employer goes through for the first six weeks 
is the most difficult period of time for the employer, and that 
once somebody has been placed in that position, it wouldn’t 
matter that much if the leave was six weeks or 26 weeks 
because you’ve already had to fill that position for six weeks. 
So we extended it across the board, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(2030) 
 
In addition, this section recognizes the right to equal access to 
child care leave for all parents. We’ve now recognized equal 
responsibilities of fathers and mothers and have equal 
provisions with respect to this particular provision in the Act. 
 
I might say that no other province has recognized this equality 
between parents, both father and mother, and that while the 
Government of Canada has longer provisions, this is one of the 
most generous provisions and we feel that it is very reasonable 
and will not be onerous upon the employer. 
 
This Bill also introduces pro rata fringe benefits for employees. 
Not just minimum benefits as the former Act had, but pro rata 
benefits so that if you’re paying part-time workers a particular 
benefit to full-time workers, you also have to pay that to 
part-time workers. Of course there’s some limitations but . . . 
because you can’t go straight across the board for very small 
amounts of hours, so casual employees would not qualify for 
this. Employees would have to have two years of continuous 
service and normally work more than eight hours a week or 35 
hours a month to qualify. 
 
It is the intention to phase this in over a period of time. The 
pension legislation is the most complicated, and we expect it 
will take a few months, or even a year or two, to synchronize all 
of the provisions in the pension legislation so that these benefits 
can be calculated and that the plans can be altered to allow for 
part-time employees. There’s a clear commitment on the part of 
this government to equalize on a pro rata basis, benefits 
between full-time employees and part-time employees. 
 
I might say also that no other jurisdiction has introduced  
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1879 
 

such significant protection for part-time workers, Mr. Speaker, 
and this morning my office received calls from four or five 
provinces inquiring as to the details of this legislation. In 
addition, Mr. Speaker, the public holiday pay calculation, and I 
might indicate here that we should probably adopt the American 
terminology that — and I know the members opposite don’t 
like American terminology — but we should adopt the 
American terminology of vacation pay and holiday pay. 
 
The provisions with respect to vacations remain the same and 
are among the most generous in Canada, and there is no change 
in those provisions. With respect to public holiday pay — that’s 
for statutory holidays such as Labour Day and Christmas and all 
of the other statutory holidays — this Bill provides equal pro 
rata benefits for those public holidays, and the calculations for 
hourly workers will be on the basis of 3.5 per cent across the 
board. And at the end of each month, each worker will receive 
as part of their pay package, 3.5 per cent for public holidays. 
 
Now this is not a major change in the number of holidays; it is 
not a change at all. It is not a major change in the amount paid, 
but it takes away the complicated formula of calculating the 
public holiday pay, which was based on the average hours 
worked in the previous week, and which allowed for two 
possibilities: it allowed for employers to adjust the shifts to 
avoid paying public holiday pay to all of the workers in the 
part-time category. Most employers did not do that, Mr. 
Speaker; they simply tried to pay pro rata the public holiday 
pays as we are now legislating. But it also made dishonest 
employers out of honest employers who had a difficult time 
calculating on the basis of this complicated formula. As a result, 
the complaints received at my department last year, Mr. 
Speaker, 40 per cent of those complaints were related to public 
holiday pay and vacation pay. 
 
We feel that this simplification which has been used in the 
construction industry for many years, of paying 3.5 per cent per 
pay period for public holidays, will bring to the forefront for all 
of the part-time workers that they are actually receiving their 
public holiday pay and will limit the number of disputes 
between employers and employees with respect to the public 
holiday pay. 
 
In addition, this Bill introduces a 30-minute paid meal break 
after five consecutive hours of employment. There area certain 
exceptions to this — where an emergency exists or where it’s 
not practical to take the 30-minute break, or where the employer 
allows the employee to eat on the job, for example, at a gas 
station where at a slow period, they can have their lunch with 
them on the job and can carry on because the employee may not 
want to sit around for a half an hour taking their lunch break if 
they can get their hours in and get on with life and get home. So 
if they’re allowed to eat on the job or if they agree to forego this 
break, then it isn’t necessary that they have this 30-minute 
break. 
 
But overall, the legislation — we’ll go into the details in 
committee — for the first time brings in this provision that 
where possible and practical, the employee is entitled to a 
30-minute meal break after five hours. And this is a new 
concept for this province. Other provinces have introduced it 
and it’s working quite well. 

With respect to other provisions, Mr. Speaker, there’s now a 
notice of reduction in wages or working hours so that 
employees aren’t surprised to be finding out that they are 
working 35 hours a week or 30 hours a week, and all of a 
sudden their hours are cut to 10 hours or five hours. This would 
give them some notice so that they could look for other 
employment or make preparations to get their forms and apply 
for unemployment insurance to adjust for the difference in 
hours. But some notice provisions to the employee so they 
know where they’re at. 
 
In addition there’s a new provision in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
called reimbursement of vacation costs. And what this means is 
that up until now, there was no law that said the employer 
couldn’t cancel your vacation. And if the employer does that, 
and you’ve already bought tickets to somewhere and you lose 
money by that, or you’ve got your vacation planned and you’ve 
got your down payment made on your trip, the employer, by 
cancelling this vacation without giving you any notice, will 
have to compensate you for your losses by cancelling your 
vacation. 
 
Now that doesn’t mean that you don’t have to get approval from 
the employer for taking of your vacation. Once the employer 
agrees, the employer must stick with that or compensate you for 
your losses if at the last minute your trip is cancelled or you 
lose your deposit or anything of that nature on your tickets. 
 
With respect to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Little bit of socialism in you yet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — . . . And the members opposite say, “a 
little bit of socialism.” I do not apologize for that, members 
opposite. I say this is fair, it’s progressive, and it’s reasonable 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And the members opposite don’t 
like the word “progressive,” but it is progressive. That is the 
progressive part of our name in this government. We are 
Progressive Conservative Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what that means is that we bring in progressive 
changes. We do them conservatively with thought. We are not 
radicals to change the world at once, but we change it gradually, 
in an orderly manner. That’s the progressive element of this 
party, and it shows itself in this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Lastly, Mr. Speaker, I want to deal with 
the part of the Bill that deals with retail employees. With 
respect to retail employees who work more than 20 hours per 
week in establishments with 10 or more employees — that’s 
now the existing cut-off line — they will continue to be entitled 
to two consecutive days off in seven. 
 
We are including in this, one of which shall be Saturday or 
Sunday. Before it was simply Sunday where possible; now it’s 
Saturday or Sunday where possible, to provide some form of 
weekend for the employees where Sunday is not possible. 
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1880 
 

In addition, there will be a limitation in this Bill with respect to 
short-shifting, Mr. Speaker. And what we mean by 
short-shifting is the requirement that you could have employees 
work split shifts. There now will be a 24-hour period, a day, and 
you are entitled to work that employee for eight hours for that 
day, and only once will you be able to require them — once in a 
week — require them to work more than eight hours in that day. 
 
What it will do is cover the problem where we might get to 
wide open shopping of seven days a week, depending on the 
choice of the municipalities. 
 
Prior to this kind of deregulation, when stores were only open 
one night, it was not possible to short-shift employees once per 
week because they could be working from 9 until 5 or 6 and 
then be asked to work part of the evening, and they’d been 
working all day. Now once per week is difficult, but if an 
employee were required to do that two or three days in a row, it 
certainly wouldn’t be fair to the employee. So under this 
provision, the employee will not be required to work more than 
one short shift per week, and we feel that this will assist in the 
protection of, particularly, part-time employees. 
 
I might say that this will not limit, for example, students who 
wish to work Saturdays and Sundays every week — will not 
limit them if they work less than 20 hours per week. They can 
work every Saturday and Sunday if they so wish. But those 
people who start working more than 20 hours — and we had to 
cut off the line somewhere — in establishments with 10 or more 
employees, will only be allowed to be short-shifted once per 
week. 
 
So all in all, Mr. Speaker, it’s my submission that as quoted in 
the headline in the Leader-Post, “Bill increases protection for 
Saskatchewan workers.” I have indicated in my press release 
that this Bill does what most reasonable employers are already 
doing, and therefore will improve the working conditions for all 
employees, and in particular, those where employers have really 
not managed well and have not provided these benefits as they 
should be providing them in a fair manner. In those instances, 
those employers will have to pay a slight more amount of 
money. But for the average employer, there’s not a great cost in 
doing what I believe most of them have already been doing, 
having reasonable working conditions. 
 
But this put in law a guarantee that all employees will have 
reasonable working conditions; it will place in law a 
requirement that every employee be paid their public holidays, 
as has been the custom. Public holidays have existed in this 
country for over 70 years. So these employees will now have 
those kinds of protections and an employment benefits board to 
which they can go for a settlement of their disputes. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to move this 
progressive legislation for workers in Saskatchewan, and I 
move second reading of this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I listened  

with some care to what the minister had to say. I might say that 
if everything he says is correct and it is a true reflection of the 
Bill, this may be one of the few pieces of legislation that this 
government will have introduced in this session that might be 
worth something considering in the positive sense. You might 
say it may very well be one of the few pieces of legislation in 
which the government isn’t attacking somebody in a very 
vicious and direct way. 
 
But we have to consider, Mr. Speaker, the comments of the 
minister and see how accurately they reflect what, in fact, is in 
the Bill in a specific way, because speaking of the intent and 
comparing it to what the Bill itself may say may be two 
different matters. I don’t want to say that that’s definitely so, 
but I think out of fairness to the public that will be affected by 
this legislation, we would want to do that. And so on behalf of 
the New Democratic opposition, I at this time adjourn the 
debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 74 — An Act respecting the Production, Supply, 
Distribution and Sale of Milk 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the minister, it’s my pleasure to rise before the House today to 
propose second reading of a Bill to introduce The Milk Control 
Act, 1988. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to provide you with some 
background information regarding The Milk Control Act and 
also explain the intent and the purpose of this Bill. This Bill will 
replace the original Milk Control Act which was enacted in 
1934-1935. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — The purpose of that Act was to provide 
control and regulation of the fluid milk industry in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
For a number of reasons, Mr. Speaker, it has become necessary 
to rewrite The Milk Control Act of 1934 to more accurately 
reflect the needs of the industry today and to update the Act in 
light of current-day activities of the board. For example, the 
original Act does not make clear reference to quotas and price 
pooling. It is intended therefore, Mr. Speaker, that the new Act 
will more clearly define the duties of the board and make that 
Act easier to understand. 
 
I’d like to go through with you a few of the key features of the 
Act. The new Act provides updated and modernized wording 
which will allow for easier interpretation for both producers and 
all members of the industry. 
 
(2045) 
 
Secondly, a new penalty structure for contravention of the Act 
is provided as follows: for individuals or producer corporations, 
a fine of up to $1,000, plus up to $100 per day for each day the 
offence continues; for other corporations, a fine of up to $5,000, 
plus up to $500 per day for each day the offence continues. 
 
The definition of milk has been changed to clarify that the  
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1881 
 

Act refers only to cows’ milk and to avoid any confusion . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — . . . And to avoid any confusion about 
the inclusion of goats’ milk. 
 
And I smirk at this, Mr. Speaker, but I can tell you that it’s an 
important part of the Act and indeed there should be a 
distinction between goats’ milk and cows’ milk. 
 
Fourthly, Mr. Speaker, the board will be continued with 
Lieutenant Governor in Council appointed members and no 
restriction on the number of members. The Lieutenant Governor 
in Council may appoint a general manager to the board. Section 
9, which establishes the powers of the Act, has been rewritten 
and clarifies the board’s authority for the conduct of day-to-day 
operations. 
 
Section 12, which establishes authority for board regulations 
and other orders, is rewritten. 
 
Section 13 sets out a procedure for holding hearings. The old 
Act provided little direction on the conduct of hearings. 
 
Section 14 provides that the board shall not hear and decide a 
matter unless a majority of the members present have no 
personal interest in the matter. Finally, appeal to the courts is 
allowed on a point of law or jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the intent of this new Act is in keeping with our 
commitment to provide fairness and efficiency to the 
agricultural producers of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this is 
indeed . . . I believe the time has arrived to bring forth this 
legislation. As I stated earlier, The Milk Control Act is now 
being rewritten, it has been in place since 1934, or 1935. The 
Act has worked fairly well. But I believe, Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the dairy producers in the province, these changes are 
well warranted. I feel that they will be met with a great deal of 
appreciation by those affected in the industry. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, after some 55 years or thereabouts, I believe 
it is time that this Act be rewritten as we have suggested here to 
the Legislative Assembly. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I do 
move second reading of The Milk Control Act, 1988 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order! Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as we 
have seen in the last few months in Saskatchewan in the dairy 
industry, there would be a number of problems that have arisen 
out of what I believe is interference by the government 
members opposite. I don’t know how this Bill right now will 
affect them. I’m in the process of ensuring that the dairy 
producers of this province get a fair deal. Then we won’t get 
locked into a situation where we will be eliminating anybody 
from the industry, or whether we’ll be discriminating against 
the major dairies in the province or allowing others to come into 
this province  

and replace the milk that is produced here. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that I will be 
further looking into this Bill and will have much more to say at 
a later date, and I would now like to move we adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 27 — An Act to adopt the Model Law on 
International Commercial Arbitration 

 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Yes. With me today is Doug Moen, 
Susan Amrud, and Rita Vogeli. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Ill be very brief. I would like from the 
minister an explanation of the sort of circumstances under 
which this legislation would be used. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well an example of where this might be 
used would be in the private sector. Let’s say Ipsco, for 
example, entered into a contract with a company in China or 
Japan or some place else, and they decided a clause of their 
contract would be . . . rather than going to court on a 
commercial dispute, that they would mutually agree to set it to 
arbitration and that they could use the arbitration and the situs 
of that arbitration would be the province of Saskatchewan. Until 
we had this legislation, that could not be done. 
 
That would be the type of situation that would be envisaged. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I gather that this is used in the private 
sector and only by two consenting parties and thus I . . . If that 
is the case and if the minister will confirm that, then I think I 
have no further questions. If there’s something wrong with the 
legislation, I guess they can use alternative means, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I can confirm to the hon. member that is 
what the Act says and that’s the intention of the Bill. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Schedule agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend The Matrimonial Property 

Act 
 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I have no questions on this legislation.  
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1882 
 

I think its changes are appropriate and at that we’ll let it go. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 29 — An Act respecting the Convention Between 
Canada and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 

Northern Ireland providing for the Reciprocal Recognition 
and Enforcement of Judgements in Civil and Commercial 

Matters 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Shillington: — With respect to this Bill, it had always 
been my assumption that such a piece of legislation was 
unnecessary and, in fact, now there is full reciprocity with 
respect to enforcement of judgements. I will take the minister’s 
word for it that this ratification of this convention is necessary 
to accomplish that. The need for it is obvious. And, again, I’ll 
let it go without any questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Schedule agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 27 — An Act to adopt the Model Law on 
International Commercial Arbitration 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move the Bill 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend The Matrimonial Property 

Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, with leave I move the Bill 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
(2100) 
 

Bill No. 29 — An Act respecting the Convention Between 
Canada and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 

Northern Ireland providing for the Reciprocal Recognition 
and Enforcement of Judgements in Civil and Commercial 

Matters 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move the Bill 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 4 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. I am pleased to 
introduce Mr. Ron Kessler on my left, the deputy minister; on 
my right is Mac MacGillivray, superintendent of insurance; and 
directly behind me is Al Dwyer, director of administration and 
human resources; and beside him is Phil Flory, director of 
corporations. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. In some 
respects, Mr. Minister, this is a rather sad occasion because it’s 
a time — and it’s been quite a time since the last sitting of the 
legislature — this is a time when we have an opportunity to 
come back and review some of the details of your government’s 
handling of the Principal Trust affair and the lack of regulatory 
enforcement and competency that cost 6,733 Saskatchewan 
individuals, in most instances their entire life savings. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, and I’ll say this right from the start, that 
the actions of your Premier and of previous ministers and other 
ministers of your cabinet are nothing short of criminal with 
respect to the treatment of people who invested in First 
Investors Corporation and Associated Investors Corporation — 
that those individuals, 6,733 Saskatchewan individuals, should 
now stand, having lost their entire life savings because of 
government mismanagement, negligence, and incompetence, is 
a damning indictment of your Progressive Conservative 
government and its entire philosophy of deregulation. 
 
I can only say that in the strongest possible terms, and I would 
say it stronger if it were allowed in this Legislative Assembly, 
because I speak for those Saskatchewan investors who can’t get 
an answer out of you or any of your predecessors. 
 
Now I will say to your credit that you are new to this position, 
but I will also say that you still bear responsibility and you still 
bear accountability tonight to those people who invested in First 
Investors and Associated Investors, respectively. 
 
Previous ministers — your predecessor, for example, has 
refused consistently to talk about the issues to people outside of 
this Legislative Assembly. The Minister of Justice has refused 
to do the same; the Minister of Finance has refused to do the 
same; the Premier has refused to do the same. 
 
I think it’s high time tonight to have an accounting of what your 
government has done — or not done, as the case  
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1883 
 

may be — with respect to those investments that Saskatchewan 
people had in First Investors and Associated Investors. 
 
These Saskatchewan depositors in these two corporations were 
victimized not only by Donald Cormie and his family, as is very 
evident in the Code inquiry which has taken place these last 
months; they were victimized not only by Donald Cormie and 
his clan, but they were victimized by your government, by your 
negligence, by your government’s lack of regulatory 
enforcement. 
 
Your Premier has talked about homosexuals, described them as 
being like bank robbers, and yet he has stood by and your 
ministers have stood by and allowed robbery to happen to 6,733 
Saskatchewan individuals — depositors in First Investors and 
Associated Investors. And you, Mr. Minister, by virtue of being 
in the cabinet, are complicit in that crime of those investors 
losing their life savings. 
 
The Premier has all sorts of concerns for personal morality of 
individuals on a number of topics like homosexuality and 
abortion, but he won’t deal with public morality, the morality of 
his government — the immorality, maybe we should say — of 
seeing these life savings deposited under The Investment 
Contracts Act of the province of Saskatchewan obliterated in a 
twinkling because of Donald Cormie and his criminal activity. 
 
I think that this is a testimony to the failure of your government 
to protect Saskatchewan people. The issue then is government 
complicity in the demise of Principal Trust and the loss of these 
life savings and public protection from this point on. Your 
Premier will fully deny his responsibility in this regard. Your 
predecessor has denied her responsibility as minister of 
Consumer Affairs. But tonight, I want to ask you how you 
understand your role vis-a-vis the depositors, the Saskatchewan 
depositors who lost their life savings in First Investors and 
Associated Investors. They’re waiting to hear. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I find it 
somewhat surprising to listen to the member opposite because I 
know that he’s a very compassionate, caring individual, and he 
has a sincere concern, I’m sure, about seniors and others that 
have invested. And I would point out that these people are 
investors; they did not deposit with First Investors and with 
Associated Investors. 
 
But what really concerns me, Mr. Chairman, is the fact the this 
individual, as members opposite are so inclined to do, is once 
again throwing out the old scare tactics. And I find that 
somewhat appalling. And the reason I say that, Mr. Chairman, 
the reason I say that, Mr. Chairman, is that the member opposite 
is saying that these people have lost their life savings. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, I would say to you, at this time, that to this 
point, nobody has lost their life savings — unless you’re saying 
that the hearing is over and that the whole case is closed and 
that these people have got all of the  

money they’re going to get. But to this point, Mr. Chairman, no 
one has lost their life savings, nor have they lost the money that 
they have invested in Associated Investors nor First Investors. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s as artificial as a three dollar bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well it is not artificial. I mean, if 
you look at the facts — you look at the facts. To this point in 
time, those people who have invested in First Investors have 
received 30 cents plus eight — so 38 cents they have received 
on the dollar. Associated Investors have received 30 cents on 
the dollar, I think, with another 5 cents pending the sale of the 
real estate. 
 
Now you’ve been told on many occasions, and I know that you 
visited the Code inquiry in Edmonton yourself, and I give you 
credit for that, but until such time as the Code inquiry is 
finished, until such time as the reasons have been firmly 
established as to why First Investors and Associated Investors 
went down — until that time, there is not going to be any 
further settlement in so far as the investors are concerned. 
 
That’s been made quite clearly. And you’ve been told, I’m sure, 
on many occasions that the number of investors that we have is 
not 6,733. I don’t know where you’re getting that figure from 
because the total number of individuals that have invested in 
these two particular companies is 4,392, and that figure was 
given to your colleague last fall when you were in estimates for 
1987. So I don’t know where you’re getting this inflated figure. 
But I would simply ask you to desist from saying that these 
people have lost their life savings and scaring them into 
thinking that it’s all gone, because it isn’t gone. 
 
We don’t have any way of knowing at this point in time that 
when the hearings are finished — and I know your colleagues 
visited the inquiry as well — there’s no way of knowing until 
the inquiry is finished that the investors are not going to receive 
the full money that they have put into these two companies. So I 
would suggest to you, sir, that until that time is done or has 
come, when the hearings are finished and Code comes in with 
his recommendations and we see what the primary regulatory 
jurisdiction of Alberta is going to do, that it’s really unfair for 
you to be saying that these people have lost their life savings. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, this is beginning to be a bit of a 
disappointment, I’m sure, to the investors who are monitoring 
your government’s actions because they’re looking for you to 
do something a little bit different than your predecessor in this 
position has done, and that is to be responsive to their concerns. 
It seems to you to be a small matter whether they have lost 30 
per cent or 100 per cent; you’re just very patient with the Code 
process. 
 
Yours, Mr. Minister, is a do-nothing department, a do-nothing 
government, and you’re looking to be a do-nothing minister in 
this matter as well as your predecessor was. That isn’t good 
enough for Saskatchewan people who were looking for your 
department and your government to monitor and to regulate The 
Investment Contracts Act of Saskatchewan. 
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1884 
 

Saskatchewan people have been betrayed by your government. 
You have an opportunity tonight to set the record straight and, 
if nothing else, to hold out some shred, some minuscule shred 
of hope for these people that they might see justice done. It 
hasn’t occurred yet. There hasn’t even been a hint of that from 
any of your colleagues. Why can’t you tonight do the 
honourable thing, do the just thing, do the responsible thing, 
and stand up and say to those people that you understand their 
plight, and not only understand it, but you’re prepared to go to 
bat for them rather than to give excuses like your predecessors 
have done? 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ll ask you again: what do you understand to be 
your legislated responsibility to these depositors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, let me make it 
quite clear that I certainly do have sympathy for those 
individuals who have invested in these two particular 
companies, and I have talked to several of the investors that 
have invested in these two particular companies. But I would 
point out again, the fact of the matter is, the accepted practice is 
that the province where these particular institutions are licensed 
or registered is the prime regulator. 
 
(2115) 
 
We are monitoring the hearings; you know that. There is 
nothing further that we’re going to be doing at this time. It’s 
been reported in the media by the Premier of Alberta that if the 
Government of Alberta has been found to be negligent in 
monitoring the situation with these particular companies, that 
they will be looking then at compensating the investors. So until 
such time as the Code inquiry is finished, there is nothing that 
this government is going to be doing nor any of the other 
provinces are doing in so far as paying compensation to the 
investors. 
 
Mr. Koenker: I notice that the minister had his hands folded as 
he was talking, and it’s probably a good thing. He better be 
praying that some of the facts don’t come out with respect to his 
department and his government’s negligence. And it’s little 
wonder that his government and other governments aren’t 
willing to do anything with respect to these investors. 
 
Mr. Minister, your government had the facts, or should have 
had the facts about First Investors and Associated Investors, as 
it was regulating through the years. Your government had the 
responsibility to see that they were conducting their affairs 
properly. And tonight you have the responsibility to be 
accountable — you have the accountability tonight. 
 
Mr. Minister, this legislature is the place where the public 
ultimately decides who will assume responsibility for regulatory 
or administrative failure. You may want to wash your hands of 
it tonight. Your predecessors have wanted to wash their hands 
of it in the past, but this is the place, this is the public forum 
where accountability and responsibility is established, and I 
intend to do that tonight. People want to know who will police 
the police. If the Department of Consumer Affairs is unwilling 
to put its shoulder to the plough and to look into these matters  

and to act on behalf of the public and to regulate and to give an 
accounting tonight, who in the world is? 
 
Mr. Minister, the people who invested in Associated Investors, 
in First Investors, deposited their money and may well have 
taken risks with respect to the interest payment that was going 
to be made by Associated and First Investors. But they did not 
assume the risk of regulatory failure in depositing their money 
with the Principal Group. That was one risk that they did not 
assume — regulatory failure. Or do you disagree with that, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m pleased to 
see that finally the member opposite is referring us now to 
investments and not deposits. 
 
I would also point out to him that to this point there certainly 
was no regulatory failure in the province of Saskatchewan. And 
it’s during the Code inquiry where it will be determined 
whether or not there was failure on the part of the Alberta 
government. 
 
Now if the member is interested in the answers to his questions, 
I’d like to proceed . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — We are listening with bated breath. We 
wouldn’t miss a thing you’ve said. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — All right. There was no regulatory 
failure in the province of Saskatchewan, and it hasn’t been 
established whether there has been one in Alberta. 
 
But let me point out — now you like to make a big thing of this, 
and I know your colleague did in the past as well, trying to 
maintain that there was negligence on the part of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. But that was not the case at all. 
We were following all the procedures in same way that your 
government did. 
 
Now let me point out to you a little bit of information as well. 
An article here then that refers to the fact that some 15 years 
ago, 1973, a recommendation was made at the time by the 
Alberta Securities Commission that the licences be pulled on 
these two particular companies. Why wasn't the government of 
the day in Saskatchewan doing something at that time? Because 
I think you know who was in power in 1973 in this province. 
Why wasn’t the government of the day doing something — the 
NDP? Nothing was done at that time, and in all probability it 
was because you didn’t have the information or your 
government didn’t have the information. That’s part of the 
problem that we have faced as well in the last while. 
 
Let me point out another fact to you, just to get you straightened 
out on this. It was in 1981 that the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs assumed the responsibility insofar as The 
Investment Contracts Act. The administrative procedures 
respecting the filing of financial and other reports in practice in 
the Department of the Provincial Secretary, which had the 
responsibility up until 1981, were continued without change 
when the Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs 
assumed the responsibility of the administration of this Act. 
And I would point out to you,  
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1885 
 

sir, that that’s the same procedure that is being followed today 
— the procedure that was established when the NDP 
government was in power. 
 
So for you to suggest that there was regulatory failure in this 
province and that we weren’t following the proper procedures, 
we were following exactly the same procedures as your 
government had followed prior to 1981 . . . prior to 1982. The 
reports were filed when they were supposed to be filed, with the 
exception of the last one in 1987, and of course that was what 
triggered the whole thing, where the Alberta government pulled 
the licences of those two companies. 
 
So just a couple of things for you to get straight. There was no 
regulatory failure in Saskatchewan; it hasn’t been proved yet 
that there has been in Alberta — and that’s one of the things 
that we’re waiting for — but we are following the same 
procedures that your government followed from the 1970s right 
on through until 1982 when this government took over. 
 
I would also point out that these companies have been around 
for a long time. They’ve been around for over 30 years, since 
the early 1950s. So, I mean, you’ve seen all three parties in 
power in this province when these companies were in existence 
and, in fact, were having some bit of difficulty. But for the most 
part, the difficulties were overcome until June of 1987. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, it’s hog-wash to say there was 
no regulatory failure here in Saskatchewan — pure and utter 
hog-wash. There was fraud in the Saskatoon office on Principal 
Trust during the tenure of your government, and if that isn’t 
regulatory failure, I don’t know what is. Your people, your 
regulatory people knew about what was going on in that 
Saskatoon office of Principal Trust with its sales-people, blew 
the whistle, but did nothing. 
 
Mr. Minister, another one of my objections to your regulatory 
failure or negligence has to do with the whole issue of the 
Principal Group being able to place on their contracts that were 
sold to Saskatchewan people, representations — representations 
that repeated various provisions of The Investment Contracts 
Act. 
 
They said, for example, that the assets of the company must be 
equal to all liabilities, or that licences are granted by the 
government to FIC (First Investors Corporation) and AIC 
(Associated Investors Corporation), and other Principal Group 
companies in keeping with the provisions of what? — The 
Investment Contracts Act. 
 
And these weren’t just incidental addenda to the sales pitch 
offered by Principal sales people; these were representations 
continued on documents that investors saw and read, and were 
referred to, that gave a level of legitimacy to the contract that 
was used as part of the sales mechanism. And this encouraged 
investors to sign contracts by virtue of your government being 
the regulatory agency, through The Investment Contracts Act, 
overseeing the affairs of the Principal Group, AIC and FIC. 
And it created the expectation and the understanding in the 
minds of Saskatchewan people that the government had 
investigated and regulated and in fact sanctioned the  

operation of these companies, or else these companies would 
not be operative. Do you deny that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Do you deny that consistently on their sales materials that the 
Principal Groups placed representations that led Saskatchewan 
people clearly to understand and to believe that your 
government was in fact regulating them, and that as a result 
their deposits were secure and safe by virtue of that regulation. 
Do you deny that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would point 
out to the member opposite that this same type of questioning 
was asked last year, and I could probably give you the same 
answer if you’d like, or I could refer you to Hansard, October 
27, 1987, because at that same time you were saying that the 
investors were under the impression, certainly, that everything 
was okay, and as far as we knew everything was okay. 
 
You’re well aware of the fact then that Alberta had prime 
jurisdiction with regard to these companies. We had not 
received any information from Alberta to the contrary that there 
was anything wrong in so far as these companies were 
concerned, so there was really no reason for my department to 
have concern at that time as to whether or not these companies 
were in difficulty. Certainly, according to the latest annual 
report that was filed in the spring of 1986, everything was in 
order as far as our department was concerned, and there was no 
indication that those companies were in difficulty at that time. 
So we hadn’t received any information from Alberta to state 
otherwise. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, at the Code inquiry there’s 
been numerous testimonies given to the fact that the Principal 
Group misrepresented itself here in Saskatchewan. I have in my 
possession here an investment contract issued to a resident of 
Saskatchewan, purchased with the Associated Investors of 
Saskatchewan limited, and on the investment contract is the 
heading: 
 

Security. You can feel secure! First Investors Corporation 
Ltd or Associated Investors of Canada Ltd guarantee your 
principal and interest. First Investors and Associated 
Investors are investment contract companies and are 
regulated by The Investment Contracts Act. Assets equal to 
100 per cent of certificate liabilities must be maintained on 
deposit with a government approved custodian. 

 
Now, I’m sure that you’ve read those words yourself, Mr. 
Minister, if you’ve reviewed any of the Principal affair. And do 
you not deny that this pitch from Principal, this pitch for the 
security of the investment by virtue of it being regulated by The 
Investment Contracts Act does not lead Saskatchewan people to 
assume that their investment is safe because the government is 
regulating? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, a couple of things. I 
would point out again to the member opposite, as has been 
pointed out in the past, that the first indication of any difficulty 
with either of these companies that we had in Saskatchewan 
was in June of 1986, and the licences were cancelled two days 
later. 
 
I would also point out to the member opposite, Mr.  
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1886 
 

Chairman, that with regard to his usage of the term “asset” here 
and what it really means — The Investment Contracts Act 
details the requirements here in so far as the assumption that an 
asset is money — is incorrect. The Act specifically defines 
qualified assets to include bonds, debentures, stocks, and real 
property. 
 
(2130) 
 
Now there’s no doubt about it, with the decline in the value of 
real estate property in Alberta, that the assets as such were 
going down in value, to a certain extent. The monitoring by the 
Alberta government regulator indicated a shortfall in meeting 
the asset provision of the Alberta Act. On notice to the 
investment firm to deposit further assets to increase the value of 
assets held in custody to meet outstanding liabilities, the 
companies failed to do so, resulting in their licences being 
cancelled in Alberta and subsequently suspended in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the information that we got then, as I say, was the end of 
June, 1986, ’87, and the licences here were cancelled 
immediately after that. So you can’t be referring to assets then 
as money, because it does refer to bonds, debentures, stocks, 
and other property. So when they were asked to up those 
qualified assets, they did not do it, and that’s when the licences 
were cancelled in Alberta. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Now we’re getting somewhere, Mr. Minister, 
because you’re quoting legalese. We’re not interested in 
legalese; we’re interested in the question of the public 
understanding of government regulation. 
 
I want to ask you again if, when a depositor reads the kind of 
representation on an Associated Investors of Canada term 
certificate, the kind of representation that talks about security 
and the fact that investors can feel secure, exclamation point, 
quote: 
 

First Investors and Associated Investors are investment 
contract companies and are regulated by the investment 
contract company. 

 
Do you not think, Mr. Minister, that in the understanding of Joe 
or Mary public, implicit in those kinds of references is the 
understanding that the Government of Saskatchewan has 
investigated these firms? 
 
Let’s just start at that level. Do you not believe it to be the case 
that Joe or Mary average would understand that their 
government had investigated First Investors or Associated 
Investors, that it was regulating it, monitoring the activities such 
that the companies could make such a claim for security as they 
did on their investment contracts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, it has been raised on 
different occasions, I know, at the Code inquiry, and certainly 
been reported in the media, that in fact it would appear that 
some of the literature that the sales-people were circulating was 
misleading. I’m sure that the member opposite knows as well 
that there is a police investigation — one has taken place; I 
suppose it’s ongoing — plus the Code inquiry. And the 
contracts that were returned to the investors did have a 
disclaimer in  

bold print on them, certainly point out the fact that they weren’t 
covered by CDIC (Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation). 
 
And I know that individuals at first probably felt that they were 
investing in Principal and this would be something that would 
be covered, but as I understand it, when the contracts were 
returned it was in very clear print on there that they weren’t 
covered by CDIC (Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation). 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, in your own mind does the 
invocation by Principal Trust, Associated, First Investors, does 
the invocation of government regulation by The Investment 
Contracts Act not legitimate the representation made by the 
Principal people? Does their invocation of The Investment 
Contracts Act not lend legitimacy to the representation of the 
Principal Group in your mind? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t think there’s 
any question that there have been some bad selling practices 
that have been utilized here, and I think at the same time we 
have to consider the fact that we probably have had numerous 
financial institutions across the country that have failed, even 
though they were fully regulated. 
 
You’re, of course, trying to indicate here that they weren’t fully 
regulated, and that’s, of course, what the Code inquiry is going 
to point out as to why these two particular companies failed. 
Some of the information — and I haven’t seen the literature that 
was circulated to the investors — but some of the information 
obviously was misleading. I believe that when some of the 
sales-people have been questioned on the stand in the Code 
inquiry, that they pointed out that some of the information that 
they were in fact giving to the investors, they firmly believed to 
be the case. And yet they have now found out that that was not 
the case. The guarantee was not there. 
 
I believe in some cases that some of the investors, when they 
saw the change in the contract, once they had received it and 
went back and questioned the sales-person that there were, in 
fact, told for the most part that it would be covered by the 
Alberta government. So whether or not this is going to happen, 
we don’t know at this point. 
 
But certainly I would say there was misleading information 
going out to the investors. I know, as I indicated to you, I have 
talked to several of the investors, and they have indicated very 
clearly to me the process that was used in getting them to 
purchase some of these contracts, and obviously they felt that 
they were fully secured. But in fact they have found that that 
was not the case, and they learned that as soon as they received 
the contract in the mail. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, how might it be that misleading 
information was shared with Saskatchewan investors? How 
might that be that misleading information was shared with 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, the question in itself 
was a little bit vague, but if I’m not on track here in  
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1887 
 

answering it, I’d ask the member to ask it again. 
 
You’re wondering about how misleading information was used. 
I would think that this was not information that was in printed 
form, for the most part; this was the line, I suppose, of 
salesmanship that each representative was using. Certainly it’s 
not . . . we don’t have any printed information; certainly 
nothing was shared with the department that would give us an 
indication as to misleading information. We haven’t received 
that at all. This was not shared with us. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Well, Mr. Minister, in the investment 
contract that I’m referring to tonight, the claim is made, and I’ll 
quote again if you need to hear it once more: 
 

First Investors and Associated Investors are investment 
contract companies and are regulated by The Investment 
Contracts Act. Assets equal to 100 per cent of certificate 
liabilities must be maintained on deposit with a 
government approved custodian. 

 
Now do you consider that a piece of misleading information? 
That was shared with Saskatchewan investors. Was that 
misleading information in your estimation, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would point 
out again that the conditions of The Investment Contracts Act 
were met. You’re making reference again to the assets, and the 
assets had been deposited. The only problem was that they 
weren’t adequate enough, and that came about through the fall 
in the price of the real estate. And that, of course, had been met 
up until last spring, and when the companies failed to put in 
additional assets, that’s when their licences were pulled. 
 
So there certainly was no indication there of any problem with 
conditions not being met, because they were. And it’s when 
they weren’t met that the licences were pulled, but the problem 
was caused by the decrease in the value of the real estate that 
was involved. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Precisely, Mr. Minister. And this was the 
problem that was apparent as far back as 1982 or 1983 or 1984 
or 1985, Mr. Minister, that the assets weren’t adequate, and so 
for people to receive an investment contract that reads: “Assets 
equal to 100 per cent of certificate liability must be maintained 
on deposit with a government approved custodian,” do you not 
agree, leads people to assume that it’s the government who is 
establishing whether the assets are adequate or inadequate. And 
if they’re inadequate, the investment contract isn’t issued. The 
company isn’t even in operation because the government is 
there regulating. Isn’t that the case, Mr. Minister, if in fact the 
government is doing its duty — that the assets are adequate? 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I would ask the 
member opposite: who said the assets weren’t adequate? You’re 
saying the assets weren’t adequate. What regulatory body was 
saying they weren’t adequate? 

The Alberta government was saying that things were okay until 
last spring, and that’s when they pulled the licences. You were 
wondering why the Government of Saskatchewan wasn’t doing 
something. 
 
I’ve indicated to you before, and I’ll do it again, that we were 
not given any indication from the Government of Alberta that 
these companies were, in fact, in difficulty. Yet you’re going 
back and saying they were in difficulty in ’82 and ’83 and ’84. I 
can tell you they were in difficulty back in 1973 when the NDP 
were in power, but you weren’t doing anything about it. You 
probably didn’t have the information, any more than we did, 
that there was anything wrong with those companies. 
 
The renewal of a licence is based on the submission of the 
appropriate application and payment of the prescribed fee, 
unless it has been previously cancelled or suspended. The 
requirements outlined in The Investment Contracts Act were 
met, so we didn’t have any reason here in Saskatchewan to 
suspend or cancel the licences of either one of those companies. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Just so I understand, Mr. Minister, you just 
said you had no reason to suspend the licence of any of those 
companies based on the information you had? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — That’s correct. Until the notice was 
given by Alberta that they were going to be suspending the 
licences, which I think was on or about June 29, 1987, the 
Government of Saskatchewan did not have any other indication 
that there was any difficulty with those companies. And 
following that, we pulled their licences, I believe, on July 2, 
1987. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — So what you’re saying, Mr. Minister, is you 
gladly took their money and you issued them a licence. Isn’t 
that what you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — The licences are issued following the 
. . . The year end, of course, is December 31. The licence is 
reissued pending, or not pending, but depending on the annual 
report that was filed for the previous year. Obviously if the year 
end of 1986 — December 31, 1986 — was when the licence 
had to be renewed, now it’s impossible to have an audit done 
immediately, that your going to renew that licence on January 
1, 1987. So the information that the Government of Alberta 
would use would be the final auditor’s statement which was 
issued from 1986 and forwarded to the departments, I think 
somewhere around May of 1986. 
 
The 1986 report would have been due, or would have been 
expected some time in the spring, probably around May, I 
suppose, again of 1987. And it was when that report was not 
forthcoming and the problems were indicated here that they 
were short of some of the assets that they were required to have, 
that the Alberta government at that point moved in and 
suspended their licences, and then we followed suit. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — And what you’re saying, Mr. Minister, is 
before the Alberta government suspended the licences of First 
Investors and Associated Investors, meanwhile the Government 
of Saskatchewan was quite happy to take the application fees 
put forward by these companies and  
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1888 
 

issue licences — to set these companies free to victimize the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, according to the departmental mission of 
the Department of Saskatchewan Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs annual report, 1986-1987, point number three in the 
general mandate, or statement of departmental mission is, I 
quote: 
 

To ensure that basic standards of conduct in the 
market-place are upheld. 

 
And it’s precisely adherence to that kind of self-professed 
departmental mission or mandate, “To ensure that basic 
standards of conduct in the market-place are upheld,” that we 
would expect the Department of Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs to do more than collect licensing fees and issue licences. 
But we would expect them to go further than that and read the 
materials that are tabled, to read the investment contracts that 
are sold to Saskatchewan people, and to see if in fact the 
representations made in the sales materials are lending an air of 
legitimacy to the sales process by invocation of The Investment 
Contracts Act and government regulation of the same. 
 
I don’t think that we’re going to get very far with you on this 
matter. I think that we’ve established enough for the investment 
contract holders to know very clearly where you stand on this 
issue tonight. But before we leave it, Mr. Minister, I’m 
wondering if you could tell us what steps you contemplate with 
respect to eliminating or tightening up the kinds of 
misrepresentations that occurred with respect to Principal 
Trust? How do you propose to eliminate these kinds of 
misrepresentations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite 
makes a point again with regard to the issuing of licences and 
what the process is, and the fact that we might be happy to take 
that money and issue the new licence. 
 
I pointed out earlier in my remarks that we have followed the 
same procedures that were established by the NDP government 
back in the 1970s. And I can go through the dates here if you 
want, and I can tell you that your government was in some 
cases issuing a new licence before it was even year-end — 
before the end of December. And there was no way that you 
had any audited statement until 2, 3, 4, 5 months after the end 
of the year. So we’re following the same procedure. 
 
So for you to say that we’re being irresponsible, and that we’re 
issuing these new licences and taking their money without any 
thought for the consumers or the investors, that’s just total 
nonsense because we’re doing the same practice that you did, 
and I can’t understand why, if you think it was okay for you, 
why it’s not good for us to do, to follow that same process. 
 
You asked about the steps that we’re taking. The provinces 
across the country right now are very concerned about this. We 
had a meeting in Edmonton last week of the western provinces 
and looked at some of the steps that can be taken out here in 
western Canada in so far as the better sharing of information. 
We certainly feel  

that there was information that probably the Government of 
Alberta should have been providing us much sooner than they 
did. So we’re in the process of developing an agreement, a 
memorandum of understanding, for the sharing of information, 
and information that is going to be more readily available — 
something that’s not going to be held back until something like 
this happens. 
 
We also have the provinces across the country that are looking 
at the usage of terms like “guaranteed” and “secured” and 
“insured”, and how they’re applied in making sure that they are 
adhered to. There is no doubt about it that the Principal Trust 
affair has attracted a fair bit of attention, not just in western 
Canada but all across the country. Certainly some of the 
Atlantic provinces have also been involved in it, and I think it 
has pointed out the fact that all governments really need to take 
a look at the systems that they have had in place and that 
changes have to be made. So we certainly all want to ensure 
that a situation like this does not arise again. 
 
We want to also look at the early warning systems that can be 
built in, and education, of course, is a good part of the work that 
our department does, and we continually are trying to make 
people aware of the options that are available to them, but it’s 
not always possible to get that information out to everybody, 
and it’s unfortunate that we can’t do it. It seems that in spite of 
all the advertising that is done and the awareness programs that 
we have, that we simply can’t seem to touch everybody and 
protect them. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — It’s more than unfortunate, Mr. Minister, it’s 
tragic for many of the people who invested in First Investors 
and Associated Investors. I think we’re talking about the green 
light syndrome — the government regulators giving the green 
light to financial institutions to do what they want to do. And I 
hear you saying tonight that while you’re looking at it and 
you’re studying the problem and you’re consulting, that you’ve 
taken no steps to protect Saskatchewan investors from a 
reoccurrence of precisely the kinds of misrepresentation we’ve 
been talking about here tonight. Have you done anything? Do 
you have anything in hand that you can point to as evidence of a 
concrete step you’ve taken to deal with this problem, other than 
to jaw-bone about it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, some of the steps that 
have already been taken and programs that are in place — one 
thing that’s been developed, a financial planning kit specifically 
designed to meet this need of taking a look at people who may 
be potential investors in various types of companies. We’ve 
also made amendments to the Saskatchewan Insurance Act to 
pave the way for a natural insurance compensation fund to 
compensate consumers. 
 
Those are just a couple of the things that have been done, and 
we’re continuing, of course, on with our education program and 
making people aware of some of the pitfalls, I suppose, that 
exist when it comes to investing their money and trying to 
ensure that they do look very carefully that they are investing in 
safe securities or investments that are going to be covered by 
insurance like CDIC. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, we’re not talking about  
  



 
June 6, 1988 

1889 
 

education, we’re talking about action to deal with the problem 
of misrepresentation with respect to financial investments such 
as those offered by Associated Investors and First Investors. 
These companies used the invocation of government regulation 
and The Investment Contracts Act to legitimate the security of 
their product and to boost their sales pitch. They offered 
comfort to innocent investors, if we can put it that way, by their 
soothing words about The Investment Contracts Act and the 
Government of Saskatchewan as an approved custodian of the 
assets — guaranteeing, legitimating, securing the investments 
that were made. So I’m asking you about actions you’ve taken 
to deal with these kinds of misrepresentation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Chairman, I’d point out to the 
member that at the present time there is only one company, 
there’s one company in the province that is handling investment 
contracts, and they have to file reports monthly, so we’re 
monitoring that very, very closely. 
 
We’re always open to people raising concerns with us. Until 
such time as the end of June, first part of July of 1987, we 
certainly did not have complaints raised with the department 
with regard to any one of these companies, First Investors or 
Associated. So I mean, you’re talking about the concerns of the 
investors. I know there’s been a lot of contact since that time, 
but prior to then we didn’t have complaints being raised by 
them — even when they were getting some of the contracts 
back, that they thought at first they had invested money with 
Principal and then found that it was maybe under the name of 
First Investors or Associated, that we were not getting 
complaints within the department from those people who had 
invested. 
 
So when we get those concerns raised, certainly we act on them. 
But as I said, we’ve only got the one company right now, and 
we have stepped up the filing of the reports in that they now are 
on a monthly basis. So they’re being monitored very closely. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on Provisional Rule No. 33(2) 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Before the House adjourns, I wish to make the 
following statement. Earlier today the new provisional rule no. 
33(2) was used by this Assembly. Since this was the first time 
this rule was implemented, unfortunately, as the hon. members 
noted, it did not work as smoothly as it could have. I now wish 
to further clarify the matter for the future. 
 
The new rule 33(2), provides for the deferral of divisions of 
debatable motions. Rule 46(2) states that the motion for first 
reading of a Bill is not debatable, that the motion for first 
reading of a Bill cannot be deferred, slipped by the entire 
collective House today. 
 
Since the division bells were turned off this afternoon on the 
understanding that the division would be deferred, and since the 
division was in fact deferred, the recorded  

division will take place as scheduled before orders of the day on 
Wednesday, June 8, 1988. However, in the future, deferral of 
recorded divisions on first reading of Bills will not be allowed, 
in compliance with rules 46(2) and 33(2). 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:03 p.m. 
 
 


