


















































May 2, 1988 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

May 2, 1988 
 

975 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure 
to introduce to you, and through you to the members of the House 
on behalf of my seat mate, Don Toth, who has some urgent 
business in his constituency this afternoon, to introduce to you 
and the other members of the House, 31 students form Langbank 
Kennedy Elementary School in Langbank, Saskatchewan, grades 
four and five. They’re seated up in your gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are accompanied by their teachers, Jim 
Golding and Erin McKee. Also chaperons include Lois Toth, 
Arnold Barsi, Jim Armstrong, Judy Munro, Cathy Muir and 
Renetta Godfrey. 
 
Would the members please welcome them and I will be pleased 
to meet with them at 2:30 on the steps for pictures on behalf of 
my seat mate, Don Toth. Welcome to the House: I hope you 
enjoy your stay. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me pleasure to 
introduce to you, and to other members of the Assembly, two 
people seated in the east gallery. We have people who come 
fairly regularly to observe the question period proceedings in 
Mrs. Passmore and her son, Gunnar Passmore. So please join me 
in welcoming these two guests to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d to introduce to 
you, and through you to members of this Assembly, three visitors 
from outside of the province of Saskatchewan seated in your 
gallery. Mrs. Pam Hrycyk from Toronto and her brother Rob 
McMahon from Australia, and Mr. McMahon’s wife, Iris. There 
is nothing unusual about visitors from Australia or Toronto in 
this province, as we all know, but the unusual thing about Mr. 
McMann and Mrs. Pam Hrycyk from Toronto, is that they are 
brother and sister and haven’t seen each other for over 34 years. 
So I’d like to ask my colleagues to welcome them here. They’re 
here with their daughter, or at least Pam’s daughter, Marg Tustin 
from Avonhurst, and I would ask all members to welcome them 
to this Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Funds for Health Research Board 
 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Premier, and it’s in reference to the provincial budget for the 
Saskatchewan Health Research Board, which is responsible for 
supervising provincial health research in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Premier, I have here a copy of a letter

addressed to you, from the chairman of the Health Research 
Board, and it talks about, and I quote: 
 

The extremely serious budget crisis facing the 
Saskatchewan Health Research Board . . . 

 
The letter goes on and says further: 
 

. . . a budget shortfall so severe as to call into question our 
continued existence as a separate entity. 

 
Mr. Premier, will you now admit that your health care cut-backs 
have caused a severe crisis in the area of health research in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I’m aware of the letter that 
was sent to the Premier with copies to various of the ministers, 
myself included. I will just say to the hon. member that we are 
into, and have been for some time, in discussions with the board 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re right about it being for some time. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, that’s true. I mean, with the board 
members of the Saskatchewan Health Research Board. The facts, 
Mr. Speaker, are as follows: the Health Research Board in this 
province over a period of some time has spent approximately $1 
million a year on research, and that would be the indication this 
year that we would want them to maintain that level of spending, 
about $1 million a year. And there was some consideration of 
them drawing down upon some reserves that they had. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is our intention, as it is the intention of the Health 
Research Board because of some contracts that they have either 
let or contracts which there is an understanding surrounding, that 
there would be about a million dollars spent this year, and it 
would be our intention to have that much spent by health research 
on good health research projects in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister of 
Health. Why, if you’re intending then to spend a million dollars, 
Mr. Minister, have you only budgeted 750,000 to the research 
board? Do you deny, sir, do you deny that in 1984-85 you cut the 
budget from 750,000 to zero? And do you deny that as soon as 
your government took office that you eliminated the grant for 
testing effects of low-level radiation? Do you deny that, Mr. 
Minister? And why have you only given them 750,000 in a 
budget if you intend them to spend $1 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the Health Research Board, 
over a period of time, and on an ongoing basis, will determine 
the projects with which . . . in which they will undertake . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The hon. member is 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

976 
 

having some difficulty answering the question. Let’s allow him 
the opportunity to be heard. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — As I was saying — and I thank you for 
bringing order to the House, Mr. Speaker — the Health Research 
Board, on an annual basis and on an ongoing basis, will 
determine which projects and which areas of health research they 
will undertake projects. That’s the case and that’s as it should be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I put the number out to the hon. member now, 
and when I say to all members of the House that the amount of 
money that we believe will be spent and that should be spent in 
this fiscal year will be a million dollars, we take into 
consideration a draw-down on some reserves. Now the Health 
Research Board has subsequently said to us that that’s not an 
option that they have to extent that we thought it was possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to do that and we will continue to 
be sure, continue to be sure that about . . . the amount in about 
the $1 million range is spent by the Health Research Board on 
health research projects in this province. And yes, Mr. Speaker, 
they do some excellent work and have done some excellent work 
over the past several years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Your health care 
cut-backs, Mr. Minister, have reduced the amount and quality of 
basic health research in Saskatchewan. In its annual report of the 
Health Research Board of two years ago, of which, incidentally, 
I understand, Mr. Minister, Dr. Peter Matthews, president of the 
PC Party and Ms. Toni Davidson, your PC candidate in 
Saskatoon Eastview, is on the Saskatchewan Health Research 
Board. In any case the report of the board said two years ago, and 
I quote from the report: 
 

The first is that Saskatchewan has a seriously 
underdeveloped health research environment. An analogy 
might be that the province is a lesser developed nation 
compared to others in Canada. 

 
Mr. Minister, the men and women of Saskatchewan want good 
health care. I want to know, Mr. Minister, when you will stop 
your cut-backs with respect to health care and when you will 
adequately fund health research in the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member makes 
reference to members of the Health Research Board, both present 
and past, members who now happen to hold positions within the 
Progressive Conservative Party, and so on. Mr. Speaker, we’re 
proud that forward-looking people like that are part of our party 
and continue to be a part of our party because they have the 
forward-looking nature that it takes to be involved in research 
activities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will stack the research activities of the Health 
Research Board, undertaken under our administration, against 
anything that was done under the former administration, anything 
that was done under the

former administration as it relates to health care research. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health care research is a priority, is a priority of that 
board under the leadership of Dr. Robertson. It is a priority of 
this government and there will be in the order of a million dollars 
spent this year, some portion of it from reserves, some portion of 
it from grants from this department, but in the order of $1 million. 
and those negotiations are ongoing. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, negotiations between people who are 
forward-looking and who may have who may have some 
connections to the Progressive Conservative Party, not on the 
basis of their being on the research board but on the basis of the 
fact that they are forward-looking as are members of this party 
who are represented on this side of the House today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, in the words . . . New question, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, in the words of your own health board 
you have reduced Saskatchewan health . . . research in health, to 
the status of a lesser developed nation. 
 
In the words of your own board, Mr. Minister, you eliminated 
funding for health research and to low-level radiation and you 
underfunded health research in Saskatchewan. You also 
promised the chairman of the Health Research Board that you 
reneged on that promise, Mr. Minister, and the budget shows that 
clearly. 
 
My question is: when are you going to stop betraying 
Saskatchewan men, women and children; and when are you 
going to stop betraying medicare in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, when the member doesn’t 
understand the issue, she will revert, as will all members on that 
side, revert to the political rhetoric of medicare being betrayed, 
and all the stuff that you hear from them that rolls out of them all 
too easily with lack of understanding of the wider issue. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I deny, I reject the view of that member over 
there and of that party opposite who says that there is no 
emphasis on health research, because there is. There will 
continue to be an emphasis on health research, well thought out 
and excellent research, Mr. Speaker — priorities for which will 
be determined by the Health Research Board itself, priorities 
which they have done an excellent job in recent years, in more 
recent years, of identifying just the areas where research should 
be conducted. 
 
And they’ve done a good job of that, continue to, and those 
negotiations that we have with them I know will bring us to the 
point of spending $1 million this year, in this fiscal year, 
wherever that money comes from — some portion from grants, 
some portion from drawing down. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

977 
 

Supplementary to the minister, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, in 
view of the fact that the chairman of the Health Research Board 
has stated in a statement on April 6 that only $525,000 are 
available for 1988 competitions, even when some of the reserves 
are used up, as you say, Mr. Minister, how can you justify your 
earlier statement that there is going to be a million dollars there? 
Aren’t you in contradiction with what the real facts are as stated 
by the research board in that memo? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, Mr. Speaker, I am not in 
contradiction. Mr. Speaker, the Health Research Board 
understands now that our intention and theirs were on the same 
track in terms of spending $1 million this year, or very close to 
that number — okay? — whatever portion will come from 
reserves and so on. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve said that clearly and categorically to the 
House. That’s as it will be and all members of the House should 
recognize that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Production of SaskTel Directories 
 

Mr. Shillington: — My question is to the minister in charge of 
SaskTel. I want to begin the question by refreshing his memory 
with a quote attributed to him in the Star-Phoenix on October 10, 
1986. The quote, Mr. Minister, is as follows: 
 

Saskatchewan’s Progressive Conservative government has 
no plans to sell SaskTel or any portion thereof. (Or a any 
portion thereof) 

 
Mr. Minister, I remind you that telephone directories are an 
integral part of every telephone system everywhere in the world, 
whether large or small. 
 
My question therefore, Mr. Minister, is: are the rumours of the 
impending privatization of the SaskTel directories inaccurate, or 
is this just simply another of your election promises which has 
become inconvenient and is therefore something to be discarded? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I recall when I announced in 
the Assembly that there would be a review of the printing of the 
directories that it was welcomed by the members opposite as long 
overdue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think there’s little doubt that the scare tactics of both the NDP 
and the leadership of the union in SaskTel are predictable. They 
did it prior to the provincial election; they’re doing it prior to the 
by-elections. Union members within SaskTel are seeing through 
the patent political efforts of the union leadership. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m surprised at the hon. members. The hon. 
members welcomed the announcement of the review the other 
day, and they’re today saying that it doesn’t mean what it says. 
I’m a little surprised at their position.

Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. I know it would 
be unparliamentary for me to suggest the minister is intentionally 
misleading the House. I trust however I can be forgiven for what 
I’m thinking. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. The hon. member is 
aware that the rules or the House dictate that members may not, 
indirectly or directly, suggest that others hon. members are 
deliberately misleading the House. I wish to bring that to his 
attention and ask him to refrain from using that tactic. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, new question for the minister. 
This matter came to the attention of the public because of a letter 
written by the general manager of industrial relations for 
SaskTel, a J.T. Lax, to the director of the Communications 
Workers of Canada, the authorized bargaining agent. 
 
The letter begins with what must be one of the great 
understatements of this decade: 
 

The SaskTel directory department has been experiencing 
some difficulties in preparing telephone directories that are 
of high quality and delivered on time. 

 
The letter the goes on to say that: 
 

As of May 5 there will be advertisements in the newspapers 
requesting expressions of interest from anyone who is 
interested in participating in a possible restructuring of the 
directory operations. 

 
Mr. Minister, your officials are admitting what you just finished 
denying. I ask you, Mr. Minister, will you now admit that you are 
going to be privatizing the directories, and will you admit that 
your earlier statement that you weren’t, may have been 
inconveniently inaccurate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I hate to tell the hon. member, Mr. Speaker, 
being a former minister responsible for communications and 
SaskTel under the Blakeney administration, that the printing of 
the directories is in the private sector now and has been for some 
considerable period of time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Modern Press, I believe it is, in Saskatoon has been doing the 
printing for, I believe, 15 years, but I’m subject to some 
correction, Mr. Speaker. So it’s been privatized, it’s been in the 
private sector for a long time and under the NDP. So I’m a little 
surprised at the question. 
 
Again I say that the hon. member from Saskatoon Westmount 
welcomed the review. I’ve made it clear that I’m as fed up as I 
think members opposite and the public with the mistakes and the 
difficulties with the directory printing. We’re going to get the 
directory printing straightened out, Mr. Speaker, to the 
satisfaction of the people of this province, whatever it takes to do 
that, Mr. Speaker. And that’s what we’re going to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

978 
 

Mr. Shillington: — New question. Mr. Minister, I wish you the 
best of luck in convincing the Saskatchewan public that what 
you’re going to advertise on May 5, the day after the 
by-elections, is an activity which has gone on for a long time, and 
that’s the private printing of the directories. That’s happened for 
a long time. No one is going to believe it. 
 
Mr. Minister, for eight decades the production of the SaskTel 
directories has gone on quietly, competently and, I might add, 
quite profitably. Mr. Minister, in the last few years you’ve turned 
this hitherto unnoticed activity into an annual spring adventure 
which has become absolutely one of the rites of spring in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Saskatchewan people look forward to the 
day when they can find out if they’ve been included in the 
SaskTel directory. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you admit what Mr. Lax admits, and that is 
that the reason why you’re sell . . . you’re going to privatize the 
directories is because you’re too incompetent to get all the names 
in the directory and get them in alphabetical order? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I find it somewhat unfortunate in that prior 
to the election of the new leader the NDP thought that the printing 
of the directories was a serious issue. Mr. Speaker, all of a sudden 
it becomes a laughing matter. 
 
Now the member from Quill Lakes does not want to hear this, 
but we have made it clear that the printing of the directories is 
already in the private sector. 
 
Secondly, the transposing to the new computer system is 
certainly a part of the problem. 
 
Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, there are some indications that we could 
improve the revenues from the directories, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 
indicated in the public statement that I want to see the review as 
to whether there should be perhaps one directory in the province 
of Saskatchewan, whether we should continue the practice of 
having several directories. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I find it absolutely appalling that the 
hon. member stands up and is critical of the government for 
putting the ad off until after May 5 when he should know full 
well that The Election Act requirements of this province prohibit 
that type of advertising during the course of a by-election. I think 
he owes us a apology, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — A supplementary. do I take it, Mr. Minister, 
that you’re also going to deny something that I think would be 
obvious to anyone who thinks about it, and that is that this 
privatization is going to cost the Saskatchewan taxpayer more 
money?

Their Crown corporation, which for the moment at least they still 
own, are going to lose their profits from this operation, and the 
directories are now likely to cost them an additional sum charged 
by yet another independent corporation. 
 
Will you . . . do I take it, Mr. Minister, having denied everything 
to this point, that you’re also going to deny this rather obvious 
proposition? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I find it difficult to listen to an argument of 
incompetence when SaskTel has just had a record profit, Mr. 
Speaker, under this administration and this government, and 
several records, Mr. Speaker, because of far better 
administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can give the hon. member this assurance. I can 
give the hon. member this assurance, that there will be far more 
revenue from the directories with the changes that could happen, 
that I expect to happen, in savings on printing. 
 
I suggest to the hon. member that there are opportunities based 
on what other provinces and other telephone companies are doing 
in terms of the selling of directory space. I believe that there are 
some other opportunities to raise revenue as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again I’m somewhat surprised at a former minister responsible 
for SaskTel being so appallingly ignorant of what is happening, 
what is going on, Mr. Speaker. And I give the assurance that the 
people of this province will be more than satisfied with any 
changes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Do I have the minister’s solemn assurance 
that everybody, everybody with a telephone in Saskatchewan 
will continue to get one copy of the directory free of charge? Do 
I have your solemn assurance that that’ll continue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — That’s a far cry from how the question started 
out, wasn’t it, about the privatization of the . . . the whole 
question . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — The answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes, I’d be more than . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’d be more than happy to give that assurance 
to the hon. member, providing we’re dealing with people that are 
paying their phone bills, which is the only rider I would put on. 
But I would certainly be prepared to give that assurance. 
 
I’ll give a second assurance to the hon. member, Mr. Speaker, 
that the changes to the directory, which will be proposed 
whenever the study come in, will have the support of most of the 
people of this province, Mr. 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

979 
 

Speaker. I don’t expect it form the NDP. 
 

Education Tax Burden on Property Owners 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to direct a question to the Minister of Education, and it deals with 
the continuing tax shift onto local property owners as it relates to 
the cost of education. 
 
Today we have the highest inflation rate in Saskatchewan of any 
place in Canada, and your current level of school operating grants 
at 2.2 per cent represents an effective cut in the provincial 
funding. And so I ask you, Mr. Minister, how do you justify 
underfunding education and transferring this cost onto local 
property taxes — tax owner? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t accept the 
hon. member’s observations about underfunding of education. In 
fact if one looks back over the past five or six years, what you 
will see is that the grant per pupil has increased 60 per cent; and 
inflation, which is what the point was that the hon. member 
raised, has gone up during that same time by 34 per cent. So I 
would suggest that the expenditures per pupil on education in this 
province are running well ahead of inflation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, let’s take a couple other facts then. 
Are you aware that the property taxes have increased by $400 
million during your administration, or 92 per cent since your 
government took office? And are you aware that Saskatchewan 
has the third highest net property tax in all of Canada? 
 
I ask you, in light of those facts, why are you in fact underfunding 
education? How do you justify the further transfer of education 
costs onto the taxpayers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first of all, there is 
no off-loading of education expenditures from the provincial 
government onto local jurisdictions. In fact, Mr. Speaker, if one 
was to look at the mill rate increases over that same time frame I 
talked about in answer to the first question, and compare it to the 
NDP years, you would see that the mill rate increases have been 
once again substantially lower than in the so-called halcyon days 
of the NDP, Mr. Speaker, so there’s been not off-loading. 
 
Now that doesn’t mean to say that in some jurisdictions the 
government per cent . . . government grant versus the per cent 
raised by the local taxpayers hasn’t shifted, because there’s a 
formula there, and that formula is based on a couple of things: 
number one, the pupils; and number two, the assessment base that 
they have to work with. 
 
And what that formula attempts to do is provide money to those 
school boards who have . . . To be fair to them, if you have a 
lower assessment base, you get more money from the 
government. If you have a higher assessment

base, like upgraders and manufacturing, you get less from the 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Would the member wrap up his remarks. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A further supplement, Mr. Speaker. Let’s take 
another set of facts, Mr. Minister, then. I want to ask you, Mr. 
Minister: are you aware of the fact that the government share of 
school funding in the city of Regina has declined from 45 per 
cent in 1980 to 34.5 per cent of the funding has decreased from 
43.4 per cent to 33.9 per cent over the last 10 years? That, in my 
view, is a tax shift. I ask you: how do you justify it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I already said in 
response to the earlier question, how much money as given board 
gets from the government depends on a number of things, one of 
which is the numbers of pupils. If their pupils go up or go down, 
obviously that’s a big determinant on the grant. 
 
The second thing is: has their assessment base gone up or down? 
And that reflects whether they . . . their ability to raise funds, Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s a formula that was put in by the NDP, and are 
they now suggesting somehow that formula is unfair? 
 
But to get to his example, specifically of the Regina school board, 
let’s look at the facts — the facts as I see them, Mr. Speaker, not 
as he sees them. And what we see there is the decline — as the 
hon. member would have it, simply based on lack of government 
funding — but what I see when I look at the numbers is that 
they’ve had a 27 per cent increase, a 27 per cent increase in 
assessment. That is to say their ability to raise revenue has gone 
up substantively, Mr. Speaker — 27 per cent. 
 
The total government spending in the same time went up thirty 
and a half per cent; enrolments only went up 3.7 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. It was a question, of 
course, that can elicit a long response, and I’m sure the minister 
could have . . . Order. It was a short question which could have 
required a great deal of explanation; I acknowledge that. 
Question period has expired. Question period has expired. 
 
Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Fuel Tax Rebate Applications 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, if I may, on April 21 the 
member from Quill Lakes asked the Acting Minister of Finance 
for the number of fuel tax rebate applications that had been 
processed to date. I’m pleased to announce, Mr. Speaker, that the 
first 6,065 fuel tax rebate cheques were mailed Friday. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

980 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, the minister, when taking 
notice of a question, responds to it in question period. I do not 
think it’s appropriate, Mr. Speaker, to make a ministerial 
statement on a question asked in question period, when he didn’t 
respond in question period. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I was simply reminding the hon. members 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. The member form Regina North 
East has raised point of order regarding the appropriateness of 
answering an oral question which had been taken notice of. 
 
Of the ministerial statement, the point of order raised by the 
member for Regina North East is a correct point of order, and 
well taken. And ministers, of course, cannot use ministerial 
statements as a vehicle to answer questions on which they have 
taken notice. However, if the minister does have the ministerial 
statement to make, he may continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize; I thought the hon. 
member . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. I repeat once more 
for the members that there is no doubt that ministers cannot 
answer questions they have taken as notice as a ministerial 
statement. However, having said that, and having corrected the 
minister on that aspect of his remarks, I rule that if in fact he has 
a substantive ministerial statement to make, I will allow him to 
continue. 
 
Order. Order, please. What is the member’s point of order? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — The point of order is clearly in respect to the 
document which the minister is referring to as his ministerial 
statement. And at the first paragraph, Mr. Speaker, just for your 
ability . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order, order. The minister 
has passed a copy of his ministerial statement to you out of 
courtesy; I do not know what is in that ministerial statement. 
 
However, as final ruling — and there’ll be no more debate on this 
— if the minister has a substantial ministerial statement to make, 
I will allow him to proceed; but if he does not, if he’s simply 
talking about the question that he took notice of, he will have to 
discontinue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m pleased to announce that the first 6,065 
fuel tax rebate cheques were mailed last Friday. The cheques 
total $938,243. Of this amount, $551,000 represents payments to 
people under the fuel tax rebate program, and $386,314 
represents . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. I believe that the minister is 
simply going on in the same vein, from what I can gather, as the 
question. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He’s reporting to the people of

Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He should sit down. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. The way I recall, I believe that 
the minister is going on describing the question that he alluded 
to, and therefore I will have to ask the minister to discontinue. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the statement deals with the 
status of the farm fuel — or the fuel tax rebate system. It’s 
nothing to do with the question he was asking me, the number of 
applications. This deals with the status, Mr. Speaker, and the 
notice of the deadline for application. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, please clarify on this point 
of order. I thought I heard you say, make a ruling that the minister 
was out of order because he was really responding to his initial 
statement which was in response to a question. I heard you very 
distinctly make the ruling which I respect and I think everyone in 
the House will respect, and I am wondering why you’re allowing 
the minister to continue arguing with your point of order, which 
I don’t think he should. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. I don’t believe the minister or 
anybody is arguing with the point of order. I think that both sides 
are trying to make a point. I have tried to listen carefully to the 
initial statement and the continuing statement which the minister 
is making, and the way I recall, the minister is in fact going on 
discussing the original answer he gave, and therefore I will 
simply have to ask him to discontinue. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 1 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I’d 
like to continue these Agriculture estimates with a few more 
questions on the production loan program. 
 
Mr. Minister, you . . . After the mess that was created by your 
changing of the policy and the program in mid-stream, putting 
greater hardship upon farmers of higher interest rates and 
security that the banks said they could . . . would put in jeopardy 
some of the operating capital, you sat down and had an 
agreement, or made an agreement with . . . between the banks 
and yourself in this 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

981 
 

regard. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, is: at those meetings, were there any 
farm groups or farm . . . farmers or farm groups represented? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, we met with farm groups 
prior to the meetings with the financial institutions, and then we 
met with the financial institutions, the credit unions and the 
banks, and clarified the modification to the production loan 
which extended it over 10 years, because the farmers wanted it 
extended over 10 years and wanted a low, long-run, fixed interest 
rate. The financial institutions, credit unions and the banks 
agreed that that would be the appropriate way to go, particularly 
for new operating money. And we’re happy with it, and we went 
back and advised the farmers of that. and as you know now, 
people are quite satisfied with the fact that they’ve got 10-years 
option as opposed to just a three-year option. 
 
(1445) 
 
So I wouldn’t buy your argument, I suppose, that this is not what 
farmers wanted. They wanted 10 years and they wanted the 
option, and we provided both in discussions with them, the credit 
union, and the financial institutions. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — The farmers wanted the 10-year option, Mr. 
Minister, but they did not want the nine and three-quarters per 
cent interest, and they did not want it to tie up all their security. 
The point being . . . is that you now have a triangle, so to speak, 
of the farmer, the government, and the banks. And the 
government and the farmers have a deal, and the banks and the 
government have a deal. But there’s no connection, Mr. Minister, 
between the governments and the banks with regards to this . . . 
with this deal. 
 
And I think what’s happened here is that you have negotiated first 
rights of claim — fine — on somebody if they get foreclosed 
upon and they have to leave the land. But the problem is, is how 
does that support the farmer? 
 
You sit back and instead of rethinking your whole program and 
renegotiating the interest rate or bringing it down to 6 per cent, 
as it should have been, as I asked you in last year’s estimates if 
you would be leaving it at 6 per cent and which you answered in 
a non-answer and you didn’t reply, and I believe at that time you 
knew you were going to be raising interest rates. And the farmer 
didn’t ask for the security agreement to put themselves in 
jeopardy with the banks. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister: why, when you found out that there 
was a problem with security agreement, a problem with getting 
operating capital, why would you not then go back to your deal 
and say, look, maybe this is not right. Instead of trying to amend 
the error, why did you not retract on the agreement, retract on the 
policy change to a 10-year program, simply what people were 
asking for — just give us 10 years at 6 per cent under the same 
terms. Why would you not consider that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I’ve told you perhaps a dozen times now 
that you can’t offer public funds over 10 years

without some sort of security. You’re asking for that. I’m glad I 
now know the NDP’s position. They can offer 10-year money 
over a billion dollars and absolutely no security. I mean, in three 
years you can, but not over 10, okay. Not over 10 years, because 
10 years takes you right through cycles. It could take you through 
two or three administrations. 
 
And the taxpayer wants to know that if you’re going to lend that 
kind of money over a long period of time . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The member from Quill Lakes will get his turn 
to ask questions. Mr. Chairman, I want everybody to know that 
the member from Quills is again talking from his seat because he 
can’t stand the answers. I’ve answered this question 12 times, 
maybe more than that, and every time I answer, he sits and talks 
from his seat. 
 
I can only say, Mr. Chairman, 10 years means that you have to 
have some security. That’s the only responsible thing to do for 
the taxpayer. 
 
We did it, Mr. Chairman. We’ve asked for co-operation from the 
financial institutions. They have provided it. They have been 
very co-operative. Farmers now have the choice and there’s no 
penalty, so that if they want to pay it off earlier they can pay it 
off. 
 
To go into a 10-year agreement without security would not be 
responsible to the taxpayer. The farmers agreed that they should 
pay it back. The taxpayers agreed that it should be paid back. And 
over a 10-year period of time they’ve now got an average of 8 
per cent money, fixed, no penalties to pay it off as quickly as they 
can. Everybody has option of six-year money. In the first year, 
the second year, the third year, no penalties at all. It’s the 
combination of exactly and precisely what people wanted. 
 
So I would say again, Mr. Chairman, to the hon. member that the 
extension over 10 years plus some security is precisely what both 
the taxpayer and the farmers need to have. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Under what legal premise or judgement did you 
make that decision? Could you explain to this House if that was 
the only route you could take, to take it over 10 years? And what 
is the legal implications of doing that, other than taking no 
security? 
 
And another thing, Mr. Minister, is why could you not have taken 
security on specific items, rather than the blanket security that 
you have asked farmers to sign, basically on everything that they 
own other than real property? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the critic for the NDP 
is being very, very flippant about the way he’s dealing with 
policy. When the NDP were in power, they had security 
agreements on all short-run and long-run loans. 
 
You took it if . . . you look at the various kinds of farmstart 
programs. There was security on everything. And when the NDP 
were in power, if you took out a three-year loan, you had security. 
And they’re standing up there now, well 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

982 
 

we’re not in power, therefore we don’t need any security at all. 
You can lend a billion dollars and no security whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’m saying to the hon. members it’s like their free 
trade stuff. When they’re in power, they say that Saskatchewan 
supports free trade, and they do it in their documents. When 
they’re in power, they’ll say that they need security agreements. 
When they’re outside of power, then they’d stand up there and 
they’d say, well we don’t need any security at all, Mr. Chairman, 
Mr. Premier, you just offer the money with security. 
 
I would say . . . I’ll just use this argument. When the NDP were 
in government and you had farmstart, you had security. And the 
security clause was very powerful and very strong, and it was in 
place short run and long run. 
 
When we went to a 10-year extension, we said, to protect the 
taxpayer because it could go over — obviously, a decade and 
many things can happen — we should have security for the 
taxpayer. And it will be reasonable security that applies to credit 
unions and financial institutions so that they can lend money on 
a operating basis. They said, that’s fair; the farmer said, that’s 
fair. And it’s perfectly consistent with the kinds of things that you 
would normally ask, and absolutely consistent with NDP policy 
when they were in government, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think I’ll ask my question 
again because I simply did not get an answer, which is typical of 
the way these estimates are going. I’ll remind the Premier that we 
can be here till doomsday if he continues to avoid the questions. 
 
The question was: what legal documents, legal explanation or 
authority do you have to base on what you said that you couldn’t 
put it over 10 years without security? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, 10 year, in case the hon. 
member is not aware of it, is a decade of time where you can go 
through more than one administration. Any degree of common 
sense would tell you that you might be able to go through two or 
maybe three administrations. The taxpayer would like to know 
that if they are going to lend to the public something in the 
neighbourhood of a billion dollars, that there is security. 
 
That same logic applied to the farmstart loans that the NDP had. 
When they had farmstart loans, they had security. And now 
they’re saying, yes, but when you have a 10-year money, you 
can’t have security. The same common sense that applied to the 
NDP administration in terms of farmstart applies to this, that if 
you’re going to extend it over a longer period of time, then just 
have some sort of security so that the taxpayer knows that it’s 
there. If it applied for the short run for the NDP, quite logically 
it would apply for the long run for the Progressive Conservatives. 
 
So if you had asked for security on your farmstart loans, why 
would you get on my case for asking for security over a 10-year 
period, which would be longer than some farmstart situations? I 
mean, you’re just . . . you ask the same question over and over 
and over and over again and

I give you the answer. The answer is that there’s security with 
farmstart under the NDP; there’s a security under the production 
loan program because it only makes sense, with over a billion 
dollars out to the taxpayer, that indeed you ask for some security. 
 
We have the security now. The farmers are happy with it; the 
financial institutions are happy with it. Everybody’s happy 
except the critics that sit here and chirp for hours in the 
legislature, wasting people’s time, asking the same question over 
and over and over again. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — The reason we have to ask the same question 
over and over again is because you’re not giving us the answer. 
You indicated to this House that there was some legal implication 
that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Legal necessity. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Legal necessity that you had to take security 
over 10 years. And, Mr. Minister, months before an election I 
1986 you required no legal . . . no . . . there was nothing legal, 
because all you took was a promissory note, and the 
administration could have changed then, but now you’re 
changing your tune. 
 
And a month before the election there was no security for 
taxpayers, not necessary for taxpayers, and now you’re saying 
that you’re going to be responsible. Well I say to you that the 
reason is, is because you got yourself dug into a hole and now 
you’re trying to shuffle your way out of it with these meagre 
excuses. 
 
So on one hand you’re saying yes, that there’s a legal 
requirement, and when I ask you specifically what it is, you say, 
well it’s just administrations and things can change over 10-years 
period. So I asked you two or three times to back up your 
arguments with the specifics of that legal interpretation, and 
obviously you can’t do that. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I ask you: why was a promissory note good for 
farmers before the election in 1986, under those simple terms, 
when administration could have changed, and all of a sudden 
now, a couple of years later, instead of just continuing to collect 
the interest the way you could have done it, you decide to change 
the rules — why is that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member needs to 
be reminded several times over several days that it isn’t changed 
at all. The farmers still have the choice of three years, no security 
at all at 6 per cent money, and he keeps neglecting that. That’s 
what the point is, that they have the alternative of going for 6 per 
cent, or they have their choice of going for nine and 
three-quarters over 10 years, and the average is obviously 8 per 
cent. And they can choose to go for the 10-year agreement and 
pay it off any time thy like in the second year or the third year 
and take advantage of the 6 per cent money and no penalty. 
 
So they’ve got it either way; they can go for . . . Mr. Chairman, 
would you please ask the member from Quills to co-operate in 
the legislature and show some respect for the legislature? Please 
ask him either to play ball or go play some place else. I mean, the 
public must, Mr. Chairman, like to find out some information, 
and he 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

983 
 

continues to argue with me from his seat. So I would just say, 
Mr. Chairman, I guess we’ll just talk right over his head and 
continue to talk about the kinds of things that the people are 
concerned about if he isn’t interested in listening. 
 
I will only say to the hon. member once more, farmers have the 
choice; they don’t to have to have a security agreement for three 
years; they can go for 10 years; they have a long-run fixed 
interest rate; they can go either way; they can pay it off without 
penalty — they have all those options available to them. And for 
security, I will only say to the member opposite that any time you 
offered loans you asked for security. We offer to them on a 
three-year program without the security and a 10-year with 
security. 
 
You can’t be against security because you asked for security on 
everything that you did under an NDP administration. With all 
your legal advice and all the common sense that you could 
muster, you said it should be there. When I give them the choice 
of either security or no security and fixed rate interest, you’re 
mad at all of them. You’re upset because you say, well, he can 
get 6 per cent, but it isn’t long enough, you want longer; then it’s 
8 per cent; or he might be able to pay it off with no penalty. 
 
It’s flexibility. It allows him to go over a long period of time, a 
short period of time; he has no penalty when he wants to pay it 
off; he doesn’t have to have security on the three-year option; 
he’s got all the flexibility in the world to accommodate it. 
 
Most of the farmer have responded. They say it isn’t a problem; 
it’s obviously a problem in your mind, and that’s clearly the case. 
and I will say that time and time again the three-year option gave 
him that flexibility. He still has it because he can buy and opt for 
the three-year probability and the interest rates whether he signs 
the three-year or the 10-year, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, if I am a farmer who has 
the money to repay that loan, I have an option. If I’m one of those 
40 per cent, as we indicted the other day in these estimates, that 
are either insolvent or have serious cash flow difficulties, I don’t 
have an option. 
 
So you’ve put out a program two years before that said, you don’t 
need security, we trust you, it’s hassle-free cash. And now you 
turn around and say that they have an option. Well I tell you Mr. 
Minister, they don’t have an option if they don’t have the money. 
And if I had a dollar for every one of those farmers that told me 
that if they would have known the rules were going to be changed 
to this they never would have taken it, I could pay mine off today. 
And that’s how serious it is. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I tell you that your flexibility mode that you’re 
in now s not true for those people who’d have cash flow 
problems. 
 
And I just want to ask you something very specific right now. 
Under the security agreement, is your department or ACS 
(Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) signing any 
specific security, making any specific security

negotiations with farmers, or are all farmers being treated the 
same, that security is a blanket security? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I’m advised that they can negotiate 
security. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, this is a little bit of a switch, 
isn’t it, because you put out a policy that says that there’s nothing 
in there indicating that they could negotiate security, so you press 
them to the wall to make this decision, putting more pressure and 
stress on them, and now you’re saying that they can negotiate 
security. Well I ask you: Mr. Minister, if that’s possible, why 
wasn’t that done for all farmers in the first place? 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member . . . well, 
maybe probably doesn’t know and I’ll describe it to him. In terms 
of general security, it applies to grain and livestock. If the 
individual farmer does not want to use grain and livestock as 
general security and he wants to use land instead, we’ll give him 
the choice, and that can be up to him. If he’s got an appropriate 
amount of land that would substitute for that, we’ll look at that, 
because general security does not normally apply to land; it will 
apply to non-land assets. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, I have a copy of the form that was 
signed by farmers with your option program: Option I, the three 
year . . . maintaining the three year deal; or Option II, extending 
it over 10 years. And I just want to take a minute here to read 
section 5. It’s a security clause, and this is the document that 
farmers were asked to sign: 
 

To secure payment of my existing Production Loan, my 
Extended Production Loan, and any further loans under the 
Production Loan Program that may be granted to me by 
ACS, I hereby grant to ACS a present and continuing 
security interest in all of my present and after-acquired 
personal property of whatsoever nature and kind, whether 
tangible or intangible, and all proceeds derived therefrom, 
including without restriction any interest whatsoever I may 
have in goods, chattels, livestock, livestock products, 
fixtures, machinery, equipment, vehicles, supplies and 
inventory, now owned or hereafter acquired and 
wheresoever situate (the “Collateral”). 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, my question to you is this: if I was mailed 
this form to me, what in that subsection (5) would give me 
indication other than that I had to sign this with this blanket 
security? And now you’re telling me that if I come in to you, I 
can negotiate security on specific items. Now that is not what this 
form says. And that is unfair to those other people, those other 
farmers in Saskatchewan who were intimidated by this form and 
went ahead and signed it anyway. So could you explain that to 
me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, personal property is 
different than real property. Personal property does not refer to 
real estate. That’s what it is. So personal property is there and 
that’s what it says that the security is. 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

984 
 

If the man chooses, or the family chooses to have real property 
instead, then we’ve given the flexibility to substitute it. Now 
most families don’t want to put up the land; they would rather 
have it in terms of real property. So if they want to the flexibility, 
they can have it. So personal property applies to grain and 
livestock, not real property. And that’s the same as it applies to 
any kind of other loans that we have with respect to general 
security, and the same as farmstart in general security, exactly 
the same thing. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, I asked you a simple question. 
Where does it indicate in this form that I, as a farmer, have an 
option of signing specific securities to my production loan? 
Where does it say that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The form says that it is general security, 
which means personal property. That’s it. What I’m saying is that 
if individuals come into us and said that we have other assets, we 
have had real estate that we want to put up as security, as opposed 
to livestock or cattle, we’ll entertain that, give him the flexibility 
if they want. 
 
Now in most cases, if it’s at a point where they’re in some 
financial difficulty, they wouldn’t want it on real estate, but they 
would want it on livestock or on grain or some of the liquid 
assets. But if they want to put up real estate, then that’s a choice, 
and we’ll give them that flexibility. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, there’s something that’s not 
clicking for me here, and that is the fact that you sent out a form 
to farmers indicating — and you key on livestock and machinery 
— well this form, this form says basically everything but real 
property. But it doesn’t even say that in the form; that’s the 
interpretation that you put on it. 
 
If I am sitting back on the farm, I’m not privy to all these 
technicalities that can be moved one way or another in order that 
I can get security on specific items. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, this clause (5) the security clause in this 
agreement, does nothing to indicate to a farmer that he can 
negotiate specific securities — nothing, and yet you sent them 
out. And now you’re telling us that there are situations where a 
farmer can negotiate specific securities on this production loan. 
 
What, Mr. Minister, what would allow a farmer to make other 
security arrangements? What would allow a farmer to make other 
security arrangements other than what is in this form? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Only his desire. All he has to do is say to 
the agriculture credit corporation, look, I’ve got a general 
security agreement; it’s on personal property; I’d rather put some 
land up, and they’ll talk to them about that. 
 
We had farmer come in, and people from around the province 
who said, well, if I put up property as opposed to personal goods, 
would that be acceptable? And I said, well, we’ll consider that. 
If we had said, no, we won’t allow you to put up real estate even 
though you’ve go real property, then you’d be asking me, well, 
why don’t

you let up some land rather than his personal goods. Now you 
can’t have it both ways. 
 
We’ve got the complete flexibility for the farmer. It’s a general 
security agreement that says personal goods, and that does not 
mean real goods. But if he wants the choice to say, well, I’ll put 
up a quarter, rather than inventory or something else, we’ll 
certainly give him the flexibility to do that. If I didn’t, you’d be 
on my case saying, well why didn’t you let him have the choice? 
 
So this is a security agreement on personal goods. And you’re 
asking me if they can use an alternative, and I said, of course they 
can, as they did with the production loan, three years or 10 years. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, I have the letters that you 
sent out to the production loan clients. I have your statements in 
this legislature where you say you have option one or option two, 
and you just finished saying that not more than half an hour ago. 
And while you were saying that and sending out your letters, 
there is absolutely no indication that I, as a farmer, have the 
capability or have the flexibility to sign the security agreement 
on something specific. 
 
Now the question is: if I’m a farmer who goes in, as most farmers 
do, and say, look, this is option one, this is option two, sign it; in 
fact if we struck out the security clause — and many farmers did 
— they were sent back a letter saying that they could not do that 
and that they had to sign either option one or option two. But now 
you’re saying — again you’re changing the rules. Now you’re 
saying that if a farmer comes in there and has enough money to 
get some legal advice to find the loopholes, then he’s going to 
get negotiated security. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I tell you that that is some way to run a 
department in government — to push all the farmers to the wall 
if they don’t have the means to find out all the technicalities of 
your agreement; and somebody that does, then you say, okay. 
What kind of a double standard is that, I ask you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t understand the 
NDP’s complete lack of concern for the individual to have the 
flexibility to put up he security he would like to have. We’ve 
gone to the farmer and said, I’ll ask for general security, which 
means personal property. And then the individual farmer said, 
well, if I didn’t want to put up personal property, would you 
allow me to put up some land and some real estate. And we said 
we would entertain that if you’d rather do that. 
 
And now the NDP is coming back and saying, Mr. Chairman, we 
don’t want to give that farmer the flexibility; we don’t want to do 
that at all. Well I mean, they can’t have it both ways. Either you 
want to give them the flexibility, or not. The general security 
agreement is on personal effects — that’s what it says. And it’s 
the same thing — if I could read the farmstart, it says the same 
thing exactly: 
 

NOW THEREFORE witnesseth that the mortgagor for and 
in consideration of the premises and the advance of the loan, 
or any portion thereof, by 

  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

985 
 

FarmStart to the Mortgagor, does hereby grant, bargain, sell 
and assign unto FarmStart, its successors and assigns, all his 
rights, title (and) estate and interest in and to all livestock, 
goods, chattels, machinery, equipment, vehicles, parts, 
supplies and other personal property of any and every 
description presently owned by the Mortgagor or which 
may hereafter be taken or brought into possession by the 
mortgagor during the currency of this mortgage or any 
renewal thereof and (whatsoever situation), and all such 
goods shall at one, upon being so brought into possession 
of the mortgager, become mortgaged hereby without new 
or other instruments being executed for that purpose. 

 
Now that’s farmstart that said that there was a general security 
agreement on chattels, not real estate. 
 
Now I’m going to do some research. I’m going to do some 
research after the result of these questions, and I’m going to find 
out if the previous administration would allow anybody to put up 
any other collateral other than personal security, and if they 
denied, if they ever denied people to have the choice. 
 
People came to me and said, can we have the choice to put 
something else up if they don’t want to put this up. You now have 
the choice to go three years, which means no real estate at all. 
You have the seven-year choice, which means that you go to 10 
years at 8 per cent and you can pay up any time you like at no 
penalty and still have 6 per cent. You have the choice, without 
any penalty at all. And now if you do sign the security agreement, 
you don’t even have to put up the kinds of chattel that we would 
like; if you have something else that might be meaningful, we’ll 
say we’ll talk to them. 
 
And you’re saying, well, you don’t want to give them choice. I 
don’t understand, Mr. Chairman, why they wouldn’t have — and 
want them to have — the choice if they come in and say: I don’t 
want to put up my grain; I’d rather put up a quarter. If we said, 
no, then they’d say, well, you’re not being fair, why don’t you let 
them put up a little bit of land rather than his personal effects. I 
mean, that’s only fair. That’s the reason that we did it. 
 
We provided it, to start with, to help them. We extended it to help 
them. We got a low interest loan to help them. They can pay it 
off as quickly as they like, without penalty, to help them. And 
when they do put up security and opt for the 10-year agreement, 
we said, if you don’t want personal security, you’ve got 
something else. Advise us and talk to us. I’m advised that there 
are six people who have asked to have land put up as opposed to 
inventory — six people. 
 
So I say, Mr. Chairman, they’ve got the flexibility to look at all 
the alternatives. That’s what this is designed for, to help the 
farmers — $1.2 billion dollars in the hands of farmers at 6 per 
cent. That option has never been taken away. They’ve got it at 6 
per cent; they can pay it back at 6 per cent; they can opt for the 
10 years and still pay it in two or three with no penalty, still 
getting 6 per cent. And if they want collateral and they don’t want 
personal effects, we’ll entertain other things for collateral. 

All that flexibility and the NDP are sitting here saying, well I 
don’t think that you should give them the choice; that you should 
say, this is the way it was, therefore don’t change that. And if you 
do change it, then it’s being unfair. Well I think the flexibility is 
fair and the farmers have asked for that. The financial 
institutions, the credit unions and the banks, have said that’s the 
way to go. They’re happy with it. The farmers can now get 
ongoing credit. They’re happy. 
 
The best credit they can get from the government is long-run, 
10-year money at 8 per cent or three years at 6 per cent, which is 
the lowest interest rate you can get any place in the country. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, I have 
a copy here of the production loan program extended payment 
form. And I want to ask you, Mr. Premier, is it not correct that 
the form that went out and all attached information gave the 
farmers two choices: one, to pay it back on the basis of the 
existing three years in accordance with the terms, or the alternate 
method of repayment. Are those the two options that are given 
within this production loan contract? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the form that goes out 
describes the choices that the individual has that he can opt for, 
or she or the family can opt for, three-year money or 10-year 
money with 6 per cent in both cases — 8 per cent on 10 years if 
they opt for the latter, with security. And the security is on 
general security which is on personal property. 
 
Now individuals that come back afterwards, they get into some 
financial difficulty or others, as with any financial institutions, 
will talk about the kinds of things that they may have as 
alternatives. And that’s been the case here. 
 
Some farmers have come in and said, I don’t necessarily want to 
provide personal security, can I put up some land? And we said 
we would entertain that, we wouldn’t rule it out. And I’m advised 
so far that six people have participated in that fashion which says, 
I’d rather put up some land as opposed to the general security. 
And we’ve said we’ll entertain that as anything that could be 
flexible and fair to individuals if there’s some difficulties. 
 
I would remind the individual, when credit unions, for example, 
lend money to farmers and farmers come back in and say, I can’t 
make my payments, well a credit union can say, but that isn’t in 
the contract. The contract said you had to pay. And the guy says, 
I can’t pay. 
 
Well then they sit down and talk and say, well could you work 
something out that would be in my favour. That’s exactly what 
they do. It’s not in the contract, but common sense would say, I 
got to be fair to these individuals and give them some flexibility. 
 
That’s exactly what this does. It says you have the choice of three 
years or the choice of 10 years. And if you want to come in with 
some security, then if you’d rather opt for land as opposed to 
personal effects, we’ll talk about that 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

986 
 

as well. And that’s exactly what we’ve done. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Premier, you’ve indicated that there was two 
choices. You can opt for the three years or the 10 years, and out 
to the farmers to sign. Let there be no, no mistake. You have a 
document here which concerned many farmers across this 
province. And what you insist on and what you have indicated is 
what you ask for security under clause (5): 
 

To secure payment of my existing Production Loan, my 
Extended Production Loan and any future loans under the 
Production Loan Program that may be granted to me by 
ACS, I hereby grant to ACS a present and continuing 
security interest in all of my present and after-acquired 
personal property of whatsoever nature and kind, whether 
tangible or intangible, and all proceeds derived therefrom, 
including without restriction any interest whatsoever I may 
have in goods, chattels, livestock, livestock products, 
fixtures, machinery, equipment, vehicles, supplies, 
inventory, now . . . or hereafter acquired and wheresoever 
situate (the “Collateral.”) 

 
That’s what you asked the farmers of Saskatchewan to sign. That 
is the information that went out to them. That’s what many or 
most of them were required to sign. 
 
I ask you: had all the farmers have this specific information that 
they could come running into you and ask to change the 
collateral, or were the farmers misled and you had a special 
arrangement for a few? Because the farmers of Saskatchewan 
didn’t know they had an alternative. They had major concern in 
respect to this clause (5) of all of blanket protection . . . or blanket 
lien on all of their personal property. 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Premier, some of the farmers sent those 
forms back crossing out (5) and you indicated in return letters: 
you either sign it with clause (5) in it or you’re on to Option I, 
which is the three years. I ask you, Mr. Premier . . . You have 
deceived the farmers of Saskatchewan because now you indicate 
that you have six people that have been able to slide in under it, 
other than what other farmers. 
 
I ask you: have you made this position known to all farmers in 
Saskatchewan, and why didn’t you have another clause in your 
agreement that either you sign this or you put up real property as 
an alternative security? Is that in the agreement, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I’ve already told the hon. member 
that we provided the alternative. If people said they’d rather put 
up something else that is equivalent security, we would sit and 
talk to them about it. Are you recommended we don’t do that, 
that we don’t . . . Shouldn’t we do that? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Did you send them out a notice to that 
effect? Did you send them out a notice? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The member from Regina North East will 
obviously get his opportunity to ask questions.

An Hon. Member: — I’m asking now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well all right, get on your feet and then 
you ask. We have given them the alternative when they came in. 
If we’d said no, then you’d be asking, well why didn’t you give 
them a choice? 
 
Mr. Chairman, when they ask, is there an alternative with respect 
to equivalent amount of security, we say, well we’ll talk to them. 
I mean, that’s what financial institutions and the credit union or 
any others do when they send out an agreement. 
 
They say, this is how you should pay. The guy comes in and he 
say, I can’t pay. What are you going to do? Well, he says, there’s 
no alternatives; I didn’t list any here. We won’t even talk to you. 
And then the farmer says, well, that’s not very fair. Can’t we talk 
about some alternatives here? And that’s what the manager does. 
He sits down and says, look, I’d rather put up this than I would 
that. And that’s precisely what we’ve done and the farmers 
appreciate that. 
 
Now you’re saying that we shouldn’t allow any alternative — we 
shouldn’t allow any alternative. Well, Mr. Chairman, we’ve 
allowed the alternative for individuals. About 40 per cent have 
opted for Option I, and about 50 per cent have opted for Option 
II, and some have said, well, can I put up some equivalent 
collateral as opposed to the personal effects. And we’ve said, 
we’ll entertain that. It seems to be as fair as you could, if you 
could deny them, but we’ve given them that flexibility. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Premier, were all the farmers of 
Saskatchewan that signed this form given the option to either sign 
clause (5) or consider alternate security — all of the farmers in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, all of the farmers in the 
province of Saskatchewan were given the alternative to go for 
three years or to go for 10 years. And if they’d come in and 
they’re talking to people as they’re filling out and say, is there 
alternative security, and I’d rather opt for land — and most 
farmers would not want to opt for land, and you know that, very 
few; and I think we’ve only got six out of 50-some thousand. I 
mean that’s how much credibility you’ve got to your argument 
— six out of them out of 50-some thousand who would opt for 
this, that would opt for property as opposed . . . as inventory. 
 
I mean any farmer . . . you know that farmers would rather have 
inventory as collateral than they would their land. I mean, for 
Heaven’s sakes, we’ve given them a choice. They can put up land 
as opposed to inventory. And you’re saying that that wouldn’t 
. . . I mean most farmers would say, take some inventory as 
security, take some machinery as security, but I don’t want to put 
the land up. If the odd one says, well I’d rather put up land as 
opposed to inventory, then you’d say, well no, deny him that — 
deny him that. 
 
We’ve got 99 per cent of them who have said, I’m going to opt 
for Option I or Option II, and then have come in under Option II, 
any of those that took it, and said, well I do really want to put up 
land as opposed to my grain or something, and we said, well, 
we’d entertain that, and 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

987 
 

you said we shouldn’t do that. That’s what you said — don’t do 
it, don’t do it. 
 
Well I’m just saying to you that most farmers would agree with 
me that they’d rather have the alternative on inventory, that is 
grain, than they would have put up their land. But if the odd one 
wants to put up land, we said, well, we’ll look at that, and 
obviously 99 per cent of them agree with most of their 
neighbours who said, if I’m going to sign security, I’ll do it on 
wheat or cattle rather than on my property. I’ll give them the 
choice. When he came in he says, I’ll put up a quarter as opposed 
to some inventory. And you say, don’t do that; don’t give him the 
choice. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Ninety-nine per cent of the farmers didn’t have 
an option because they didn’t come running into your office. You 
said, if they came to see you or your administration, that then that 
you’d start considering. Why won’t you be fair with all farmers? 
If it’s good for six or eight or 10 or 12 or 100 of farmers on 
option, why isn’t applicable to all of them? That’s the question. 
Why didn’t you make that a public policy available to all? Why 
don’t you admit that you didn’t? That you actually . . . this form 
gave them the only option, if they went for the 10-year, that they 
had to sign, including clause (5). There was no option. And many 
farmers, let’s face it, thousands of farmers across this province 
did not know they had an option, nor could they come in to 
negotiate. 
 
And I’ll tell you that the farmers sent this here in, stroking out 
clause (5) and had it returned to them. And your answer, from 
your department, was either sign that or you don’t get the loan, 
you’re back on the three-year. You didn’t say, well you come in 
and make another arrangement; you didn’t ask them that. You 
didn’t ask them whether they could put up other security; whether 
it was RRSPs (registered retired savings plan) or whatever, or 
Canada savings bonds or whatever they wanted to. If you can do 
it for some, why is the door open to a few selected people to be 
able to come in and renegotiate what thousands of farmers have 
felt that they had to sign. There was no option to thousands of 
farmers. 
 
Did you miss — specifically, I’d ask you — did you specifically 
make it known to every farmer in this province that they had an 
option to change clause (5) and to substitute other forms of 
security? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I would say to the hon. 
member, if anybody . . . if he wants to find out if farmers . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I’ll be as fair as you can be. If farmers 
want to trade in real property as collateral over inventory and 
personal effects, I’d be surprised. 
 
But if you want to find people . . . You go find me some farmers, 
okay, you find me farmers that want to trade real estate, real 
property, for collateral . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You just found six. You told me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Six. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That wandered in and wanted to do it.

Hon. Mr. Devine: — That wanted to do something. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The others didn’t know. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, all they have to do is to write and 
say, I would rather put . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. Order. Allow the Premier to 
answer. if you want to ask questions, I’d appreciate it if you’d do 
it from your feet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, 
if the NDP critics want to find farmers that they think would 
rather put up real estate as opposed to inventory, then I would be 
glad to share with them, and have anybody sit down with them, 
because most farmers do not want to put up real property as 
opposed to inventory; 99 per cent of them want to deal with 
inventory, not their farm, not their base. 
 
They don’t understand agriculture at all. They don’t understand 
farmers. Farmers don’t want to put up real estate, their farm, their 
home quarter, their land; they want to put up inventory. They 
want to put up inventory. 
 
If the odd one, like 1 per cent or less than half of 1 per cent, came 
in and said, I’d rather put up the home quarter as opposed to 
inventory, we said, look, we’ll entertain that. 
 
So I just throw it out to the hon. member. You go get me farmers 
that would trade in real estate, real property, as collateral for this 
security agreement, and they can have a full hearing. If they want 
to put up their home quarter or their land or their farm land for a 
$10,000 loan or a $3,000 loan or $20,000 loan . . . I mean, you 
must not understand farmers very well. They don’t want to do 
that. 
 
They’re telling us in our travelling surveys with MLAs and 
caucus . . . They said, don’t even force us to put up the home 
quarter; don’t force us to put up property; let us deal with 
inventory. And you’re standing up here saying, no, we should 
have everybody be able to put up property. It’s exactly the 
opposite. 
 
You couldn’t find . . . I’ll venture you couldn’t find 10 per cent 
or 5 per cent of the farmers who’d come in here and say, no, I’m 
willing to put up the home quarter. You wouldn’t find half of 
them. You wouldn’t find . . . Well by far the majority will say, 
I’d rather have my inventory — that is my grain and my livestock 
— as security than I would land. 
 
What I’m saying to you is, if the odd one comes in and says, no, 
I’ll put up the home quarter, we’ll say, fine. If you want to do 
that, that’s your business. We’ll take that as collateral. 
 
The beauty of a general security agreement is that it’s on personal 
property as opposed to their farm land. You must know that. If 
I’d asked for farm land for personal security, you’d be mad at me 
for asking for farm land. I didn’t ask for farm land; I just asked 
for personal effects, which in most cases include inventory like 
grain and livestock. And now you’re saying, well, it should have 
been the 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

988 
 

other way. I mean, if it was black you’d say it was white. I mean, 
you’d . . . I understand that. 
 
Most farmers, vast majority of farmers, would rather have the 
security agreement on their inventory than they would their home 
quarter. For the odd one that would rather put up his home quarter 
or some real estate, we said, fine, if that’s what you like. 
 
So I would say to you that if you think that a whole lot of farmers 
out there wanted to put up land as opposed to inventory as 
security, then I think you better go revisit the farmers and talk to 
them. Because I would suggest to you, you couldn’t get very 
many farmers that want to put up their home quarter as opposed 
to wheat or livestock as security. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You’re trying to sneak your way out of this, Mr. 
Premier, but you’re not going to, because what has happened here 
is you got two standards. The question I am asking you, and I 
want an answer, is: why didn’t you give all farmers of 
Saskatchewan at least that option? Why just some who came 
crawling into your office? 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve said to the hon. 
member, he can talk to all the farmers in Saskatchewan and he 
can canvass them all, and if he can find individuals that want to 
put up their home quarter for security over this, I’m willing to 
talk to them, or the officials are willing to talk to them. If they 
want to trade in real estate for this, I mean, it’s so far out of line, 
I mean, it’s such an exceptional case that you wouldn’t find one 
in a hundred that would want to put up their personal property — 
one in a thousand — that would want to put up their personal . . . 
their farm estate as opposed to inventory. 
 
I mean, everybody knows that. So I mean, it’s such an 
exceptional case . . . He’s standing up here and saying, why 
didn’t you give everybody and opportunity to do it. I mean, not 
one in a thousand would want to have their farm up there, their 
real estate, as opposed to inventory lien. And I’m sure the hon. 
member knows that. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Very unfair not to give the farmers of 
Saskatchewan the option. First of all, you deceived them prior to 
an election that they had a loan which required no interest 
whatsoever, then you send out to all of the farmers across 
Saskatchewan a firm commitment that they had to put up all of 
their personal property. Now you say, if they came into may 
office they could get a different deal. 
 
Mr. Premier, there’s a number of deals. You don’t have to start 
talking about the home quarter and make it . . . try to turn it 
around. There are other options that could happen. If a farmer, 
for instance, owed very little on a mortgage on his land, would 
your department also consider, other than the home quarter — 
say he has three quarters and he has $30,000 against it in a first 
mortgage — can he come in to your office and say, ACS, will 
you take a second mortgage on this because the land is worth a 
lot more and that will free up my inventory and my operating 
flow of cash? Would you in fact look at that?

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member lost on the 
first count, so now he’s off on a fishing trip. 
 
I will say to the hon. member that a general security agreement 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’ll tell you we’re on a fishing trip, all 
right, and you’re on the end of the hook. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Minister, would you just ask the 
member to please listen to the answer? 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re on the end of the hook. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Would you ask the member just to 
co-operate so that we can provide some information here? 
 
It will probably cost about $45 to register a general security 
agreement, and the hon. member, as a lawyer, should know that. 
I also remind him, because the NDP lawyers have been in the 
farming business an awful lot; there would probably be about 
$150 in legal fees if you wanted to register a mortgage and search 
for it, and so forth. 
 
Now I ask the hon. member — I’ll throw it out; I won’t ask him 
— I mean, is this why you’re after mortgages? Is this what . . . 
this is what you’re after? I mean we know now that NDP lawyers 
have been foreclosing on farmers. They know that the legal fees 
are three or four times as high to register mortgages as opposed 
to general security agreements. 
 
He’s standing up here knowing there wouldn’t be one in a 
thousand, but if he could get it into law, then obviously you could 
make three times the money for the lawyers. Now as a lawyer 
he’s standing there, and he knows the legal fees associated with 
it. He knows what it’s worth to him to foreclose on farmers. And 
he knows that NDP law firms have been doing that, and he’s 
very, very familiar with it. 
 
So I just say to the hon. member, it’s not fair that you should 
abuse farmers. It’s not fair when they’re in some difficulty that 
you should be foreclosing on them, and it’s not fair that you 
should ask now to have it in law to have the lawyers pick up three 
times the fee to register mortgages as opposed to a general 
security agreement, which is about $45. 
 
I believe I know where you’re coming from now. As a lawyer 
sitting there, you’re saying, well, I can see the numbers. And you 
know that not many farmers would put their home quarter up. 
But if you could get it into the agreement, then you’d know how 
to make a little bit of money at it. 
 
Well obviously, Mr. Chairman, farmers are smarter than the 
member opposite, I would say, that’s for sure. And he will now 
recognize that most farmers would rather put up their inventory 
than they would pay the legal fees to register a mortgage and have 
it searched and all the rest of that. And most of them wouldn’t 
want even to put up their home quarter or their land, they’d rather 
put up inventory. 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

989 
 

So it saves lawyers. It’s better and it’s safer for them, and that’s 
why they’ve opted for this. And they’re happy with it, and so are 
the financial institutions and everybody else. 
 
So I’d say to the hon. member that I don’t think farmers should 
have to pay $150 legal fees unnecessarily, particularly when they 
don’t want to have any part of putting up their home quarter for 
collateral. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — My understanding, Mr. Premier, is that you want 
your friend, the Royal Bank, to draft up one that would really 
sink the farmers. That’s what you did. Your friend, the Royal 
Bank, drew up this her form and told you what to do. 
 
I think one thing that you said is true, that you should be fair. And 
I think you should be fair to all the farmers. And I think the 
farmers should have the option, not you stand here lecturing them 
as to what security they want to put up. 
 
And if you talk about drawing up the securities, you have a 
department that can draw it up. You can draw up this here one 
that you sent out to the farmers. Why can’t you draw up another 
security from your department if you’re thinking of the farmers? 
 
The question that I want to ask you, Mr. Premier, is when did you 
announce to all of the farmers of Saskatchewan, under what 
official document, and can you file it, whether the farmers of 
Saskatchewan were given the other option which you allude to? 
That’s the question I’m asking. Are all the farmers in 
Saskatchewan, to your knowledge, aware that they had an option 
to strike out this and to negotiate and to put down another option 
for security? That’s the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I have said to the hon. 
member many times now, when the odd farmer, like one in a 
thousand — a little less than that; one in ten thousand — would 
come in and say, rather than put up my grain, I’d rather put up 
my home quarter, we’d say, well look, not many farmers would 
like to do that. You want to do that, we’ll talk about it and we’ll 
entertain it. 
 
So obviously not many farmers in the world would put up their 
land when all they’d have to do was put up some inventory. But 
if the odd one come in, we’d say we would entertain that. And 
he’s saying, don’t do that, don’t give them the flexibility. Well I 
just say to the hon. member, when a farmer did — and not many, 
like six out of 50,000 — would come in and say, I’d rather put 
up some land as opposed to inventory, we said, fine, if you want 
to talk about that we’ll sit down with you. We didn’t deny them 
the right to come in and give us the suggestion when they offered. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Premier, you can’t hide behind the six 
because nobody knew your policy. Nobody knew your policy. I 
ask you again: did you publicly indicate to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan, in a general way, that they had an option to 
change this; or do they have to come sneaking into your office 
and negotiate? That’s the question. Did they have the option? 
Were they notified of the option? That’s a simple enough 
question.

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, we said to the farmers when 
they signed on that we wanted a general security agreement, 
knowing that there wouldn’t be one in 40,000 that might want to 
ask for property included. If one comes in, we said we would 
entertain it. That’s all that it is, and it’s the alternative that’s there 
so that they can have that flexibility. Most farmers know that 
they’d rather put up inventory as opposed to any other form of 
the home quarter or real estate, and that’s precisely why we 
provide it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Premier, by your own admission, what you 
didn’t do — and you won’t answer because you didn’t do it — 
you didn’t notify the farmers. so how can you make a . . . be a 
judge as to what they wanted to opt for? They weren’t given the 
option. Only a few that happened to sneak into your office were 
given the option, and you hide behind that number. I ask you 
again; if you’re so convinced, why didn’t you send out the option 
to them and let them decide? And will you send out to the farmers 
of Saskatchewan, indicating to them that there is another option? 
Will you in fact do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, it’s like asking for the 
option — if you paid me twice as much money, twice as fast, 
we’d adopt it. Okay? I mean it’s such a remote possibility, it’s so 
remote that the farmer would put his farm as opposed to some 
inventory, that’s it’s . . . Most farmers, I’ll say to the hon. 
member again, most farmers do not. And they told us time and 
time again, all over the province, we do not want security on the 
home quarter. 
 
And you’re asking them now, well give them the right to throw 
in the home quarter; why didn’t you give them the right to throw 
in the home quarter? They don’t want to put in the home quarter, 
Mr. Chairman. They don’t want to put in any land. Only very, 
very few would opt to put in some land, and they are obviously 
in a much better financial position. 
 
So it isn’t even something that was worth considering, not even 
worth considering, because nobody is going to opt for it. I mean, 
very, very, very few would say, I’ll put up my home quarter 
rather than some inventory. 
 
So obviously, Mr. Chairman, there could be people who would 
come up with some very, very unique ideas or isolated 
circumstances where they would want to put up something else. 
But I mean the general security agreement has applied in 
agriculture, as the hon. member know, for years and decades and 
decades. And from once in a while when somebody came in and 
said could I put something else, I would say for decades they 
have been at least give a hearing. 
 
You’re saying, well, no hearing; or you say, or any other 
possibility that might ever come to mind, we’ll throw that in the 
mill. Well I’m saying to the hon. member, if the odd one came in 
and said, can I look at something else in terms of putting my 
home quarter up, we’d entertain it. And he said no, you shouldn’t 
have done it. 
 
What he’s saying is you’d have been better off . . . don’t give 
them any alternative, just say it has to be security. Then he’d be 
standing up here and he’d say, well isn’t that 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

990 
 

unfair because there’s no flexibility. We give them some 
flexibility and he’s standing up here and saying, well that’s unfair 
because you are being flexible. 
 
Well, I mean, clearly the member and I have disagreed on 
agriculture policy for a long time, and will likely continue to 
disagree for a long time to come. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Premier, I want to ask you: is it your view 
then that the six people that came in and put up another form of 
security — and I don’t know what it is yet, other than signed what 
you asked for here — do you consider them to be stupid having 
done that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I said it’s a choice that the 
individuals have, and that most people would not want to put up 
their farm, wouldn’t want to put up their land — wouldn’t want 
to put it up. So some did, and we said if they don’t want the 
choice, then that’s up to them. And they came in and they asked 
for it and we said we’d entertain it and we’d look at it. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I can only say to the hon. member, if I didn’t 
give him the choice, the alternative, he’d be on my case, because 
well, once you give him, the odd one might want to put up his 
farm. Well I said, all right, I’ll let you put up your farm rather 
than inventory. 
 
Then when he says, well you did that, he says, that’s not fair 
because maybe everybody’d want to put their farm. Well I’ll say 
. . . You know as well as I do, and certainly the caucus members 
that travel the province, they don’t want to put up their land. They 
don’t want to do it. Okay? Now for the odd one, they might, and 
we said we would entertain them. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Premier, why didn’t you give the choice to 
all Saskatchewan farmers, at least for them to choose? Why have 
you. . . You’ve given it to six people. You’ve said they’re stupid 
to do it. And you said that the farmers, to use this option, would 
be stupid. But six did — the ones that were able to make contact 
with the right person, apparently. They could do what they 
wanted to and set up that type of security. Why didn’t you give 
at least the option to all of the farmers of Saskatchewan? That’s 
the question. 
 
You have admitted that you haven’t. And here you’ve got two 
standards, and all we’re asking you is to be fair. Let the farmer 
make the choice. Because you came in, and if you happened to 
have the right connection you could come in and do exactly what 
you wanted to. And you say six people put up different security. 
 
But across this province, I’ll tell you, Mr. Premier, that’s not the 
information that the farmers had, because I’ll repeat to you, many 
of them stroked out the clause (5) and you sent it back and you 
said, fill it out; accept clause (5) or accept the three year. You 
didn’t say, do you have . . . if you find this clause reprehensible, 
if you don’t like this clause, you didn’t write back and say, you 
have the right to come in and to negotiate yet another type of 
security. Isn’t that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, you wouldn’t find people 
who would be concerned about the security

clause — they’d be anxious to put up their home quarter — 
would you? You know . . . or other quarters of land — farm land. 
He’s saying, he’s saying he knows all these farmers who’d put 
up farm real estate as opposed to inventory. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well I know a lot of farmers that had no 
option. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — They always . . . If they don’t have an 
option with respect to it, and he knows the situation . . . So I 
mean, obviously, Mr. Chairman, he must know, or think that he 
knows farmers who would put up the home quarter or quarters of 
land in place of inventory as collateral. And it’s just not the case. 
No place in the world do we know farmers who would rather put 
up their home quarter or land, as opposed to inventory. I mean, 
the odd one might for very unique reasons, but generally farmers 
told us, we don’t want you to take security on the home quarter; 
we don’t want you to take security on farm land. And so that’s 
why we put it in the general security agreement — that’s 
precisely what they asked for. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You don’t make a lot of sense, you know, with 
your logic, but that’s not new in this House. You know, you say 
that six people opted for it. Now either you have to come to the 
conclusion that they were absolutely stupid to opt for it, or you 
gave six people an option that you didn’t give to other people in 
Saskatchewan. Obviously that’s the only conclusions you can 
come to, and six people opted for it. 
 
Now either you’re saying that they’re stupid and you shouldn’t 
have given it to them because they’re stupid, but the fact remains 
is that you didn’t give the other people, other farmers of 
Saskatchewan, the same option that a few had when they sneaked 
into your office or had the right contracts. 
 
That’s the point that we’re making. You’ve been unfair in dealing 
with the farmers of Saskatchewan. That’s the nuts and bolts of 
this because thousands of farmers were forced to sign this. And 
I’ll tell you, I’ll ask you: how many forms did you get back with 
the clause (5) struck out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, we reviewed the production 
loan and the question comes up: do you think that anybody might 
want to offer property, real estate, as opposed to inventory for 
security? And the answer came back, not likely — not likely. 
Most people would put up inventory. 
 
So the question comes back up: well if the odd one did, would 
we entertain it in place of inventory? And the question came 
back: well if the odd one wants to, should we deny them that 
choice? And I said no, don’t deny them the choice, give them the 
opportunity to . . . if they want to offer something else up. The 
odd one might want to put up their farm, but very few will, and 
it bears that out. 
 
Now you would say to me, I shouldn’t have done that. You said, 
well you should have said no, shouldn’t do that, shouldn’t give 
them the choice. And if they want to do it, 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

991 
 

don’t give them that. 
 
Now anybody that wanted to look at the alternative of putting up 
their farm as opposed to inventory, we looked at and we 
responded to . So I mean he’s saying, well no, don’t do it, 
shouldn’t do it, shouldn’t do it. Well I can say, Mr. Chairman, all 
we did is, the odd one might for their own unique reasons what 
to put up the home quarter. We said okay, fine, if you want to do 
that we’ll talk about it. 
 
We could have said as you would, no, we wouldn’t do that, don’t 
want to look at your land. We said, if you want to do that and put 
up the land as an equivalent collateral, or real estate, we’ll look 
at it. 
 
So we’ve given them every choice, given them every choice. And 
if somebody wanted to do that . . . and the average farmers out 
there, as you know, don’t want to put up the home quarter and 
they don’t want to put up land as collateral; they’d rather put up 
security associated with their inventory, either grain or livestock. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I can only say again that farmers, if the odd 
one wanted to put up his farm as opposed to inventory, we said 
we’d look at it, we’d give him that flexibility. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Would you provide us with the names of the six 
farmers that were given the special provision of opting for this 
special putting up of real property, if you want to come clean. 
Because you didn’t offer it to the rest of the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan, the rest of the farmers. Somehow six 
got in to where they were able to negotiate a special deal, which 
other farmers of Saskatchewan weren’t able to. 
 
Why wouldn’t you give all farmers the option — why just six 
that have connections — the right to come in and negotiate what 
they want? You can’t give away saying it’s stupid. Six of them 
opted, an option which other farmers of Saskatchewan didn’t 
have. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Premier, why didn’t you? And if you haven’t, Mr. 
Premier, if you haven’t notified the farmers of Saskatchewan that 
there are special options to clause (5), will you in fact notify all 
the Saskatchewan farmers that, if they come creeping into your 
office, or if they get in contact with the right person, that you’ll 
make a special arrangement for them? Is that the policy of your 
office right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll make the offer to the 
hon. member. If he has any individual farmer, if you have any 
individual farmer that wants to put his farm land up for collateral 
as opposed to inventory, please give me the name of the farmer 
and we would be glad to talk to him. I mean, if there’s any 
individual farmer in Saskatchewan, anybody that would rather 
put up his home quarter or his real estate as opposed to inventory, 
please give me his name, and our officials would be more than 
happy to visit with them. 
 
So in your mind, if any fairness, even if he signed it, if you’ve 
got somebody out there that says, no, I’d rather put up my farm 
land rather than this general security agreement, please let us 
know and we would be glad to

discuss it with him. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Premier, I asked you a question specifically: 
how many applications did you receive back from farmers where 
clause (5) on the initial . . . when they sent it back was cancelled 
or struck out and sent back in that form, deleting clause (5) 
because of their concern that was covering all of their personal 
property. How many of those were sent back to you, and what 
was you response to the farmers of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know how many 
forms come back with a line through it or with somebody writing 
on it. And the response was that you have the alternative to go 
for the three-year money or the 10-year money and the general 
security agreement. And if one or more wanted to put up some 
other kind of agreement, we would talk to them about it with 
respect to the real estate. 
 
I come back to the hon. member and say that if he has any farmers 
that think it’s a good idea to put up their home quarter or real 
estate or would rather trade in that for collateral over this, I mean, 
I would be glad to talk to them, and I’ll call him on this. Okay? 
You find them and we’ll deal with them. You find them and we’ll 
deal with it, and we’ll find out whether it’s really a lot of farmers 
would like to do this or not. And I’d venture to say that not many, 
not many at all would rather put up their home quarter or real 
estate as opposed to a general security. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Premier, you can’t hedge your way out of 
this talking about home quarters. Farmers don’t just farm with 
home quarters. But the question that I asked you is this, and you 
have to know it. Any department, any minister of Agriculture 
would know: how many farmers sent this form back initially with 
striking out clause (5)? 
 
Now don’t say you don’t know. You don’t want to tell us, 
because a lot of farmers wanted more options. A lot of farmers 
were concerned with the degree of security that you requested 
here. A simple question. Ask your officials; they can tell you. 
 
There’s a number of them because there’s a number of them in 
my constituency that sent them back. and what I’m asking you, 
I’m asking you this: how many of these applications did you get 
back with clause (5) stuck out? You can find that information but 
you’re scared to give it. That’s why you’re hiding. You won’t 
even put the facts before the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Here you have a vicious agreement here of all personal property, 
and then on the side, for Tory friends you have another little 
package. That’s what you’re saying here today in the legislature. 
That’s what you’re saying. We got a special deal for special 
people. That’s what you’re saying, and that’s the way you run 
your government. You got special deals for special people. And 
people of Saskatchewan are sick and tired of you with your 
special deals for special people. 
 
And I ask you again, can you give us the information as to how 
many of these forms came back with clause (5) struck out? And 
you can give it if you want. 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

992 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I cannot provide the 
hon. member with the names of individuals who opted for Option 
I or the names of individuals who opted for Option II, or the 
names and numbers of individuals who wrote out . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I didn’t ask for names, I asked for 
numbers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — You asked for the names of the individuals 
that have asked to have their farm property put up. I’m not going 
to give you that. I’m not going to give you the names or the 
numbers of individuals who apply for this or apply for that. I’ve 
told you already that 55 per cent have opted for Option I and 
40-some per cent have opted for Option II, and I’m not going to 
get into the names and addresses of individuals on either option. 
 
And he should know better than that. I mean, he wants to make 
the point, and nobody’s going to believe him. Nobody’s going to 
believe him that the production loan program that we have 
universally . . . I mean, first, Mr. Chairman, he argues that the 
program should not be universal. He says pick and choose. And 
then when we have it universal, he say, oh, but you still pick and 
choose. 
 
I mean, he doesn’t make any sense at all. He wants to stand up 
and try to tell the people of Saskatchewan that the production 
loan program was partisan because it was universal. And then he 
says it’s partisan because you pick and choose. And then it’s 
partisan because you have Option I, II, and III. Then it’s partisan 
for some other reason. I mean, he knows, he knows very clearly 
that it is administered by the agriculture credit corporation across 
the entire province for everybody — north, south, east and west 
— livestock people, grain people and all others. 
 
We’ve given them the option of three years at 6 per cent, 10 years 
at 8 per cent, which included still the three years at six, and they 
can pay it back at any time without a penalty. And he knows that. 
And some, the odd one that’s come in and said, well can I actually 
use my farm land for security as well, we’ve said, if that’s what 
you want to do, fair enough. 
 
Most of the farmers tell us they don’t want to put up the farm 
land, and we know that. It would be a very, very, exception. 
 
And finally, I’ve offered to the hon. member, I said, if you think 
you know farmers that want to put up their farm land as opposed 
to inventory, then I’ll be glad to have my people, I’ll be glad to 
have my people meet with them. And I’ll venture to say that you 
won’t find very many that’ll trade in security, real estate security, 
for inventory in the province. And you know it. You know it. So 
we’ve given them all those options, and they’re there. 
 
And I ask you, if you really think it’s a problem, go find the 
farmers that want to trade in real estate as opposed to the general 
security agreement, and we’ll talk to them all. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. Minister, 
we see again in this House a classic example of a Premier and 
Minister of Agriculture not laying all the

cards on the table. You know, you went from one agreement to 
another agreement, and now we find out there’s another 
agreement. 
 
If you can wheedle your way in somehow to bypass the original 
agreement — an agreement that, I might say, Mr. Minister, that 
some farmers had as few as four or five days to make up their 
mind, to make the decision on which option to sign. And months 
later, we’re finding out that there indeed was a further option. 
 
And it’s not for you, Mr. Minister, to decide whether a farmer 
should make that decision or not. That is none of your concern. 
And yet you say that there is an option beyond Option I and 
Option II if the farmer requested it. And you didn’t give any 
indication. I’ve looked through all my literature, all my 
correspondence, and in no cases has there ever been anything to 
indicate that there was an option whereby you could put in other 
assets. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I ask you this: are there any cases specifically 
where personal properties have been used as assets, any cases any 
specific personal properties have been used as assets — as 
security? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, that’s what a general 
agreement is, personal property. So 99.9 per cent of them have 
used personal property because they didn’t want to use their farm 
land. 
 
And I extend the same offer as I did to the member from Quill 
Lakes. If you know farmers who would rather put up their 
property or their farm land as opposed to their inventory, please 
let me know, and we’d be glad to talk to them — even those that 
have sent them in — and he will find that it will be very, very 
few. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, let me be a little more 
specific by way of example. Are there any cases where farmers 
have the production loan and have negotiated security on that 
loan specifically to a piece of machinery — let’s say a combine 
or a tractor or some other personal property — other than the 
blanket clause which section (5) of this agreement says? Are 
there any farmers who have negotiated a specific agreement with 
a specific personal property? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I’m advised, none. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — So that in other words then, if I came in, if I 
hadn’t negotiated my production loan, I would not be able to say 
I have . . . let’s, for example, say my loan is worth $30,000; I 
have a tractor that is worth $35,000; I can’t assign that tractor as 
security on the production loan. Is that true? Is that what you’re 
saying? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — No, I’m advised that it’s a general security 
agreement or, in the exceptional case, it’s real estate, and over a 
10-year agreement it would, if the member thinks about it, not 
likely be a depreciable asset because of the value for security. So 
I’m advised that they’re general agreements or, in the odd case 
— six out of 50-some-thousand — that somebody has put up real 
estate as opposed to the general inventory. 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

993 
 

Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, can you tell me now: how 
many farmers sent back the production loan forms, either Option 
I or Option II, the number of farmers that sent back the forms 
without full payment under whatever option they considered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well we don’t have the exact number of 
individuals that might have not made the full payments, but we’ll 
have a . . . Approximately, of the 58,000 farmers, 55 per cent of 
that opted for Option I and 45 per cent opted for Option II. Some 
paid the whole thing, and some still have some payments to make 
with respect to meeting their full obligations in either Option I or 
Option II. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think it’s information that 
the general public should have. There are still some contracts, I 
believe, that are pending, people who haven’t made a complete 
decision of what they’re going to do; they’ve sent some money. 
There’s a multitude of ways people are returning these things. 
 
And I think it’s pertinent information that the general public, the 
farmers, and this side of the house should have as to the numbers 
of farmers who have selected an option but not been able to make 
full payment on that option. 
 
Because the next obvious question is: what does the Department 
of Agriculture and ACS intend to do with those people who have 
not made full payment, and how much time are they going to be 
given? Let’s say I can only make partial payment and this could 
be strung out over a number of years. How much latitude are they 
going to be given to repay that loan in full? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that’s what they do 
every day is they sit down with farmers and work out the best 
possibility for them, given the alternatives that the farmer has, 
whether he’s in livestock or grain, or there’s children farm, or 
what other debts that they might have. I mean, that’s the . . . we 
try to be as accommodating as we can, saying at the outset that 
the loan has to be paid back. 
 
Now I can say to the hon. member, the first year we said you 
didn’t even have to pay the principal, pay the interest. Then the 
next year you said, you’ve got an option, you can go to 10 years. 
And some people said, well I still can’t make my full payment. 
Well come in and try, give us your best shot at it, then we’ll hang 
in there with you. And we’ve got counselling and assistance, and 
we’ve got other programs that we provide for people to 
accommodate them. So the agriculture credit people continue to 
work with the farmers. 
 
The only farmers that are in some difficulty, in a legal sense, are 
those that won’t even talk to you, won’t even go in there and say, 
I don’t want to even talk to the credit corporation, I don’t want to 
talk to the credit union, I don’t want to talk to the bank. If they 
don’t talk to anybody, then you’ve got to start some action so that 
you can in fact get some information from them. 
 
But if they’re talking to us, providing us with some

income, providing with some payments and trying, then we’re 
trying to work with them as best we can and as best they can work 
with us. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, I wonder if those farmers 
who refuse to talk would it make a difference if they knew they 
had a third option. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What’s the third option? 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Your third option of signing some other asset. 
Now, Mr. Minister, the problem that we have here is that we just 
laid out before this House the fact that your government changes 
the rules constantly, and these people who haven’t made full 
payment and who can’t make full payment now, I’m sure must 
be wondering, well, what’s coming next? You know, is there 
another way we can get around this? You know, what’s the next 
card that’s going to be played that the government hasn’t told us 
about? Why don’t you come clean with them all and give them a 
break for a change? 
 
The problem that you have . . . Okay, let’s just go back to the 
beginning. I said some people had as much as four or five days 
. . . as little as four or five days with which to make a decision on 
whether to sign Option I or Option II. There was a number of 
people calling me, and I’m assured you and other members of 
your caucus, saying, look, give us 30 days to think this thing over. 
Give us an extension before we have to sign it. Why did you not 
consider that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, let’s make it very clear that 
the loan is just that; it’s a loan, and farmers have to pay it back. 
 
Now we will provide various alternatives to allow them time, and 
they have requested 10 years, and we’ve opted for that. They 
want low, long-run, fixed interest rates, and we’ve done that. 
They’ve said they’d rather use their inventory as collateral than 
farm land. The odd one has come in and said, well, would you 
take my land instead? And we’ve said, look, we’d look at that. 
I’ve offered to you, if you know any farmer today that wants to 
put up his land rather than his inventory, please let me know and 
we’d negotiate with that. 
 
So let’s make it very clear. It’s a loan. It’s to be repaid. We have 
counselling assistance. We have other mechanisms that they can 
use to get access to ongoing credit. We have extended it. We’ve 
kept it low. We’ve done several things, and we’re negotiating 
with farmers every day and being as co-operative as we can. 
 
If I didn’t negotiate with them or if we weren’t co-operative, 
you’d be on my case for not being flexible. When I am flexible, 
you’ll say, well for Heaven’s sakes, you’re flexible. Well we’ve 
got a billion two of taxpayers’ money out to farmers, and most of 
them are making their payments, most of them are doing the best 
they can, and we’re providing flexibility to each and every one 
of them to the best of our ability. 
 
The loan is to be paid. It’s not going to be written off, so make 
that very clear; there’ll be no mistake. It’s a loan, it’s taxpayers’ 
money, and the taxpayer expects the farmers 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

994 
 

to pay it off, in some cases maybe longer than others, but we’re 
as flexible as we can be. But we are encouraging people to pay 
it, and to pay it on time; of course, that’s what we would normally 
do. 
 
The kinds of security are the same security you had when you 
were in power. Farmstart loans were exactly the same, and you 
had a general security agreement. You know all about that. In 
some cases you were flexible under the farmstart agreement and 
you’d work something out with farmers — flexible. Then you’d 
say, well my gosh, you were flexible. Why didn’t you tell 
everybody else that this was the kind of flexibility you had for 
this and that and so forth? 
 
You cut lots of deals for farmers as they come in, from time to 
time in their unique circumstances. Okay. 
 
Now you’re saying, oh, but I can’t; that wouldn’t be fair, if you 
were flexible and had some leeway to help them out. So I mean, 
you can’t have it both ways — either you want flexibility for 
families as they come in and talk to you or you don’t We’ve 
provided it; we’re glad to. 
 
And I offer you — I’ve just extended to you — if you know of 
farmers that want to put up their land, their real estate in place of 
inventory, please let us know, and we would be glad to talk to 
them. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, I find it odd that you talk about 
the flexibility of your administration in your program. When 
farmers had four days to make a decision, you weren’t very 
flexible as to saying, look, we’ll give you another 30 days to 
decide what you’re going to do, and you know that put them 
through severe stress and strain. And then you say you’re 
flexible. 
 
After you had to make a deal with the banks to decide who was 
going to get first right of security, those people who had four days 
to sign had to already make that decision. You weren’t very 
flexible in that respect. 
 
You weren’t very flexible after you told us today earlier that they 
had Option I or Option II. Then we discovered that you say 
you’re flexible; they have another option — that they can assign 
real asset. 
 
But you’re not giving them the facts. You’re not being honest 
with them, and that’s the problem that we’re having here today. 
If you would come clean with the farmers and tell them 
everything that is involved in the program, right up front, then 
we wouldn’t have these decisions. You have constantly, 
constantly come out with changes, little niches and changes in 
your policy, that confuse the farmers as to know what really your 
policy is, because you’re not being honest with them. 
 
Mr. Minister, another aspect of this production loan program that 
I find amazing is that if I choose Option I, then I have three years; 
I have no administration charges. If I choose Option II, I’m 
paying 10 bucks up front for administration, and I’m paying 10 
bucks every year for administration. And those poor farmers who 
choose Option II are those people who can probably least afford 
it, and they’re the people who you’re asking to pay more money. 
And it’s not great sums of money, but it’s the idea

involved. 
 
And so it’s back to your old philosophy to put pressure on those 
guys who are in trouble, to get rid of them, and then maybe things 
will run better. Well that’s not what we believe on this side, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
And I just don’t want to go away again, because it’s still 
bothering me, about the fact that the security, as you said, once 
before, could not be taken on personal properties and designated 
specifically to some asset. Was there any consideration given to 
that option of assigning a personal property specifically, rather 
than the blanket security agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, what the farmers told us, 
and I’m sure that you’re aware of it, is that they didn’t want a 
situation where they were going to trade in their combine or trade 
in their tractor that they’ve got to come and see the government. 
They wanted to say, if I’m going to be able to have operating 
cash into the future and I want to go to my credit union or my 
bank to get operating cash, I don’t want to get permission from 
my government whether I can trade in my tractor for operating 
costs and so forth. 
 
I mean, we generally would accept the general security 
agreement or, in the case of . . . for some, the odd one, id they 
want property. We’ll put it up, but most farmers did not want to. 
I know the hon. member wasn’t listening that carefully, but they 
did not want to have to come to the government to trade in their 
tractor. Do you understand what I’m saying. So they said, general 
security, fair enough — or farm land — but once you tie up 
depreciable equipment, then you’ve got come in and see 
agriculture credit or something else to get it released, to go trade 
it in. And they said, we don’t want any part of that. 
 
Financial institutions also said, on existing loans we understand 
exactly what’s going on. On new loans they want to be able to 
have the same kind of security. And we said, fair enough, that’s 
exactly what we’ll do. So we provided that, then they had no 
problem with extending the production loan to 10 years. 
 
I would say to the hon. member — he says we’ve changed this 
— we have changed it because people asked to have it changed. 
The first time we had three years, and people said, I don’t want 
to pay; I’ll pay my principal for the first year. And we said, we’ll 
change it; you don’t have to pay your principal. 
 
Then the next time they said, we want to make some other 
changes; we want it longer. We said, fine; we changed it. Then 
they said, but when we put it into a 10-year program, we still 
want the same rights as the three-year guy so that we can opt for 
that. We said, we’ll change it. And we want to be able to pay it 
off with no penalties. We said, we’ll change it. we made all those 
changes on behalf of farmers and you stand up and say, you’ve 
made changes. 
 
I mean there . . . I suppose that’s what farmers appreciate. The 
fact is that the government listens and adapts to the kinds of 
things they want. When the NDP were in, there 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

995 
 

was no change at all. It was land bank and that’s it. All you got 
is land bank, period. Land bank — I’ll buy your farm; if you want 
some help, sell me your farm. There was no interest rate 
protection, nothing else; just land bank was it, no change. Or, I’ll 
tell you what we’ll do, if we can just run your industry, if we 
could have supply management and beef, it’ll be fine, and sell us 
the ranch into government and we’ll help you. That’s all there 
was. We’ve got flexibility and an awful lot of flexibility. We are 
not just hung up on the philosophy that says it’s just for 
government. 
 
So when you talk about change, we’re very, very satisfied that 
the changes that farmers wanted . . . First they wanted the 
production loan; then they wanted it to be universal; then they 
wanted some help in terms of paying it; then they wanted an 
extension; then they wanted the same rules as the three-year 
applied to everybody else; then they wanted no penalties to pay 
it up. We’ve made all those accommodations — every one of 
them. And even after that, if they came in and say, would you 
entertain something else with respect to my real estate? We’ll 
entertain that. 
 
And finally today I say to you, if you know somebody that wants 
to put up their land instead of their inventory as collateral, just let 
us know, just let us know. If you want that, if you want to find 
them, please let us know. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, all I can say is that we have been very 
accommodating at the respect of the farmers and they have got 
five or six alternatives. And he says, well you’ve changed. We’ve 
changed every time as a result of a request by farmers. 
 
(1615) 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, I’m happy to say that farmers want to know 
that we will fight for them in deficiency payments, low interest 
loans that will extend long-term credit. Right now we’ll find out 
that in terms of the net income for farmers, 158 per cent of it this 
year is going to come from government. 
 
And because we have stood beside them, as well as the federal 
government, and have changed the view so that we could 
accommodate these circumstances — and obviously the 
members opposite all they can think about is land bank, land 
bank, land bank, you can’t get them out of that route . . . that rut. 
They just . . . they . . . the land bank . . . if the government could 
own your farm. Do you know what it would be like, Mr. 
Chairman, if they had their wish? You’d have tens of millions of 
acres of farm land owned by the land bank. And then they could 
run it, then they could run it and they could say these are the rules 
and this is how they have to market your stuff; here’s how you 
have to do it. 
 
Well I can say to the hon. member the NDP were rejected in 
Saskatchewan across the province, all across rural Saskatchewan, 
and in Manitoba, and in Alberta, and in British Columbia and all 
across the country, for good reason. Farmers don’t trust them. 
They know that the NDP believes in one thing — socialized 
agriculture. That’s what they say, socialism in agriculture. That 
means the government will own the land.

And the member from Regina Rosemont and the member from 
Regina North, they stand in here and say, socialism for 
agriculture. They believe it. Everybody knows they believe it. 
That’s why nobody in rural Saskatchewan wants to have the 
NDP, because they don’t want the government to own the land. 
 
Well I’ll say to the hon. members, he can say that we have 
changed to accommodate farmers; I’ll say, you bet we have 
changed to accommodate farmers, and when they need help 
we’re there. The NDP have not changed. It’s socialized 
agriculture; it’s land bank. Everybody know it; that’s all they 
hear about. They have no new agricultural ideas. They don’t 
come up with any new ideas. The government shall own the land. 
They can meet in Edmonton, they can meet all over the place, 
and all they find is that no new ideas; it’s under review. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I would say, we will accommodate farmer; 
we will continue to give them help. We don’t want to own the 
land; we want farmers to own the land. And any changes we can 
make in government policy to accommodate that, we’ll be more 
than glad to do. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, that little burst reminds me of an 
old badger you’ve got concerned in the chicken coop — he just 
lashes out at anything. And that’s a sign of somebody who’s 
backed into a corner in deep trouble. And that’s exactly what you 
and your government are, because of issues like the production 
loan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, back to the question. If you 
would have taken into consideration specific security on the 
production loan, I would suggest to you that you wouldn’t have 
had the problem of going to the banks and deciding who was first 
up in line for the farm when she went down. 
 
And if you would have only asked for the interest back on the 
production loan, as you did in the first year, that would have 
provided the flexibility that most farmers wanted. Instead you 
changed the rules again, as indicated time and time again. 
Whether it be community pastures or this issue or any other issue 
in here, you come along and change the rules in the middle of the 
stream, and you don’t tell the farmers what all the options are. 
 
And that’s the problem that we’re having. It’s not the fact that 
they don’t want to pay their loans back. Farmers know they have 
to pay them back. It’s the fact that you’re not coming clean with 
them. You’re not telling them what the options are. You’re 
constantly changing the rules. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, as far as the security provision goes, you and 
I know that that caused a tremendous amount of hardship in the 
farm community. And you can say all you like about your 
flexibility, that provision caused great, great stress on the family 
farms, and they didn’t know what to do. You gave them four days 
to make up their minds in the many cases, and now we see that 
there are other options, and we don’t even know yet what all the 
options are, I’ll predict that. 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

996 
 

So Mr. Minister, why did you not look at specific security on the 
production loan that would free up operating capital for farmers, 
and it wouldn’t have put them through this harangue, this whole 
harangue that we had over the last few months? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, nobody would want 
to opt for the option that is mentioned by the member opposite. 
So we didn’t look at it because farmers said they don’t want to 
put up the home quarter. They don’t want to put up specific 
pieces of machinery so they have to come back in here and ask 
us if whether they can trade it. 
 
So, I mean, the general security is precisely what the NDP did. If 
I could just remind them again, general security is what you 
wanted in farmstart. You started farmstart and you had general 
security as part of the agreement. And now you’re saying that 
isn’t the case. And we provide more flexibility and you’re saying, 
well that’s a mistake. I mean, come on. 
 
We’ve gone over this, we’ve gone over this all day. General 
security is what you had in farmstart and you thought it was a 
good idea and now you’re standing in your place and saying it 
isn’t any good. So I mean, how can you say that? Okay, so the 
. . . I mean they . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman, the farmers have asked for the flexibility. We 
have given them a great deal of flexibility — far more, much 
more flexibility than the NDP did. The NDP farmstart, land bank 
and that was it, with general security agreements, period. No 
more of the programs . . . nowhere near the programs we did. 
And I can only say to the hon. member, his suggestion doesn’t 
make any sense at all. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Just a few questions. Mr. Minister, on the 
production loan program you indicated in the House earlier today 
that you had all these requests from farmers to make changes. 
Could you table in this House the actual requests that you had — 
you must have had them by letters — and could you tell us how 
many requests there were? 
 
Or, Mr. Minister, is it something like the Minister of Education 
recently speaking to the Easter council saying that, oh, he detects 
a concern out there of parents that they are not happy with what’s 
going on in education and therefore we need standardized tests? 
When he was asked about, well, who has written to you, how 
many parents? Oh, I detect a concern out there. And when the 
trustees’ association said, no, we don’t want standardized tests 
and the STF (Saskatchewan Teacher’s Federation) said, we don’t 
want standardized test, the minister says he detects a concern. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you tell me: how many letters did you receive 
from individual farmers who — or representations to you — that 
they wanted a change from the three years to the 10 years? Could 
you tell me that first of all. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, we detected a drought in 
’84 — we detected it. Farmers and families across southern 
Saskatchewan felt the real problems of

drought and grasshoppers in 1984 and ’85, and that’s why we 
came up with a production loan program to give them some help. 
And you’re asking me how many farmers wrote me a letter? You 
don’t have to have letters from southern Saskatchewan, 
particularly south-western Saskatchewan, to know that it’s dry 
out there. 
 
They asked for help, and we were there, on a program of drought 
throughout the province of Saskatchewan, ’84-85, and we came 
in with it. Then the price of wheat started to fall off dramatically 
and they said, we can’t come up with all the payment in three 
years; can we postpone it? We said, yes. 
 
Then we had the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) and the wheat pool and the others, all suggesting, 
well some will make the three-year payments, maybe we should 
extend it for 10 years for some. So we did that. And at the same 
time they said, and don’t eliminate the possibility for all of us to 
get in on the three-, six-year money, and therefore no penalties, 
so if we pay it off in advance we still get that 6 per cent. So we 
did that. 
 
I mean, and you’re asking for cards and letters and people telling 
us whether there was a problem in drought, or where there was 
an income problem. You stood here for four days now, or three 
days, talking about the debt in agriculture and you want to know 
how many letters we had and whether there was a problem. 
 
Clearly, clearly, when there is a grasshopper infestation, when 
there’s a drought like we had in ’84 and ’85, farmers need help. 
We put out over a billion dollars across the piece to help, and 
they asked for more help and we helped them. They asked for 
deficiency payments and we helped them. They asked for low 
interest loans, they asked for cash advances, they asked for kinds 
of protection in the north-east because of flood, and we were 
there. We talk to people all the time in rural Saskatchewan, as 
well as urban, and they give us the indication of the things that 
we should do, and you’re saying: how many cards and letters did 
you get telling you that there was a drought or a financial 
problem? 
 
Well I can only say to the hon. member, we have literally put the 
Saskatchewan treasury up, and our shoulder to the wheel, to 
defend farmers in rural Saskatchewan. We will continue to do 
that. We will continue to defend them in the North, in the South, 
in the East, and the West if they need support. And right now 
they do, and they’ve asked for the flexibility, and they’ve asked 
for cash, and they’ve asked for low interest loans, and they asked 
us to help them internationally to get prices up. We will continue 
to do that, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman. 
 
I mean, you’re asking here in the agriculture estimates how many 
letters did we get about drought, as if that was going to make 
some significant difference with respect to whether we come up 
with a production loan or not. I’ll tell you whether we got any 
letters on drought or not. In ’84 and ’85 it was serious and we 
come up with a production loan program because we are close 
enough to farmers; we don’t have to wait for the letters to come 
in, as you probably did, condemning the land bank, to know that 
there’s a problem. And that’s why we dealt with it up 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

997 
 

front and as fast as we did. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t mean to laugh at the 
Premier, but I wish I had kept a hearing aid so that I could have 
given him one. 
 
Mr. Premier, I never mentioned the word drought once. I simply 
asked you how many letters did you receive from farmers to 
change your production loan program from three years to 10 
years. Could you just take it a little bit easy on your intellectual 
capacity and just address yourself to that question. That’s all I 
asked you to do. Okay? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the largest rural 
organization in the province, the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities, that has counsellors all over the province, 
locally elected municipal people, met with us and provided us 
with a recommendation that we extend the three-year to the 
10-year. 
 
The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, which is one of the largest 
organizations on the prairies, and one of the largest in 
Saskatchewan, met with us and recommended that we extend it 
to 10 years. Now they have delegates and members all over the 
province. 
 
Now if you had to pick two organizations that probably 
represented rural Saskatchewan, that you could say the SARM 
clearly covers, on a non-partisan base, everybody, and the wheat 
pool is fairly large. Both those met with me, met with cabinet, 
met with our caucus, and said, please do this. Now that kind of 
representation is fairly significant to me, as Minister of 
Agriculture, and I would think would represent for you an awful 
lot of attitude and conversations and recommendations from 
people all over the province. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the Premier 
addressing the problem. That’s what I was asking in the first 
place. That’s what I wanted to know. Now we’re finally getting 
somewhere. 
 
Now did they also recommend, Mr. Premier, did they also 
recommend to you that you change it from three years to 10 
years, plus nine and three-quarters per cent? Was that also one of 
their recommendations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — No, it wasn’t part of their recommendation, 
as is the production loan program. They recommended that we 
have 7 per cent money out to farmers across the piece. We came 
in with 6 per cent money, so we didn’t follow their 
recommendations. 
 
When we came in with this one they said, extend it and have it as 
low interest rate as possible. And that’s what we did. They also 
said, wherever possible don’t eliminate the three-year 6 per cent, 
so that alternative is always there. So that’s exactly what we did. 
 
So the combination of 6 per cent plus nine and three-quarters, 
because that’s the rate we have for urban as well as rural, was 
fair, and on average it’s 8 per cent money. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Well it’s not quite fair, Mr. Premier. I

remember quite well that Weyerhaeuser, I think, got it at 8 or 
eight and a quarter. So it’s not quite fair, but Weyerhaeuser is so 
poor they needed cheaper interest rates; I understand that. 
 
But, Mr. Premier, what interest rate did Sask Wheat Pool and 
SARM recommend to you on the 10-year term? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t think they did 
recommend any. In my conversation with them, and from what I 
can recall of anything they had written, I don’t think they 
recommended a rate. 
 
They recommended a rate in the production loan program of 7; 
we came in with 6. If they did recommend one here that was 
different than what we have, fair enough. We listened to the 
recommendations and we put them together in the best policy 
possible. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Premier, you mean to tell me that they would 
recommend an interest rate on the three-year production loan 
program, but they would not recommend an interest rate when 
they recommend it to go to the 10-year? You said they 
recommended that you go to the 10-year. And they did then not 
recommend an interest rate — when they would on the one 
program, they won’t on the other? I don’t think that that’s quite 
saleable. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the wheat pool is careful 
when it comes to interest rates in their recommendations — very 
careful, because they charge twenty-three and a half per cent and 
a lot of farmers know that. So when they’re coming in here 
pushing us too hard, they say, well look, you do the best you can, 
you do the best you can. And they know that. 
 
So we said we would be as good as we can, and I don’t think they 
recommended a specific interest rate. If they did, I stand to be 
corrected, but I don’t believe that they did. 
 
(1630) 
 
But they did recommend that we go to 10 years. But I do know 
that it was long-run, low and fixed, but not to have us eliminate 
the three-year option at the front of it. So that if you did opt for 
the 10, you could still get in on the 6 per cent, nine and 
three-quarters for the end, because all urban mortgages are nine 
and three-quarters and that’s only fair, rural and urban, over a 
10-year period of time, long run, as we do with your house and 
farms, and it would average about 8 per cent. 
 
But you know we do the best we can, as I’m sure the wheat pool 
does the best they can, with respect to our interest rate policy. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Premier, I don’t think that the wheat pool 
would appreciate your running at them at 23 per cent, because I 
don’t think that’s quite true that they charge 23 per cent on their 
. . . In my dealings with them, they have not charged 23 per cent, 
and I think you stand to be corrected on that. I think that I would 
take an exception to that as a wheat pool member. I don’t think 
that my organization charges that kind of interest. They 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

998 
 

have not charged me that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well, have you got a special deal? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Well, you know about special deals. Let me talk 
to you about special deals. Give’er snoose, Bruce — Bruce 
knows about special deals too, and we know now who Bruce is. 
And if you have made special deals with your six people — 
whose names you won’t give us — we know that you know about 
special deals. 
 
But I’m not going to get into that, Mr. Premier. I want to ask you 
— let’s stay on the topic: on the production loan program, what 
did they recommend; what did the wheat pool and SARM 
recommend as far as security is concerned? Did they make any 
recommendations as far as security of loan is concerned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I don’t believe that . . . I don’t recall 
that they did make recommendations with respect to security. 
 
But I would just — for the record, this is a country services 
division credit application and credit agreement — just so that 
you know what it is — and it’s 1.75 per cent per month or 23.15 
per cent per year. So just so that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Would you table that for us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Certainly. We’d be more than happy to 
have it. 
 
And with respect to any recommendations on terms of security, I 
don’t recall them making recommendations with respect to 
security. Obviously those that manage the taxpayers’ money 
have to consider all the things that should be considered when 
extending money over a 10-year period of time — we do with 
respect to urban extension at nine and three-quarters; we do with 
respect to rural extension at nine and three-quarters. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Premier, on the production loan program, 
when you first initiated it, you weren’t too concerned about 
security. Why then, when you changed the program, were you so 
concerned about security? If it wasn’t important in the first place, 
why then, without any warning to the farmers — and I can’t 
recall any warning to the farmers — you changed the rules of the 
game? 
 
Why then, suddenly, did it become important for you to tie, very 
closely to the loans, the security, when it the first place, when 
you initiated it, security was no importance at all? Or was it the 
timing of the loan? Was it the timing when you first initiated the 
loan, which was before the ’86 election? Did that have something 
to do with it, maybe? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, it has to do with extending 
a lot of money over a decade, a lengthy period of time. And to be 
responsible from a financial point of view, security is needed in 
taking the taxpayers’ money and extending it over 10 years. 
 
And you would understand that, I’m sure, with respect to the 
farmstart program, where you asked for general security — and 
you did — to protect people. Now if you go over a 10-year 
period, as we do with urban mortgages,

and you go over longer periods of time — I mean, the normal 
things that financial institutions do over a longer period of time 
is to provide for some sort of security. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Premier, I’m not arguing with you on some 
form of security, but you didn’t have any to begin with. What 
changed in the three . . . in that time period? What changed in 
that time period that made you suddenly think that you had to 
have much more security from farmers? 
 
If in 1985-1986 all you needed was a promissory note, no 
security whatsoever, why then suddenly, a year or a year and a 
half later, did you have to change it? What has changed that made 
you change your mind? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I should remind the hon. 
member that the three-year agreement hasn’t changed at all — 
nothing has changed. If you opt for that three-year agreement, 
you’ve got it exactly the way it was signed before the election 
after the election. In fact, we kept the same agreement, even just 
pay the interest. Their allegations about before and after elections 
don’t make any sense at all. You have the same choice — the 
same option. We didn’t change a thing. 
 
Then they came in and said, well give us a 10-year option, and 
we said, fine, you can have a 10-year option, but over a longer 
period of time we’re going to ask for some security. They have 
either way. And they can opt for the 10-year one and still pick it 
up in the second or third year, pay it off, and they have no penalty 
at all. They have every option possible. And it is true, because 
you have that choice today. 
 
Even every individual that signed the 10-year one today, if the 
price of wheat goes up in the second or third year and they want 
to pay it off, they get 6 per cent money, no security; it’s gone; 
there’s no penalty; it’s over. Now that’s before and after — it’s 
everything. I mean, we’ve just accommodated farmers for any 
alternative they want to look at. 
 
So I say to the hon. member, they have that choice, that option, 
and never changed. Before and after, it’s still there. If they want 
to go for a longer one they can, and still no penalty if they want 
to pay it off faster. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Premier, you’re avoiding the question. All 
I’m asking you is, and the wheat pool agrees with that — pool 
against loan repayment changes. The pool agrees that if there was 
no security needed, if there was no security needed before the 
election in ’86, why did you suddenly need security after the 
election? 
 
And don’t come to me with that three years . . . that that three 
years to ten years is what changed your mind, because I don’t 
buy that. I don’t buy that, that there was any magic to the three 
years and the ten years. The magic was that the election was over. 
The election was over, and now you could make some changes, 
unilateral changes without any consultation with the farmers 
whatsoever — without any consultation with the farmers. 
 
You made those changes. Wheat pool and farm organizations 
were upset with that; individual farmers 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

999 
 

were upset with it. They said: look, in the middle of the stream 
you suddenly changed the rules; these were not the rules that you 
gave to me when I took out the loan. 
 
I don’t blame farmers of being upset, because I think they were 
betrayed — one rule before the election, another rule 
immediately after the election. And I think, Mr. Premier, if you 
were honest with the House here and honest with the people of 
Saskatchewan, you’d say to me: yes, member of Saskatoon 
South, you’re absolutely right; I did it; I did it because I had to 
do something that would get the farmers’ vote before the election 
of ’86. Well after election we had a better look at it and we 
realized that we had made a mistake, and we had . . . we made a 
mistake, and we had to get some security. 
 
I think if you’re honest with the people, that’s what you would 
tell them. Isn’t that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I just pointed out to the hon. 
member that the three-year option hasn’t changed at all — before 
or after. Do you understand that? 
 
An Hon. Member: — I know that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well admit that then. Admit that it’s 
exactly the same before as after. And I make it . . . For the 
television cameras, I want the public to recognize that the hon. 
member acknowledged that that’s the case. It’s the same before 
as it is after. If you opted for the three-year program and you stick 
with it afterwards, it’s exactly the same thing. Now he 
acknowledges that that’s the case. 
 
Now farmers said, could you extend it over 10 years — the wheat 
pool did? And we said, yes. We talked to people who have 
extended credit over periods of time. Do you know what they do? 
They have security agreements and they charge very high interest 
rates. 
 
And I’m tabling here for the hon. member — this is the interest 
rate charged by those that are recommending that we have low 
interest rates: 23.15 per cent on the security agreement. Send it 
over to the hon. member. All right? That’s for a security 
agreement. 
 
Now we said, we will treat rural and urban exactly the same — 
nine and three-quarters for the rural and nine and three-quarters 
for urban over a longer period of time. But please acknowledge, 
please acknowledge that the agreement did not change on the 
three-year program, exactly the same today as it was when we 
took it out. So he can’t . . . you can’t say that’s the case. It’s the 
same as before election; it’s the same afterwards. 
 
Except now we’ve given them another option with no penalties 
to pay off any time they want, and that’s complete flexibility. So 
your “garbledegook” with respect to pre-and post-elections has 
no credibility at all — none, because it is exactly the same 
program before and after. And to make that allegation is . . . well 
you should be able to back it up — back I up. 
 
You have to admit that if we didn’t change it, even giving them 
the alternative to go to 10 years, it’s exactly the same program 
before and after. And everybody has that choice. Some have 
opted for the 10-year program so that they get

access to 8 per cent money over the long period of time. That 
we’ve asked for security —we do all the time — and you did and 
so does the wheat pool and others. You don’t have to have 
security now if you opt for the same one you had prior to the 
election. Acknowledge that fact, and then we can get on with 
some common sense here. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — I’d love to get on with some common sense, but 
I’m having some tough time with you. I also remember some 
common sense when you wrote an article some years ago where 
you said 80 per cent of the farmers are inefficient; I remember 
that too. That wasn’t common sense. No, that was economic 
agriculture — I think that’s what you called it — where 80 per 
cent of the farmers are inefficient. 
 
Let me say to the member opposite: if you didn’t need any 
security in the first place — when you put out the production loan 
program, you didn’t ask for any security; you asked for no 
security — why then is it so important, when the farmers are in 
worse shape today, for you to ask for security? If in the first place 
you said: I believe the farmers; I can give them the loan; I know 
they will repay it if they can; I don’t need any security because I 
have faith in the farmers — why then immediately after the 
election, suddenly you lost your faith in the farmers, you no 
longer can trust them? Now we need security; now we want not 
only general security, but now he’s talking about asking for their 
home quarter. No farmer in his right mind would put up the home 
quarter for security. Why would they? 
 
I’m simply saying to you, Mr. Premier, if you needed no security 
before the election, why do you need security now, or are you 
assuming that the position right now of the farmer is such that 
you cannot have the faith in them now that you had before ’86? 
 
Mr. Premier, I want to say to you again: I think that you changed 
your mind after the election — after the election; you had won 
your election. I don’t think you were totally honest with the 
farmers. You pulled them in. You said: all right, here, I’m going 
to give you all this money; I’m going to be Santa Claus; no 
security — no security, I’m going to be the farmer’s helper. But 
once they voted for you, you betrayed them. You then came in 
and said, no, now I no longer trust you, and I want security. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Premier, what prompted you to change that 
position from no security to security, that’s what I want to know. 
What changed you position from no security to security? And 
don’t tell me it was because of the term, from three years to 10 
years. I don’t buy that and the farmers don’t buy that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there is no change in 
the original option. You opted for three-year money before the 
election, and the option now is for three-year money and there’s 
no security. So what are you talking about? There’s no change; 
you have exactly the same option now as you did prior to the 
election, exactly, exactly. 
 
Now when we go to the 10-year, we ask for security. Over a 
10-year period of time, with $1.2 billion out, the taxpayer, as we 
do urban and rural, has to have some security when you’re 
looking over 10 years. Now they’ve 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1000 
 

got this same principle before as they do after — exactly the 
same. And I’ve reminded the individual — how many times this 
afternoon? The same situation before as after. If you opt for the 
three-year, you’ve got the same interest rates, no security, exactly 
the same thing. 
 
People have come to us and said, give us a 10-year one and we 
said, 10 years, we’re asking for security; three years, you’ve got 
it exactly the way it was. 
 
So the question whether it was any different before or after — 
there’s no difference. If we hadn’t opted for the 10-year, you’d 
have exactly the same before as after. Would you acknowledge 
that? 
 
An Hon. Member: — I didn’t ask you that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — No, but you’ve got to acknowledge that 
that’s exactly the way it was. when you want an alternative, we 
come out with the alternative. And the alternative is there. Maybe 
you miss it. 
 
Do you understand that prior to the election we said three years 
at 6 per cent money, no security. Today you have the option of 
three years, 6 per cent money, no security. Now that’s exactly the 
same, Mr. Chairman, exactly the same. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Could you sit down and I’ll ask you the 
question. 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well you’ve asked the same question 14 
times. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Speaker, the NDP must have a strategy. They’ve 
asked the same question for two or three days — the same one. 
They’re not off Item 1; the same thing over and over again; 
they’re trying to impress people in rural Saskatchewan that they 
know something about agriculture. They’re all standing up and 
say, well we’ve got . . . this is their strategy — we’ll ask the 
Premier the same question 20 different time so we can impress 
the public that we have some concern for agriculture. How many 
letters did you get, Mr. Premier, on drought? How many letters, 
Mr. Premier, did you get on, we should extend this? How many 
letters did you get with respect to deficiency payments? 
 
I mean, they . . . I mean, somebody . . . I mean, I don’t know 
who’s doing your research, but if this is the plan, to have days 
and days of the same questions to look like you know something 
about agriculture — I’m sure people have turned the television 
off a long time ago, a long time ago — that this is going to be the 
new policy by the NDP. Politically they’re going to say, now, 
look at all the questions we can ask the Minister of Agriculture 
— the same question over and over and over and over again. 
 
And I say to the hon. member: you had a three-year option with 
no security at 6 per cent prior to the election; and I say, you have 
a three-year option a 6 per cent after. And he asks the question 
all over again: but why, Mr. Premier, is it different? And I answer 
him again: you have the same option before as you did 
afterwards.

Well, Mr. Chairman, I suppose if we come out with a new 
program with a deficiency payment that went up another $25 an 
acre, he’d say, whey did you change it later? I mean, he’s all for 
change, and then when we make a change, he say, but you 
changed your mind; you changed your mind; you’re going to give 
them more. We’ve given them more and more and more and 
more, and now he’s standing up and saying, but you changed 
your mind. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I can say to the hon. member — and I’m sure the 
public has shut their television off long time ago. You’ve now 
duly impressed the public that you can ask questions in 
agriculture. You stood up and you said — from Regina North 
East and from Regina Centre and from Saskatoon Nutana, 
Saskatoon South — they stood up and said: we can ask a question 
in agriculture; boy, we’ll ask him, what was it like before and 
after the election. 
 
And I’ve said: how many times; how many times, please? How 
many times have I answered the same question the same way. 
You had an option before and an option afterwards. People said, 
keep it exactly the same way, add a new option that would extend 
it over time, and have some security. 
 
Now we extended it over time, asked for some security. The 
financial institutions and the farmers have all responded, and they 
said, it’s just fine. But the NDP said, no, we’ve got to have a little 
more mileage here in agriculture, because we didn’t do well in 
Manitoba in agriculture. we got blown away in rural Manitoba. I 
mean, all you’ve got left is northern Saskatchewan, but all the 
rest of the farmers, they didn’t want any part of you, no part of 
you at all. They said, the NDP just wants land bank in Manitoba, 
they want land bank in Alberta, land bank in Saskatchewan. The 
people don’t want any part of you. 
 
So you say, we’ve got to impress them. We’d better get the 
member from Saskatoon south to stand in his place and ask him 
a really tough question on agriculture, something really, really 
critical, something real critical. And then we’ll get the member 
from Regina North East to as a question on agriculture, and 
another member from Saskatoon, a member from Rosemont, 
he’ll stand up and he’ll say: but what about water in 
Saskatchewan; what about Rafferty? 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, how many times can I respond to the hon. 
members when they said, why did you extend the loan for 10 
years? I extended it because people asked for it. They wanted an 
extension. The public wants some security when you extend it. 
But the original option is identical today as it was before. The 
new option is longer and it comes with security. Now he says, 
but you changed. Obviously I changed. I give them a new option. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I can only say to the hon. member, he will 
probably ask — mark my words, mark my words; I want 
everybody to listen — he’ll ask the same question again: is it the 
same before as it is after? And I give it to the hon. member, ask 
the question again — and it will be for the 24th time — please 
rise in your place so that all the public can hear you ask the same 
question again. 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1001 
 

Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, there is a real display of a man 
under quite a bit of real pressure. I know you’re worried about 
Wednesday. I wonder where you’ll be on Thursday. You won’t 
be in this House on Thursday. I know you’re under a lot of 
pressure, but don’t demonstrate that kind of irrationality in the 
House here, Mr. Premier. We would appreciate if you just stuck 
by the Department of Agriculture. 
 
But you just displayed why you’re here so long. I asked you a 
simple question, a 15-second, and you went on for five minutes, 
you know, going over everything except the question I asked you. 
But I’ll ask you very slowly, I’ll ask you very slowly: Mr. 
Premier, the wheat pool said that no security was required before 
the election of 1986. Now you go after the election, when you’ve 
won it, you say: well now I suddenly realize that, you know, I 
have no security on this loan, so I’ve got to change this thing 
because the people of Saskatchewan are demanding that I have 
security. But they didn’t demand this before the election of 
course — of course they didn’t. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Premier, anybody can see through that 
glass house. You’re not going to fool anybody with that kind of 
illogic. I will ask you the question, Mr. Premier: why, why, Mr. 
Premier, did you not need security on your three-year loan, and 
suddenly under a 10-year loan you need security? Why — why 
did you have to have security? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. He has asked 
the same question again, and I’m sure the public will appreciate 
the same answer. The answer is, on the three-year agreement 
there is no change at all. On the alternative, which is a longer 
period to pay it back, there is a change in the interest rate and 
there’s a change with respect to security. It’s a new program, a 
brand-new program. The old one is identical. If you stay with the 
three-year one, it’s exactly the same today as it was prior to it 
starting. 
 
The new program is just that — new. Now we did not opt for the 
interest rate charged by the wheat pool; we didn’t opt for some 
other interest rates. We said we’ll go nine and three-quarters and 
we’ll have some security, and over 10 years it’ll be 8 per cent 
money. 
 
So if he could just follow it, on the original program there’s no 
change at all. On the new program, it’s new; it’s new, with longer 
term security and a different interest rate. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Such a non-answer. Mr. Premier, why don’t you 
admit and be honest with yourself. One was before the election 
and the other one was after the election. You know that 10-year 
term had absolutely nothing to do, absolutely nothing to do with 
why you needed security — absolutely nothing at all. The 
election was over and now you could put it to the farmers. You 
changed it without any discussion with the farmers at all. You 
simply . . . and the wheat pool didn’t recommend it; SARM 
didn’t recommend it. The election was over; now you could do 
it. 
 
Mr. Premier, obviously you’re not going to answer it, but I want 
to say to the people of this province, the real reason

was, before the election he needed to get the votes of rural 
Saskatchewan to get himself re-elected, therefore he wasn’t 
honest with them. He wasn’t honest with them; he tried to pull 
the wool over their eyes. And after the election, yes, after the 
election he didn’t have to worry. No. 
 
I say to the Premier, Mr. Premier, if I may ask you another 
question . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Premier, I want to ask you a question now on 
the farmers who asked to have their loans changed. Would you 
tell me, would you tell me why or how many farmers had struck 
out clause (5)? How many farmers on that loan . . . The same 
question was asked by the member from Quill Lakes. 
 
I know you may not know the answers, but your officials will. 
The officials will know how many have come in and how many 
people struck out clause (5), because a number of the farmers I 
talked to and asked me about it, I simply said, look, I’m not a 
lawyer. I won’t advise you. Go and see you lawyer. Go and see 
your lawyer. That’s what I told them, to go and see their lawyer. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The member from Riversdale. Right? And 
this is how you can foreclose on them. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — And . . . Well, I say . . . I want to have the . . . I 
want to let the farmers of Saskatchewan know that the Premier is 
laughing at this and making a joke about the whole situation — 
a situation . . . The Premier is sitting in his desk right now and 
laughing at the farmers of Saskatchewan who are concerned 
about clause (5), who are concerned about clause (5) enough to 
go to their lawyers to try and find another option. 
 
And I’m asking the Premier again: how many of the farmers that 
have sent in their reapplication, how many have struck out clause 
(5)? Ask your officials on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member talks 
about being concerned for farmers. We have provided low 
interest rate loans for farmers; we have provided cash advance 
for farmers; we’ve provided deficiency payments for farmers; we 
provided programs for water, programs for drought protection 
and flood protection, processing and manufacturing; all kinds of 
incentives — rural gas, individual line service, burying power 
lines, literally billions of dollars. And this year alone, this crop 
year, the over two billions of dollars for farmers. And he talks 
about concerns for farmers. 
 
When the NDP was in government there wasn’t a dime at 20 per 
cent interest rates, and he can talk about concerns. He didn’t have 
a concern for them. He had on alternative — land bank. The 
government can own your land. That was it. Nothing else. 
 
And he shouldn’t even . . . he shouldn’t even speak about helping 
farmers. And then he stand up and he says, well he recommended 
the farmer go to their lawyer if there’s in trouble. It wouldn’t be 
to the law firm of the member for Riversdale, because he’d be 
the first to foreclose on it. 
  



 
May 2, 1988 

 

1002 
 

And he knows that. I mean, that’s pathetic. What a hypocritical 
stance to stand there and say he’d refer a farmer to a legal firm 
when his leader is foreclosing on farmers. 
 
You know better than that. I mean, no wonder. I’ve got letters 
here from farmers who said, written to the member for 
Riversdale, and said, your firm foreclosed on me. Your firm 
foreclosed on me. People from Albertville, who said that law firm 
. . . the Bank of Nova Scotia said, all right, you’re on contact, you 
foreclose on farmers on my behalf. And you talk to me about 
looking after farmers. 
 
You know that this province is based on agriculture and based on 
rural people and based on farm families, and when they’re in 
trouble, we have gone to the wall and put our treasury at stake — 
$1.2 billion at stake in a production loan program. And you’re 
asking me if we’ve got more flexibility. You know very well that 
you can get one year mortgage at 9 or 10 per cent, and if you go 
to a 10-year mortgage it goes up considerably. Any financial 
institution will tell you that, regardless of when you did it. 
 
The hon. member, you know this. When you buy a one-year 
mortgage it’s at a low rate. When you buy a three-year mortgage, 
it’s a little higher. If you go to a 10-year mortgage, it’s at a higher 
rate. And you know that. It’s got nothing to do with anything else 
except when you extend the length of the term the interest rate 
goes up, the risk goes up, and the security goes up. That’s just 
normal. You know that. 
 
But you’d stand in your place and talk about . . . talk to the public 
about concerned about farmers. All you had was land bank and 
succession duties and death taxes, and then when you got kicked 
out of office, your leader went and made a living foreclosing on 
farmers. You should be ashamed of yourself. You shouldn’t even 
mention agriculture in the legislature. You haven’t earned the 
right to talk about agriculture in this province or indeed across 
the country. You don’t understand backing them up. You say you 
defend the poor. Well the shenanigans you got caught doing in 
this by-elections, I mean, you don’t defend the poor. 
 
You said, oh it’s fine to deal with them as long as they’re poor. 
Right? Students is poor. You don’t defend students. What do you 
say to them? Eighteen thousand students, bye boys, you don’t 
have to write exams, we’ll defend the union leaders. Right? We 
asked the professors to go back to work so people could write 
their exams, rural and urban. 
 
Do you know what rural people said? Rural people said they 
wanted their students to write exams. And the NDP said, I don’t 
care. I don’t care about rural people. We’ll stick up for those 
radical few professors who said, I’d rather strike. That’s what 
they said. 
 
Now you don’t defend students, you don’t defend farmers, you 
don’t defend families, you just stand up there and say, we defend 
the poor. Well rural people understand what you did for them. 
You took their farms — you took their farms. You had land bank 
to offer them. You don’t understand agriculture; you never did. 
What’s more, people across Manitoba and across Alberta and

Saskatchewan, every place in rural Canada, know that you don’t 
understand them. They don’t vote for you; they have no reason 
to vote for you because you don’t understand agriculture. 
 
I’ll say to the hon. member, we are going to continue to support 
agriculture — farm families, individual members, processing, 
manufacture, livestock, cash advances. We’re going to continue 
to provide rural gas to towns and villages and farmers to help 
them. We’re going to continue to lobby internationally for higher 
prices. We’re not going to be like the member from Humboldt 
who said it’s okay to subsidize in Europe. I mean, that’s going to 
go all over Humboldt, I’ll tell you, that he stood in his place here 
and said it’s okay for Europeans to subsidize agriculture and 
wreck our lives here. That’s the NDP’s position. Just do it like 
good old Europeans, just subsidize and wreck our prices. And he 
says it’s fine. 
 
We understand, Mr. Chairman, that rural people need to be 
defended. We’re going to defend their families; we’re going to 
defend them against high interest rates, against drought, against 
grasshoppers, against international unfairness. We’re going to go 
to the wall for them, and we’re going to put our back to the wall 
and our treasury to the wall to defend them. And you stand here 
and say, well you have some flexibility, you’ve got all these 
programs. 
 
Well, I can only say to the hon. member, we are not isolated to 
socialist views, that it’s only land bank and that’s all we’ve got. 
I mean, people didn’t come to this province and to this country 
for the government to own their land. That’s why they left 
Europe; that’s probably why your ancestors left Europe. They 
probably left Europe to own their own farms. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — And you know that that’s true. They came 
here to own their own land, to own their own businesses, to build 
their own schools and build their own churches, and do all those 
kinds of things that they couldn’t do in Europe because the 
government owned everything. 
 
And he stands there, Mr. Chairman, he stands there and says: I 
want to see some action in agriculture. He doesn’t deserve the 
right to speak about agriculture and in this legislature. He’s going 
to hear a lot more about sound agriculture policies as opposed to 
just land bank and socialism for rural people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


