


















































June 2, 1988 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 2, 1988 
 

1791 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Education 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I 
rise to express some concerns this evening that I share with 
many people of Saskatchewan regarding the possible impact of 
the free trade agreement particularly as it applies to education 
— this being the Education estimates — specifically as it 
applies to education. 
 
There has been very little public discussion on education in the 
current free trade debate and it’s perhaps time we looked at the 
issue squarely. So I indicate to the minister that I propose to 
take several minutes to outline a sort of a general position and 
then I will be following this with a series of questions related to 
questions which I will raise in the entire position paper. 
 
While the free trade debate has focused on economics, many of 
those people who are knowledgeable about education are 
concerned that our educational system may be radically altered 
as a result of this trade agreement. If there are two words that 
characterize the public concerns regarding the impact of trade 
and free trade on education, they are “confusion” and “anxiety.” 
 
People are confused because they keep getting different stories. 
First, we are told that social programs were not on the table; 
then Peter Murphy said that everything was on the table. We 
were told that culture wasn’t on the table; then we learned that 
while that might be true under article 2005-1 that article 2005-2 
allows the Americans to retain the right to retaliate when 
measures in our cultural sectors impair benefits that the 
Americans might otherwise have enjoyed under the free trade 
agreement. Some protection that is, I say. 
 
We were told that we could great general economic benefits 
from this agreement; then in 1987 a federal government study 
of 70 to 72 sectors reported that manufacturers in the following 
educationally related areas will be in difficulty under free trade 
and those areas are: coded paper, writing paper, books — 
presumably including textbooks — office equipment and 
computer services. 
 
We were told that giving up the postage subsidy would not 
harm our magazines; then the Canadian Periodical Publishers’ 
Association, representing 260 magazine distributing and 150 
million copies . . . distributing 150 million copies a year, many 
of which are used in our schools, told us that many magazines 
would be at serious risk. 
 
We were told that our educational system would not be affected 
by the agreement. Indeed the propaganda promised that 
economic returns of the free trade would give  

us the means to more richly fund education. Then a leader of 
the Canadian Teachers’ Federation told us that the education 
system would be put seriously under risk under the free trade 
agreement. Why? Because it would be forced to conform more 
closely to the American counterpart. 
 
It’s no wonder that people are confused, and this confusion has 
led to anxiety regarding free trade and education. Education in 
Saskatchewan is almost sacred — sacred to the people of 
Saskatchewan. At the practical level, education gives people 
power over their lives — power to know, to understand, to find 
a better way, to build a career. Education opens the doors of 
families for those most disadvantaged — the poor, low wage, 
the unskilled people, immigrants, aboriginal people, and the 
handicapped. It is through education the people obtain the 
ability to exercise choices and options in their lives. 
 
At the spiritual or philosophical level, education is the way 
societies preserve their cultural heritage and pass it on to the 
young. It’s the way we instil attitudes about what we feel is 
true, what is real, what is good. To do this, a society needs 
control, not only of the physical structure of education, but also 
the vital intellectual content of education, and it needs to control 
the processes used. It is for these reasons that education is a 
crucial instrument of public policy. 
 
As parents, we want assurance that both the practical and the 
spiritual aims of education are carried out. And what I am 
concerned about, and I share this anxiety with growing numbers 
of Saskatchewan people, is this, and I pose the general question 
to the government opposite: does the free trade agreement in 
any way jeopardize our ability as a distinct society to achieve 
our practical and spiritual aims in education? It’s very important 
that this question be asked, addressed and very important to 
have clear answers. And I will repeat the question. Does the 
free trade agreement in any way jeopardize our ability as a 
distinct society to achieve our practical and spiritual aims in 
education? 
 
The immediate answer from the Premier and other free trade 
partisans will be, no. But I am concerned and sceptical because 
close reading of the agreement raises profound questions, 
questions the government must address. 
 
First, let’s take a look specifically at articles 105 and 502 of this 
proposed agreement. These articles guarantee, and I quote, 
“natural treatment (to American firms in) . . . investment and to 
trade . . .” as well as, and I quote, “treatment no less favourable 
than the most favourable treatment accorded.”  
 
These general articles, when combined with the provisions of 
chapter 14 on services, raise serious questions. These sections 
would appear to prohibit this province from ensuring Canadian 
content in curriculum materials, from favouring provincial or 
Canadian suppliers of school supplies, or from any measure to 
ensure that the Canadian heritage is safeguarded in the materials 
we use in our schools. They appear to open the doors of our 
schools to increased influence of the  
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1792 
 

American market-place over our chosen Canadian way. 
 
So I ask, under these sections, would not policies to protect 
Canadian educational software manufactures and Canadian 
publishers with preferred market access be prohibited, and 
would not rigorous standards of Canadian content in such 
materials as they . . . in such materials be seen as non-tariff 
barriers, and hence a violation of the trade agreement? Will not 
these sections halt our recent gains in Canadian content 
standards and educational materials and push us back to the 
increasingly U.S. service curriculum? 
 
Next let’s look at book publishing. We’ve been told that the 
previous protection of Canadian book publishing will continue. 
While this may be true on investment and take-overs, it may not 
be true in terms of text procurement policies. Can we as a 
province demand under the terms of this free trade agreement 
that texts and teaching aids be Canadian? Can we impose a 
Canadian content rule? Can the Department of Education ensure 
it? Can school boards guarantee a Canadian content rule? Can 
anyone control a Canadian content rule? 
 
Can we ensure that texts will reflect our multicultural heritage, 
our native heritage, our bilingual status, our identity as 
Canadians? Can we assure that by virtue of their origin our 
curriculum materials will have a Canadian bias as opposed to a 
U.S. bias? 
 
Will such non-tariff marketing and procurement barriers be 
allowable under the free trade agreement? I’m concerned that it 
would not be allowed, and I am joined by many in asking this 
government for an ironclad assurance that what appears to be 
just marketing and trade policies will not in fact begin to erode 
our capacity to make vital educational decisions. 
 
Such anxieties are heightened when we closely read the free 
trade sections on services in chapter 14. There is nothing there 
to tell us that educational services are excluded from the free 
trade agreement. Article 1402 gives, and I quote again, national 
treatment, and I quote, “no less favourable” treatment 
assurances to all U.S. private suppliers of services. 
 
Article 1403 tells us that we cannot discriminate against 
American supplies of educational services based on 
certifications of licensing. Then annex 1408 lists the following 
educationally related services covered by the free trade 
agreement, and they include: commercial educational 
correspondence services, scientific and technical services, 
management consulting services, librarian services, training 
services, educational research services, and computer services. 
 
Now it’s quite clear that the above list includes just about 
everything that goes on in our school system, expect those 
services provided directly by government. More than that, the 
free trade agreement opens up to American access the 
contracting out of support and maintenance services and to 
supplying our schools with everything from paper clips to desks 
to business machines and light bulbs. 
 
Finally, Mr. Chairman, there’s a great anxiety, a great  

public anxiety about the broad commitment to harmonize the 
economics of Canada and the United States. This move to 
harmonize is deeply worrisome to Canada’s educators and to 
the Canadian public. If harmonization means establishing a 
so-called level playing-field and becoming competitive with the 
U.S., it therefore means that Canada must become more like the 
U.S. in order to compete successfully, and in order to avoid 
retaliation under the U.S. trade laws. 
 
The mouse will harmonize with the elephant; the elephant will 
not harmonize with the mouse. But before we harmonize on 
education, we should first see how Canada and the U.S. are 
different in that area. Then we should ask whether those 
differences are good or are they bad. 
 
Let’s look at several items. Item one: Canadians, we know, put 
a larger share of natural resources into education than the 
Americans do — 5.3 per cent of personal income in Canada, a 
full 5.3 per cent, in 1984 went to the K to 12 system. In the U.S. 
only 3.7 went — we’re different. 
 
Item number two: Canada assures equity and resource 
distribution, especially through revenue sharing and 
equalization payment, the Americans do not do that. 
 
Item number three: Canada spends more per pupil than the U.S. 
does. In the 1983 to 1986, Canada sent an average of $3,420 — 
American dollars; U.S. — per pupil, while the U.S. spent 3,199 
on the average per pupil. I repeat those figures: Canada spends 
an average of 3,420 U.S.; the American’s spend an average of 
3,199. 
 
(1915) 
 
And Canada’s spending was more fairly distributed throughout 
the nation. We have less disparity interprovincially than there is 
between the states in America. We can say that the lowest 
provincial spending in Canada was 61 per cent of the highest 
provincial spending when we compare disparities. While in the 
U.S., there’s a greater disparity; the lowest spending state only 
spends 42 per cent of the highest. We’re different, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Item three: Canada has lower pupil-teacher ratio than 
Americans have. It’s 17.5 pupils per teacher on the average here 
versus 17.8 in the U.S. It’s a significant difference, and we 
know then in the States there’s much . . . In Canada there’s 
much less national variation. 
 
Next item: Canada’s funding system is fair. In 1983 and ’84 the 
provinces provided 69 per cent of the funds for K to 12, while 
local governments provided 24 per cent. What’s it like in the 
States? The breakdown is 48 per cent, compared to 45 per cent 
at the local level. Our local government, 24 per cent; American 
local governments, 45 per cent. 
 
Now this pay-as-you-go can be explained another way. A 
person I talked to recently was taking classes at the University 
of Oregon. It was indicated that an equivalent of one U.S. class, 
which would be six credit-hours, costs $720 tuition in America. 
A U of S (University of  
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1793 
 

Saskatchewan) class — one class at our University of 
Saskatchewan — costs 276. So compare those tuitions — 720 
versus 276. 
 
Another item: Canada pays teachers and professors better here, 
and they have collective bargaining rights throughout the 
nation. In the U.S. only 33 states provide such rights. We have 
an accreditation system where our teachers, those who are 
teaching grade 12, go through a scheme where they have to 
have the approval of the board and the department and their 
peers before they can teach at that level. That way we guarantee 
our quality. Clearly our standards are higher than the 
Americans’ are in many ways. 
 
Now the key to our success here has been our determination to 
forge a raising of standards to those rivalling the more advanced 
societies, not to lowering to those lagging behind. 
 
Now I say these are good differences, Mr. Chairman, 
differences to be proud of. And the defence of just such 
differences is one of the reasons why the Canadian Teachers’ 
Federation, representing 220,000 teachers in Canada, oppose 
the free trade agreement. Canada’s and Saskatchewan’s 
leadership in education is known world-wide. It’s known in 
areas like distance education, community-based research, 
innovative community colleges, mass quality education, 
community schools, core curriculum development, and so on. 
 
The question is: will this trade agreement undermine that 
leadership? Will this trade agreement put pressure on Canada’s 
education system to become more like that of the U.S.? Can this 
government guarantee that our spending on education in 
Canada and in this province won’t harmonize down to U.S. 
levels? 
 
Will we begin to allow a return to those inequities in 
educational access and opportunity we have striven for 
generations to overcome? More importantly, will the move to a 
level playing-field with the U.S. put pressure on us openly 
allowing U.S. values into our curriculum at the expense of 
Canadian values? 
 
Will there be pressure to teach our children to be more 
economically ruthless, competitive, and individualistic in order 
to survive in a North American free trade jungle? Will values 
like co-operation, interpersonal support, sharing and caring be 
discarded as irrelevant in the new market reality? 
 
As you see the people of Saskatchewan have every right to be 
anxious about the impact of the free trade agreement in our 
educational system. And the people of Saskatchewan look to 
this government opposite for the assurances and commitments 
to protect and to nurture our educational system which we so 
highly value and urgently need. 
 
That was a summary, Mr. Chairman, of some of the points I 
wanted to raise and questions I wanted to ask. I will ask a 
specific question and invite the minister to reply either in total 
or to individual questions as he pleases. 
 
My first question, Mr. Minister, would be: do you agree or  

do you dispute the fact that article 105 accords national 
treatment with respect to investment and trade in goods and 
services — goods and services — and that that would include 
educational services such as curriculum materials and school 
supplies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, before we recessed 
tonight at 5 o’clock, I somewhat facetiously bantered across to 
the opposition that, given that we were coming into Education 
estimates tonight, that we ought to have a debate on the impact 
of the free trade agreement on education. I was being quite 
facetious, but lo and behold, that’s exactly what we are opening 
up the examination of estimates with tonight. 
 
The timing is unique in that a few days ago, an article in The 
Globe and Mail appeared and it was entitled, “Free trade’s 
impact on education deserves an F,” and it was written by two 
researchers at the Ontario — and I would underline that, Mr. 
Chairman, Ontario — Institute for Studies in Education. When I 
read that article, as a lot of stuff that’s written in Ontario about 
the free trade agreement, it disturbed me greatly, Mr. Chairman. 
So I asked my officials and the officials in the Trade and 
Investment department to do some research for me on this, and 
with that research I put together a letter which I sent to the 
editor of The Globe and Mail May 26, Mr. Chairman. And it 
went like this, because I think the questions the hon. member 
asks — not asks so much as the statement he’s read — 
contained a lot of the same misinformation and disinformation 
as the article written by the researchers at the Ontario Institute 
for Studies in Education contained. 
 
I can think of no better way to answer his question about the 
impact of the free trade agreement on education than by reading 
this letter into the record, Mr. Chairman. And it goes like this: 
 

I would like to respond to an article in The Globe and Mail 
from May 19 written by two researchers at the Ontario 
Institute for Studies in Education (“Free trade’s impact on 
education deserves an F”). The essence of the article is that 
free trade poses a threat to our education system by 
opening the way for American textbooks to displace 
Canadian materials in our class-rooms. On this basis, the 
writers urge Canadians to reject the free trade agreement. 
 
I think it’s important for your readers to know that this 
argument is entirely incorrect. In the first instance, as the 
writers concede, American textbooks already enjoy 
considerable freedom of access to our class-rooms. This is 
because American publishers who enjoy local economies 
of scale can produce cheaper materials. It has nothing to do 
with trade policies. 
 
However, Canadian schools and provincial governments 
have the solution to this problem in their own hands. We 
can, and often do, decide to pay the additional cost 
required to purchase materials produced specially for our 
own school systems. That right has always existed and is 
entirely unaffected by the free trade agreement. 

  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1794 
 

Indeed, the agreement specifically . . .  
 
And in this letter, Mr. Chairman, the next line I read was in 
bold type: 
 

Indeed, the agreement specifically excludes provincial 
procurement practices. Under the terms of the agreement, 
provincial governments can continue to insist that our 
textbooks be written by Canadians and published by 
Canadian firms. It is simply a matter of our being willing 
to pay more for the specialized needs which meet our ends. 
 
However, there is a far larger issue which seems to have 
eluded the writers (and where I’ve put writers in here, Mr. 
Chairman, we could say NDP) entirely, namely, how are 
we to continue paying for social programs without a strong 
economic base? 
 
In my own province, education represents the second 
largest expenditure of public funds, exceeded only by 
health care. In our most recent budget, four out of every 
five new dollars went toward education and health. Over 
the last years our government, like all other provinces and 
like the federal government, has been forced to borrow 
funds and at the same time raise taxes to maintain social 
programs. But it must be obvious that this is unsustainable 
in the long term. 
 
Only by generating real economic growth can our country 
maintain its social programs. In the context of growing 
protectionist attitudes around the world, economic growth 
in Canada is possible over the long term only with free 
trade. 
 
Let me be more specific. Our province, Saskatchewan, is 
rich in resources — potash, oil, uranium, forests, fertile 
wheat, and ranch land. Our one million residents could 
never eat or use all that we produce. Indeed, we make our 
living by trading this largess with the countries of the 
world, especially the United States. This is the basis for the 
creation of our economic wealth as individuals and as a 
province. If it is jeopardized by protectionism, there 
remains no way to pay the health and education bills of the 
future. 

 
I’d like to repeat that sentence, Mr. Chairman. 
 

This is the basis for the creation of our economic wealth as 
individuals and as a province. If it is jeopardized by 
protectionism, there remains no way to pay the health and 
education bills of the future. That is the important and so 
often overlooked point in the free trade debate. 
 
As I have indicated, the concern for Canadian content in 
our textbooks, while important, is not at issue in the free 
trade debate. Rather, our economic well-being is at stake, 
and it is only by building a secure economic future that 
we’ll be able to maintain our first-rate education system. 
By adopting free trade and at the same time  

resolving to pay the additional costs of having Canadian 
content in our class-room materials, we could have the best 
of both worlds. 

 
And it was signed by myself, and I thank the hon. member, 
almost, for raising the point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!  
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Chairman, the minister indicates that 
we have always been willing to pay more. We’ve been willing 
to pay more because we’ve been able to tax — tax not only 
individuals; tax corporations, put on sales tax on consumer 
goods — as we felt we could. 
 
Now with the economic forces of wanting us to harmonize . . . 
We have an example already; we have an example already of 
the force of the free trade agreement or the harmonization 
process where the corporations are refusing or demanding tax 
concessions, using the argument that they can’t pay taxes so 
that they can harmonize and compete against the Americans, 
which brings down our tax level. And that’s exactly the 
problem — that we will not be able to continue to tax at the 
same level. They want a level playing-field. 
 
Now you and I know already that there’s been a large 
corporation in Saskatchewan by the name of Weyerhaeuser 
which are paying less taxes, in the case of the surtax on power, 
than used to be paid by PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company). 
So that the problem here is, as I see it, Mr. Chairman, is that we 
will not have the funds to be able to keep those standards up. 
 
(1930) 
 
The minister makes the point that Canadian content is not at 
issue. I say it is at issue; I say it is at issue. In the school 
systems that I have worked over the last 15, 20 years, we 
continually strove to find textbooks that were suitable; that 
would reflect our culture as opposed to European culture; that 
would reflect our history as opposed to European or American 
history — even mathematics books that would have examples, 
using words like Estevan or Prince Albert or Saskatoon or 
Moose Jaw, and even the small towns, Carnduff. We searched 
for those things. We finally found one in the last five years and 
it was Canadian printed. You have to have people with a 
Canadian sensitivity. It takes years to develop that, and I see 
this eroding if we put all of our eggs strictly into the economic 
basket. 
 
Now the question I ask the minister, which he did not answer, 
and I will ask again: do you agree or do you dispute the fact the 
article 105, which accords national treatment with respect to 
investment . . . pardon me, with investment to trade in goods 
and services? I’ll repeat the question. Do you agree or do you 
dispute the fact that article 105 accords national treatment with 
respect to investment in trade goods and services, and that those 
services include such things as curriculum materials and school 
supplies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I answered the 
question. The reality is, this very day, this very day we have 
educational materials coming in from the United  
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1795 
 

States, and the day that this agreement is signed, it will 
probably be no different. And what I said is, the solution is in 
our own hands and to suggest that under the terms of this 
agreement . . . If you’re trying to suggest that under the terms of 
this agreement we have somehow lost our control, you are 
wrong, you are incorrect. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well when I look at the article, the chapter 
on services, which is chapter 14, and specifically the annex, 
1408, it details the services which are included. And in those 
details it includes commercial educational correspondence 
services; it details management consulting services; it details 
training services; it details educational use and services. Those 
things are itemized. Now do you not agree that this includes just 
about everything that goes on in our educational institutions, 
you could put them in under those headlines? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve already answered 
the question, and as I said in the letter, and I was pretty clear 
here, “I think it is important for your readers to know that this 
argument is entirely incorrect.” 
 
And I want to go on to say, Mr. Chairman, that I think 
Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan parents, Saskatchewan 
trustees, would be done a disservice if somehow the NDP were 
to mount a campaign to try and suggest that our educational 
sovereignty is somehow jeopardized by the free trade 
agreement. 
 
I read another article with interest this morning in the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix, and it was a column by Carol Goar. And I don’t 
remember the exact title, but the first word in it was “veracity” 
and I forget what the second word was, but something along 
that line, veracity lacking in free trade debate. This has been a 
debate marked by, I agree, a lot of jargon on all sides and not 
much facts. And that’s why I had the officials examine in some 
detail this question. And what you are saying and what the 
article purported to say in The Globe and Mail is incorrect. 
 
And I think it’s . . . Maybe it’s significant, maybe I’m reading 
into it more than I should be — I don’t think so — but maybe 
it’s significant that it’s written and published and researched in 
Ontario. We all know where they stand. They’re in the same 
place as the NDP. You’re against economic opportunity. And 
the hon. member in his early remarks talked about the elephant 
and the mouse. He used the elephant and the mouse example. 
And what he is really saying there, Mr. Chairman is that we as 
Canadians, because we are the mouse sleeping with the, or up 
against the elephant, that we can’t compete. We can’t compete. 
 
And the reality is, Mr. Chairman, we can compete. We have 
some of the largest . . . The largest shoe-maker in the world is a 
Canadian firm. Some of the largest banks in the world are 
Canadian. The largest forestry companies in the world are 
Canadian. The largest oil companies and potash companies and 
uranium companies are Canadian, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the opposition with their inward-looking mentality, with 
their inward-looking mentality, say we cannot compete. Mr. 
Chairman, the free trade agreement is  

important to education for this reason and this reason 
particularly. 
 
As I said in the letter, our future educational opportunities will 
depend on the economic security that will come with the free 
trade agreement. 
 
Our young people, this debate is important to those young 
people in the schools today. It’s their opportunities and the 
future that we’re talking about. You would deny them 
opportunity. You and the Liberals want to tear up the 
agreement. That agreement represents opportunity for my 
children and for your children and for their children. It 
represents good jobs. It represents diversification of our 
economy. 
 
He talked about a level playing-field. We do want a level 
playing-field. We don’t want our uranium shut out. We don’t 
want our pork shut out. We don’t want our forest products shut 
out. We want a level playing-field, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And he talks about, we’ll have to bring down our tax level. 
Now that has got to be a new high in hypocrisy for the party 
opposite. They spent the last three months in this legislature 
talking about taxes being too high, and now their worried about 
taxes being too low. You can’t have it both ways. 
 
We’re in favour of free trade. You’re the establishment party. 
You’re looking backwards rather than forwards. You’re being 
doom mongers and fear mongers. We want to go forward for 
our children’s sake and that’s why we support the free trade 
agreement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!  
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well, Mr. Minister, we’ve heard the 
discussions before about backwards and forwards, and I was 
hoping to get a little more specific here so that we could 
actually ask you some questions about some of the details, 
particular details as they apply to us. 
 
Now you mentioned that there was going to be a level 
playing-field; that there’s going to be harmony. We will tend to 
harmonize, and I agree with that, that that’s what this agreement 
does, that it will force us to harmonize. And I ask you, I ask you 
then, is this the way that you want to harmonize? 
 
Do you want to harmonize so that our share of our national 
resources that we put into education will be lowered to that of 
what the American share is? It will go down to 3.7 per cent 
from 5.3 per cent. Or do you have some kind of a dream that the 
Americans are all of a sudden going to boost and harmonize 
with us by setting up some kind of redistribution system equal 
to our revenue-sharing program? Do you really believe that? Do 
you really believe that, because that’s what harmonizing will 
do. It’s going to bring us together. 
 
Do you really believe that the spending per pupil in the States is 
going to go up to rival ours, where we’re at $3,420 per pupil, 
and the U.S. — and that’s U.S. dollars 
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1796 
 

 — and the U.S. is at $3,199. Quite significant — $200 per 
student. Quite significant. 
 
Now do you feel that our disparity, the disparity that we now 
have across the nation, will shrink, will actually shrink so we 
won’t have as much disparity between provinces in education as 
a result of this agreement? Or will the disparity increase to 
approach that disparity which is now in the States? Because 
that’s what harmonization is going to do. It won’t do it directly 
on education; it will do I indirectly if we put all of our eggs in 
the free trade, free market basket. 
 
Do you agree, Mr. Minister, that our system of funding, where 
the provinces fund an average of 69 per cent of the revenue to 
the K to 12 schools, will be predominant over the U.S., where 
they only spend 48 per cent and the rest, or most of the rest, is 
provided by local governments? Do you agree that American 
tuition fees and American universities are suddenly going to go 
down to our levels at the U of S, or is it more likely that the 
opposite is going to happen? 
 
I ask you these questions about harmonization, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I was trying to fathom 
why it is that these issues are being raised relative to the free 
trade agreement. And I think the conclusion I must draw is that 
the NDP, over the course of the last several months, have 
advanced a number of arguments, read various articles, put their 
own interpretation on various articles and chapters and clauses 
of the free trade agreement, and put forward, quite frankly, Mr. 
Chairman, a number of myths, a number of straw men, a 
number of arguments — all of which have been disproven. And 
now they’re grasping at the final straw. They’re grasping at the 
final straw now. All the other arguments are gone — that the 
wheat board would be destroyed, that we’d lose our marketing 
boards, that . . . I mean, you name it. They go on and on. All of 
those arguments have essentially been put to bed and laid to 
rest. And now, grasping at a final straw, they’re saying, it’s our 
educational system that’s at risk with this free trade agreement. 
 
And yet, Mr. Chairman, is that not the member who, over this 
past winter and spring, a new paper plant has been built in his 
community? He represents Prince Albert, and just outside of 
Prince Albert a new paper mill is going to be built — jobs at 
$25 an hour, excellent training programs for the employees. Is 
his community not one that’s going to benefit from the export 
of that paper? I challenge the hon. member to answer that 
question. How and you be against free trade when your own 
community, your own school boards, are going to benefit from 
the taxes and the economic security and wealth that that export 
sales will bring? And it’s substantial. It’s substantial, the 
amount of the product that’s going to go into the United States 
— very substantial, as I understand it. And yet there’s the 
hypocrisy that somehow that would be no good — that the plant 
shouldn’t be there, the jobs shouldn’t be there, the economic 
opportunity shouldn’t be there, and that school boards shouldn’t 
get those tax dollars to run our education system. That’s what 
free trade could mean. 

But let’s look at the arguments, Mr. Chairman, one more time. 
What they are essentially saying, that if education is at threat, 
and our cultural industries are at threat, and this is at threat, and 
that’s at threat, that somehow our cultural sovereignty is 
threatened. 
 
And I see the hon. member from Saskatoon Eastview nodding 
his head in agreement with that statement; that he believes, so 
do all socialists, that our cultural sovereignty is going to be 
jeopardized by this agreement; that somehow we’re going to 
become the 51st state of United States. Would that precis the 
NDP’s position fairly accurately? And I see a number of . . . I 
see a number of the NDP, Mr. Chairman, and let the record 
show that a number of the hon. members nodded their head in 
the affirmative. 
 
Let’s examine the argument of, somehow, if we sign this free 
trade agreement with the United States, that Canada will 
become the 51st state of the United States. If that was the case, 
Mr. Chairman, I would ask this question. If that was the case I 
would ask this question: today, about 80 per cent of the goods 
that move between Canada and the United States move freely; 
that is to say, under no different system that we’d have with the 
classic free trade. Is that not true? About 80 per cent, and I see 
the trade critic nods his head in the affirmative; about 80 per 
cent moves freely this very day. 
 
Now I would argue then, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, if I 
was going to somehow lose my cultural sovereignty, I think I 
would have lost a great deal of it already if it’s 80 per cent, 
because now we’re only talking about the last 20 per cent. 
 
And I guess the other point I would raise there, Mr. Chairman, 
is that, you know, for some many, many years . . . I guess all of 
my life I’ve lived within 20 or 30 or 40 or 50 miles of the 
American border, with the exception of these last few years that 
I’ve lived in Regina. And I have to frankly admit that on 
occasion our family has . . . And when I was a child, and as I 
grew up, once in a while, as do many of my neighbours in 
Weyburn and Assiniboia — they slip across the border on 
weekends; they go to little holidays down there. And yes, Mr. 
Chairman, I have to admit they’ve even bought the odd pair of 
American cowboy boots. But that’s part of that 80 per cent of 
goods that move freely across the border this day, without 
tariffs. 
 
Now I ask you, if we were going to lose our cultural 
sovereignty, wouldn’t we have had a substantial loss already at 
the 80 per cent level? And I ask you, how many times have you 
seen that number reported in the media that has said this debate 
is characterized by jargon instead of facts? But yet you and I 
both agree on that fact — 80 per cent today does move freely. 
 
(1945) 
 
So that would be point number one that I would raise to 
disprove the argument that our cultural sovereignty is lost, is 
that today we have 80 percent. It seems to me, if we’re going to 
lose our sovereignty, we have lost it substantially already.  
 
But if you don’t like that argument, and I hear the hon.  
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1797 
 

member from Saskatoon suggest that she doesn’t like that 
argument, well I would offer up this argument then. In western 
Europe, a number of countries, most recently Spain and 
Portugal were added to the group, formed a commercial union 
or a trading bloc if you like, of — what? — about 250 million 
people. Is that what the EEC (European Economic Community) 
represents today? Something like that — 260, 270 million. They 
formed a 12-member nation trading bloc amongst themselves. 
Some of them have been in it for a decade and more now. And I 
guess, you know, that’s a free trade agreement of a very major 
extent involving many nations. They’ve been doing it for many 
years. 
 
And I ask the question because this union includes England and 
Spain and Portugal and Italy and West Germany and France and 
some of those countries. Greece, I think, is in it. And I ask you: 
do you think the Italians feel any less Italian for being part of 
that agreement, or the Irish any less Irish, or the English any 
less English, or the Germans any less German? I would say not. 
 
Those arguments were raised when Britain decided to join the 
European Economic Community. That was the big furor from 
the socialists in Britain. We would lose our identity; we would 
lose our cultural identity. And now, what, 15 years later, 19 
years later, whatever the terms is now — I forget how long 
they’ve been in — are they any less British, any less English, 
any less Irish? Well I suggest not. 
 
But some say they still don’t like either on of those arguments 
that I’ve put up — that’s 80 per cent free now and that the EEC 
model . . . I see the hon. member from Saskatoon Eastview 
nodding his head. He’s right. He doesn’t like those arguments 
yet. 
 
You know, the one that is the most convincing to me is not 
either one of those arguments. As powerful as they may be, the 
one that is most convincing to myself is this. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Based on fact. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth:The best check . . . And the hon. member 
from Saskatoon Centre says based on fact, and I will indeed, 
ma’am. 
 
The argument that is the most compelling in my mind is: do we 
have a Canadian province who, more than any other, would be 
ultra-sensitive to any threat to their cultural identity in this 
country? Is there one province in this country that has 
historically been very, very sensitive to their cultural and 
linguistic heritage of what it means to them and the forces 
around them that could threaten it? And the answer is yes, Mr. 
Chairman, that province is Quebec, a francophone province, a 
francophone province that, on occasion, in the last 20 and 30 
and 40 years in the history of this country has, on occasion, 
expressed frustration in many forms about the anglophones 
around them — some swallowing up, for example, and 
imposing their view on them, and threatening their cultural 
linguistic heritage. 
 
And so it seems to me if this mouse, Canada, was going to 
snuggle up to this elephant, the U.S.A., this large, 250  

million anglophone population, that the first province to raise 
the alarm would be Quebec, because they, on occasion, have 
felt threatened, even in a population of 25 million, of which 60 
per cent or so are anglophone. 
 
But I ask hon. member: has Quebec sounded the alarm on free 
trade as it relates to their education, their culture, their linguistic 
heritage, all of those things that they hold dear, and particularly 
educational institutions? Has Quebec said, we will have no 
truck nor trade with the Yankees when it comes to this 
agreement? Have they said that this threatens us in a way unlike 
any threat we’ve had in this country before? Have they said one 
iota about those kinds of dimension, Mr. Chairman? I ask you 
and all members and I ask the hon. member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
The reality, the facts, Mr. Chairman, are that Quebec is 
fourscore and square behind this agreement — 100 per cent. 
They are behind this agreement, and I’ll tell you why. It’s 
because, first, they see it as no treat; and secondly, Quebec 
people today want to take the world on. They are ready, as my 
colleague, the Minister of Public Participation, says, they are 
ready to compete with the world. Some of the most dynamic 
businesses and business men in Canada today are Quebec 
business men. They are ready to take on the world. They are not 
inward-looking like the socialists opposite, they are not change 
resisters, they do not fear, they have no . . . they do not feel 
threatened by this agreement. They say, we know our young 
children’s future lies in the economic opportunity that lie in the 
global village, and we want to be part of that action because we 
can compete. 
 
And to me, Mr. Chairman, of all the arguments, whether it’s the 
CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) that makes us 
unique or the RCMP or our clod winters or whatever, the most 
compelling argument in my mind for our cultural sovereignty 
not being threatened is the fact that Quebec has given the green 
light to this agreement because they, to me, are a significant 
litmus test, if you like, for all of Canada, and I applaud their 
initiative. And those are the facts, Mr. Speaker. They want to be 
outward-looking like we do, not inward-looking like the 
socialists opposite. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister opposite 
has refused to answer my questions. Instead, he went on in 
general terms as the Tories have continually done since this 
whole free trade debate started, and given us the generalization 
about the whole thing with respect to economic arguments. 
 
I asked specific questions related to harmonization as how it 
would impact on education. But what does he do? He doesn’t 
give me an argument on that because he doesn’t want to make 
an argument, and nor do any Tories want to make an argument 
on the educational scene. We haven’t heard any arguments 
about it. They want to stay away from it because they know that 
that’s where they’re vulnerable. And I say it needs to be 
discussed, it needs to be discussed. Now I wanted to make that 
point before I deferred, Mr. Chairman, to my colleague from 
Saskatoon Mayfair . . . Fairview. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Now listen. 
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1798 
 

Mr. Mitchell: — Exactly, exactly, now listen. Mr. Chairman, 
the minister is not a good listener. The minister is not a good 
thinker, either. The minister has made one of the most fatuous 
arguments supporting the free trade agreement that I’ve had the 
pleasure to hear or read in the last six months. 
 
Minister, I don’t know what it’s going to take to satisfy you, 
that if you’re looking to the free trade agreement as your engine 
for economic growth or your engine for increased government 
revenue, you’re just kidding yourself — you’re looking in the 
wrong direction. That agreement is not going to produce those 
benefits for you. If you and your government are relying on that 
agreement to get you over the hump so far as economic growth 
or government revenues are concerned, you’re just sadly, sadly 
mistaken. 
 
No serious analyst is making the kind of predictors that you’re 
setting forth here. No serious analyst is predicting the level of 
economic growth that will meet your kinds of deficits — 
nowhere near it. Even the most optimistic estimates of 
economic growth won’t come anywhere near balancing your 
books. The kind of revenue that you might hope to get from 
even the most optimistic analysts of that agreement isn’t going 
to come anywhere near satisfying any of the requirements of 
this government for money. 
 
The reality is, Minister, if you look hard at the situation in 
Saskatchewan and taking the most optimistic views of what’s 
likely to happen in Saskatchewan, there isn’t going to be either. 
There isn’t going to be any measurable economic growth at all. 
In fact, the real possibility is that there will be a negative 
growth; that there will be a contraction in our economy as a 
result of it. 
 
And so far as increased government revenues are concerned, I 
just challenge anybody to show us where that is going to 
happen; where the increased jobs are going to be; where the 
economies of scale are going to happen in Saskatchewan. 
 
Remember that all of the economic analysis, all of the economic 
analysis by the eastern economists who have been pushing the 
free trade line for the last 20, 25 years are based upon the notion 
of economies of scale, Minister — economies of scale. 
Somehow these Canadian plants are going to be transformed 
into great, huge plants to satisfy a larger market. And I have yet 
to hear you or the minister responsible or the Premier tell us 
what plants in Saskatchewan are going to experience this 
mushrooming effect as economies of scale on a continent-wide 
basis are going to happen in this province. It’s just not going to, 
Minister. And if you think it is, you’re sadly mistaken. But I 
suspect that you know that these things are not going to happen 
and all you’re doing is feeding us a big lie. I suspect that’s the 
real answer. 
 
Now I don’t know how many times we have to tell you, I don’t 
know how many times we have to tell you that this agreement 
and our opposition to it is not a question of tariffs. We’re not 
talking about the dangers of eliminating tariffs on the last 20 per 
cent of trade between our country. I’ve said over and over 
again, and so have other  

members in this House and elsewhere, that if this deal were 
simply about tariffs, we’d favour it. We’ve said that again and 
again and again and I’ll say it tonight again. 
 
What we object to in this agreement are the other parts of the 
agreement. Now, please, be a good listener for once in your 
legislative life and catch that message. What we object to are 
the many other provisions in this agreement that have precious 
little to do with trade, nothing to do with trade in some 
instances. You get by the tariff provisions and you see the 
provisions respecting investment, for example, where the 
Canadian economy is virtually opened up to unlimited . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order. I’ve been listening to the 
debate very carefully over the last 10 or 15 minutes, and I’m 
finding it rather difficult to make the assimilation of free trade 
and the educational aspect which we are discussing. So I’m sure 
the member would want to bring this specifically as far as it 
relates to education, please, and I would expect the answer to be 
the same. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, I’m . . . of 
course, Mr. Chairman, I’m in your hands, of course, and that 
was our intention tonight. My colleague, the minister of Prince 
Albert, asked questions that were specifically related to the field 
of education. The answer had nothing to do with education at 
all, but rather covered three reasons why, three reasons why we 
in Saskatchewan ought to be supporting this free trade 
agreement. And it was to that argument that I’m addressing my 
reply. I am reluctant to leave the minister’s statements on the 
record of this House unchallenged. That’s how I got into it from 
the perspective that I was in. 
 
And I was going to go on to deal not only with tariffs, but to go 
on and deal with this nonsense about the European Economic 
Community, which is a totally different situation and has 
nothing to do with this, and then with the Quebec situation . . . 
but, of course, I’m in your hands. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I realized that when the member from 
Prince Albert started his questioning, it was kind of far-ranging 
at that point and then he became quite specific after that. And 
having become specific after that, it seems to me that then the 
minister took the liberty of also being far-ranging. And I would 
ask you now, please relate it as specifically as you can to 
education. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Chairman, with all due respect, I object 
to that characterization of my questioning. I did make 
comments completely related to education. Every question I 
mentioned was related to education. I did reply to the minister 
when he raised wider issues — some of the red herrings he 
tossed forward. 
 
And I think that would . . . if a minister raises that, then I think 
it’s fair to go both ways. If he wasn’t called to order on that, 
with all due respect, Mr. Chairman, I feel that neither should I 
be, or neither should the member from Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — I will be brief, Mr. Chairman, but I do want to 
be able to answer the minister on the statements that he made. 
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1799 
 

With respect to the argument that the European Economic 
Community has had a something like a free trade agreement 
and hasn’t experienced any of the difficulties that we predict 
will happen in Canada, Minister, I simply want to point out to 
you that the arrangements in the European Economic 
Community are substantially different than the arrangements 
under this agreement — substantially. 
 
(2000) 
 
The European countries retain complete sovereignty. They 
don’t deal it away to the extent that Canada has dealt with it 
away under this agreement. They maintain, totally, the 
ownership of their own economies, and they keep in place their 
very, very stringent legislation respecting the review of foreign 
take-overs. Nothing in the European Economic Community 
even resembles the provisions contained in chapter 16, which 
opens Canada up to investment by American entrepreneurs. 
 
Let me also tell you, Minister, or let me suggest that you go 
back in your history books and you review again the arguments 
that occurred in the United Kingdom when they were 
contemplating whether or not to enter the European Economic 
Community. The arguments that are now going on in Canada 
don’t even resemble those arguments. Those were totally 
different arguments on totally different grounds that have no 
relevance at all to our situation. 
 
Finally, the question of Quebec. You ask why Quebec favours 
the agreement and I think you know. I think you know that it 
has everything to do with their James Bay power situation and 
the export of their electricity. It also has to do with the fact, 
Minister, that when they discussed the cultural question, the 
“Frenchness” of Quebec, they’re dealing with a totally different 
argument than Canada is now facing when it considers the 
precarious position in which Canadian culture has been put as a 
result of this agreement. 
 
In Quebec the question is largely a question of language, at 
least it’s focused around the question of language. And this 
agreement, of course, does not touch upon the question of 
language. 
 
And the other thing that I would draw to your attention, Mr. 
Minister, is the reaction of Mr. Parizeau, the reaction of Mr. 
Parizeau to this agreement. Mr. Parizeau is quite content with 
this agreement, because he thinks that in the long run, his case 
with his own people will be stronger as a result of watching 
what happens to the rest of Canada, as a result of the operation 
in the long run of this so-called free trade agreement. He’s quite 
satisfied with this agreement on that score. He’s not concerned 
that it poses a danger to the “Frenchness” of the Quebec culture. 
He thinks that’s secure, and in fact the political program of his 
own separatist party will be advanced as a result of the 
operation of this agreement. 
 
Now thank you for allowing me to make those remarks, Mr. 
Chairman. I suggest that if you want reasons to support this free 
trade agreement, you’re going to have to come with ones that 
are more compelling than the three that you offered to this 
House tonight, which are  

pure bunk. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!  
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we did a little 
more research on this side of the House since the hon. member 
from Prince Albert raised his points about downgrading 
education and the harmonization that would take place, and we 
all recall those kinds of phrases. And guess where else those 
kinds of phrases and a lot of the very same statistics show up, 
Mr. Chairman? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Statistics. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Sorry, the same sort of data shows up, 
Mr. Chairman. I never have . . . I have a bit of a speech 
impediment when it comes to pronouncing the word “statistic” 
and the hon. members have corrected me. I don’t have any of 
the same kind of problem when I use the word socialist, but I do 
have it when I talk about statistics, and I apologize for that. 
 
But back to what I was saying, Mr. Chairman. We heard tonight 
the opening statement from the hon. member from Prince 
Albert, talked about the downgrading of education that would 
occur with the free trade agreement, at least in the mind. He 
talked about harmonization, elephants and mouses . . . mice and 
all those kinds of things. And we did a little research over here, 
and guess where else you find virtually the same numbers, the 
same terms, the same language? Well, lo and behold, it’s in an 
article entitled, “Downgrading Education” by Wilfred Brown. 
Now that article entitled, “Downgrading Education” is 
published in a book called The Facts on Free Trade. And who 
publishes that book, Mr. Chairman? Well it’s published 
monthly by the public relations department of the Canadian 
Union of Public Employees, and Jeff Rose had a very nice 
opening paragraph or two in here. But who else published in 
that? Did you find any Saskatchewan educators publishing in 
here, Mr. Chairman? Did you find any Saskatchewan 
economists publish in here? Did you find the hon. member from 
Saskatoon Fairview with any commentary in here? No. 
 
Well who was in here, Mr. Chairman? Who else had 
commentary in The Facts on Free Trade? Well there’s Bob 
White, oh, and Shirley Carr, yes, that’s another one, and, oh, 
Steven Langdon, NDP MP — just to mention but a few, Mr. 
Chairman. And that is their definition on free trade, Mr. 
Chairman, as it relates to education. 
 
Now I’m not suggesting for a moment that the hon. member 
was plagiarizing or anything like that, because I clearly would 
not want to cast those aspersions. But the hon. member from 
Fairview said that somehow trade — more trade, if we think 
that’s our economic engine for the future, I’m sadly mistaken. 
We’re sadly mistaken. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Didn’t say that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, you did day that. You said that if 
we have a free trade agreement that represents more liberalized 
trade, that that is . . . we are sadly mistaken if we see that as our 
economic engine. 
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1800 
 

Well I ask the hon. member . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You 
see it’s not good enough to just say that. I ask the hon. member, 
how is it then if that is bad, if more liberalized trade . . . if a 
level playing-field is bad, if that is bad, then what does he call 
these situations? What does he say to the pork producers when 
he meets with them and they tell him things like this? If we . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order, please. Order. What we’ll 
have to do is just rein ourselves in, and we’ll save the free trade 
debate for another time, same place. 
 
So I would thank the minister for his response to the member 
from Fairview, and I would give the floor to the member from 
Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a few 
more questions that I want to ask with respect . . . as it applies 
to education. And I hope that I get an answer as it applies to 
education — that we don’t start into hog farming and chicken 
farming. 
 
I want to refer specifically to the impact on private vocational 
schools and what impact it may have on private vocational 
schools. Now we know that right now in the province of 
Saskatchewan the minister has the power to supervise the 
private vocational schools, has the power to make laws to 
supervise private vocational schools, could go as far as to . . . if 
the government decided to do so, you could regulate the 
curriculums, or you could certainly guarantee a standard. You 
could guarantee a standard of the quality of teaching. And 
certainly the people in the private vocational schools are asking 
that right now, and so are the students that go to these private 
vocational schools. They are asking for that. 
 
When I look at for what impact this agreement may have on 
private vocational schools, I go to the section in chapter 16 
which deals with services. And in article 1602, it talks about 
national treatment. And it says:  
 

Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, each Party 
shall accord to investors of the other Party (meaning 
Canada and the U.S.) treatment no less favourable than that 
accorded in like circumstances to its investors with respect 
to measures affecting . . .  

 
And there’s several there. One of them, it says, “sale of 
business enterprises located in its territory.” Another one says, 
“the acquisition of business enterprises located in its territory.” 
 
So the problem that I see evolving from this is that all of our 
private vocational schools could be up for sale or could 
conceivably be purchased by American firms. Now they won’t 
all be purchased. It’s ridiculous to think they will all be 
purchased, but there could be a significant franchise coming in 
equivalent to a size of McDonald’s or A & W or Pizza Hut, or 
any — I don’t know where these originate — but it could be 
some firm like this come in and purchase the individual private 
vocational schools which we have here now, which means that 
their mandate would be to come into this province and provide 
services for a profit. That’s what it’s there for.  

That’s what a corporation is there for. Corporation is not here 
necessarily to provide a service. Its first to provide a profit 
through the provision of a service. That’s the first mandate of 
any corporation, particularly a foreign corporation. 
 
Now our tradition in this province has been that we have had 
private vocational schools where the people were actually — 
who put up the original ones, the ones that have been tried, and 
tested, and survived in the province — have actually had a 
commitment to the educational system. Now we see some 
federal money being make available through the Canadian Jobs 
Strategy, money towards education which these schools and 
these entrepreneurs can access by going and encouraging 
students to enrol. And they will do all the bookwork for the 
students so that the students can then funnel the money, through 
them, towards tuition fees. 
 
And what I see happening as a result of this is that our schools 
will eventually be American controlled, and worse than that. 
It’s okay, but will we be able to regulate it? Will we be giving 
up all our rights? And this is what I ask the minister: is there 
any way that you will be able to regulate private vocational 
schools or what goes on in them? Because once you do, it will 
be, it will simply be disallowed under this particular agreement. 
I say that you won’t have any possibility of controlling what 
happens in those kind of business enterprises under a licensing 
provision. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — We have and we will continue to have 
a control over the regulatory framework as it relates to our 
education in this province. 
 
The hon. member talks about U.S. education coming into 
Saskatchewan. I would suggest to him, and I am sure he is well 
aware of this fact, Mr. Chairman, being a teacher himself, that a 
number of teachers have availed themselves of an off-campus 
programming by the University of Oregon to take Master of 
Education degrees. Somehow — and that has gone on in the 
past, long before we started talking about a free trade agreement 
— and somehow that was not a travesty, certainly not amongst 
teachers and the teaching profession. And now, all of a sudden, 
although he hasn’t raised that example specifically, somehow 
U.S. education is seen as a big threat despite the fact that the 
reality is we have an will continue to have the power to regulate 
in this province. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky; Mr. Chairman, presently we enjoy having the 
freedom and having the right, and we enjoy the choice of being 
able to take the best and select the best for our purposes from 
the American system or from the British system or European 
systems. We are capable of doing that now. What I am afraid 
of, under this particular agreement, that we would . . . that our 
choices will be limited as to what we can exclude. That is a 
difficulty under this new scheme. 
 
Now, to further my argument, I would quote from an article that 
was in the January 14 of The Globe and Mail, by one Margaret 
Polanyi, where she states that: 
 

. . . the proposed free-trade agreement between Canada and 
the United States, even though it is to  

  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1801 
 

exclude post-secondary education, will alert more U.S. 
institutions to opportunities here, where the demand for 
university places (and I would assume that private 
vocational schools could fit in there) is greater than the 
number available. 

 
I would ask the minister: does he not acknowledge that our 
private schools could indeed be purchased and operated by 
Americans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Could you substantiate that argument 
please, Mr. Chairman? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I said earlier, and not 
to be repetitive, that we do have the . . . we do have now, and 
we will continue to have in the future, the regulatory authority 
and the regulatory powers of the province relative to education. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Let’s go on to the topic of materials and 
textbooks. I want to ask the question: will you be able to 
demand . . . will you, as the Minister of Education, under this 
agreement, be able to demand or will the school board be able 
to ensure that materials, certain materials and certain texts of 
your choice, can be Canadian and can have Canadian content? 
Can we be masters in our own household, in our own schools? 
 
Specifically, can we maintain enough Canadian materials so 
that we can truly depict the nature of our small province here, 
so that we can truly protect our multicultural heritage, our 
native heritage, our agricultural heritage, as we get into this 
shift from rural to urban, Mr. Minister. 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, absolutely and particularly. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Can you substantiate that argument? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I read into the record earlier 
tonight a letter that I’d sent to The Globe and Mail and what it 
said is that: 
 

We can, and often do decide, to pay the additional cost 
required to purchase materials produced specially for our 
own schools. This right has always existed and is entirely 
unaffected by the free trade agreement. Indeed, the 
agreement specifically excludes provincial procurement 
practices. Under the terms of the agreement, provincial 
governments can continue to insist that our textbooks be 
written by Canadians and published by Canadian firms. 

 
I read it into the record once before, Mr. Chairman. I read it in 
again at the risk of being repetitive. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I want to ask you a question, Mr. Minister, 
about what it is that our children are going to learn from this 
free trade agreement and, in general, about this free trade 
agreement. 

If the whole idea of this agreement is to harmonize our 
economy with the American economy, will our children learn 
more about materialistic life-style, that the materialistic 
life-style is paramount? Will they learn more about how to 
consume, or will they learn more about the values that we have 
traditionally tried to put into our school system? Which way is 
it going to go, Mr. Minister? Are they going to learn more about 
spiritual things that I talked about in my address, or are they 
going to learn more about consumerism as a result of this 
agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, this is incredible. He’s 
trying to suggest that somehow this free trade agreement is 
going to see our children’s minds warped with whatever 
American tripe he thinks exists across the border. He talks 
about consumerism and materialism. Our education will 
continue to be controlled by us and by local school boards. 
 
But, you know, I see a dimension of what he’s saying in terms 
of this fear mongering and scare tactics that are typical of 
socialists, quite frankly, across the world. And I saw it in the 
article that was written out of OISE (Ontario Institute for 
Studies in Education) because there, too, in that article, they 
talked about will our young people somehow become warped 
by American enterprise and initiative. Since when were 
enterprise and initiative features of the American landscape 
exclusively? Mr. Chairman, this is — to use the member from 
Saskatoon Fairview’s words — these are factuous arguments. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Chairman, the difficulty here with the 
free trade agreement as it applies to education, and as it impacts 
on education, is that it . . . It appears to me when I read the 
agreement that those who wrote the agreement had some kind 
of a notion that U.S. values, that American values, were better 
that Canadian values. That’s the idea I got from them. They 
weren’t satisfied that we had good working relationship with 
the Americans; they come up with this fear mongering idea that 
somehow that if we don’t capitulate to the Americans that we’re 
going to lose all our trade wit them. That’s what he keeps 
talking about — if we don’t capitulate and sign this agreement, 
all of a sudden all of our trade is going to vanish. 
 
It’s either that or that it’s more valuable, because which one is it 
going to be? I say, Mr. Chairman, that I like our Canadian 
values and the differences between us and Americans. I like the 
Americans. I like the Americans. I’ve travelled across the 
border a few times myself, and I’ve had Americans in my 
home, and they appreciate the differences, as well. 
 
So I ask you to answer that question. Do you really believe 
that? Do you believe as I do, Mr. Minister, that this agreement 
will change our value system slowly, making it look as if U.S. 
values that they teach in their schools are better in some way 
than the Canadian values that we teach in our schools?  
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, you’ve 
been speaking about the publishing industry. You’re the 
minister in charge of education and the minister in charge of 
libraries, and I just want you to talk to me a little bit about what 
your understanding is of the Canadian publishing industry. 
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1802 
 

You’ve talked about the province having the right to Canadian 
procurement of Canadian textbooks. You’ve talked about the 
fact that Americans can publish books 30 per cent cheaper than 
we can in Canada. You have refused to answer my colleagues’ 
concerns about the fact that the free trade treaty talks very 
specifically about more import of curriculum materials and 
other materials into the school systems from the United States. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you must know, you must understand that 
the Canadian publishing companies are very fragile, even at this 
time even with a tremendous amount of Canadian subsidy and 
help from the governments to keep them going, and that the 
right to procure Canadian textbooks depends entirely on having 
a firm industry here. 
 
We have here never had a firm Canadian publishing industry in 
Canada. We have lost control of many of our Canadian 
publishing, textbook publishing firms even in the last few years, 
Mr. Minister, and this has been a serious concern for many of 
us who are concerned about Canadian culture and access to 
Canadian materials. 
 
We have had even situation where Canadian . . . American flags 
are painted out and Canadian flags are put into textbooks that 
come across the border into Canada, and we call that Canadian 
content. And that is a miserable example of Canadian content if 
you’re talking about procuring from the governments of 
Canadian textbooks with our Canadian history and our 
Canadian social studies and our Canadian literature. It’s always 
been a big problem in Canada. And if you’re not aware of that 
as the Minister of Education and as the minister in charge of 
libraries, then you’ve got a lot of learning to do. 
 
And when you talk to us about the fact that American 
publishing is 30 per cent cheaper and somehow in this great free 
trade debate we’re going to get materials in Canada that come 
down to that price, you’re just dreaming and you’re dreaming in 
Technicolor. You really are. 
 
Now this is a very serious concern; has been for some time. The 
free trade treaty, if you would mind reading the agreement 
instead of flapping around obviously not having looked at it in 
any great detail and not answering my colleagues’ questions, if 
you would read that free trade treaty you would understand the 
implications of the questions we’ve been asking you. 
 
You obviously don’t understand about Canadian publishing. It 
is a serious problem. You don’t seem to think it is. So stand in 
this House and tell us then how you see the procurement of 
Canadian materials being possible when our Canadian 
publishing industry is so very fragile even now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, relative to the 
educational book publishing or the publishing industry in 
general as it relates to libraries, I suppose, that aspect of these 
estimates tonight, if we’re going to have a broad interpretation 
of what we’re going to discuss here, as I said earlier tonight, the 
agreement specifically excludes provincial procurement 
practices, point  

number one; secondly, as it relates to publishing, in the larger 
sense of the word, cultural industries are excluded. And in fact 
the hon. member herself has said that the status quo, where has 
the status quo got us? A fragile industry at best. 
 
I don’t know as there’s much more I can say, Mr. Chairman, 
without being repetitive. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Well I’m not surprised that you don’t have very 
much more to say because you obviously are not very well 
informed on this issue, Mr. Minister. So it’s not surprising that 
you haven’t got much to say. 
 
You’re talking about the right to procurement; I’m talking about 
the right to procurement of Canadian textbooks. I’m talking 
about the publishing in the school . . . in the industry related to 
textbooks, not even the broader Canadian publishing industry. 
I’m talking specifically about Canadian materials for the 
schools. You can’t procure that from the Americans. They don’t 
publish that down in the States for us and bring it up here. 
Where are you going to procure it from, with your right of 
procurement, if under the free trade we swamp out the fragile 
industries that we have in Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Just to give an example of the points 
I’ve been making earlier tonight about, it’s within our hands to 
control our destiny in the past as well as into the future and 
indeed now, and in fact I’m advised — just to give you a 
specific example about what we can do and what we can do to 
have our own industrial base in the sector that the hon. member 
refers to — for the first time, at least as far as we know and my 
officials know, and this is probably a sad commentary, but for 
the first time we’ve contracted with a Saskatchewan firm to 
publish and to print here in Saskatchewan one of our new social 
studies texts. It’s the firm of Linda Weigl. 
 
I mean, it seems to me that the actions that speak louder than 
the words. And I know that you and your colleagues will keep 
putting straw men up about how rotten this free trade agreement 
is, or as so often the NDP and others against it will refer to the 
agreement as the Mulroney-Reagan agreement, as they sort of 
curl it around their lips in some invidious kind of way. And I 
mean it’s fine for you to continue to put these straw men up. 
 
Education. I am very satisfied. The technical officials, who are 
just technical experts, are very satisfied and assure me in the 
strongest terms possible that we are exempt, that we’re safe. 
Our own provincial procurement practices are save and sound. 
And your fears are legitimate if they were well-founded, but 
they are not. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it is the result of fears 
that I must put the questions, and I didn’t get any answers from 
the minister, and that just tends to increase the fear. When you 
put specific questions and you get very general answers and 
when you get answers wandering all over the field, then it just 
raises one’s fears to a new level, Mr. Chairman. 
 
I want to go on so that . . . I’ve got a few other things I want to 
deal with here this evening besides the impact of this  
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1803 
 

particular Mulroney-Reagan trade deal as it applies to 
education. I want to talk briefly about student bursaries and 
forgivable loans. 
 
Now several days ago when we were discussing . . . started to 
discuss student loans, I asked the minister a series of questions 
about them, and then I got a series of answers, once again, that 
were completely unrelated to the question. So I’m going to 
rephrase the questions again, and I’m going to give them to him 
one at a time to see if I can get the answers. 
 
And the first question is: how many bursaries did students 
receive in this current year? How many post-secondary students 
received bursaries in this year — bursaries? 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I think you were 
referring to bursaries, but those have been discontinued and 
only those that might have trickled through from years past 
would there be maybe some numbers there, because of a policy 
change last year where that was changed to forgivable loans. 
 
Perhaps you were inquiring relative to the scholarships, and the 
numbers there are: we’ve seen an increase from $1.8 million in 
’81-82 to now this year we’re at a little over 6 million. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I repeat the question: how many students 
received bursaries in this last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well very few, because there is not 
bursary program. It was converted to a forgivable loans 
program. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — How many students then, seeing as how 
there was no bursary program, received forgivable loans this 
year? 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — About 4,000, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — How many students received either 
forgivable loans or bursaries last year, the year previous to the 
one you just gave me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — About 8,500, Mr. Chairman.  
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — How many students received bursaries the 
year before that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Fifty-five hundred, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Can you explain the difference between the 
reason why there were 5,500 three years ago and 8,500 students 
last year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’ll give you some numbers here that 
may provide . . . may anticipate some of your other questions. 
And the numbers are from years ’84-85 through ’87-88. 
 
Number of students in Saskatchewan student bursary program, 
’84-85, was 5,400 — and I’ll use approximate  

numbers here — 5,400. Then the next year was 5,490; 8,515; 
and 3,958. The total dollars given under the student bursary 
program were 6.5 million; 7.8; and 11.1; and 6.4 million 
respectively. The number of students who took the 
Saskatchewan special incentive bursaries, there were none in 
’84-85; 357 in ’85-86; 1,213 the next year; and then 1,622. 
Total dollars for special incentive bursaries went from 800,000 
in ’85-86 through on up to $3.5 million in ’87-88. 
 
And I know the hon. member will want to make the case 
somehow we are providing less student assistance, etc., etc. The 
reality is that we are targeting that to those who have the 
highest needs. We have way more children in our 
post-secondary institutions now than we’ve ever had before. I 
think that’s tremendous. We have a greater percentage that are 
receiving some form of assistance, whether it be low interest 
loans or forgivable loans, than ever before, and I think that, too, 
is commendable. As I sit around the table at that Canadian 
ministers of education meeting, I understand that Saskatchewan 
has one of the best student aid programs across the country. 
 
If you’re asking me, could we do more and should we do more 
and would it be nice if we could do more, yes, we would like to 
do more, but I would point out to the member from Saskatoon 
University that I’ll stack our record up against his colleagues in 
the lip service that they paid our universities and to our students 
any, any time. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you for supplying those figures to the 
minister. 
 
Now the figures, then, the way I see them — and the minister 
certainly anticipated my statement — show that the number of 
students that are obtaining forgivable loans, which used to be a 
bursary program, have decreased significantly in the last year. 
 
That number in itself, when it’s not put to specific individuals, 
explains how what the impact is like, perhaps just remains as 
another statistic, Mr. Chairman. But what I see as a real 
problem here, and as an emerging problem, is the debt that our 
students that are now entering the universities and technical 
schools — particularly the four-year university programs — the 
debt they’re going to end up with because right now before a 
student gets a forgivable loan or bursary, they have to borrow 
up to 5,940, very nearly $6,000 before any of their loan is 
forgivable if they’re into a four-year program. 
 
And of course, these are the people that we are concerned with. 
Anybody that’s only going in for a one- or two-year program 
will only have a half or a quarter of that debt. But if you take 
that $6,000 as a minimal figure and expand it over four years, 
that comes out, that means that any child that’s entering from 
grade 12, a student that’s entering from grade 12 and now is 
going into a university program, will end up with a $24,000 
debt. And that is very significant, very, very significant. It 
works as a bit of a deterrent, and I suspect what it’ll do is it’ll 
have the long-term effect of reducing the number of people who 
would ordinarily like to go to universities, who the universities 
might be able to accept if they were completely funded, and as a 
result, they will end up with  
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1804 
 

less training. And that’s not good for our nation. 
 
I want to ask the minister if there’s any plan to reverse this 
particular trend, and don’t you . . . Or first of all, Mr. Minister, 
would you agree with me that the student debt is increasing, is 
increasing? And secondly, is there any plan that you might have 
to curtail this debt that students have to get into in order to go 
through university training? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I want to touch on a 
number of points that the hon. member has made, the first being 
about the issue of . . . And the case that he essentially tries to 
make is somehow the NDP bursary program was better than the 
PC programs. And the reality is, of course, that under the NDP 
we did not have 6 per cent . . . We did not have 6 per cent low 
interest student loans. We didn’t have the special programs for 
the disabled, natives, single parents. And I want to show you 
how important that point is, Mr. Chairman, because under the 
NDP with their so-called highly generous bursary program, a 
33-week university program in so-called free money, grants, 
bursaries — whatever term you want to put on it — under the 
NDP, an individual student could have got something in the 
order of $1,850 for that year. Is that right, hon. member from 
Saskatoon? And he shakes his head. Now I want to show you 
. . . Let’s put that clear on the record. The hon. member from 
Saskatoon University says yes, under the NDP the maximum 
free money, grants, bursaries — call it what you like — was 
about $1,850 per university program. 
 
Let’s ask the same question. This awful Tory government, as 
the members opposite would have us believe . . . What can, for 
example, a native person today or a single mother — which 
they did not help — or a handicapped person, what are they 
eligible for? Well what they are eligible for is a two-year 
remission program that remits 100 per cent of the first year and 
50 per cent the second year. But what does it mean in real 
dollars? That’s the question, isn’t it? What does it mean in real 
dollars? Is it more or less than $1,850? That’s the question. And 
the hon. member from Saskatoon University and Prince Albert, 
I’m sure, would agree that’s the question. Well what does it 
work out to on a 33-week program if we compare apples to 
apples and oranges to oranges. 
 
Well what it means is that they would have $11,880 forgiven in 
that first year. Now by my mathematics $11,880 is of 
substantial more help to that single parent or that native of that 
disabled person than $1,850. Am I wrong? Is not $11,880 
substantially more than $1,848? And is it not morally right to 
target to those who have the greatest need? Now it seems to me 
that even the socialists could not make the counter argument 
there because it would indeed be an invidious argument, not 
fatuous but invidious. 
 
I rest the facts, Mr. Chairman, because I think they’re clear 
there. This is a . . . the program as we have more recipients with 
student aid. We look at combined assistance, federal-provincial 
over the last few years, we’ve gone from 5,400 of our young 
people receiving assistance to now this last year, ’87-88, 
17,600. 
 
And for the hon. member from Saskatoon Fairview, if he’s 
looking for invidious, it’s i-n-v-i-d-i-o-u-s. Thank you, Mr.  

Chairman. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well I won’t get a reply to my question 
once again. Yes, and the question was: was the government 
thinking of doing anything to curb the rising student debt that I 
saw happening with four-year students? 
 
I have another question that I want to ask with respect to the 
research that’s being done, and I ask this for informational 
purposes of the minister. I want to ask the minister: how much 
money, if any, does the university get directly from the 
government for research purposes? 
 
Now I ask that question because we know that one of the 
problems that was discussed, and is continually discussed by 
those that are in research at the universities, say that they are 
continuously spending more time on research, that there’s an 
increasing demand on research and they need space. They say 
that some of the money that goes for research is pulled off in 
administration costs. 
 
I know that a lot of the money that they get from research is 
dedicated to them from outside agencies, such as some 
corporations, and some of it is dedicated from the global 
funding. I want to know if there’s any money goes directly from 
the Department of Education to research. 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — There are a number of sources for 
research funds for the university. Some would come, some 
small amount would be for specific programs, specific research 
would come from Education; substantial allotment out of 
Agriculture, which you may want to pursue with the Minister of 
Agriculture — the agriculture development fund. I think even 
Economic Development and Tourism has funds there for a 
chair. There’s in fact negotiations under way relative to an 
entrepreneurial chair at the university. There is the Van Vliet 
chair that’s been established. There’s funding out of our budget 
for school improvement projects and research relative to that 
with the College of Education. There’s funding in Agriculture, 
as I recall, for VIDO (Veterinary Infectious Diseases 
Organization). 
 
Actually, I don’t have a summary list across the departments of 
the research funding, but I can give you an example from my 
days in Agriculture. Under the NDP, they had a agricultural 
research program that predated the ag development fund that 
was called farmlab. And it provided $25 million over five years. 
The ag development fund provides something like 150 million 
over five years. So if you’re asking, does our government have 
a commitment to research and to agricultural research, the 
answer is yes, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I want to ask specifically, with respect to 
your department, how much money goes to research from your 
department? Let’s leave the other ones out and we’ll ask those 
questions in Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The specific research that we would 
be somewhat involved in was the project I talked about, the 
school improvement project with the College of Education. 
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1805 
 

Over and above that, as you will know, universities enjoy, and 
we respect, their autonomy. And I used the example the other 
day, talking over my desk here, that we send them the cheque 
for 100, 110 million — for example, the U of S — today, 
somewhere in that neighbourhood, and it’s up to them to decide 
how to spend it. And they do, on teaching and research and 
extension and those kinds of things. 
 
A report at the University of Saskatchewan would probably 
give us the information in more detail as to sources of research 
and where it was expended . . . or sources of research funds and 
where it was expended. I know as well that their fund raising 
efforts in the private sector and NRC (National Research 
Council) grants, SRC (Saskatchewan Research Council) grants, 
all those kind of things are also significant. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Okay, I’ve found out that there’s one 
project, the school improvement project, that you’ve given 
money for, for research. How much money in the last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — There are two $50,000 grants: one for 
this leadership component that I talked about earlier, and one 
for curriculum development — two that are $50,000 in size 
each. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — With respect to money that’s coming to the 
province from the federal government through the established 
program financing scheme, what I’d like to find out now, Mr. 
Minister, is exactly how much money is coming for education 
from the established program financing federal funds, and how 
much have they gone up in the last three years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I will provide the hon. member with 
what numbers we have at our disposal tonight, and if there’s 
some others that we can provide, then maybe you can indicate 
and we’ll see what we can do at providing them. 
 
I think the essential argument that we’re dealing with here is 
that I had the exact numbers for the federal contribution in one 
year and the federal contribution in another year, and the 
spending that we might do provincially is somehow . . . has 
there been a failure for us to pass on allocated federal funds to 
education. I mean, I think that’s the essential argument. 
 
And to show you that we are, although I don’t have the absolute 
numbers, I have percentages for you. From ’82-83 to ’87-88, 
Saskatchewan spending on post-secondary education increased 
by more than 48 per cent. Now if the Saskatchewan entitlement 
had increased by more than 48 per cent, one could make the 
legitimate argument that we weren’t passing on or using all the 
federal money that should have been allocated to education. The 
reality is that we increased ours by 48 per cent, whereas 
Saskatchewan’s total entitlements under the EPF (established 
program of financing) rose by only forty-two and a half per cent 
over the same period. So, although I don’t have the exact 
numbers, I’ve got the percentages there for you. Our spending 
went up by 48.  

If the federal spending had gone up by 48, it would have been 
. . . we’d have been exactly passing it on. The reality is federal 
entitlements, that were passed on to us, only went up by 
forty-two and a half. So we are doing more, or we’re over and 
above the federal entitlement. So not only we are passing that 
along and spending it on behalf of Saskatchewan children and 
Saskatchewan young adults, but we are doing even more than 
that relative to education. I think that’s the argument that we’re 
essentially debating here tonight. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Would it be possible for you to provide me 
with the figures that would substantiate that in terms of dollars 
that are coming into the province from the feds, and the dollars 
that are being spend here in post secondary education? 
 
You will recall, perhaps, the Johnson Report, I believe it was 
called, in 1985, which made some claims that provinces — and 
I think the province of Saskatchewan was included — was 
funded considerably, or spent considerably less of the money 
that they got from the . . . less than the money that they got 
through the established program financing for education. And 
this is . . . if it isn’t . . . If it is a myth, it certainly deserves to be 
exposed; and if it isn’t a myth, it certainly deserves to be 
addressed. So I was wondering whether or not you would be 
prepared to supply some of that data, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Could I get those perhaps within a couple 
weeks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes. We’ll undertake to get them to 
you within a couple of weeks or even sooner if we have a . . .  
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Now I want to deal specifically with some 
of the events resulting . . . or particularly referring to the 
University of Saskatchewan. We’ve went through a rather 
stressful time there, and I contend that the stress is not over 
again have taken a strike vote and a strike option in the fall. 
 
Quite clearly the movement at the government level to put the 
strikers back to work did not really solve the existing problem 
at the university. I think you will acknowledge that and I will 
acknowledge that, Mr. Minister.  
 
So I’m asking the minister if you’re contemplating any changes, 
any structural changes to the university at all, any structural 
changes to administration or to the board, any financial or 
funding changes to the university. Have you got any new 
directions in mind for the university to help and address the 
problems that the universities are facing internally at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the 
member’s questions and comments are well intentioned because 
the situation as it exists at the University of Saskatchewan is an 
unsettling one for all, I think. But given the delicateness of the 
situation, that there is still a  
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1806 
 

contract outstanding. I think I would be ill-advised to make any 
comments about my thoughts or my government’s thoughts, if 
you like, relative to the situation there. 
 
The one comment I would make, however, because I would 
want it clearly on the record is: in response to your question 
about, do we have any plans for restructuring administration, it 
is not the Government of Saskatchewan that determines the 
administration and who shall be the administrators and chief 
executive officer and the president, etc., of the university; it’s 
the board of governors. And that falls within their purview, and 
that’s as it should be. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Are you giving any thoughts to restructuring 
the mandate or the board, make-up of the board, in any way at 
all at either of the universities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I suppose the only thoughts that are 
running through our minds at this point in time are not unlike 
yours in that I think it’s in everyone’s best interest, and 
certainly we would like to see the contract, to see that settled. I 
don’t know as I can offer any further comment at this point in 
time at all. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — When I talk to people at the university 
including people in administration and including students and 
including professors, there’s various reasons that seem to 
surface as possible irritants. Some of them are spaces. In some 
cases we see fights or struggles between departments. There’s 
some feeling that perhaps the professional colleges are getting 
more funding as opposed to the liberal arts colleges. Now I 
know that’s an internal matter and I don’t want to meddle in 
that any more than you do, Mr. Minister, and that’s the way it 
should be. 
 
There’s the problem of student crowding, the problem of the 
work-load for the professors, and we’ve seen students, 
significant numbers of students, which have ended up, some on 
administration side, some on faculty side as they’ve gone 
through the strike, so that we see them attempting to work out 
their internal problems. 
 
The contention that we had made, and I guess that I continue to 
make, is that one of the irritants, certainly, is the funding ratios 
that have happened. And I would hope, Mr. Minister, that you 
would consider as perhaps the department’s contribution to 
alleviating situation there, would be to strive to get that ratio, 
which has decreased — the number of dollars per students had 
decreased — by 23 per cent since you came to government . . . 
And I know you put more money in, but we dealt with that 
before and I don’t want to go through that entire argument 
again. 
 
But it ask that question, or this series of questions, to see 
whether or not you were indicating any structural changes, 
when I believe quite strongly that one of the major things that 
you could do as a government is just try to keep those funds at 
the per student level up as high as you can. 
 
I don’t expect a reply to that, so I will just carry on to  

another item that I’ve dealt with. I started dealing with this 
again once at the end of the day and then it was 5 o’clock, so I 
have to rephrase the question. 
 
You may recall, Mr. Minister, where I asked you a question 
about the autonomy of the university and how you intended to 
deal and keep the relationship between the university and the 
government, particularly in view of the fact that your Deputy 
Minister, I believe, sits in at some of the board of governor’s 
meeting, particularly in view of the fact that you have six 
appointed members. 
 
My discussions with some of the board members, the 
universities, they indicate to me that when a new board member 
comes on to the universities, that even though the member may 
come on with a bias, its isn’t long before the member is sort of 
co-opted by the university atmosphere and the rest of the board 
members. He assumes himself or herself as being a university 
board of governor first and then an appointee of a government 
or an elected person from some particular body. And that’s the 
way it should be, Mr. Minister. 
 
There is a threat that was brought to my attention, and I want to 
bring it to your attention because it was brought to my attention 
on two different instances. It applies particularly to Saskatoon 
and to my riding in Prince Albert, and that is the threat of a 
possible closure of the School of Human Justice and social 
work. Now those two institutions have done tremendous jobs in 
our community, and I know they’ve done tremendous job in the 
community of Saskatoon. 
 
In addition to the teaching that they’ve done, the 
community-based approach that they have used has allowed 
people in our university, in our little universities in Prince 
Albert — and I’m sure it’s done the same in Saskatoon — to 
actually involve people who are professionals, working at the 
jails or working among disadvantaged people in social work, to 
continue their education and not to get burnt out. It’s been a 
tremendous thing. You know, burn-out at a university, pardon 
me, burn-out at a penitentiary or at a jail or in social work is a 
real problem, as it is in teaching. And one of the things that the 
U of R (University of Regina) has done is help to overcome 
that. 
 
Now what is the threat? Right now the universities find 
themselves in a situation where they may have to contemplate 
cutting back on programs. They boosted their student-teacher 
ratios as much as they can; they filled their classrooms as much 
as they can. I know that when you’re situated here in Regina it’s 
very easy, and it’s the easiest thing to do is to cut off an arm 
that’s some place further away. 
 
Now what I wanted from you, Mr. Minister, is a specific 
commitment, if I could, that your department or any member of 
your department that might be in discussions with the U of R in 
their programs cuts would not be singling out any particular 
department, as I have heard rumour — and I won’t put it any 
further than that — that it’s this particular area that should be 
cut. Could you give me that commitment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, yes. 
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1807 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — I want to ask you now, Mr. Minister, about 
student summer jobs. We know that the number of student 
summer jobs that the Opportunities ’88 program is providing is 
now less than it was a year ago — it has gone from 10,500 to 
4,387. 
 
Do you have any breakdown as to how many of those students 
that got these jobs are from U of S, how many are from U of R, 
how many are SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology) students, or is there any kind of 
breakdown of that type?  
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The issue being, Mr. Chairman, 
student employment, the two universities, and those students 
that may have had employment as a result of the Opportunities 
’88 program. We don’t have any numbers, and the reason is that 
even if indeed such numbers are available is because it’s not 
under our portfolio. It’s under my colleague, the Minister of 
Human Resources, Labour and Employment. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — The comments and the concerns that I’ve 
had expressed to me have been that the student . . . that under 
this summer program, being as how there’s only 4,300 of them 
this year, that the university students tend to grab then up 
quicker because their academic years ends sooner, whereas the 
SIAST students quite often don’t have their programs ending at 
that time — some of them, as a matter of fact, go through 
continually. But the SIAST students would certainly like to see 
some proportion of those programs available to them, perhaps 
in proportion to their population or something like that. But 
they generally tend to feel that they are sort of left out of these 
programs. Have you had any of that type of concern brought to 
you attention? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I can quite honestly say, and in 
checking with my officials, it’s not something that’s been 
brought to any of our attention. If it is indeed a problem I’d be 
happy to look into it. And it may well be that the issue’s been 
raised with my colleague, since he’s the one who administers 
the program. But if there’s some follow-up I could do for you 
there, perhaps by way of correspondence, I’d be happy to do so. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — That would be appreciated. I think that it’s 
the kind of a thing that’s a growing issue rather than one of 
immediate urgency, but it’s one that could develop into a bigger 
issue. If it’s addressed at this stage, I think the students would 
feel quite good about it. 
 
I want to ask a question with respect to student representation 
on the SIAST board. Have you made a decision as to how that 
student representative on your board will be selected? 
 
It is my understanding that the students’ group wishes to be 
given the responsibility of selecting their representative. It is 
my understanding also that you have indicated to them that you 
would like to retain the prerogative of selecting that 
representative. I would suggest to you that student 
representative, if it should be a student representative, should be 
responsible to the students as opposed to the minister. 

Could you give me an indication that you will set up . . . 
whether you will set it up the way the SECTIS (Student 
Executive Council of Technical Institutes in Saskatchewan) — 
or formerly the SECTIS — representatives have indicated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I can say, Mr. Chairman, certainly to 
the degree that I was involved and certainly to the degree that 
my officials were involved, that we’ve tried to co-operate as 
fully as possible with the students and student associations, and 
particularly SECTIS. 
 
The reality is, because I did make the commitment in writing 
and to you and to them that we would have a student sit on the 
board — and we do have a student that will be sitting on the 
board — the SECTIS student umbrella organization did not got 
through an electoral procedure to provide us with an elected 
board member, if you like. But they did submit names for our 
consideration and from that list, from their list, we have put one 
on the board. As I said earlier, that board will be announced 
shortly. 
 
The second point I would make here is that if SECTIS or 
whatever a student organization might look like or will look 
like or whatever the umbrella organization might be — I don’t 
want to presuppose anything — if they decide on a procedure 
different for this next year than they had last year, because it’s 
only a one-year appointment, that’s fine by me. It’s whatever 
they would prefer. We’d just like to co-operate with them fully, 
but they didn’t go through an electoral process this time. They 
just provided us with some names. And it was partly because of 
the transition, if you like, from the several institutes to the new 
form of autonomy where they did indeed have to seat on the 
board. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Next I want to ask a question with respect to 
tuition fees as they have applied and been changed to 
administrative management and accounts programs at the 
Woodland Campus. 
 
What happened in this case is there is a number of students who 
are enrolled in this program and they were told, like anybody 
else, they were all told that they had to pay tuition fee of $942. 
The method of collecting the fees was to pay $3.17 for each of 
the 297 competencies. Then as they went through this program 
— and some of them are half-way through it. You know it’s a 
progress as fast as you can system; some of them are 
three-quarters of the way through, some of them might be just 
half-way through. The program at the same time has been 
undergoing revision so that the number of competencies has 
been reduced to 245, and this is right in mid-stream. So what’s 
happened is the Woodland is intentioning . . . Woodland’s 
intention is to charge the same tuition fee, but now to increase 
the number or the number of dollars per competency. 
 
(2115) 
 
Now the perception here is — and I think there’s some reason 
for understanding and being compassionate with the perception 
— is that now the students are going to get fewer competencies 
and they have to pay more for them. Not only that, but they are 
going to have to pay some  
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1808 
 

money retroactively for the competencies that they have already 
paid for — $3.17. 
 
Now I submit to you, Mr. Minister, that this isn’t a pile of 
money when it comes to the department, that it actually comes 
down to, for a department amount, it comes down to peanuts. 
But what is happening is the perception is that all of a sudden 
you’ve got to pay more, and the students probably don’t mind 
paying more for competencies which would be compressed 
now, but they certainly do object to paying more for the 
competencies that they have completed already because there is 
a new way of spreading the same tuition fee, the tuition of 
$942. 
 
And what I’m wondering is: would you be prepared to 
reimburse Woodland so that their budgets wouldn’t be out, 
because I know their problems. They have to provide, show a 
budget entry of $ 942 for competency. Reimburse them for 
those competencies that the students who have taken them 
under the old system paid so that the students don’t have to do 
the make-up retroactively, because they feel that they bought a 
program and all of a sudden the program’s price had gone up 
retroactively. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member, I think . . . Indeed 
these concerns, are as you’ve suggested, and I don’t doubt what 
you’re saying particularly. In fact, what I will do is I will ask 
the board to examine what you are saying, and if indeed there is 
something that they can do that makes this fairer — that’s the 
issue — then I’m sure that they’ll want to address the question. 
So I’ll ask the board to take a look at that. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Yes. I think the administration has sort of 
addressed it internally. I think that one of their problems is they 
may be coming back to you as a minister or to your department 
for a make-up of those few dollars. I don’t think that that 
amount of money would probably be more than a thousand 
dollars. 
 
And I tell you that thousand dollars will buy you a lot of 
goodwill if the students that are in there don’t have to pay for 
those back competencies . It will mean that you’ll probably lose 
3 or 4 or 10 dollars per student per course — whatever it is. I 
won’t amount to that much, but they would certainly appreciate 
that, Mr. Minister. 
 
I want to ask now a question with respect to Woodland again, 
and this is with respect to the money that you spent — well 
spent — on a day-care centre there, the day-care lab, but which 
you put, in your wisdom and in your planning of the program, 
you put in the 40 . . . You put in the space, and it’s a beautiful 
space. I hope you’ve seen it. I know that even the Premier of 
B.C. saw it and thought it was good, except he thought it was 
dangerous that maybe people should go there and actually learn 
something about day care. 
 
Now we’ve got the program. You’ve got the students. You gave 
a commitment to students; your department gave a commitment 
to students when they came in. This was prior to the election in 
’86 if you remember. You gave them another commitment in 
early ’87 that that day care would be open, and then you gave 
me a commitment in this legislature last year that it would be 
open by at least, oh, the end of the year, I believe were your 
statements  

of ’87. 
 
And every time I’ve gone back to Woodland and I ask the 
program, well how’s the day care lab, and they say, well we 
haven’t received the licence for it. Now the licensing happens to 
fall under the Department of Social Services. I’ve written letters 
to the Minister of Social Services and he tells me that he has 
some kind of “concerns.” Obviously, he didn’t make those 
concerns known to you, as the Minister of Education, prior to 
putting that in. 
 
Now what I want to know, Mr. Minister, is what kind of 
relationship have you got with him? Or what have you done so 
far to get that program in there? You know it’s really a discredit 
to the college and it’s a discredit to the system and certainly to 
the Department of Education that that program, that that 
particular day-care centre isn’t in there. 
 
I know for a fact that there have been surveys taken, that there 
are students available. There is nobody that I’ve talked to in the 
school — and I think you probably even agree with this — that 
thinks that the day-care lab there is not a good idea and it 
shouldn’t be in there. But unfortunately it isn’t in there because, 
I submit, what’s happening is that the Minister of Social 
Services had got some idea in his head that publicly-funded day 
cares aren’t a great thing. 
 
Now if that’s not the truth, then I want to hear something that 
might be or what his ideas really are. Actually I don’t care what 
his ideas are. What I want, Mr. Minister, is I want you to get 
after him to get that licence into Woodlands. 
 
We’ve got students from all over the province that have had to 
go out to take their practicums. It’s been an increase in costs. 
They’ve had to take their supervisors and travel them to 
Yorkton and Swift Current and wherever to take their 
practicums. They could have taken them right there. 
 
They’ve been forced to go from a competency-based system to 
a modified, competency-based system because they are unable 
to, at the time when they are ready to take the practice session 
of reading to those children or playing games, or setting up 
puppets for them, and practising it, and having that immediate 
feedback so its inefficient for the students. The day cares in the 
Prince Albert area have been very good in that they’ve lent their 
spaces to the school for some of this. But eventually their 
patience will run out, and besides what they want is they want 
qualified people. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you prepared to do, and what have you 
done to get this particular licence through? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I think, there, I would 
have to admit that if there’s some blame to be attached relative 
to myself or my colleague, the minister, for not having resolved 
this issue earlier, I would accept that as a criticism. I think it’s a 
legitimate enough one. 
 
But having said that, the reality is there are discussions that are 
currently under way between the Department of Education and 
the Department of Social Services aimed  
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1809 
 

at a resolution to the issue you raise. If those discussions had 
concluded to the satisfaction of everyone, it wouldn’t be an 
issue here today. The reality is: those discussions are not yet 
concluded and hopefully we can have some resolve and have 
some resolve soon. But I accept your criticism about the delay. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Do you, yourself, have a personal 
commitment towards that day-care centre? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think, Mr. Chairman, if ones goes 
back in the history previous ministers had made announcements 
relative to day care. I, myself, I think in response to a question 
from you last year talked about day care and the establishment 
of a day care at the, what was then called the northern institute 
of technology. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I take it then that you do have a personal 
commitment. I think you also have a personal commitment to 
the students. I would like you to advertise in the paper, the next 
time you advertise for spaces there, that the Minister of Social 
Services refuses to give a licence to this particular day-care 
program — to this early childhood program, to the centre. 
Because he is causing the Department of Education all kinds of 
trouble on this one. 
 
An Hon. Member: — A lot of grief. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — A lot of grief. A lot of grief. And if you 
want my support or if you want me to put in the $10 to put that 
ad in, I’ll do so. 
 
Mr. Minister, with respect to the condition of the Saskatchewan 
archives. You know that the archives in Saskatoon are in a 
deplorable condition and there was a press release . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s in Maxwell’s shop. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Excuse me, the minister mentions that the 
archives are not in his department? 
 
I have a series of questions that I want to ask you with respect 
to the property management corporation. I’ll just read the 
questions and ask if you will supply me with the information on 
that later. The questions are: I would like an itemized list of 
facilities, that is offices, compounds, parking lots, etc., that are 
provided to your department by the management corporation. 
Can I get those? 
 
Number of square feet or . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 
minister days, yes. The number of square feet, or in the case of 
parking lots, the number of stalls in each of the facilities which 
was outlined in question one. Can I get those? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — The minister says yes. In those instances 
where the facility is not leased, would you indicate the amount 
which each department is paying the property management 
corporation for its use today; how much it was paid; and how 
much was paid in the ’87-88 fiscal year . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Not sure. Not sure? 

Number four, in the case of all facilities outlined in the above 
questions, would you indicate the use each is presently being 
put to in one or two words. And would you provide an itemized 
list of services being provided by the property management 
corporation and the amount being charged to the department for 
those services today. And as well, how much was paid in the 
fiscal year ’87-88? I’m talking about things such as mail service 
in dollars, amount of money spent on government automobiles, 
furnishings. Agreed, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I had responded to one of your 
colleagues by letter, in fact today, on some questions relative to 
property management corporation and facilities. And I’ll have 
my officials examine the record and respond to your questions a 
fully and as appropriately as we can, given that some of the 
information may have some implications for market values and 
hence there may be some confidentiality from that perspective. 
But what I would give you the assurances of, unless that’s 
concern, we’ll provide the information as fully as we can. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I have one more set of questions on SIAST. 
I’ll defer first of all to my colleagues from Saskatoon 
University. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Chairman, I want to come back to the question of the University 
of Saskatchewan, and ask the minister a question about the 
serious underfunding crisis that his government has brought 
upon the University of Saskatchewan in the past few years. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ll be aware that this crisis is reflected both in 
a decline in the quality of education in many university 
programs, particularly in the College of Arts and Science, as a 
result of the overcrowding in the class-rooms, the inability of 
that college to hire permanent new faculty members, the 
inadequate library facilities that are available to students and 
faculty at the university. 
 
And also, Mr. Minister, that crisis in underfunding that your 
government is largely responsible for has of course resulted in 
the quota that has to be imposed on entry to the College of Arts 
and Science. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Minister, this year it is expected that in September the 
University will have to turn away students who have less than a 
76 per cent average. And that is surely appalling that a qualified 
student with an average as much as 10 percent above 65, which 
was the original requirements for entry to the University of 
Saskatchewan, a student with an average as high as 75 per cent 
is likely to be turned away from the College of Arts and 
Science. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, my question to you relates to whether or not 
you are prepared at this point to recognize that the funding 
situation at the University of Saskatchewan is so critical and so 
serious that your government has got to relent on your decision, 
this year, to only increase  
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1810 
 

funding by 1.9 per cent in a year when inflation is running at 
5.5 to 6 per cent. And, Mr. Minister, surely at this point, given 
the crisis in labour relations at the university, given the crisis in 
accessibility to the University of Saskatchewan, and given the 
crisis in quality, you will have to acknowledge that additional 
moneys in this budget year, Mr. Minister, have got to be put up 
for the University of Saskatchewan and for the University of 
Regina. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, before I ask you to respond specifically to 
that request, I want you to look at your own record for a minute. 
You’ve been making what I consider to be a number of very 
inaccurate statements about your funding record. 
 
I want to remind you of that record, Mr. Minister. In the year 
1984-85, when inflation was running at 5.8 per cent, you 
provided the University of Saskatchewan and the University of 
Regina with a 4.9 per cent grant. In ’85-86 when inflation was 
4.4 per cent, your grant was actually slightly above inflation, at 
4.9 per cent. But in ’86-87, Mr. Minister, when inflation was 4 
per cent, your grant was only 3.2 per cent; and in ’87-88, when 
inflation was 4.6 per cent, your grant was zero per cent. And 
now, Mr. Minister, this year, with inflation at almost 6 per cent, 
your grant is 1.9 per cent. 
 
In other words, Mr. Minister, you have fallen short by more 
than 10 per cent if you compare your funding levels in the 
University of Saskatchewan with the consumer price index 
since 1984-85. That’s the practical reality, Mr. Minister. And in 
addition to that, Mr. Minister, you will be fully aware of the fact 
that during that time period there have been very sharp 
increases in enrolment at the University of Saskatchewan, so in 
fact the loss has been far in excess of 10 per cent, more in the 
range, Mr. Minister, of at least 20 per cent once you account for 
increased enrolment. My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: will 
you now acknowledge that this underfunding situation simply 
can’t continue any longer, and will you address it right now, 
her, this week, in these estimates, Mr. Minister, by coming 
forward with at least an increase of 5 to 6 per cent for the 
University of Saskatchewan in this fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I would suggest to 
you, and to all Saskatchewan students, parents, residents of this 
province, that the hon. member is, quite frankly, being 
irresponsible. He opened up the question and continually used 
the words crisis, underfunding crisis, serious underfunding 
crisis. That is just hyperbole, it’s just overblown rhetoric, it’s 
inflamed rhetoric. As one of my colleagues says, it is garbage. 
 
What useful purpose is served in the debate here tonight, where 
we could intelligently discuss university funding, by such 
terms? He knows those terms are incorrect, Mr. Chairman. He 
has been incorrect in this legislature before, he has had to 
apologize because of incorrect data and his is incorrect again 
tonight, Mr. Chairman. 
 
How does he square? I ask you, Mr. Chairman, and I ask the 
hon. member: how does he square an independent study, the 
council of Ontario universities, how does he square their 
numbers that put our spending, full-time  

equivalent, based on full-time equivalents, our spending in 
universities in the year ’86-87 — which is the year I have their 
numbers for, and I provided it to the hon. member from Prince 
Albert — how does he square his statements, and I quote him, 
“serious underfunding crisis,” how does he square that with the 
council of Ontario universities who put Saskatchewan in second 
place in terms of expenditures based on full-time equivalents? I 
would like him to answer that question. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, your comments are really so 
inappropriate that they don’t deserve a response. I think, Mr. 
Minister, that the members of the faculty and the students at the 
University of Saskatchewan will be shocked to hear that you 
don’t consider that there’s a funding crisis at the university, 
because I can assure you that they do, Mr. Minister. And I think 
that you should closely review the position that you’ve taken 
because you’re leaving the University of Saskatchewan in an 
untenable situation, Mr. Minister. And I deeply regret your 
comment this evening. 
 
I want to ask you another question, Mr. Minister, and that 
relates to your comments with respect to the Johnson report 
which I was also very surprised to hear. Mr. Minister, following 
your comments, I got a copy of the Johnson report out of my 
file, 1984-85. I think that report, as I recall, was submitted in 
March 1985 to the Government of Canada. And Mr. Johnson 
looked at the percentage of moneys in each province for 
post-secondary education, and specifically for universities and 
colleges that were being provided by the federal government. 
And for the province of Saskatchewan in the year 1984-85, and 
I quote from page 6 of Mr. Johnson’s report, Mr. Minister. He 
indicated that the province of Saskatchewan received 90.3 per 
cent of all their funding for universities and colleges — and in 
the case of colleges in our province, I presume he meant our 
technical institutes — 90.3 per cent of that was received from 
the Government of Canada, Mr. Minister. Presumably then, 
only 9.7 per cent was provincial money and that was in 
1984-85. 
 
Now I just read you, Mr. Minister, the figures for the last five 
years in terms of your funding record. And I pointed out to you, 
Mr. Minister, that your government fell more than 10 per cent 
short in comparison with the consumer price index versus the 
amount of money that you put into the University of 
Saskatchewan. And in the last two years, Mr. Minister, in 
effect, we’ve had a zero per cent increase and only a 1.9 per 
cent increase. Now, if in 1984-85, Mr. Minister, 90.3 percent of 
the moneys that were going into our universities were federal 
dollars, and you’ve provided virtually no increases in the last 
two fiscal years — only a 1.9 per cent increase over two years 
— then, Mr. Minister, are we to conclude that at this point in 
time in terms of provincial funds almost no moneys are going 
into the University of Saskatchewan? 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, if you don’t agree with that assertion, then I 
ask you to table the information on which you refute Mr. 
Johnson’s claim. And otherwise, Mr. Minister, I ask you to 
acknowledge that in fact we’re seeing consistently less and less 
provincial money to go into the University of Saskatchewan and 
the University of Regina and our technical institutes, to the 
point where certainly 
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1811 
 

well under 10 per cent, and perhaps even less than 5 per cent of 
the funds are coming out of provincial coffers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, relative to the Johnson report, 
as ministers before me at the Canadian ministers of education 
council have noted, and as I would not for you, that report has 
been dismissed and disacknowledged by every province in the 
country — every province. So you can place all the credence 
you want into it but you have no support based on whatever 
political ideology across the country. 
 
The observation about we have more students — and I think 
that’s great; I think it’s wonderful that we have more and more 
young people having the opportunity to go on to post-secondary 
education. I don’t see it as a problem; I see it as a tremendous 
comment on the importance that society attaches to furthering 
their education. 
 
And indeed for universities, each student represents some 
additional revenue because of the tuition fees they pay. Yes, 
that doesn’t cover it all, that’s why we have university grants. 
As well I acknowledge that it creates some problems in terms of 
capital construction; and then the issue becomes one of: well, 
has our government responded. The answer is yes. To back that 
up, one only has to look at the capital grants, or the University 
of Saskatchewan, the University of Regina over the last decade 
and more. 
 
When we look at the NDP years — the ones that you would so 
proudly point to . . . For example, I’ll pick years, say, through 
’77-78, through ’81-82. The capital expenditures that your 
government, your administration made, that the NDP made: 
508,000; 560,000; 690,000; 969,000; 802,000. What were the 
similar numbers under the Progressive Conservative years? — 3 
million; 5 million; 5.2 million; 5.7 million. 
 
Your arguments are, quite frankly, fatuous. You consistently try 
to make a case for a serious underfunding crisis. There is 
nothing to underpin your arguments — nothing at all — 
absolutely nothing. We have independent studies put us in 
second place . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Would I like to be 
in first? Sure . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What about the libraries? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member asks, what about 
libraries? The numbers there on the capital side and on the 
acquisition side put the . . . The NDP were virtually spending 
nothing, and that’s why we had to bring in and put in place the 
university renewal development fund. 
 
I read the expenditures into the record last time we were in 
estimates about the NDP expenditures on libraries. There was 
never a number in a million. And I’ll put another number in the 
record for you. We spend more in one year on capital funding 
on our universities than the NDP spent in six years. 
 
You know, you people consistently paid lip service to our 
universities — no cash; lip service. You allowed the equipment 
to deteriorate. You never replaced the equipment. You never 
built new buildings. You never replenished and put in place the 
new technology that  

they so often needed. 
 
Our government has an enviable track record in Western 
Canada, and indeed across this nation when it comes to 
university funding, and I am proud of it and I won’t retreat one 
step from your fatuous arguments. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think anybody observing 
this debate will notice how you’ve ignored my question and 
worked around my question once again, Mr. Minister. And 
that’s you privilege, but I’m sure that the people watching 
tonight and those who read the Hansard will not be impressed. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you one final question in light of our 
time constraints tonight. Before I do, I want to again express, as 
my colleague, the member for Prince Albert has expressed, my 
disappointment at the cuts that you have made in funding to the 
bursary program and the refundable loan program, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
It’s appalling that 4,500 students who received bursaries and 
financial assistance that did not need to be repaid, in the 
1987-88, this year are not receiving that assistance, Mr. 
Minister. That is a real step backwards in terms of accessibility, 
particularly for those who are less financially fortunate and 
need assistance. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, the final question I want to ask you tonight 
relates to my responsibilities as Social Services critic, and it is 
with respect to school lunch programs in Saskatoon and Regina 
and other elementary schools where there’s an obvious problem 
with respect to child hunger. 
 
(2145) 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the Minister of Social Services has 
responsibility for much of this area, but some of this 
responsibility also falls on you. Mr. Minister, in the case of 
Saskatoon, the public school board has approached your 
department asking for moneys — only a small amount of 
money, Mr. Minister — to allow them to set up a school 
breakfast or school snack or school lunch program in some of 
the public elementary schools in Saskatoon where the problem 
of hunger is the most prevalent. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, time and time again in this Assembly 
members on this side of the House, including myself, have 
brought to your attention the fact that there are now some 
17,000 children in Saskatchewan that are having to depend on 
food banks at some point in the year. Those are the figures of 
1987, Mr. Minister. 
 
And my question to you is: in light of the fact that the 
Saskatoon school boards have told you that they can put on a 
snack program for only 18 cents per child per meal per staff; 
and in the case of Regina, the Regina Child Hunger Coalition 
has pointed out to you that a snack program can be put in effect 
for 19 inner-city schools at a cost, Mr. Minister, of only some 
$48,000 for a year, and that a major feeding program for some 
900 students in need with a daily meal can be put into effect, 
Mr. Minister, for only some $68,000 in the course of a year — 
so in the case of Regina only $108,000, and the figures are 
similar in Saskatoon, Mr. Minister. 
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1812 
 

My question to you is: why can you not, Mr. Minister, find 
from your department budget $108,000 for Saskatoon, 
$108,000 for Regina, and similar moneys where they may be 
needed in other parts of the province, but certainly not in 
excess, Mr. Minister, on a province-wide basis, not in excess of 
more than half a million dollars to deal with this problem — 
this urgent problem of children coming to school hungry and 
unable to learn because they are hungry, Mr. Minister.  
 
Surely from your budget for rental of empty office space you 
can find the funds that are necessary for your departmental 
budget to put into place half a million dollars to finance a 
school breakfast or school lunch program where it’s needed 
throughout Saskatchewan where children are hungry. 
 
And I ask you tonight, Mr. Minister, are you prepared to come 
up with that half million dollars and put it in your budget before 
we pass these estimates? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, we went through this 
in some detail in a previous session of examination of the 
Education estimates, so I will not give a lengthy answer, except 
to say this: (a) our government recognizes that there are 
children at risk. He has mentioned one category, hungry 
children. To that end we provide $200,000 of funding now 
through the community schools programs for school boards and 
some several . . . into, I think, 16 schools across the province, 
something like that. 
 
And thirdly, in so far as what more might be done relative to 
that whole category of children at risk, discussions are under 
way between the Departments of Health, Social Services, and 
Education. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Will you be able to provide me within a 
week or so which programs have been moved and which ones 
have been cancelled at the SIAST institute in the last year? . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you. The minister says yes. I 
mentioned . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d ask the minister to respond so it’s on the 
record. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, yes. And while I’m on 
my feet, the hon. member, my officials provided me with 
information which I will pass along to the member from 
Saskatoon University who asked me to use the proceeds from 
these thousands of metres of empty square footage that 
Saskatchewan Education has that would alleviate some 
problems in society. I would report to you and to all members 
of the legislature and the Saskatchewan people that we have 
empty space in the farmer co-op creamery building in 
Humboldt and the Kuziak building in Yorkton, totalling 31 
square metres, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Earlier this evening, Mr. Minister, I gave 
you two concrete suggestions of what you could do before you 
turn over the entire governance of SIAST to the board — what 
you could do. One was with respect to a  

minor payment with respect to fees. I expect to get some 
information from you once you’ve looked into that. The other 
was with respect to the day-care centre. 
 
I have one more concrete suggestion to give you, that if you 
implement, that if you did, Mr. Minister, would go a long way 
to improving morale at the institute, and not only at the institute 
but would perhaps restore a little bit of business ethics to the 
business world — something that is quite lacking under this 
particular government. 
 
And I’d talk specifically now about the printing contract that 
was given to Datacopi — Datacopi, a company out of . . . I 
believe it’s based out of either Saskatoon or Regina; I think the 
printing in done at Regina — and particularly in the way that 
it’s done. 
 
My suggestion to you, Mr. Minister, is that when this particular 
contract comes open — there has got to be a closing date on it, I 
ask you when it is — when it comes open, that you put that 
thing on a complete open and honest tender. And I’ll tell you 
why. Because what happened was when the people were . . . the 
officials were planning the institute, they first . . . You hadn’t 
yet gotten into this privatization kick of yours, and the people 
there planned to have all the printing done in-house. They have 
the capabilities still, I think, of getting them done in-house, 
providing they had access to a little bit of equipment. 
 
But what happened then was there was a recommendation that 
— after your government came down and said, no, we want to 
privatize some of this stuff, we want to privatize the printing. 
There was a recommendation that went out of the school by the 
officials — and you can deny this if you want, but I think I’m 
correct on this — that the printing contract . . . First of all, the 
recommendation was that it be done in-house; and secondly, 
that it go out to some kind of a tender, that it was at least an 
honest tender. 
 
But what happened is, there was a tender that went out that was 
so sophisticated looking that only one company really 
responded to it. When I checked with a couple of printers — 
and this involves hundreds, tens of thousands of dollars — 
when I checked it out, they said, well look, we couldn’t do it. 
And I said, well what exactly does it mean, when I went back to 
the institute. And all it meant was that you had to press one 
button that would send over an imprint over to the plant, or you 
could press button two, which would give you the piece of 
paper, and then that paper would go over to the printing plant. It 
could be done either way. But the program . . . or the tender 
specified the use of this particular sophisticated equipment. 
 
And I contend that you gave it to Datacopi, or you made that 
tender that way so that Datacopi, which happens to be owned 
by Donlevy & Company, which happens to be the PC printer. 
And I contend that you did it that way so that they would be the 
only ones that could respond to it. The problem was if they’d 
have at least delivered on the contract, but no, the stuff that kept 
coming back did not live up to the terms of contract. Many a 
time the material came back overdue — over the three-day 
turnover period. Probably, if it was done in-house or even in the 
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1813 
 

city, the turnover time would be probably less than 24 hours in 
most cases. And you know, when you’re teaching in an 
institution and you need some programs, the type that do there, 
you need them instantaneously, you don’t need them three or 
four or five days ahead of time from when your order them. 
 
In addition to that, the cost was that much greater than it could 
have been. It went up to 7 cents from 4 cents. So what I would 
ask you to do, Mr. Minister, is before you leave, before you turn 
it over, if you would open that contract up openly so that all 
printers in Saskatchewan would have a good shot at it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Many of your facts are wrong. We 
responded to this question in the House a month or six weeks 
ago. The contract comes up in three months . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Three years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — . . . in three years rather. And I’m sure 
the board will undertake normal business principles when it 
does come up for renewal. But other than that, I’ve answered 
the question previously. I think many of your facts are wrong. 
And indeed the right choice was made, and I’m satisfied that it 
was made. And I know that you and I will have to agree to 
disagree on this one. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I have 
five or six questions that I would like to address to the minister 
tonight. Several of them are rather short points that I’m sure the 
minister can respond to briefly. A couple of them may take a 
little bit of extra time, and I hope, if the minister is in the mood, 
perhaps, to try to wade through to the conclusion of his 
estimates tonight, we might see past the clock at 10 o’clock and 
try to wrap it up, but that’s obviously up to the minister and the 
good nature or otherwise of the government House Leader. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to start with this issue of the cost sharing 
arrangements between the Government of Canada and the 
Government of Saskatchewan for post-secondary education in 
Saskatchewan under the EPF, or the established program of 
financing system. That system, as you know, began, I believe it 
was in 1977, and I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you would not 
agree that at the outset of that program in 1977 the basic 
intention was that there should be, ideally, a 50-50 cost sharing 
arrangement for post-secondary education between the 
Government of Canada and the various provinces across the 
country. Everyone would know, looking at the statistics, that 
that 50-50 arrangement has by no means been achieved. But I 
wonder if the minister first and foremost would not concede 
that the spirit of the EPF system was essentially that 50-50 
expectation with the cost of post-secondary education being 
shared more or less equally by the federal and provincial levels 
of government in this country? 
 
Mr. Minister, I would then direct your attention to the statistics 
that you, yourself, have used in this House this evening — not 
the numbers that were used by the official opposition and 
numbers which you have disavowed, but I refer specifically to 
your own arithmetic where you said earlier this evening that in 
the last few years EPF — that is federal money to 
Saskatchewan for post-secondary  

education — has increased over the last number of years. And I 
forgot the time span you used, but I think it was the last three or 
four years, by about 42 per cent, and that at the same time, 
overall Saskatchewan funding for post-secondary education 
increased by something like 48 per cent. And you were trying to 
make the point that basically that meant the federal dollars were 
being passed through and used for post-secondary education 
funding in this province, and on the basis of the statistics that 
you cited that assertion about the federal being passed through 
is obviously correct and that is good. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, would you not agree that those same 
statistics, those same numbers that you used would show that 90 
per cent of the increase in funding for post-secondary education 
in Saskatchewan in the last number of years has, in fact, 
originated with the federal government? If the federal funding is 
increased by 42 per cent and provincial funding overall has only 
increased by 48 per cent, well 42 is about 90 per cent of 48, and 
it would seem to me that the larger share of the new funding is 
coming, indeed, from the Government of Canada, and that the 
province of Saskatchewan is not matching the level of federal 
funding that is being made available. 
 
(2200) 
 
And if that trend continues, Mr. Minister, do you not agree that 
we’ll get to the situation in this country where the lion’s share 
of all new dollars for post-secondary education are, in fact, 
going to federal dollars, and the provincial share will constantly 
decline as a percentage of the over all commitment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — First of all — and we’ve gone through 
this, I think, three times now tonight and I’m happy to do it 
again — there’s no agreement amongst any province to accept 
the Johnson report and 50-50 and all those kinds of things. And 
in fact, I mean, I think if one pushes that view, then I think it’s 
— well, I won’t say it. 
 
Let’s take your argument though. Let’s suppose that it was 
50-50 and we’ve increased ours by 48 and they’ve increased 
theirs by 42. That doesn’t take you to 90-10. I think you don’t 
understand what the numbers really represent. I don’t accept 
50-50. I told you that has never been the case. 
 
But just to use your example: if we were at 50 per cent each, 
and they, the feds, increased theirs by 42 per cent and we 
increased our spending by 48 per cent, you don’t end up at one 
being at 90 per cent and the other being at 10 per cent. I think 
your arithmetic — there’s a failure there and I’m not criticizing 
you, because I think it’s what your basing it on and you don’t 
have the proper base. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Well, Mr. Minister, could you then please 
clarify for me the statistic you used earlier this evening when 
you said that the funding for post-secondary education in 
Saskatchewan has increased by some 48 per cent in the last 
number of years. 
 
Are you talking about the total number of dollars that appear in 
these Estimates that go to post-secondary education? Is your 
assertion that these blue books, year after year — I think the last 
three- or four-year period you  
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1814 
 

were referring to, but if you look at that period of time you will 
find that the numbers in the blue books for post-secondary 
education have increased by 48 per cent. Would you confirm 
that that is the statistic you were referring to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, our spending has gone up by 48 
per cent, and during the same time the federal spending has 
gone up by 42 per cent. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — I think, Mr. Minister, the fundamental point 
that either you or I are missing — and I’d welcome clarification 
on this — that in your 48 per cent of total provincial funding is 
included the 42 per cent that’s federal. It’s not that the 42 is 
added to the 48. The 42 is included within the 48, and therefore 
the largest chunk of the increase — 42 out of the 48 — comes 
from the Government of Canada and does not come from the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
And if the minister has any argument to advance to contradict 
that, I’d be happy to hear what it is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, let’s take another run at this 
because you’re not right. If all we had done is, if you like, stood 
still as a provincial government, and only passed through the 
federal increases, then it would only have gone up by 42 per 
cent. But that is not what happened. In fact, it exceeded that 
way — a substantial amount . . . I mean, because the argument 
that we’re trying to determine here is, are we passing through 
federal dollars or are we not? And the answer is we’re doing 
that and substantially more. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, you say the argument is, is the 
Government of Saskatchewan passing through the federal 
dollars? I say that’s not the argument. On the basis of your 
statistics, I have conceded the point that yes, you are, in gross 
dollar terms, passing through the federal dollars. The question 
is, are you keeping up your side of the bargain in matching 
those federal dollars? And obviously you aren’t. And that’s 
where I think the difference in the point comes. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to move on to a second area. This is a 
very technical question and I think even a written answer would 
be satisfactory if we don’t have time to get into it tonight. And I 
would like to ask you specifically about the student numbers at 
the new technical institute in Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like you to tell me, if you could, how many students 
were taking courses, in total, at all of Saskatchewan’s technical 
schools in the academic year prior to the establishment of 
SIAST. And secondly, how many students are at SIAST in its 
first full academic year? How many students were there before, 
taking all of the technical schools together, and how many 
students are there now, at the new institute? 
 
And I wonder, in providing with me with the answer, Mr. 
Minister, if you would be able to tell me what is your projection 
for the coming academic year in terms of students attending the 
new technical institute. And do you have projections into the 
future beyond the next academic year? Are you, for example, 
trying to project  

what the student numbers at technical schools will be five years 
from now or 10 years from now? And I wonder if you could 
explain the system that is used by the department for doing that 
forecasting. How do you make your projections for next year 
and, say, five years from now and 10 years from now in terms 
of advance planning and preparation at the technical schools? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, I’ll provide that. In fact, I’ll be 
happy to provide that to you in written form and in detail as 
you’ve requested because it’s, from our standpoint, it’s very 
good news story. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One further 
technical question, and I refer to now a totally separate subject. 
I refer to Bill 3, the Act that was passed in this legislature 
dealing with the strike at the University of Saskatchewan. And 
you will recall, Mr. Minister, that the Act provides, under 
certain circumstances, for the provision of a report by the 
mediator to the Government of Saskatchewan in certain 
circumstances. 
 
Now as we know, the circumstances of that situation are still 
unfolding and the story is by no means yet complete. But I 
wonder, during the period of time that this legislation was in 
effect, did the mediator at any point provide the Government of 
Saskatchewan with any written documentation as was 
contemplated as at least a possibility under this legislation? Was 
anything in writing every filed? And if there was some written 
report or communication as contemplated by the legislation, 
would the minister be in a position to table that with the 
legislature to let us know what the mediator in fact said at any 
point during that period of time that the legislation was in 
effect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I can’t really answer your question 
fully. I would have to consult with my colleague, the Minister 
of Human Resources, Labour and Employment, because of the 
way the legislation was structured. I don’t know what was 
reported formally or informally, verbally or in written form, but 
I can undertake to provide you with a fuller answer than I can 
tonight on that. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, perhaps part of the difficulty is 
the section of the Act that contemplates the filing of a report is 
section 5(1) and during . . . that particular section suggests that 
a report may be filed if the dispute is not resolved. But during 
questioning, when that legislation was going through the House, 
in response to questions about the Act it was suggested that 
there might be a provision for interim reports or progress 
reports, and so forth. So I would be grateful if you could do the 
consulting with any of your colleagues that need to be asked, 
and let us know if there is anything on paper that flowed out of 
that legislation. 
 
To another subject now, Mr. Minister, again totally unrelated to 
the one that I’ve just dealt with. This has to do with the major 
school repair schedule for your department for the current fiscal 
year, for 1988-89. As you will know, a number of specific 
representations have been made to you on behalf of some 
school divisions that believe there are schools in their divisions 
requiring some pretty important capital repair work. And I think 
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1815 
 

specifically of the Borderland School Division that I know has 
made certain specific representations to you; there may well be 
others. 
 
I wonder again, in written form if you’re not in a position to do 
it tonight, if you could tell me what school repair projects will 
be undertaken this year with funding from your department in 
any of the Borderland, Assiniboia, or Wood River School 
Divisions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, I undertake to provide you that 
as quickly as possible and in writing. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I move on now to 
another question that directly relates to Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
constituency, and that is the present status of the College 
Mathieu in Gravelbourg. The minister obviously must be 
working on some kind of a financial package to deal with the 
rebuilding work that must be undertaken there, and undertaken 
very quickly. 
 
On the Monday after the fire, in this legislature, the minister 
responded very quickly and very positively to the propositions 
that were put to him about the need to rebuild the College, and 
to do so both quickly and generously. In terms of all the funding 
agencies that are involved here, one can think of obviously the 
insurance funds that come into play, the private donations that 
will become part of the picture, some of the special 
contributions that may be coming forward such as the one 
already offered by the province of Quebec. There is obviously a 
big funding component from the Government of Canada, and 
there is a major funding component to be expected from the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
I wonder if the minister’s in a position tonight to give us a 
progress report on where that situation stands at the present 
time? What arrangements are in the process of being 
negotiated? Just exactly where does it sit at this moment, and 
when would the minister anticipate a total package being 
together so that that project can proceed at the earliest possible 
moment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well there’s been virtually daily 
discussions relative to rebuilding College Mathieu. And as you 
rightly pointed out, I gave the commitment that we would, in so 
far as the provincial undertaking and what we could do to see 
that rebuilt, do it as expeditiously as possible. And I was happy 
to see, within a matter of a week, the minister in charge of SGI 
made sure that some insurance money was made available in so 
far as that could be helpful. 
 
I, myself, the Premier has met with them. In so far as the 
provincial government, we’ve already said that we will be 
providing financial support. What else we are doing relative to 
that, and very importantly, is that we’re in negotiations with the 
federal government, and in fact Tuesday of next week we’ll be 
seeing M. Bouchard in Quebec City to have further discussions 
on federal contribution to this project. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Is it safe to say, Mr. Minister, that you would 
expect to have a total package together, with each one of the 
players knowing exactly what they’re expected  

to do in terms of a financial share, say, before the end of June? 
Is that reasonable to expect, that a definitive game plan would 
have been settled in the negotiations by the end of this month? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — That would be our hope, by the end of 
June. As I just mentioned a moment ago, obviously we’re into 
some negotiations and some discussions with the federal 
government, including my meetings next week in Quebec City. 
But the time frame you’ve suggested wouldn’t be an 
unreasonable one. 
 
(2215) 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, in terms of a school like 
College Mathieu, of course academic momentum and continuity 
is critically important. And it’s very important, of course, in the 
coming academic year for the college to be able to maintain its 
class offerings, maintain the kind of academic programs it has 
been offering, and also maintain its level of enrolment, and 
perhaps even improve on that level of enrolment. 
 
Therefore, the interim arrangements that are put into place to 
bridge the physical situation, from the old buildings that burn 
down to the new buildings that will be constructed, that interim 
bridge is very important. 
 
And I wonder if there’s anything the minister can say tonight on 
what the government has in place to ensure that that bridge will 
be there and that there will not be a physical impediment in the 
’88-89 academic year that might slow down the college’s 
momentum or impair its academic continuity from one year to 
the next while this new building is being built. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think this project really brought the 
community of Gravelbourg and the surrounding communities 
together. The educational community responded across 
Saskatchewan, making available textbooks and whatever else 
they could. 
 
There’s been financial assistance from provinces, even 
including Quebec. When I met with the College Mathieu on 
Friday, three weeks ago I guess it was, I pledged to help in 
every which way we could. I would say that, relative to making 
sure that they’ve got class-room space and that kind of thing, 
College Mathieu has that well in hand. 
 
We offered up any empty space that the government might 
have, if you like, that might be available, and assistance relative 
to portable classrooms and those kinds of things. So indeed 
their insurance, as I understand it, even had a provision for that 
interim period. So I think it’s been heartening to see the 
response, the helpfulness by many, from nearby and from far 
afield. My sense is they have it well in hand. That was their first 
concern, and I’ve been happy to date with what I’ve seen. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Minister, I’m pleased to have your 
continuing, encouraging comments about College Mathieu, and 
I trust that you and your department will stay totally on top of 
that situation as it unfolds in the coming year. 
 
I have just one other area, Mr. Minister, that I would like 
  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1816 
 

to raise with you. It’s one that could take some considerable 
time, but I’ll try to compress it into one question. And that has 
to do with the provisions in the budget for the alleviation of the 
burden of the business tax — not in this fiscal year, but in the 
next fiscal year — with the government putting some $10 
million on the table as an incentive or as a carrot, if you will, to 
try to entice local governments into doing certain things in 
order to qualify for some dollars out of that $10 million fund, 
and thereby the cumulative effect being the potential reduction 
in a portion of that business tax burden. 
 
I would like to ask the minister this question: first of all, is it 
expected that that enticement or that incentive applies equally to 
local school boards as it would to local municipal governments; 
is it your expectation that school boards are supposed to 
participate in this. If that is your expectation, then you must 
have in mind that in the present operations of at least some 
school boards there are certain wasteful practices, there’s 
certain inefficiencies, there’s certain cost savings that ought to 
be made. If you think school boards are going to participate in 
this, then you must think there’s something they can participate 
with, and that would be the identification of these so-called 
savings through the eliminations of waste and inefficiencies, 
and so forth. 
 
I have been very fortunate to be associated with a lot of school 
trustees over the years, and I haven’t seen a lot of fat and waste 
and inefficiency in their operations — at least not the ones that 
I’m personally familiar with in my own constituency. I wonder 
if the minister could indicate where exactly he expects these 
savings to be achieved. Where’s the waste; where is the 
inefficiency? Where do you expect school boards to cut in order 
to qualify for a portion of that $10 million fund? What advice 
would you offer to the school boards in where they ought to 
make their cuts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — It’s a complex subject that you’ve 
raised and an important one and it’s one we take seriously. My 
quick comments would be that, relative to that, just so there’s 
no fear and paranoia unnecessarily generated amongst trustees 
and parents, is that the business tax initiative outlined in the 
budget is not at all meant to be an initiative to jeopardize 
educational funding — point number one. 
 
Do trustees and school boards have an interest in what’s 
designed? Yes, and we’ve had a voluntary consultative 
approach going on relative to that with the trustees. And as 
well, the Minister of Urban Affairs, who is leading on that 
initiative, has invited them to be part of this consultative 
exercise in a formal way because we are more than disinterested 
or uninterested observers. So those would be my two quick 
comments relative to that question. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, I would love to argue that 
final point with the minister for a little while tonight, but 
bearing in mind the hour, I will leave the point there for this 
evening, and I’ll take it up with him again on another occasion. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 

Items 2 to 18 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 19 — Statutory. 
 
Items 20 to 28 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 29 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Yes, Mr. Minister, an item of great concern 
to the people of Saskatoon, given the expansion in the 
north-east of the city, is the schedule that you’re on with respect 
to the completion of new schools for the north-eastern portion 
of the city. I’m wondering if you could comment on whether 
you are on target for the five new schools that the Saskatoon 
Board of Education has planned for that area in the next five 
years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, to expedite the 
matters, as I do want to answer your question because we’ve 
had a very good working relationship with the Saskatoon school 
boards, there’s been a number of project approvals, and I will 
not only provide you with what has gone on but what is in the 
planning or priority stages, and what has been submitted by the 
various boards for approvals. And I’ll give you as good and as 
full an understanding of capital projects as I can, but I would 
ask if I could do it in written form for you. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — You could do it in written form, Mr. 
Minister, if you can outline your own trajectories for those 
schools — the Broad Acres School, for example; the 
Hindmarsh School; a third and a fourth elementary school; and 
finally, and most importantly, a collegiate for that north-eastern 
corner of the city. If you can put your own timetable into place 
alongside the city’s timetable, I’ll accept that. Can you give me 
that assurance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — We can give you the best account we 
can, but of course, you recognize that it’s school boards that 
come to us with projects that they wish to build. It’s not a top 
down; it’s a bottom up. 
 
Item 29 agreed. 
 
Items 30 to 37 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 5 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Education 

Education Development Fund — Vote 64 
 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 64 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Education 
Vote 141 

 
Vote 141 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates (No. 2) 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Education 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5  



 
June 2, 1988 

 

1817 
 

Items 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 5 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister’s officials. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — On behalf of myself and the member for 
Prince Albert and my other colleagues on this side of the 
House, I’d like to extend very sincere thanks to your officials 
for the assistance that they’ve given us today and in previous 
days in these estimates in terms of providing information to 
many of the questions that we’ve asked. And we thank them 
and we look forward to debate again another year. 
 
(2230) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I too would like to join with the hon. 
member in thanking my officials, not only for the help they 
provided me during this examination of the Estimates, but 
indeed for the effort and the hours and hours that they put in 
during the course of the year. Saskatchewan education and 
Saskatchewan children, Saskatchewan parents are well served 
by these officials, and I’m grateful for their support. 
 
And I too would thank all members of the opposition for their 
questions relative to the examination of the Education Estimates 
for the year ’88-89, and I look forward to further debate on the 
weighty issues that face our children in the future. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:32 p.m. 
 


