


















































April 4, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 4, 1988 
 

271 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, I rise under rule 11 to present a 
petition. It is signed by nearly 4,000 people, primarily from the 
town of Assiniboia, and a large number of towns and rural 
communities in the Assiniboia district. These petitioners state 
their strong support for their local community ambulance 
service, Wald Ambulance Ltd., and they call upon the 
Government of Saskatchewan to share that support for Wald 
Ambulance in the provision of emergency life support services 
for which this ambulance operator has been widely and highly 
acclaimed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Gerich: — Mr. Speaker, through you and to the members 
of the Assembly, I would like to introduce a group in your 
Speaker’s gallery — Perry Robinson and his family, and Fred 
Walter from the Spiritwood area. They were at an Atoms 
hockey tournament here in Regina and on their way home they 
thought they’d stop by and enjoy question period. 
 
I hope it is informative and informational to them and that they 
enjoy themselves this afternoon. Please make them welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Personal and Corporate Income Tax 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the absence of the 
Minister of Finance, I direct the question to the Premier. Mr. 
Premier, in view of the fact that for every dollar paid by 
Saskatchewan residents for personal income tax, large 
corporations pay only 16 cents, and in view of the fact, Mr. 
Premier, that since your government took office that revenues 
from personal income tax more than doubled, from 409 million 
to over $831 million, while the total corporate income tax 
revenue has increased by a mere $13 million, from 121 million 
to 134 million — in light of those facts, I ask you, Mr. Premier, 
how do you justify the continuation and the imposition of more 
taxes on Saskatchewan families, and decrease in the corporate 
income tax? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member knows, 
Saskatchewan is the second lowest taxed province in Canada. 
And the hon. member selectively uses income tax but doesn’t 
take into consideration all the other taxes. As he knows, in most 
provinces of Canada people pay health care fees or premiums. 
In the province of Saskatchewan we pay about $1,200 per man, 
woman, and child on behalf of every man, woman, and child 
through government expense. 

When he looks at the fact that you don’t pay any tax on clothes 
under $300, you don’t have to pay tax on gasoline if you hand 
in your receipts, you don’t have to pay tax on your power bills, 
and you add all that up, you will find that the province of 
Saskatchewan, when you look at the total tax bill — that is 
income tax and corporate tax and sales tax — and you put it all 
together — and health care expenditures — that we are the 
second lowest taxed province in all of Canada, and we’re quite 
proud of the fact that we can provide these kinds of health and 
educational services with the second lowest tax rate any place in 
the nation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I want to say, Mr. Premier, that you can’t 
continue to justify your actions with excuses. 
 
Mr. Premier, are you aware that in this budget that you’re 
spending over $20 million in self-serving advertising, $1.1 
billion in the Rafferty-Shand boondoggle, $8.4 million in rent 
of empty office spaces, and more than $2 million in high paying 
patronage jobs? What we ask you is: why don’t you stop this 
shameful waste of taxpayers’ money and give them some relief? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the people of my 
constituency, and the people of south-eastern Saskatchewan, 
and indeed the people of all Saskatchewan would like to see us 
manage water and conserve water, would like to see us build 
power projects like Shand power in south-east part of the 
province, would like to see Rafferty dam so that we could 
indeed manage and conserve water. And the hon. member says, 
well why don’t we stop building in Saskatchewan so in fact that 
. . . so that we can give more money to people. 
 
What do you think building does? It generates money. You 
didn’t like us building the upgrader; you didn’t like us building 
the paper mill; you don’t like us building turbine 
manufacturing; you don’t like the bacon plants; you don’t like 
Rafferty; you don’t the power projects. Those are the kinds of 
things that create economic opportunity and prosperity, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We didn’t go and borrow money to buy them, Mr. Speaker, we 
built them. And that’s a significant difference between this side 
of the House and that side of the House. They borrowed and 
they gave it away, and now we have to go pay it back. And, Mr. 
Speaker, what we do is we create new wealth by building, and 
that means we’ll be a more prosperous province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — New question, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, the 
people of Saskatchewan don’t like waste . . . (inaudible) . . .  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
April 4, 1988 

 

272 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Premier, in light of the fact that your 
Finance minister, in three budgets, has run up $2.1 billion in 
deficit, average of $700 million every year, in spite of the . . . in 
view of the fact that he has increased the taxes on ordinary 
citizens of Saskatchewan 263 million — it’s over $330 million 
in two years — in light of the fact that services have been cut, 
in light of the fact that the assets of Saskatchewan are 
decreasing, I ask you Mr. Premier, don’t you think it’s the time 
to give the people of Saskatchewan a break and get rid of your 
Finance minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as I said . . . If I might, the 
opposition is still smarting because they never learned how to 
give tax breaks to the ordinary person. And they never did it; 
they never gave them a break on high interest rates, they never 
gave them a break on gas tax, they never reduced the sales tax 
on clothes like we have, Mr. Speaker. And now they’ve come to 
the conclusion, well by gosh, maybe there’s something in that; 
they think that’s really kind of novel if you can give tax breaks 
to ordinary people. We’ve been doing it for six years, Mr. 
Speaker. We got elected doing it. We protect them against high 
interest rates. We don’t run out, Mr. Speaker, and foreclose on 
them. We don’t do that. No, no, we protect them against high 
interest rates, and we cut the sales tax and they like it. In 
Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, they have a payroll tax and they have 
utility taxes. Not here, Mr. Speaker. We’ve learned a long time 
ago if you want the population to stay with you, give the 
ordinary person a tax break. And that’s what they got under this 
government right now in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A supplement, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, if 
you’re so proud of the record of your Finance minister, and if 
you’re so proud of the record of your government, and if you’re 
so proud of the increases on ordinary taxpayers, how about 
calling the by-election and letting the people of Saskatchewan 
have a voice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, for some reason I thought 
he’d finally get to that because when he runs the logic and he 
goes through all . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I would just say to the hon. 
member, I knew he was going to get to that point. I would say 
that we’ll let him know just as quickly as we can, Mr. Speaker, 
when we’ll call the by-elections, and then he can go out and 
campaign on behalf of his candidates across the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farm Debt Crisis 
 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

 to the Premier. Mr. Premier, Barry Senft of the Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool was quoted on Saturday in the Star-Phoenix as 
saying that your budget failed to address the number one 
problem facing farmers. He says, and I quote: 
 

We’re disappointed there is no financial commitment to 
restructure the debt faced by Saskatchewan farmers. 
 

And in your throne speech you noted that farm debt is of crisis 
proportions but you say people in Saskatchewan have learned to 
live with adversity. Mr. Premier, our farmers don’t need your 
surrender, they need action. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you now introduce legislation on a farm debt 
moratorium? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we ran into this kind of 
problem when the federal budget came out. Some people 
criticized the federal Finance minister for not providing more in 
terms of relief at that time. If you recall, Mr. Speaker, the 
farmers wanted the deficiency payments out ahead of the 
budget. 
 
The same applies here, Mr. Speaker. The farmers and the wheat 
pool and others asked to have an extension of the production 
loan program from three years to 10 years. Now we did that 
prior to the budget, Mr. Speaker, to provide it as early as 
possible. 
 
I would let the hon. member know that if we hadn’t done that, 
the total payment due in 1988 would have been $363 million. 
As a result of us extending the program, Mr. Speaker, to 10 
years, the total that was due was $109 million, for a total 
maximum saving to farmers this year of $254 million — $254 
million that we said to them, you have some discretionary 
power over. That was prior to the budget because they wanted it 
as quickly as possible. 
 
Now I can say to the hon. member, maybe a billion two out to 
farmers isn’t everything, but it’s an awful lot of money, Mr. 
Speaker, that has now been extended over 20 years that can 
provide the relief on the first year of up to $254 million. I 
would think that he would agree that that’s a significant amount 
of money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Supplementary, Mr. Premier, farm families 
were expecting something, some action in your budget. They 
were bitterly disappointed. The Royal Bank of Canada has 
claimed that it holds more bad farm loans in Saskatchewan than 
in any other province — nearly twice the national average at 
17.5 per cent. The Farm Credit Corporation has 2,700 loans two 
years or more in arrears, up 500 from last year. 
 
Mr. Premier, I hear your rhetoric; I don’t see any action. Will 
you now promote legislation on farm debt moratorium? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
April 4, 1988 

 

273 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, let me get this straight. The 
NDP position on agriculture is now for a complete farm debt 
moratorium. That’s what you . . . I just want to be clear so that 
we know where we’re coming from and what we’re doing. 
 
If that’s what it is, I want you to confirm that, and I’d like the 
leader to stand up and say, now we’re going to support farm 
debt moratorium right across the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would like the hon. 
members to allow the Premier to answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I just want to find out for sure, Mr. 
Speaker, in response to this question, that the NDP have now 
come out in favour of a debt moratorium so that I know what to 
respond to. We have introduced a large number . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. We can’t hear the 
Premier, and I’m sure that hon. members want to hear his 
response, so I once more ask for your co-operation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, if the hon. members are 
asking me to follow on their suggestion that we have a complete 
farm debt moratorium so nobody pays anything across the 
province, I need to know that, if you want my response in terms 
of what we’re doing compared to that. Now if you want to 
know that I will say, Mr. Speaker, we have introduced 
legislation that protects farmers from losing their land, we’ve 
got committees and we’ve got task force committees and we 
have got counselling committees and legislation that will allow 
them at least 120 days protection. And we have provided them 
up to a maximum, Mr. Speaker, of $254 million relief this year 
alone by extending the production loan program from three 
years to 10 years. 
 
Now if the hon. member want to say in addition he want this 
province to have complete farm debt moratorium legislation, I 
want him to reaffirm that so we know exactly the position of the 
NDP in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, this government is void of ideas 
and the farmers of Saskatchewan are sadly seeing that right 
now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Premier, last week you were in Ottawa. 
Surely you met with the Prime Minister of this country and the 
Minister of Agriculture, and surely you discussed the farm debt 
crisis issue. Mr. Premier, can you tell Saskatchewan farmers 
what you brought back for them out of those meetings? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will say that I had very 
good discussions in Ottawa on two things of particular interest 
in agriculture. One is, as you know, Mr. Speaker, we are 
building a new College of Agriculture building in  

Saskatoon on campus. That’s about 70 or $80 million. And with 
that biotechnology centre and with the centre of scientific 
expertise there, we are now — and have applied — the first in 
the country to apply for a science centre of excellence for the 
University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon, here in 
Saskatchewan, that could be one of the finest and one of the 
first science centres of excellence any place in Canada in 1988 
or 1989. 
 
Now the agriculture community is going to be very supportive 
of this. We’ve had support from the president of the university, 
from the agriculture college, from the biotechnology people, 
from those in the private sector. 
 
Secondly, we met with all the province, Mr. Speaker, regarding 
a national meat tripartite mechanism so that in fact we could 
have a national stabilization mechanism for meat. And we went 
through much of the detail, Mr. Speaker, and our officials are 
now working on the details to present to farmers and ranchers 
across Saskatchewan as well as across Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: —Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, maybe one of these 
times when you make some of your announcements something 
will happen, but you’ve missed the point of farm debt. You can 
talk about everything else — farm debt is the issue. Now, Mr. 
Minister, our farmers are feeling totally betrayed by your 
government because you have now become part of the farm 
debt problem.  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Premier, last year you saw fit to collect 
only the interest on the production loan program. Will you now, 
if you have no ideas of your own, stop being part of the farm 
debt crisis problem and begin being part of the solution by 
rolling back the interest rate on the production loan program 
and placing another one-year moratorium on the repayment of 
principal — will you do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as the hon. member knows, 
we considered many options in helping farmers that were in 
debt. And one of them — and the member from Quill Lakes and 
I have debated this — one of them has been the whole question 
of providing operating money at low interest rates. And we 
looked at our capacity to protect the farmer, and we said we can 
put out at least a billion dollars, $25 an acre, to people in this 
province that need some help, and we’ll have as long and as low 
an interest rate potential as possible and protect it. 
 
Now I say to the hon. member in all sincerity, I mean a billion 
dollars of operating money at low, long-run fixed interest rates 
in the province of Saskatchewan is nothing to sneeze at; it’s a 
great deal of money. 
 
And just extending it — I just make the point again — 
extending it from three years to 10 years has saved the farmers 
$254 million dollars of payments that they have to make this 
year that they could make over a 10-year 
  



 
April 4, 1988 

 

274 
 

 period. That’s a substantial amount of money — $254 million 
dollars — recommended by the wheat pool, recommended by 
the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), 
recommended by farm organizations. 
 
Take that long rate . . . low interest rate, long-term money and 
allow farmers to have access to it, and make sure, Mr. Speaker, 
that the money is there for people that are young, for people that 
are retiring, for farmers right across the piece — and my hon. 
friend from the Quill Lakes often said it shouldn’t have been 
universal, but we’ve disagreed on that — that’s a lot of money, 
Mr. Speaker, on top of it. 
 
One last point, Mr. Speaker, on top of it, we went to the federal 
government and asked for deficiency payments. We’ve got over 
$2 billion in cash in deficiency payments in the last two years, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I have one more question. Mr. 
Premier, Weyerhaeuser doesn’t have to make payments unless 
it makes a substantial profit; farmers have to make payments 
regardless of the circumstances. Tell me, Mr. Premier: why 
does your government have one set of easy rules for large 
multinational corporations and a set of hard rules for 
Saskatchewan farmers? Why the double standard? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 
knows . . . the hon. member knows that the farmers have 
received a great deal of money that they don’t have to pay back 
at all from government — a great deal of money that they don’t 
have to pay back at all. If you look at the write-down of FCC 
(Farm Credit Corporation) debt, if you look at over $2 billion in 
deficiency payments, they don’t have to pay it back at all. They 
didn’t even have to start their tractor to get that; they didn’t 
have to start their combines. Almost half their income came 
from gifts from government that they didn’t have to pay back at 
all. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member says, well would you at 
least provide them with some sort of cash and some sort of 
comfort. They’ve got a grant, Mr. Speaker, that they don’t have 
to pay back. They’ve got low interest rates over a long term. 
Mr. Speaker, both . . .  
 
And third, Mr. Speaker, when interest rates were high, we 
didn’t go in and buy their land, Mr. Speaker, and buy it on 
behalf of the government. We helped the farmers stay on the 
land, and they’ll never ever, ever forgive you for taking their 
land at 20 per cent interest rates, and then later, later going back 
and saying, well, perhaps I could help foreclose on the land that 
you’ve lost. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Budget Increases for Health 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, when your Minister of 
Finance brought in his budget, he talked about greatly increased 
funding for health, but that’s just smoke and mirrors, Mr. 
Minister. When you accurately compare figures, taking into 
account capital costs, supplementary estimates, and payments to 
the property management corporation, we see that the budget 
has increased by only 3.5 per cent over last year, and that is 
substantially less than the rate of inflation, Mr. Minister. I ask 
you, Mr. Minister, where is the money to restore a dental 
program for school-aged children in rural Saskatchewan as your 
Premier promised back in November? Where’s that money, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member makes 
reference to the budget and says — and she’s speaking as a very 
lone voice across the society of this province if you listen to 
what has been said about this budget as it relates to health care 
in the last few days, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The people who are in charge of home care in Saskatchewan, 
the home care association say, an excellent budget addressing 
home care. People involved in the special care home section 
say, an excellent budget addressing, in difficult times, the 
serious issues in special care homes. Hospital administrators all 
across the province, within the larger hospitals in the province, 
are quoted as saying . . . one even said — what was it now? — 
it’s a nice Easter present, says the president of the University 
Hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people in the health care sector across this 
province, across the piece, have said this budget is a responsive 
budget. It’s a budget which responds to the issues in health care 
across the province. The only lone voice in the wilderness 
against this budget, Mr. Speaker, as you might expect and as I 
might expect, is that member over there and her colleagues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, when people see through the 
smoke and mirrors on your budget and put pencil to paper, 
they’ll realize that the increase in your budget for Health is 
grossly inadequate and does not meet the rate of inflation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — And last year in your budget, you destroyed 
the prescription drug program, forcing many Saskatchewan 
people, particularly seniors, to make a choice between groceries 
and prescription drugs. Now, Mr. Minister, where in your 
budget have you done anything to rectify that wrong? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the member will continue 
to talk, the member will continue to talk about  
  



 
April 4, 1988 

 

275 
 

one program, one program. The member will not look at this 
budget. This budget, $1.2 billion, Mr. Speaker, one-third of 
every dollar that’s spent in the public sector in this province, is 
spent in this Department of Health on behalf of the 1 million 
residents of this province in all of their needs across health care, 
which are substantial. 
 
And this budget is responsive, as I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, very 
responsive. That member over there will stand here and scold 
me and get in that scolding mood and tell me all about how this 
should not have taken place and there’s some kind of smoke 
and mirrors and all the rest of it. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and I say to that member from 
Regina Lakeview: they’re no different. Everyone in this 
province, everyone in this province involved in the health care 
sector who has an understanding of the sector says this budget 
is responsive. The only lone voice, as I’ve said, is that member 
over there. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, when the by-election . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 
order. Is the hon. member asking a supplementary or new 
question? 
 
Ms. Simard: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, a 
close look at where the increases in the Health budget went 
shows your government’s approach, I suggest. Funding for 
public affairs is up some 200 per cent. A new Health public 
relations campaign is to be set up, we understand, and 
information systems costs increase by 115 per cent. 
 
Mr. Minister, isn’t it true that instead of trying to deal with the 
problems in health care, you have decided instead to spend 
money on a PR solution, trying to paint a picture rosier than 
reality. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Another example, Mr. Speaker, of that 
member suggesting to us that public affairs and her portrayal of 
public affairs. Let me just explain to the House, Mr. Speaker, 
and to you for a moment. 
 
The increase in the budget as it relates to life-style promotion, 
good healthy life-styles, the kinds of things which prevent . . . 
the kinds of things which prevent curative solution that they 
always talk about. Now, Mr. Speaker, here we have an increase 
in that area, and that member . . . every member in this 
legislature and every citizen in this province should be pleased, 
and most are pleased, as a matter of fact, with the increases and 
with the budget proposals which are put forward as it relates to 
promotion of healthy life-styles for all citizens of all ages in this 
province. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the member makes reference to, “call a 
by-election and the people will say.” Mr. Speaker, I will say to 
the people during by-election campaigns or other campaigns: 
this budget addresses rehabilitative services for our citizens. 
Mr. Speaker, rehabilitative services are the following, the kinds 
of things this government is becoming known for: rehabilitative 
services as it relates to people who are in serious trouble 

with addiction to drug and alcohol abuse, rehabilitation for 
young people who are hooked on drugs and alcohol — that’s 
the thing that we’re known for. Mr. Speaker, rehabilitative 
services that we see just close to this building in the Wascana 
Hospital that’s being built — one that they would never build 
— but rehabilitative services for injured workers, for crippled 
children, and so on. It’s . . .  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Are hon. 
members ready for the next order of business? Order, please. 
Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 2 — An Act respecting the Use of the English and 
French Languages in Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill, An Act respecting the Use of French and English 
Language in Saskatchewan. 
 
Motion agreed to, and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to say that I’m pleased to have this opportunity to enter this 
debate to respond to this, the third budget of the Minister of 
Finance opposite. And I think what the Minister of Finance has 
proven in this document is that three wrongs do not make a 
right. What the people of Saskatchewan are saying to the 
Minister is that three strikes and you’re out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, a budget should set out the 
government’s plan for the future. A budget should identify clear 
priorities. A budget should raise revenues in a fair and 
reasonable way. A budget should provide a vision of 
Saskatchewan’s future. But this budget does none of these 
things. 
 
What this budget does is to provide more debt, more taxes, less 
equity in our Saskatchewan assets, and less services for the 
Saskatchewan people. I say again, Mr. Speaker, what this 
budget does is increase our debt, increase our taxes, reduces our 
equity, and reduces our services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And I say, Mr. Speaker, it is little wonder 
  



 
April 4, 1988 

 

276 
 

that this budget has been branded hopeless, heartless, and 
helpless. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Hopeless, heartless, and helpless. What, Mr. 
Speaker, are the highlights of this budget? As I said, there are 
more tax increases for ordinary people, more tax cuts for the big 
corporations. Today, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan for every 
dollar that ordinary people pay in personal income tax, the big 
corporations pay only 16 cents — more tax increases for 
ordinary people, more debt for farmers and working people, 
more give-aways for their big business friends, more profits for 
the Peter Pocklingtons of the world. And what is the result of 
their actions, Mr. Speaker? What have they accomplished? 
Another deficit, the seventh in a row — $328 million more on 
the backs of the residents of Saskatchewan, a $3.7 billion of 
accumulated deficits over seven years, a total provincial debt of 
$11.7 billion. This, Mr. Speaker, is the highest per capita debt 
in all of Canada. And now, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that 
that is mismanagement on a grand scale. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That’s what the minister opposite calls 
performance. And how do the people respond, Mr. Speaker? 
How do they respond to what this government says and to what 
this government does? 
 
Well people tell us that the Premier has a problem, Mr. Speaker. 
They say his Minister of Finance has a problem, and they say 
that this government has a problem. People tell us that they can 
no longer trust this government. People tell us that they can no 
longer believe the Premier. People tell us that this government 
has lost all its credibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That’s what the ordinary people of 
Saskatchewan are saying. This government promised farmers of 
Saskatchewan a farm purchase program, and I ask you: where is 
that farm purchase program today? I say it’s gone, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s gone — gone with their credibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — This government promised an improved 
prescription drug program, and they promised it on two 
successive elections. And where is the improved drug program, 
or drug plan? And I say, Mr. Speaker, it’s gone — gone with 
their credibility.  
 
This government promised free telephones to our citizens, and 
they pledged it. And where are they today? Gone, gone with 
their credibility — Mr. Speaker, promises made and promises 
broken. And as a result of all these broken promises, what has 
happened to the people’s trust? Gone, Mr. Speaker, gone with 
their credibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, four years ago the then Finance minister set out in 
what he called the most intelligent budget — and many will 
remember that — and he drafted the so-called  

“partnership for progress.” This partnership for progress would 
be, and I quote: “a comprehensive, far-reaching plan to 
dramatically increase funding to the four corner-stones that our 
province rests on — education, employment, agriculture and 
health care.” And this partnership for progress would be a 
long-term plan to improve all four of these areas. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what has happened since that time? How 
has this partnership for progress been developed by this 
government? Let us examine how this budget has treated the 
four areas of employment and education and health care and 
agriculture. 
 
And I’ll turn first of all to employment, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll 
tell you in respect to that, you recall the words of the Premier to 
the young people of this province — join with us; there’s so 
much more you can be. Well I would like to begin and set out 
what happened to that promise by the Premier. 
 
What has happened to the government’s commitment to the 
provision of jobs for working people? Let us examine the 
performance of some of the key economic indicators. Housing 
starts. Last year was a good year for housing right across 
Canada. Housing starts were up 20 per cent across Canada — 
more homes for ordinary people. But not here in Saskatchewan 
— no, not here in Saskatchewan. Here in Saskatchewan, 
housing starts dropped; they dropped. Mr. Speaker, by 11 per 
cent. Last year in Saskatchewan we had fewer new housing 
starts than we have had for well over a decade. And what does 
that mean, Mr. Speaker? It means fewer jobs for our 
tradespeople, fewer opportunities for small businesses to 
provide materials, fewer opportunities for young people to learn 
the trades. Yes, that’s what it means — lost jobs, lost 
opportunities. And for some it meant leaving their home or 
farm, in fact leaving Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, for some who 
stayed, it meant leaving their job and being forced on welfare, 
losing their opportunity to make a meaningful contribution to 
their community and to their province. So much, Mr. Speaker, 
for their involvement in their partnership for progress. 
 
What happened, Mr. Speaker, to those who sought their own 
business, that of owning and operating their own business? That 
last year Saskatchewan had 922 bankruptcies — nine per cent 
more than a year before, and much higher increase than the 
national average. Shattered dreams, Mr. Speaker, lost 
opportunities. So much, Mr. Speaker, for the involvement for 
partnership for progress. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Last year, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan had the 
second lowest rate of retail sales growth in Canada, less than 
half the national average. And why was that, Mr. Speaker? Why 
were retail sales so low? The answer is simple: when you freeze 
wages; when you increase taxes; when you shift the tax burden 
from corporations to ordinary people; when you raise license 
fees and other  
  



 
April 4, 1988 

 

277 
 

charges in some 234 different areas, one thing is certain, Mr. 
Speaker — you reduce the ability of ordinary people to 
purchase retail goods and services. You reduce the 
opportunities for small business to meet the needs of the 
community they serve. And I’ll tell you, that’s bad news for 
small business in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and they’re 
suffering under this administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I say, Mr. Speaker, that’s some partnership, and 
that’s some progress they have offered to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Today in Saskatchewan, 41,000 people are unemployed. And 
these are more than numbers, Mr. Speaker; these are men and 
women, young and old, in every community in our province. 
These people want work, Mr. Speaker; these people need work. 
These people want to be involved; they want to be partners in 
progress; they want to be partners and participants in the affairs 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, and what does this government offer? What 
does this budget offer to these people? Well this year the budget 
actually cuts funding for job creation, and I say they had no 
winter works program to help the job problem. at a time when 
unemployment is unnecessarily high in Saskatchewan, at a time 
when unemployment is incredibly high — 13 per cent in 
Saskatoon — at a time when one person in 10 in our four 
largest cities walks the streets in search of jobs, this government 
cuts funding for job creation. ask the unemployed, Mr. Speaker, 
about their involvement in this so-called partnership for 
progress. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I have to be honest. There is still one major 
job creation program left in the government’s assault on 
unemployment. and I was surprised that it wasn’t the 
centre-piece of this budget. I was shocked that the members 
opposite haven’t stood up and sung its praises. Because if ever 
there was a program that illustrated so clearly to the people of 
Saskatchewan the kind of future that this government holds in 
store for the young people, it is this program. 
 
And I ask: what is that program? It’s a program designed 
specifically for our best and our brightest — you know, our 
future lawyers and our future teachers and our future doctors 
and our future dentists and our future accountants and our 
future agricultural graduates. And you ask, Mr. Speaker, what 
hidden program is this? Why, it’s the government’s 
commitment to provide summer employment for university. 
 
And what does it entail? Well it entails counting gas receipts, of 
course, Mr. Speaker. This is their commitment to our young 
people of Saskatchewan; this is their vision for the future; this is 
their commitment to excellence. Now that’s some partnership; 
that’s some progress. Yes, Mr. Speaker, some partnership, some 
progress. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, some people don’t want to be 
partners with this government any longer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Koskie: — I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, some people have 
decided there’s so much more we can be somewhere else. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’ll tell you, thousands of our youth have fled 
this province to get away from the economic mess of this 
government has created. In their economic forecast, the 
government’s economic advisers pointed out, and I quote: 
 

Economic conditions are worse in Saskatchewan than in 
central Canada. About 85,000 people could migrate from 
the province between now and 1995. 

 
Eighty-five ex-partners making progress elsewhere, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, let me turn to another 
corner-stone of this government, so-called, and that is 
education. I’d like to indicate that this budget here boasts of an 
increase of some $39 million, or a 5.2 per cent increase in 
spending. Now that sounds almost too good to believe, Mr. 
Speaker, and it is. Unfortunately, as we have learned so often 
about this government, this is yet another example of triumph of 
wishful thinking over accuracy. 
 
(1445) 
 
In 1987-88 this government budgeted 750,290,000 for 
education, an additional 23,494,000 in supplementary estimates, 
for a total of $773,784,000. This year it is budgeting 
788,966,000, for a total increase in the educational funding, 
considering the actual spent last year, funding of 15,182,000, 
not 39 million as the minister claimed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You know the total in actual increase in the 
educational spending this year amounts to about two-thirds of 
what this government donated to Peter Pocklington. The 
increase in school operating grants, university operating grants, 
grants to our technical schools is not even one-half of the 
amount of grants provided to Peter Pocklington. And at the 
same time as this government slashes the budget for the school 
for the deaf by 51,000, it spends over $100,000 to rent empty 
office space at the Ramada Renaissance. Some educational 
priorities, Mr. Speaker, some partnership, some progress. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, even these increases do not reflect the actual 
situation. Let us look at how this government has funded these 
areas since 1986, and still a different picture comes forward. 
 
In 1986 the university operating grants for our university were 
$143.5 million. In 1987 they were $143.5 million. In 1986 
they’re $146.4 million, so that in the past two years the grants 
have actually increased by really only 1 
  



 
April 4, 1988 

 

278 
 

 per cent — 1 per cent over the ’86-87 fiscal year. 
 
School grants, Mr. Speaker, in 1986-87 were $333 million — 
school grants. In 1987, they’ve cut them back to 329.8 million 
. . . 7 million — the actual cut of $3.3 million. In 1988 they’re 
proposing to spend $336.8 million or just $3 million since 1986, 
an increase again of 1 per cent, and inflation has not even been 
taken into account, which is 4 per cent. 
 
Now that demonstrates a real commitment, Mr. Speaker, to 
education. It is little wonder that the university professors are 
on strike, teachers demonstrate on the steps of the legislature, 
and trustees cut programs, and school divisions close schools. 
Some progress, and some partnership. 
 
But it doesn’t stop there, Mr. Speaker. The main thrust of this 
so-called partnership in progress in education has been to 
reduce the province’s share in educational spending and place 
an even higher burden on local taxpayers. 
 
If we have an increase in the teachers’ salary this year, Mr. 
Speaker, even at two per cent it will cost more than the $6 
million dollars this government has allocated to local school 
boards for operating grants. This means that local boards will 
either have to cut other expenditures in education or will be 
forced to seek higher education taxes from local rate payers. 
Either the quality of education decreases, or the tax burden is 
transferred onto local taxpayers. And I say, Mr. Speaker, this is 
some partnership, this is some progress. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to yet another 
corner-stone of the so-called corner-stones of progress, and that 
is health care. I want to say that this government likes to talk a 
lot about health care. This government likes to talk about its 
commitment to health care. This government likes to talk about 
how much it spends on health care, and this year is no 
exception. 
 
This government says that the health care budget will increase 
this year by $65 million or 5.6 per cent. Unfortunately, what 
you see is not what you get. Actually the increase is only 3.5 
per cent, 40 per cent less than what they claimed, Mr. Speaker. 
In fact, when you remember that Saskatchewan has the highest 
rate of inflation in any province in Canada, there is actually a 
substantial cut in real health spending in Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it is not what the minister says but what he 
omits that tells us the real story about the state of health in 
Saskatchewan today. Nowhere in his budget is there a reference 
to the drug plan or to the so-called new, improved dental 
program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’ll tell you, the government has learned its 
lesson well. It knows that the people of Saskatchewan were 
hurt, and they were angry over those cuts. Mr. Speaker, the 
budget does not refer to the new, improved  

dental plan because they claim that privatization of dental plan 
would be more efficient. So they fired 450 dedicated dental 
therapists and support staff. They dismantled the dental offices 
in every school in every community in Saskatchewan. They 
sold the equipment at fire sale prices to buyers from all over 
Saskatchewan and Canada who wanted to take advantage of this 
government. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, why did they do all these things? Was it to 
improve the services to the people of this province? I say no, 
Mr. Speaker. The people of rural Saskatchewan are faced with 
long trips now to receive adequate dental care for their children. 
Indeed, many children that were provided dental care in the past 
will never receive dental care. So was it to improve the services, 
Mr. Speaker, ? I say no. This year the so-called, new, improved 
Saskatchewan dental plan will provide $7 million less in 
expenditures than it did in ’87 — $7 million transferred cost 
onto the people of the province. 
 
And how did they accomplish this savings, they call it, Mr. 
Speaker? In two ways. First of all, they reduced the age 
eligibility from 17 to 13, cut out a whole group of young people 
who were eligible for the dental program, transferring that cost 
from the plan to the families. And then they reduced the number 
of children who would have utilized the plan had it still been in 
operation in the schools of our province. So they have cut 
utilization and they have cut those who can participate — a 
great improvement — and they had the gall to advertise that as 
a new dental program for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Another area that the minister neglected to 
mention, deliberately, Mr. Speaker, was the prescription drug 
plan. Why? Because under the new improved prescription drug 
plan we have calculated that it costs on average $145 per family 
per year is being taxed, not on the basis of ability to pay but on 
the need for drugs because of illness. This government has 
given a new meaning to freedom of choice. Now they are 
giving the people of Saskatchewan the freedom to choose 
between putting food on the table or purchasing drugs for the ill 
members of the family. 
 
In 1986-87, if you look at the cost to the province for the 
prescription drug program, $76.2 million was budgeted for the 
prescription drug program. In 1987-88, 56.9 million was 
budgeted for the prescription drug program. And in 1988-89, 
$50.1 million is being budgeted for the plan — a slash of $26.1 
million less than in 1986 — $26 million more placed on the 
backs of our elderly and our sick and those that need drugs. 
Now I say, Mr. Speaker, that’s some partnership; that’s some 
progress. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, a hospital bed costs about $400 a day, and 
this government spends about $34,000 per day on empty office 
space. Do you know what? If we got rid of empty office space, 
we could have 85 more hospital beds in operation today. But we 
can’t; we have to pay for empty office space. Now I say, that’s 
a partnership, and that’s progress. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I must give credit where credit is due.  
  



 
April 4, 1988 

 

279 
 

This government knows it has a performance problem. In the 
provision of health care to Saskatchewan residents, faced with 
this problem, what did the government do? Did it address the 
problem of hospital wards, expanding them? No. No, Mr. 
Speaker. When this government has a performance problem, it 
has only one solution, and only one solution it uses. 
 
And what is that solution? Do you address the problem? 
Certainly not. No., Mr. Speaker. What you do is place the 
problem into a public relations context. So what do you do? 
You establish a task force to identify the problem, even though 
everyone knows what the problem is — underfunding of our 
health care system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Everyone knows what the problem is, and it’s 
the philosophy of the members opposite in the government and 
their attitude to health care. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — So if you’ve got a problem, you set up a task 
force; and secondly, you provide a massive increase in the 
information systems, up 115 per cent from last year; and then 
third, what you do is you triple the budget and public affairs 
budget by over 200 per cent from last year; and fourth, you will, 
in the words of the minister, undertake a public education 
campaign that will focus on healthy life-styles and personal 
responsibility — personal responsibility — for good health. 
 
What the minister is really saying, Mr. Speaker, is that in Tory 
Saskatchewan, health care is rapidly becoming unavailable and 
too expensive for ordinary people That’s what he’s saying. And 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that really represents some progress, 
some partnership. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I turn to their other corner-stone 
and that of agriculture. And I want to say that this is a very 
important area of Saskatchewan’s economic and social life. 
Again this government likes to talk about its commitment to 
agriculture. I would like to examine this commitment, Mr. 
Speaker, to examine the performance of the Minister of 
Agriculture. And first, let’s review the previous commitment to 
agriculture. Here are some of the things that that commitment of 
that government opposite has done for the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
First, a cut in the budget of the Department of Agriculture last 
year by 25 per cent. They went about the elimination of the 
property improvement grant. They slashed the farm fuel rebate 
program from 21 cents to 9 cents per gallon. They phased out 
the land purchase program; phasing out all provincial funding 
for agricultural fairs and exhibitions; chopping grants to various 
producer groups; cancelling travel grants and clinic operation 
grants for veterinarians; cutting grants for weed control; 
eliminating grants to R.M.s for rat control; cancelling grants to 
the University of Saskatchewan for feed testing and soil testing. 
And the list goes on. I say, Mr. Speaker, that’s real progress, 
and that’s real partnership. That’s  

some commitment. 
 
Now given the record of last year and of previous years, I think 
it would be difficult to imagine that they could match it this 
year. But they’ve tried, Mr. Speaker, they’ve tried, and I think 
they have succeeded. 
 
There is a cut of about $8 million in the agricultural budget, 
about 5 per cent cut again this year. Grants to agricultural credit 
corporation slashed by 40 per cent; grants under the 4-H 
program for our future farmers chopped by 12 per cent; lands 
branch grant cut by 9 per cent; interest subsidies for farmers 
reduced by $9 million for a 25 per cent cut; and payments to the 
hog and cattle producers will also be reduced by 10 per cent. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I didn’t think it was possible, but this government 
opposite was able to better the performance of the previous 
year. A year ago, the Minister of Finance promised that the 
members opposite would address the two central issues facing 
the farming community; low commodity prices, he said, and 
high debt. And on Saturday, March 26, the Minister of Finance 
is quoted as saying, don’t expect too much; don’t expect many 
new programs in agriculture. Well we didn’t, Mr. Speaker, and 
we weren’t disappointed. 
 
And then the Minister of Finance went on. Do you know what 
he said? He said, in essence: we surrender, we give in. He said 
the problem has shifted in the last few years to one of debt, and 
cannot be solved by the provincial treasury, he said. 
 
In the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, we learned, and I quote, 
what their position is in respect to farm debt. Farm debt, they 
say in the throne speech, is of crisis proportion. And how did 
this government respond? It said, and I quote: “The people of 
Saskatchewan have learned to live with adversity. Tough times 
come, and tough times go.” That’s what they say to the farmers, 
20 per cent of the farmers who are about to lose their farms. 
They say, Tory times are tough times. That’s what they’re 
really saying. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I say, Mr. Speaker, that must be truly, truly 
comforting to the farmers. But just in case our rural community 
or rural families does not truly understand, this government has 
increased in this budget counselling programs for the farmers 
by over 30 per cent, so the farmers can rest assured that this 
government is prepared to explain to them the nature of the 
farm crisis, which the farmers already know. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this government isn’t prepared to 
do anything about it. Nothing could illustrate better that 
philosophy of this government than how it dealt with the 
farmers on one hand, and how it dealt with a huge multinational 
corporation, Weyerhaeuser, on the other. 
 
This government tells farmers that they must pay higher interest 
rate for their production loans at a time when they admit that 
there is a farm debt crisis of all proportions.  
  



 
April 4, 1988 

 

280 
 

And even as our farmers struggle to cope with the low 
commodity prices and higher input costs, this government 
increased their interest rates up to nine and three-quarter per 
cent on their loans. 
 
Now compare that with the agreement to the Weyerhaeuser. 
Compare with it a foreign, multinational corporation. Does 
Weyerhaeuser pay nine and three-quarters per cent? No! And 
what is even more interesting, Mr. Speaker, is that 
Weyerhaeuser only has to make payment when it makes money. 
Were the farmers offered that option, Mr. Speaker? No, they 
were not. Loan relief for the multinational corporations, higher 
interest rates for our farmers — some partnership, some 
progress, some future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to the government’s 
economic performance. I’ve looked at this government’s 
performance in four areas: in health; education; jobs, 
employment; agriculture. Even though these are, in their own 
words, their priority areas, their performance has been dismal. 
When you dismiss the rhetoric and look at their performance, 
one is forced to the conclusion that this government is 
incompetent, uncaring, and untrustworthy. Or, as the people are 
saying, they’re all of these things. 
 
Let us examine the economic performance of this government. 
How many budgets, Mr. Speaker, have they brought in? It’s 
seven. And how many deficits have they brought and placed on 
the backs of the people of Saskatchewan? Seven, Mr. Speaker. 
And I ask you, how high is our debt now; how big is our 
deficit? Is it $1 billion? Is it $1,000 for every man, woman, and 
child? No, it’s higher. Is it $2 billion, Mr. Speaker? Is it $2,000 
for every man, woman, and child? Much more. It’s higher. Is it 
$3 billion; $3,000 on the backs of every man, woman, and 
child? And I say no, Mr. Speaker, it’s higher. The cumulative 
deficit brought down by this administration is $3.7 billion — 
$3,700 on the backs of every man, woman, and child; $14,800 
for every family of four. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of Finance rose in his place 
Thursday last, the PC deficit was $3.4 billion, and when he sat 
down it was $3.7 billion. And then, Mr. Speaker, he had the gall 
to claim that he had reduced the provincial deficit. When the 
people of Saskatchewan have the highest per capita debt in the 
nation, the Minister of Finance says he has the situation under 
control. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how has the minister got the deficit under control? 
Well I can show you one of the ways that he’s achieving the 
reduction of the so-called deficit. In 1987 the federal 
equalization payments were $185 million. In 1988 the federal 
equalization payment increased to $360 million, almost double. 
In 1982, the last year of the previous government and in the 
previous years, Saskatchewan did not receive these equalization 
grants. 
 
I’ll tell you, we were classified as a “have” province. Today 
we’re classified as a “have-not” province, and as such are the 
recipients of an additional $175 million handed out by Ottawa 
due to the mismanagement, the waste, of the government 
opposite. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, when the members opposite took 
office, Saskatchewan’s net equity was over $1 billion. In other 
words, if you took all of the assets of Saskatchewan and take 
away all of the liabilities, the value of assets to the province of 
Saskatchewan was $1 billion to the good — to the good. 
 
And do you know what this administration has done, Mr. 
Speaker? The net debt of Saskatchewan today is a minus $2.9 
billion. Net equity is $2.9 billion in the red. Now I say, that’s 
performance, Mr. Minister, that’s progress. With any other 
business that would be bankruptcy, Mr. Speaker. and that’s the 
administration opposite, their legacy to the people of this 
province. 
 
Worse still, Mr. Speaker, even as they have placed this crushing 
burden of debt on the backs of ordinary people here in our 
province, they have also shifted the burden of taxation. Today 
the people of Saskatchewan pay more in sales tax — 40 per 
cent. Today the people of Saskatchewan pay more in the 
new-founded flat tax, 33 per cent more, as a result of this 
budget. Today the people of Saskatchewan pay more in 
personal income tax. But, Mr. Speaker, some areas of the 
economy are not paying more. Corporations are paying less. In 
fact today, Mr. Speaker, every dollar this government takes 
from ordinary people it collects only 16 cents from the 
corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to look now at the so-called public 
participation, the myth that this government is trying to foster 
on the people of this province. This government talks about 
public participation and how, and I quote: “this common sense 
approach will assist the development of this province,” he said. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure that this is a common sense 
approach. One thing that I am sure is that, as this government 
sells off the hard-earned assets of the people of this province, 
big business gets the bucks and the people of Saskatchewan get 
the cents. 
 
Perhaps the minister opposite could explain to me: how did the 
people of Saskatchewan participate in the Weyerhaeuser deal 
when our pulp mill was sold to the corporation based in United 
States? How did the people of Saskatchewan participate in the 
sell-off of Saskatchewan Minerals only recently to eastern 
Canada firms? How did they participate? How did the people of 
Saskatchewan participate in the Manalta Coal sell-off when 
they sold to an out-of-province company? How did the people 
of Saskatchewan participate when they sell off the highway 
equipment? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has created two kinds of citizens 
in Saskatchewan — their corporate friends who ride at the front 
of the bus; the ordinary people who get the opportunity to push 
the bus. And now the Minister of Public Participation, or 
piratization, wants to sell the bus. I say, some partnership, some 
participation, some progress. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
April 4, 1988 

 

281 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, I want to ask: what does this 
government offer the people of Saskatchewan from this budget 
and in recent budgets? And let me summarize: they offer the 
people of this province the highest inflation rate in Canada. 
They offer the people of Saskatchewan the fewest new housing 
starts in the last decade. They offer the people in Saskatchewan 
the second highest incidence of low income families in Canada, 
second only to Newfoundland. They offer to the people of 
Saskatchewan the slowest growth increase in the labour force in 
all of Canada, a projected deficit of $328 million, and a total 
cumulative debt of this province of $11.7 billion. 
 
They offer to the people of this province the highest per capita 
debt in all of Canada; $26 million in additional costs to sick 
people purchasing prescription drugs; increased tuition fees for 
all the students in higher education; at least $7 million of 
reduced services under the new, improved dental plan; 234 
separate increases in fees and licenses — 234 major increases in 
fees and licenses. 
 
(1515) 
 
Let me just give you a few examples. Motor dealer license fee 
issuers has increased from $150 to $500 annually — 320 per 
cent increase. Business Names Registration Act renewal for a 
limited partnership — that goes up from $100 to $150, or a 150 
per cent increase. Certificate of incorporation — from $100 to 
$250. I’ll tell you, the list goes on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt that this government is bankrupt 
financially, this government is bankrupt morally, and this 
government is bankrupt of ideas. 
 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, you could tell a lot about a 
government’s real priorities by carefully reviewing the 
estimates that the minister tabled on Thursday. And what do 
you find? You find a budget increase for the Premier’s office, 
but no increase in the family income plan. You find a budget 
increase for the Department of Finance, and a budget cut for the 
school of the deaf. You find $2.5 million more for prisons, and 
less money for job creations. You find 200 per cent more 
money to advertise health care, but less money for Health 
capital. You find, again in this budget, $190 million for welfare 
pay-out — no jobs for the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government increases taxes on every resident 
of Saskatchewan, freezes the minimum wage, and at the same 
time they increase the flat tax by 2 per cent for every 
Saskatchewan resident. They reduce the corporate income tax 
by 2 per cent, and even though our percentage of revenue from 
non-renewable resources has fallen steadily in the last seven 
years, they are proposing a further reduction in resource 
royalties. 
 
And they haven’t forgot another tax — a tax on telephone bills, 
on your telephone bills. Here they have done the ultimate. The 
federal government has put on a communication tax, and the 
provincial government is not only taxing your telephone bill but 
is taxing the federal government’s tax. 

Well I want to say, Mr. Speaker, for a few, Tory times are good 
times; but for most of the people, Tory times are hard times. 
 
In 1983, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier spoke to a group of 
investors, he stated, Saskatchewan has so much going for it that 
you can afford to mismanage it and still break even. I don’t 
even think that the Premier could imagine the degree of 
incompetence of his mismanagement. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, since then, what have the people of 
Saskatchewan got going for them? Well they got more taxes, as 
I’ve indicated — more debt. They’ve had all these services and 
fee increases. But they got more: car insurance has gone up 38 
per cent; telephone bills have gone up 23 per cent; home 
heating bills have gone up 55 per cent; electricity bills up 51 per 
cent; retail sales up a hundred bucks; prescription drug costs, on 
average, $144. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has got a lot going for it. Oil 
revenue is going down. Employment is going down and, I’ll tell 
you, this government’s credibility is going down. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, this government has created a 
crushing burden of debt and taxes for ordinary people here in 
our province, and at the same time that they have mortgaged 
our future they have, indeed, destroyed our heritage. Gone is the 
drug plan which people in Saskatchewan cherished; gone is the 
best school-based dental program in the world; gone is a health 
care system that was second to none. Mr. Speaker, they have 
mortgaged our future, they have squandered our heritage, and 
they have picked the pockets of every taxpayer in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, this budget provides the people of 
Saskatchewan with more debt, with more taxes, less equity in 
our Saskatchewan assets, less services to Saskatchewan 
families. This budget justifies selfishness and meanness of 
spirit, and it blames the victims of misfortune instead of 
addressing the causes of this misfortune. 
 
To those who have much, this budget offers much, and to those 
who have little, it offers nothing. To working people, to farm 
families, to our youth, to our small-business people this budget 
offers no help; it offers no hope. It’s a heartless, it’s a hopeless, 
and it’s a helpless budget. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, it’s a betrayal of Saskatchewan’s past, a 
betrayal of Saskatchewan’s future, a betrayal of Saskatchewan’s 
people, a betrayal of Saskatchewan’s promise, and a betrayal of 
Saskatchewan’s trust. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, there is nothing in this budget but 
more debt, more taxes, less equity, less services. This 
government has given the people of Saskatchewan a 
  



 
April 4, 1988 

 

282 
 

legacy of crushing debt, crushed hopes, rather than a legacy of 
opportunity and optimism. Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, for those 
reasons I will oppose this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, it’s indeed a pleasure to 
enter into the throne speech debate of this session of the 
legislature early on in the debate. And I want to begin by 
complimenting my seat-mate of many years in this legislature, 
the Minister of Finance, for delivering what I am hearing from 
the people of Saskatchewan, people I’ve talked to, as being a 
very reasonable and well thought out type of budget. 
 
I see that the opposition critic who has just spoken in the House 
here — and I must say, perhaps delivered one of the most 
negative and, I would think, almost on a sour note of any 
speech I’ve heard in here in the last ten years. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Bitter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I mean . . . yes, it was bitter, is the way it 
came across to me. And you know, he comes with a slogan — 
and I guess your speech-writers put this together, and I tell you 
you’ll have a terrible time trying to sell that in Saskatchewan. 
 
They talk about hopeless and hapless and things of this nature, 
and, Mr. Speaker, I talked to a lot of people over the weekend. I 
went back to my home and around Regina, doing some 
shopping and so on, and I never heard anyone reflect anything 
of the nature that the opposition critic did. 
 
Now I want to say to you . . . You know, I’ve spent a lot of time 
in this House, and I want to go back to a situation of estimates 
of a number of years ago when a Mr. McArthur was the 
minister of Education at that time, and I was the Education 
critic. 
 
I was new to this Chamber and this House. And the person who 
had been the deputy minister of Education had been a deputy 
minister for many, many years and served under various 
governments. We had our debate in here on the educational 
estimates, Mr. Speaker. And there were things within that 
address, in that budget that year, that although I did not support 
that party philosophically, there were some things there that I 
believed were good, and they were common sense and they 
were good for Saskatchewan. 
 
And so when we discussed those estimates, I gave the thrust 
where I didn’t agree, but I gave credit to Mr. McArthur — and 
Hansard will prove that — where it seemed logical and right. 
Well I want to tell you this long-time deputy minister came 
down from the stands and he said, of all my years that is the 
best set of estimates I have ever heard debated, because it was 
fair — it was fair. There were some things on each side of the 
House — and I know they don’t like that — there were some 
things from each side of the House that said, yes, that’s good, 
and that’s in the best interest of Saskatchewan. 
 
I listened to this critic in this Chamber for over an hour, and I 
never heard him say one positive thing, not one 

positive thing about the budget brought in just last week. Now 
he may not agree, he may not agree with statements like taking 
welfare fraud, cutting down on welfare fraud and using that 
money to help people with foster homes. I happen to agree with 
that, and I believe a lot of people in the province of 
Saskatchewan agree with that. And I don’t care from which side 
of the House a suggestion like that comes; if it is common sense 
and if it is good for Saskatchewan, then why not give credit 
where credit is due. 
 
But did I hear one statement of that from the member opposite? 
I heard bitterness coming from that member. I heard rather a 
sour approach and a complete condemnation of a budget which 
I believe had some very good and common sense ideas. He 
happened to say, and he wanted to talk about a government . . . 
he said they were a government that are morally bankrupt. Well 
I would debate with him, or any member opposite on that side 
of the House, about moral bankruptcy. I would love him to 
justify the standards of the member from Moose Jaw, his 
standards on adoption, adoption by homosexuals. That’s his 
viewpoint. We happen to differ with that on this side of the 
House. 
 
I would debate with the members on the other side their stand 
for abortion on demand, free. Abortion is a means of birth 
control, and many of them stand for that. I don’t believe this 
side of the House would tolerate that. I know we do not, and I 
think that is moral bankruptcy. And of course we know what 
their member in Vancouver has been saying in the last two 
years. So If you want to see the government and the party that is 
on the side of families and family life and family virtue, they sit 
on this side of the House, not over there. We know very well 
where that moral bankruptcy is. 
 
Not only do we know that, but many people in Saskatchewan 
. . . if there’s one thing that happens to me more and more as I 
walk around the streets of the towns in this province, I have 
more people coming up to me and saying, what has happened to 
the NDP since they lost Allan Blakeney? That’s the question in 
the minds of people. That’s the question, things are shifting, 
shifting far away from what were maybe more substantive 
issues to things that many of us question as very unsubstantive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I question and I challenge the members on the 
other side of the House to accuse this government of being 
morally bankrupt. What did they ever do to support families? In 
1982, Mr. Speaker, we know that families were losing their 
homes because of interest rates. Would they step in and help 
them? No, they certainly would not. They wouldn’t lift a finger 
to help the families of this province. 
 
What about the farmers? I listened to the hypocrisy of the 
member opposite talking about what they had done for farmers. 
Well I’ll tell you what they’ve done for farmers — and I’ll tell 
you most recently what they’ve done for farmers is that the now 
new Leader of the NDP allowed his law firm to go out and 
foreclose on farmers, both on farms and on home mortgages. 
And if that’s helping families in Saskatchewan, then I don’t 
understand that type of rational reasoning. Now is that moral? I 
question that also, if that’s moral. 
  



 
April 4, 1988 

 

283 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we see a man stand up and take an hour 
in this House to never give any credit to some things that I 
believe were very substantial in that budget, I wonder who’s 
being moral and who’s being honest and who’s being truthful 
with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
He criticizes health care. And I want to take a few minutes to 
talk about health care and education and families because, Mr. 
Speaker, there are things that mean a lot to me and to many 
people that I represent in this province. He mentions about the 
budget of the Department of Health, and I will give my 
colleague from Meadow Lake full strikes in holding and 
bringing forward a very substantial, a very well thought out 
health budget in which we see an expenditure, Mr. Speaker, in 
this province of $5,000 per family of four in health care. And 
I’d challenge any other government in Canada to make up that 
kind of a comparison. 
 
And we see that the Minister of Health has brought forward the 
nursing homes that were promised. And I remember when we 
had the five-year plan and we brought it in, and last year there 
had to be a deferral, and we know that. But the minister stood 
strong to his word, and he said to the communities that I had 
dealt with when I was minister and he continued to deal with — 
he said, just wait, and you will see that you will get your 
nursing home or your integrated facility or your hospital 
expansion when we can come up with that type of investment, 
and we have. 
 
Last year there was a deferral; we all know that. It wasn’t 
applauded. One understands. But certainly this year he has 
delivered, and I know in the town of Montmartre, which is in 
my seat, who are getting their integrated facility; and I know the 
city of Estevan with their hospital; and Davidson and 
Humboldt, and many of these that he has dealt with, that they’re 
saying, right on; you’re delivering as you said you would. And 
those are important things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the people 
of this province. 
 
(1530) 
 
Not only in the extended care beds but also more money for 
home care, more money for alcohol treatment for our young 
people — all of the substantial things that help families and 
help the people of the province of Saskatchewan — come 
forward in this budget. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that the budget as presented by 
the Minister of Finance and drafted by the Minister of Health in 
regard to health care in Saskatchewan is certainly a 
forward-looking budget, and I believe that the task force will go 
a long way to designing the health care system of this province 
for years to come, which will again continue to be not only the 
best in Canada but the best in North America. That’s our goal 
and that’s our objective. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — And, Mr. Speaker, as I said, families are 
important to us. And I see that in this budget the Minister of 
Social Services has been able to have some  

money put forward to expand day care, to expand day care not 
only into the cities of the province but also into the rural areas, 
Mr. Speaker, where it is much needed. And I applaud that and 
congratulate the minister for that initiative. Day care will be 
there for rural Saskatchewan as well as urban Saskatchewan. 
and also, if my memory serves me correctly, there is a line in 
there that indicates, for those families with children of special 
needs, and I know very well that that will be well received by 
many people in the province that suffer from that type of 
situation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I believe when they talk about compassion and 
caring and feeling and families that we see within the health and 
social services thrusts of this budget, that those basic 
ingredients, those basic elements of Saskatchewan society are 
being looked after and being well taken care of in this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — And certainly, Mr. Speaker, if we’re to 
develop the potential of this province, it is to develop the 
potential of our young people. And I’d like to speak to that for a 
minute because, having spent a large part of my career in 
education, it is certainly important to me. And I want to say at 
this time, I understand that there is a tentative settlement 
between the teachers of the province and the boards that employ 
them. I congratulate the people on this, and I hope it is certainly 
ratified and brought to fruition. 
 
And I understand that the negotiations are going on today 
between the university professors and the administration. And I 
hope again that saner heads prevail and that the students who 
are in the universities of this province will be able to write their 
exams without the stress and strain of wondering when they 
will get their marks, or even when they can have the exam. I 
hope that type of logical thinking takes place, and I urge all of 
those who are involved with that to let that take place. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education — I don’t think 
there has been a busier one in the history of this province — has 
been in a large number of schools, and I hear right across this 
province of visitations with staff and with students, right down 
there at the grass roots, talking about the issues and explaining 
the new core curriculum that’s coming in. 
 
And I want to congratulate the minister, because I see in the 
budget, I believe it is $1 million for in-service training so that 
teachers can implement the new core curriculum. And I can tell 
you, spending many years in the classroom, that in-service 
training is something that the teachers require, and is something 
that teachers certainly appreciate because as you bring in new 
thrusts in education you can only do your job if you have had 
that type of training to bring you right up to speed with these 
new initiatives. And I think that is forward looking; I think that 
augurs well for Saskatchewan, and I believe that’s in the best 
interests of our students, now and in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see also in the budget some initiatives in 
education, initiatives in education for the further development 
of services for the handicapped. And again I  
  



 
April 4, 1988 

 

284 
 

compliment to the minister on that because I believe that as 
we’ll see the horizons . . . I was just reading some articles today 
regarding services to handicapped children in Los Angeles — 
use of computers, new technology, where we are seeing that 
some of those who years ago were put in institutions and 
written off as having no potential are able, through new 
technology and new teaching methods, to develop a potential 
that is far greater than anyone every realized, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I encourage the Minister of Education, and I commend him 
for putting the initiatives in the budget in the province of 
Saskatchewan that we may some day lead in Canada, and these 
types of new teaching techniques with the use of computers and 
new methodology to unlock that potential, that just because 
there maybe was a little listlessness in the eyes, and maybe the 
facial expressions were a little different, that there is a lot more 
potential there than anyone else realized. If we can share in that 
in this province, Mr. Minister, I say, good work, and let’s get on 
in doing it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when I hear the members opposite get up and 
say that it is an immoral budget, that there is no feeling and no 
care, and when I see thrusts for handicapped people, and I see 
thrusts for students and for seniors and for health care, I say that 
is a moral budget, that is a budget coming from a government 
that cares about families and that cares about the young people 
and the future of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — And, Mr. Speaker, as a government that 
takes it head on, we realize that there is a problem out there. 
The Minister of Health is well aware of this, and my colleagues 
within this government, that due to no one’s fault but the times 
we live in, that drug and alcohol abuse is a very, very serious 
situation ruining the lives of many young people in the 
province. And you will see substantial moneys, substantial 
moneys — I think a 16 per cent increase — to combat that and 
to take it head on and to take it out with this task force and to 
talk to the people of the province of Saskatchewan and to 
develop initiatives and new plans to make Saskatchewan free of 
this terrible curse that is affecting the lives of our young people. 
 
And Whitespruce probably is one of the most avant—garde and 
the furthest advanced type of facilities in this province. And I 
see he’s changing the Calder Centre. And I remember when I 
was in health care, there was the home in . . . Frank Eliason 
centre in Saskatoon, was questioned, what should we do with 
it? We’re building a new level 4, and here . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — The one they would never build. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, that’s right. And here we see now 
that it is going to be used also for youth and drug treatment in 
this province. I just want to help and say to the ministers, both 
in Education and in Social Services and in Health, that I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, I believe that if you look at this budget 
and you look at the initiatives, you will see that it is far from an 
immoral budget. It is a budget  

that cares for families; it is a budget that puts forth those very, 
very precious elements of our Saskatchewan way of life and our 
Saskatchewan culture in this province. These are certainly some 
of the paramount objectives in this budget and, I think, well 
received. 
 
In Agriculture of course, the backbone of our province, and as I 
said earlier, we hear criticism about what we’re doing for 
farmers. I don’t think I have to go through this in any detail 
because many of my colleagues will explain this, but I come 
from an agricultural seat, and Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that 
the farmers in the part of the province that I represent are very, 
very supportive of the initiatives that have been brought in by 
this government since 1982. 
 
If you would look at a farm purchase program, at cash 
advances, at a production loan program, removal of fuel tax — 
all of these things put together — there has been by this 
government initiative after initiative that has gone to the wall to 
safeguard the farm families of this province. And I think if you 
heard the Premier today in question period, you’ll see that about 
50 per cent of the income that is coming to some of the farmers 
in these difficult times is coming from initiatives from 
government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is much different, and let me remind you 
once again, this is much different action than the action taken 
by the Leader of the Opposition in the law firm of which he is a 
member, and where they were working with the banks to help 
bring about the foreclosures on the farm families of 
Saskatchewan. There, Mr. Speaker, I think is where I see the 
immoral action. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we hear — and I want to bring this to your 
attention — we heard the member, the critic opposite, say that 
there was certainly going to be some terrible tax gouges of the 
ordinary person in the province of Saskatchewan. I was talking 
with the Minister of Finance, and I think it’s very interesting to 
note, and I think you’d be interested in this, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that with the implementation of the changes in the tax 
structure that the Minister of Finance brought in in his budget, 
coupled with the changes in the tax structure by the federal 
government, that when those are both impacted, the only tax 
group that will receive an increase, Mr. Speaker, are those in the 
$50,000 range. And would you believe that the combined tax 
increase, when both have been implemented, will come to $14 
— $14, $14 a year, or a little over $1 per month. I do not think 
that is an outrageous type of increase in taxation. And that is the 
only one that is a tax increase. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to take some time now to talk 
about one of the new thrusts of this government, one of the ones 
that I have responsibility for, and that is in public participation. 
We hear the minister . . . the critic opposite giving some 
negative remarks again about public participation. We’ve seen 
some questions from some of the members in the House about 
this, and certainly this is where it should be is right in this 
House, and if there’s a philosophical difference about this or if 
they think it’s not beneficial for Saskatchewan, then by all 
means raise it because that’s what this forum is for. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to take a few minutes to  
  



 
April 4, 1988 

 

285 
 

indicate to you and to the members opposite what is meant by 
public participation and why public participation is a thrust of 
the Devine government at this time in the development of our 
history. And I should say, not only of this government but of 
governments around the world. You know, there are those that 
say it’s ideologically driven. Well I think you could check with 
some of the other ones such as Austria and Hungary where we 
see the same thing taking place, and in New Zealand where 
there are socialist governments in place, who are well along the 
way to a change in the delivery of government services. It’s 
happening around the world in approximately 35 different 
countries; it’s happening here in Saskatchewan, and it’s 
happening here in Canada. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to just indicate to you what 
public participation means. We will hear the members opposite 
say, oh well, it’s selling things — they like to emphasize the 
selling part. Well I want to say to you, it’s much more than 
selling things, because I’ve seen four component parts to the 
public participation. And true, one of them is the divestiture of 
Crown—owned assets to the private sector, and certainly we 
have seen indications of that, and that’s one aspect of it. 
 
And I cite, for example, Weyerhaeuser. They preferred to see 
PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company) lose $90,000 a day; that 
was their idea of a good deal. We were able to bring in a 
company, Weyerhaeuser Canada, who have built . . . are 
building right now a paper plant which I don’t think would have 
been built otherwise. You were there with me at the tour of it, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, about a week or two ago. I believe there 
are about 500 people working there now and may peak to 
around 700, with permanent jobs in the neighbourhood of 160. 
 
So certainly what I saw in my visit to Prince Albert was not a 
detriment from that type of action, but a very positive sign. And 
I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’re much closer to that scene 
than I am, and I imagine you could tell me the feeling of the 
people there, but the people I talked to were very positive of it. 
There were jobs there, there was building, there was growth. 
And I understand, in discussion with some of the people there, 
that Weyerhaeuser will have contracts in Japan. It will be state 
of the art paper that is produced, using our raw products with 
value added, creating new jobs. And to me that’s economic 
diversification and the way to build this province. 
 
So in public participation, one aspect can be that type of 
transaction as took place in Weyerhaeuser, as took place the 
other day with Sask Minerals in Carrot River and in Chaplin, 
where we were able to have $60 million come into the province. 
We were able to bring in expertise that will have value added 
products that will add new jobs and create new wealth in this 
province. 
 
But that’s only one aspect. A second aspect of public 
participation, Mr. Speaker, is that of contracting out, where we 
could take something that is being done by the government at 
this time with government employment, and perhaps those 
employees or someone else in the society could contract to do 
that work. And that is nothing new. Many of these things have 
been going on. 

I cite last year where the decision was made by this government 
to contract out the auditing services of the Crown corporations 
to the private auditors in this province. And I understand that is 
working well, and it’s nothing new. It has been going on. 
 
(1545) 
 
We could do the same thing with legal work and various other 
professional things. But it doesn’t just have to be professional 
type of services. One that comes to mind and could be looked at 
is certainly the mowing of ditches along our highways. I know 
we all would like to see our province looking very nice and a 
beautiful attraction for our tourists. And certainly we could look 
at a contract to farmers. And goodness knows, some of them 
may need that to try and mow the ditches and beautify the 
highways. That’s a simple example. 
 
A third aspect of public participation, which they choose to 
ignore, of course, is that of employee take—over of a function 
they’re doing now. and that may be where a group of 
employees say, look, we’d like to form a little company or a co-
operative; we’d like to do the service that we’re doing for the 
government now, and if we can do it more efficiently, then that 
benefit comes to us and we can compete in the private sector for 
other types of work. That also is public participation. 
 
And of course the fourth aspect of it, and probably the one that 
they choose to ignore most often, is that of shares and bonds 
that people of Saskatchewan can have in the development of 
our province. And again this is nothing new, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We have seen the Saskoil shares that many people 
have purchased in the province. SaskPower has had three or 
four bond issues. And we may look at more of those type of 
things. 
 
We may look at things such as Saskatchewan government 
bonds. Surely the idea of Canada Savings Bonds is well 
understood and well accepted throughout our country. And why 
shouldn’t the people of this province, why shouldn’t they 
benefit from the type of development that will take place in the 
future years? Why is it necessary that we go and borrow money 
for SaskPower or SaskTel or the government, whoever it may 
be, in the New York money markets or in Tokyo or in 
Switzerland, and the interest accrue to those areas? Why can’t 
we borrow from our own people and allow them a good return 
on their money, and they benefit from this development and 
they become stakeholders in the development of this province? 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we want to do this in a way that 
people can certainly access this type of borrowing. I don’t know 
about your constituents, but I know many of mine are not 
sophisticated investors. Many of them have never been in a 
brokerage house. Many of them feel that you need 5,000 or 
$10,000 to walk in the door. Well that isn’t the type of 
development and participation I want to see. 
 
I want to see the person out there in Saskatchewan being able to 
go to his credit union or his bank and talk to the person who he 
believes is his financial expert in his community, and through 
there, right through the local branches all around this province, 
access shares and  
  



 
April 4, 1988 

 

286 
 

bonds. 
 
I want to see people be able to get these by payroll deduction. 
Certainly we have third—party groups such as nurses and 
teachers employ . . . that’s a large part of the work—force of 
this province. I see nothing wrong with hospital boards 
allowing payroll deductions for government bonds and 
government shares and so on, or for school boards or for 
anyone, for that matter. Or people in the private sector allowing 
their employees to have ease of accessing these types of 
government shares so that these people can participate in the 
development of this province in accordance with what they are 
able to afford. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s nothing new to Saskatchewan. 
In fact, if you look at this, there’s a very close similarity here to 
the development of the co-op movement in this province. The 
co-op movement was where people gathered together, threw in 
what they could afford, a share for each person, and received a 
dividend. And if we look at that, we will see what the co-op 
movement has built in this province, the latest being in 
conjunction with the Government of Saskatchewan with the Co-
op upgrader. 
 
So what we’re doing with large share offerings and many 
stakeholders across this province is very, very similar to the 
development of the co-op movement in this province, but let me 
tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s on a much broader scale. 
 
We will hope to have shares and bonds in many of our Crown 
corporations, because what better thing to invest in. They’re a 
monopoly; the prices are set by the government; they’re 
assured. I’m sure that in years to come we will still have 
SaskPowers and we’ll have SaskTels, and so on. So why not 
allow our people here in Saskatchewan to invest in those and to 
enjoy those and to . . . into them in accordance with what they 
can afford, and make it easy for them to do it, make it easy for 
them to do it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those are certainly some of 
the things that we see as we talk about public participation. 
 
Now there are those on the other side of the House who like to 
use limp phrases and call it piratization and things of this 
nature. I don’t believe that allowing employees $5 or $10 or 
$20 per month deductions on their pay cheque, or allowing 
people to go down to their bank or their credit union or to their 
broker, or whoever it may be, and access these shares in 
accordance with what they would like to spend, is any way, 
shape of a pirating act. I believe that is allowing the people of 
Saskatchewan an opportunity to build and to develop and to 
share this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remember back when I was teaching in 
Wolseley, Saskatchewan, and I voted in an election. I never 
heard anything of a take—over of potash mines, but soon after 
the election one day, I woke up and here I was the owner of a 
potash mine. Well, Mr. Speaker, I never had a piece of that 
potash mine, and I never had that as any type of . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — No, your only problem was that, 
Graham, you couldn’t spend it in the next hour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No. I didn’t have any opportunity to  

use that as collateral. I touched a hot spot here with the potash 
mine, because we all know how they said nothing about it in the 
election, and come in and took them over and bought what was 
there, not creating one new job. using our money. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s well documented, had the member opposite had 
the foresight and the brains to take it down to the Sherwood 
Credit Union and put it in there, we would be better off today; 
we would be far better off. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — But certainly there comes the difference 
in the viewpoint, Mr. Speaker, because the members opposite 
are obsessed with the idea of the government owning it all. We 
believe in state ownership by the people of Saskatchewan, and 
that’s what public participation will be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that there are many things that they will 
change as we change in the delivery of government services. I 
say it’s not new to this province, it’s not new to this country. 
It’s happening all around the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But I wanted to take this opportunity to share with you and to 
other members of this Assembly, and any of the people who 
may be watching this on television, what we mean by public 
participation, because it’s far different — it’s far different — 
it’s far different than what the member opposite would say. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to end on a note or two of 
indicating what I thought was very disappointing action on 
behalf of the opposition. The other day in question period I saw 
the Leader of the Opposition try to make a deliberate attempt, 
the day of the budget, to indicate that somehow the 
Saskatchewan auto fund was going to be affected. He tried 
unsuccessfully in here, but tried to confuse the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I say this, Mr. Deputy Speaker: if the members opposite 
do not agree, fine, and that’s well; let that be so. They have 
every opportunity to come into this Chamber here — that’s 
what it’s for — and argue the merits. But to directly try to 
confuse and misrepresent is not correct. That is not in the best 
interests of Saskatchewan, and that’s what was happening in 
here the other day. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not only does it happen in this 
Chamber, but it happens out in the small towns of 
Saskatchewan. I had booked a meeting to go out and talk to the 
employees of the sodium sulphate division in Chaplin, and 
when I came there, lo and behold, I see two of the opposition 
members, feeling that it was their duty to come into the 
employee meeting. We had the meeting with the employees 
which went quite well, I should say. But then there was an open 
meeting in which the town people were allowed to come — and 
rightly should be, it’s the future of their town — and I wanted 
to discuss with them and allay the fears and rumours which, I 
should say, had been generated by the NDP and sent out there 
to the community that the mine was going to close down . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Fear mongers. 
 
  



 
April 4, 1988 

 

287 
 

Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Fear mongers, that’s right. That there 
would be lay—offs, which was not true, and that they were 
selling to a company that wasn’t even in the action. So we were 
going to have this meeting with the people. But no, that wasn’t 
good enough, Mr. Deputy Speaker, The member from Moose 
Jaw, minerals critic, came out with some misleading 
information. The privatization critic was there, but that wasn’t 
enough, they brought out the newly-nominated NDP candidate 
from Moose Jaw Lake Centre. And what was to be a town hall 
meeting, and discuss with the people, turned into a political 
forum. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe the political forum is 
here. We’ll debate these issues in this Chamber, as we should, 
but I think that is an attempt to mislead. 
 
I don’t think that’s treating people of small town Saskatchewan 
fairly when the NDP would like to come out and give 
misleading information and take up the time of that meeting, 
where the people were intimidated to ask questions, because it 
became just a political harangue between the members and 
myself. That isn’t the reason I go to that town, and I would ask 
the members in all due respect for the people of small town 
Saskatchewan to keep that in mind. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, just one other thing that I want to 
mention, as we see within these halls and within this Chamber 
also, an attempt by the members opposite to mislead. the 
opposition critic, a few days ago, got up and indicated that there 
was a mining company that was buying the sodium sulphate 
mine, that had been in uranium development here in 
Saskatchewan, had operated mines and had shut them down. 
And that’s completely false; that’s completely false. 
 
The member opposite was confused between Dickenson mines 
and Denison mines, and yes, Denison mines did do that. But I 
don’t think that’s fair, to do that to companies that cannot come 
in here and debate. That slur, that slander is cast out there, right 
into that small town. And I believe the member opposite, when 
he gets his attempt to talk in budget speech, should apologize to 
those people because that was certainly misleading. 
 
And I think it was wrong to a corporate citizen that was 
entering this province. I think he cast a slur upon them because 
certainly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t think . . . I go back to 
what I said in the beginning, I do not believe that those things 
are in the best interest of this province. If there are things that 
you disagree with, if you don’t think the transaction is correct, 
fine and dandy, that’s what this forum is for; debate it, but let’s 
do it fair and square and let’s not have slander and slur and 
accusations that are unfounded, because that’s what’s been 
taking place, Mr. Deputy Speaker. and I believe the members 
that are involved in this should, when they have their 
opportunity to speak in this House, retract shoe statements. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to indicate to you that I believe, in 
closing, that this budget is one that serves our province well. I 
believe that, as I pointed out, in the fields of health care, in 
education, families, protection of those who are perhaps abused, 
safe houses, things of this nature, action to take on the evils of 
wife battering, of alcohol and drug abuse, many of those things 
that are very, very important to the future of this province and 
to  

the families of this province are addressed within this budget. 
 
I believe we see with the added money for soil conservation in 
agriculture — goodness knows, in the southern part of this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is certainly a concern; with 
the initiatives for irrigation in this budget, we are addressing 
future trends in agriculture with new crops because farming will 
be changing, I’m sure, in subsequent years within this province, 
Mr. Speaker. So I think many of the things that are so 
fundamental, so fundamental to families and to the ordinary 
men and women of Saskatchewan and the young people, were 
addressed in this budget. 
 
And I want to just say in closing again, Mr. Speaker, that 
certainly public participation is going to be one of the major 
thrusts of this government as we move ahead in succeeding 
years. and I wanted to take some time this afternoon to share 
with you and other members of this Assembly some of the 
aspects of public participation as I see them, and the minister in 
charge. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the grounds that this 
budget is there to protect health and education and the family, 
and that it brings about means to develop and diversify the 
economy of this province, and also to improve the efficiency 
and the operation of government in this province, while at the 
same time maintaining that very vital component, that 
component of agriculture, I believe that my fellow colleagues in 
cabinet, and through the guidance of the Minister of Finance, 
have come together with a very reasonable, a very realistic 
budget — a budget that I think will be seen as one that well 
serve the people of this province. And I’ll be more than pleased 
to support it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to enter 
this debate on the budget this afternoon. I’ve been quite 
honoured to represent the people in the Regina North West 
constituency over the past 18 months. 
 
Since opening my MLA office in the Sherwood Village Mall, 
I’ve had a steady, heavy flow of people and visitors into my 
riding office from the riding, offering to me their opinions, 
coming to talk about concerns that they have with respect to this 
government, and generally seeking information and help in 
dealing with this government opposite. 
 
(1600) 
 
Never have the problems in my constituency in the city of 
Regina been so many and varied, in particular since this 
heartless PC government came to office. People are telling me 
as they visit, either with me in their homes or their place of 
business or in my office, that they have never had such difficult 
times making ends meet, financially, job-wise — be it looking 
for work or not having a sense of security in the job which they 
hold, or meeting their weekly food bills. 
 
Family stress is at its highest ever, quite a contradiction from 
what this PC government says. some have even  
  



 
April 4, 1988 

 

288 
 

likened the PC government to economic terrorists, Mr. Speaker, 
taking tax dollars out of the taxpayers’ pockets at 
unprecedented rates for bad government reasons, or to use 
against families, contrary to what the member from Indian 
Head-Wolseley has said, and their well-being in progress. 
 
Their perception, the people in my riding’s perception, is that 
rather than spending tax dollars for job creation or health care 
or education, the PC government has foolishly squandered tax 
dollars on mismanagement, patronage, their rich and powerful 
friends, the large corporations, and of course, on bad 
investments. 
 
I note in the health section of the budget a 200 per cent increase 
for public relations in the health department alone, Mr. Speaker, 
to advertise what a wonderful job this PC government is doing 
in health care and in feeding families in Saskatchewan. 
 
My question to the Minister of Finance and to the Premier of 
this province is this: are hungry families and hungry children 
supposed to eat pamphlets for breakfast as a result of their 
public relations efforts? Families and children don’t need 
pamphlets to eat, Mr. Speaker, they need jobs, cash, and good 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — The families in my constituency are fed up 
with this government and their crazy tax programs, in numbers 
which are startling and staggering. Families are hurting all over 
this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and all this government 
does — the member from Indian Head-Wolseley and others do 
— is they sell off the revenue-bearing assets, owned by 
everyone in Saskatchewan, to a few PC friends at discount 
prices. 
 
Or their newest solution, their newest solution, Mr. Speaker, in 
this budget is to increase taxes yet one more time, hoping in 
subsequent budgets to bring the people and to buy the people 
into the fold with their own money one more time. Someone 
told me, one thing is in favour of death over taxes, Mr. Speaker; 
death doesn’t get worse every time the PC government 
introduces a new budget. 
 
This has been the legacy of PC budget in Saskatchewan for the 
last six years and over the last seven budgets. The tax burden 
for ordinary taxpayers, for working people, continues to grow. 
The budget of 1987 and ’88, a tax increase of $250 for every 
man, woman, and child in Saskatchewan, was slapped on the 
backs of working people — a $1,000 increase for a family of 
four. 
 
With this budget, this budget of 1988-89, another tax increase 
of about $150 for every man, woman, and child in this 
province, another increase of over $600 for a family of four, a 
net increase over the seven consecutive budgets of this PC 
government of over $2,500 in provincial taxes on a family of 
four — $2,500 increases in taxes. 
 
Saskatchewan has the fastest-growing deficit in North America. 
My colleague, the member from Quill Lakes, indicated the total 
deficit is $3.7 billion — $3,700 for every man, woman, and 
child, nearly $15,000,  

Mr. Speaker, for every family of four in Saskatchewan. 
 
Contrary to what the member from Indian Head-Wolseley has 
said, this government doesn’t support families, but attacks 
families once more through this heartless budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — After having listened to the Minister of 
Finance, in reviewing the budget, and in light of the reality of 
life in Saskatchewan, my first impression was that 
Conservatives enjoy suffering. Of course, that may be a trifle 
unkind. Perhaps they don’t enjoy suffering; perhaps it just 
makes them feel good to see other people suffer. 

 
The budget and other secret measures taken by this PC 
government — measures, I might add, we’ve had to rely on the 
press to reveal to us in many instances — amount to a blueprint, 
in my view, for surrendering Saskatchewan and its people to the 
ruthless exploitation of outsiders. It’s another stage in the 
Conservative strategy of destroying our freedom and our way of 
life in Saskatchewan. 
 
It leaves few choices for ordinary people. Under Conservatives, 
the choice of ordinary people in Saskatchewan is either to be 
sheared like sheep or skinned like rabbits. But we in the New 
Democratic Party do not intend to see families trampled under 
the heel of the fanatics of privatization and their foreign friends. 
 
Once again the Finance minister trotted out the old straw man 
of the world economy to justify the colossal failure of 
Conservatives to come to grips with the real world in which 
Saskatchewan people live. Once again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
Minister of Finance dragged out his bag full of rhetoric about 
hostile trading environments, possible world recession, greater 
protectionism, the decline of export prices versus import prices, 
and the list goes on. Everybody and everyone else is to blame 
except this government. 
 
Once again he mentions the Premier’s favourite one-liner about 
being world class. Yes, he did it again. I’ve been wondering, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, just what Conservatives mean by this 
phrase, world class. Now I know. Under Conservatives, 
Saskatchewan is either owned by everybody else in the world 
or, with its $3.7 billion deficit, owes everyone in the world. Yes 
indeed, Mr. Speaker, Conservatives have made us world class. 
 
Yet we know this tired old method of blaming others for our 
problems just doesn’t hold up under scrutiny. While 
Saskatchewan faces a more difficult world economy, it’s not the 
first time in our history. There’s nothing new or unique about 
the world economy in which we live. All this talk by 
Conservatives is simply meant to take the heat off the true 
source of our economic sickness, the mean-spirited, bungling 
policies of this Conservative government. 
 
The real reasons for the sorry state of our economy in our 
province are much more sinister. The real reasons for the way 
things are happening are found in boardrooms far removed from 
our borders. There, together with their  
  



 
April 4, 1988 

 

289 
 

corporate friends and allies, Conservatives actively conspire to 
destroy the historic consensus built over years among 
Saskatchewan people, and they’ll not stop until every last 
vestige of what was a gentle, prosperous province is destroyed. 
We in this opposition must not let it happen. 

 
There’s a saying going around these days: you can always tell a 
Conservative, but you can’t tell a Conservative much. The 
credibility of this government, its ability to level with the 
people, to be believed, to be trusted, is very strained. 
Conservatives don’t listen to people; they don’t listen to the 
opposition when we make speeches in this House. 
Conservatives, instead, make deals behind closed doors, then 
tell the people when the dealing’s done. Conservatives conspire 
to fire local people and replace them with outsiders and 
announce the decisions after they’ve already been made. 
 
And the example I’ll use, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is Saskoil today. 
Saskoil was set up: (a) to create jobs in a head office in this 
province; (b) to make a dollar in the oil business so that 
revenues and profits that were made could be used to help assist 
the government in expenditures, in terms of operating revenues 
and dividends to the treasury so taxpayers didn’t have to pay the 
burden; and also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, (c) to explore in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What this government has done, as soon as they privatized or 
sold it off to the shareholders that now own it, they have sold an 
asset, an interest— and revenue—bearing asset, to other people. 
We control it in a certain sense with 47 per cent of the shares, 
but the objective of the corporation, that is to create head office 
jobs, is now gone. We’re exploring in Alberta; we have laid off 
and fired 275 people when the operation was privatized. We 
have hired, instead of Saskatchewan people, people from 
outside of this province, and now when the dividends are being 
paid, they’re not being paid to the people of this province, 
they’re being paid to the shareholders who live outside this 
province. 
 
Conservatives cut and hack away at the foundations of our very 
way of life and announce what happens after the dirty deeds are 
done. They privatize Saskoil, then they lay off 275 people. They 
privatize Saskoil, then they hire people from Alberta to run it. 
They privatize Saskoil, and they spend exploration dollars, not 
in Saskatchewan but in Alberta. 
 
The quality of Conservative credibility is strained to its 
breaking point. They are gutting and gouging the historic 
consensus built among all people in this province. And now 
they have enlisted new weapons in their grand plan to surrender 
our province to outsiders, surrender control over our lives and 
our economy. Their weapons in this outrage are privatization, or 
as they sometimes call it, public participation, and a promotion 
of a blind and questioning support for the free trade agreement. 
In one fell swoop they have combined blind incompetence in 
the management of our economy with deliberate destructiveness 
to create a recipe, in my view, for disaster for ourselves and our 
children. 
 
Viewed separately, privatization and free trade are  

difficult to comprehend relative to their impact on our lives, but 
when considered together, as Conservatives already have in 
concert with their corporate allies, privatization and free trade 
form a strategy of blitzkrieg, a sudden frontal assault by 
Conservatives to undermine and transform a free society into a 
corporate controlled totalitarian state. 
 
The stakes are high. Ultimately it means not only the 
destruction of our province as we know it, but a sell—out of our 
country. And you may sit here and think that what I’m saying is 
perhaps not true. The Conservatives, in their own words, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, have conceded in public that they plan to sell 
off every Crown corporation or as much of the Crown 
corporations they possibly can to their friends and outside 
interests, to the point, to the point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where 
it will never be retrieved by the people of Saskatchewan again. 
 
And I refer to a Crown Corporations Committee meeting of 
February 3, 1988, where the Deputy Premier, when questioned 
about the Conservative ideology with regard to privatization, 
looked us in the eye and he said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we 
are going to sell off as many of the Crown corporations and as 
many of the assets of the people of this province as we possibly 
can, to the point where you, when you get into power, will 
never ever be able to retrieve them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — And what he meant by that, Mr. Speaker, was 
with the privatization, that’s not so bad; there’s always 
opportunities to recapture some of those economic instruments. 
But with the free trade deal hand in hand, Article 2010 on page 
299 and 300 of the free trade agreement states very clearly that 
if a government provincially or federally wishes to institute or 
create an economic instrument, for example like SGI, we 
require approval, not from a government, Mr. Speaker, the 
approval of the US Congress. That’s what this free trade deal 
says. Privatization to sell off our assets; the free trade 
agreement hand in hand to ensure those assets will never be 
retrieved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned earlier there has always been a 
consensus in Saskatchewan — that is, until Conservatives came 
to power — a mutual interdependence of farm, labour, business, 
and government people. That consensus was built through 
extremely hard times, built carefully and lovingly by pioneers 
who know their strength was in the mutual trust they had for 
one another — a trust, Mr. Speaker, found in their confidence 
they could and should control their own destiny. Even in the 
most horrendous and dangerous periods of drought and war, 
that consensus among our people carried us through. 
 
Saskatchewan people from all walks of life were a family. They 
fought among one another at times and had difference, but they 
were basically a family. They had from time to time different 
opinions, sometimes conflicting priorities or even arguments, 
but we were basically a Saskatchewan family with a common  
  



 
April 4, 1988 

 

290 
 

purpose. We were a family united when it was needed or when 
it counted. 
 
(16l5) 
 
Now after six years of Conservative fumbling and bumbling 
and outright dividing and attacking Saskatchewan families, that 
confidence and trust we’ve had in ourselves is undermined. 
 
Conservatives are doing their level best to brainwash our people 
with right-wing, dog eat dog privatization philosophy. It’s a sad 
state of affairs when your own people turn on you, when 
members of your own family turn on you, as Conservatives 
have turned on ordinary Saskatchewan families who only want 
to live with dignity and purpose. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s always hard to figure out just which term to 
use, privatization or public participation. Both terms sound like 
something you do in the dark or you want to make legal. When 
Tories want to make their nefarious schemes sound good, they 
refer to it as “public participation.” When they want it to sound 
as though they’re doing something for the individual, they refer 
to it as “privatization.” Which is it? Any way you cut it, it 
sounds to me more and more like it’s piratization, as the 
member from Moose Jaw North has indicated. 
 
Most people know that the PC government has been getting 
advice from right-wing , foreign governments and corporations 
for years. For example, on the right to work legislation and right 
to work theories of this government, they get advice from 
Tennessee, home of the $1.60-an-hour minimum wage. They’ve 
been getting it on a regular basis from the Thatcher government 
in Britain. 
 
For years now, Saskatchewan Conservatives have been 
cavorting with the courtesans of privatization from Britain — 
wide-eyed fanatics of the rights such as Madsen Pirie who are 
bent on turning the clock back in Britain to Victorian times 
when they were the very few rich and the many, many poor. 
 
You may not know this, but in Great Britain private schools are 
called “public schools.” They’re usually schools for the children 
of the wealthy and powerful. So we can only conclude that 
privatization must mean the same things as public participation, 
since public and private are used in this manner in England. It’s 
bewildering, Mr. Speaker, yet it is consistent with a government 
that says it is “progressive” on the one hand and “conservative” 
on the other — two contradictory terms. 
 
With missionary zeal, Conservatives have set out to persuade us 
that somehow we’ll be better off if we sell what we already own 
to outside business interests. This tells me a lot about 
privatization. It tells me that ultimately the word’s true meaning 
is that a few Conservatives and their families will be generals, 
and the rest of us will be privates. 
 
But privatization is much more than selling off assets, owned by 
the people who live here, at discounted fire  

sale prices. It’s a total attack on every aspect of life as we know 
it in Saskatchewan, and here are a few of the major elements in 
the privatization scheme: one, advertising to persuade people 
that it’s wrong for them to own their own vital industries and 
services; two, attacking public employees and instilling fear and 
distrust in them by sudden, unexpected firings and other 
changes; thirdly, giving special money incentives to certain rich 
parts of the population to buy their financial support; and 
fourthly, cutting vital programs in the name of greater 
efficiency; and finally, making scapegoats of the poor and those 
who cannot defend themselves. 
 
This is the shameful strategy of Conservatives in Saskatchewan: 
a strategy, Mr. Speaker, without exaggeration, that is a carbon 
copy of every right-wing, totalitarian government, from Hitler 
to Stalin to General Pinochet in Chili, or Botha in South Africa. 
 
But don’t take my word for it, although my word is good on 
this. If privatization is such a great idea, why isn’t it working in 
those areas of Canada where it flourishes? Why isn’t it working 
for the ordinary people who live there, for example, in Ontario? 
Using the Minister of Finance’s own figures from his budget: in 
Ontario, medicare premiums are $714 per year, car insurance 
averages $1,022 per year, home heating average is $1,062 per 
year, for a taxpayer who earns $20,000 per year. 
 
In Saskatchewan, those comparative same items cost: nothing 
for medicare, $459 for car insurance and $650 per year for 
home heating for the same family. That’s a difference, Mr. 
Speaker, of $1,689. 
 
Where privatization flourishes in Ontario, car insurance, home 
heating, and medicare premiums cost just under $2,800, or 250 
per cent more — 250 per cent more for a family of four, 
according to the Conservative minister’s own figures, than in 
Saskatchewan. Yet Ontario is the place where privatization 
flourishes — 252 per cent more to families for those three basic 
requirements. 
 
Why then do we have to pay so much more? You can go 
through the figures in the government’s own records which 
show that for those items necessary to life, they all cost more 
under privatization where privatization is the rule, and that’s the 
fact of life. 
 
Up until now, budget day in fact, we thought we still had 
control over that part of our economy in which we had a say, 
but we don’t any more. Just watch those health costs and car 
insurance costs and home heating costs sky-rocket as the 
building blocks of our economy are cut, stacked, and sold on 
the auction block of privatization. 
 
It’s a truth that when you no longer have access to the decisions 
which affect your life, it’s going to cost you more. Up until 
now, Conservatives have been afraid to tamper with those vital 
industries and services created by the tears and hard work of 
countless thousands of Saskatchewan people. Now they’ve 
gone the whole hog, and the costs, the costs to ordinary people 
will be unbelievable. I predict this without fear of contradiction 
in the future. 
  



 
April 4, 1988 

 

291 
 

Mr. Speaker, selling off valuable assets and being in debt like 
this Conservative government is, is a little like the carpenter 
who falls on hard financial times. He sells his tools here and 
there to help his cash flow. Then he has a chance to build a 
house and make some money, but he doesn’t own his tools any 
more. And because he’s in debt and has spent his money, he 
can’t buy any tools either. So he goes to those people he sold 
the tools to and asks them to loan them to him. And they won’t, 
so he offers to rent the tools back. You can guess how much 
he’s going to pay and still not own his own tools. 
 
Privatization or piratization is making us strangers in our own 
province. Privatization is making us tenants in our own house. 
It’s taking away our individual freedom to have some say in 
what we pay for our resources and services, which we in 
Saskatchewan created. It’s making us pitiful creatures of the 
corporate state, unable to decide anything except by permission 
of our corporate bosses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our parents and grandparents didn’t come to this 
country and struggle to establish homes to see them owned by 
absentee landlords and their children governed by a 
Conservative aristocracy. No, they came here to escape those 
very things. 
 
Today a great sadness grips our people. Their government has 
not only lost touch with them but is hell-bent on selling them 
down the river. We look at, Mr. Speaker, exactly what this 
privatization means. I’ve given you an example with the 
carpenter. I’ll give you a business example. 
 
When a business is in trouble it looks at the assets that it has, it 
does an inventory, and it decides what assets to sell, what 
revenue—bearing assets to sell in that business, to meet the 
credit that is due on the business. So the business sells off all its 
assets, and once the economy turns around or once the cash 
flow problem is solved, what is there left to do? The carpenter 
illustration shows very clearly what the options are: pay high 
rent for your tools to earn money that you will never own, to 
earn money, maybe. 
 
With regard to business, once you sell off your assets and 
you’ve got no more revenue-generating assets, like Crown 
corporations, all you have is the ability to tax people for 
revenues to run your government. And that’s what this 
government is planning on doing through their successive 
budgets and their deficit financing. 
 
We on this side of the House will not let that happen. We intend 
to fight every inch of the way to protect the birthright of 
Saskatchewan people. Who will stand up for Saskatchewan in 
this fight? Not that government opposite. New Democrats have 
in the past, and will stand up for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
We have stood up in the past; we will continue to stand up for 
our people in the future, in particular when it comes to 
protecting our children’s assets and freedoms and our way of 
life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the Premier and his government began in 
1982 with strong principles. Everyone who is new at something 
should begin with strong principles and keep them, but the 
Premier and his government haven’t let those principles take 
root. Conservative principles are  

like flowers planted by children. Every now and then the 
children pull them up to see if they’re growing. And if you 
don’t like their principles of this government, they have others. 
Whatever it takes to fool you is what they will adopt as their 
very own. 
 
Let me briefly give you some examples and outline the lack of 
credibility and principles of this government. Example one. 
When they came to power, they said they were going to 
introduce a public utilities review commission to make sure 
Saskatchewan people got a fair deal on utility rates. When the 
public utility review commission began to do its job and point 
out that, in fact, the government was doing exactly the opposite, 
Conservatives scrapped PURC (public utilities review 
commission). So much for principles. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
utility rates are up $519 from ’81 to ’87 for a family of four 
with a net income of $25,000. Utility rates have more than 
doubled after a promise to freeze them. 
 
Second example. They talked about tax decreases, and you 
remember the speech that I’ve given before on tax decreases. 
The Conservatives, during the campaign, promised to cut 
personal income tax by 10 per cent. We have seen a 56 per cent 
increase — not decrease, but increase — in personal taxes in the 
last while, and 103 per cent increase over the last six years of 
this government. They promised to eliminate the sales tax, and 
of course that principle is gone. We have not seen the sales tax 
eliminated; we have seen an increase of 40 per cent, from 5 per 
cent to 7 per cent. 
 
They promised to do away with the gas tax, and the Premier of 
this province, principles all aglow, stood out in front of this 
Legislative Assembly in May of 1982, and he promised to the 
people of this province that as long as there’s a Conservative 
government in this province, you will never, ever see the 
reimposition of the gas tax. What do we have now? We have a 
gas tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They promised, Mr. Speaker, to do away with bureaucratic red 
tape — promise after promise. What do we have? We have the 
largest bureaucratic, red tape nightmare in the history of the 
world — 641,000 licensed vehicle operators now gather 
together their receipts on an annual basis and generate 33 
million gas tax receipts or thereabouts. That’s doing away with 
red tape? You’ve got to be kidding! People are laughing at this 
government. This is a Premier of principles who promises less 
red tape? 
 
The drug plan — this created more red tape for every citizen in 
this province who is over 18 years of age or live on their own. 
This is the PC Party of principles? People are laughing at this 
government and the use of the words “trust” and “credibility” 
and “principles.” 
 
My final example, Mr. Speaker, is that this government said 
they would never, never touch those areas which affect the 
health of Saskatchewan people; then you check the record. 
Where’s the dental program for children? Privatized. Gone. 
Where’s the prescription drug plan? Where is that, Mr. 
Speaker? It’s privatized; it’s gone. Where is the promise of 
lower nursing home rates? Gone. Instead crippling increases for 
seniors. Where’s the easy access to hospitals promise? That’s 
gone too. Instead we have record—sized waiting lists for people 
who have to get  
  



 
April 4, 1988 

 

292 
 

into hospitals. And where’s the Saskatchewan medical care 
insurance commission, Mr. Speaker,? That’s gone as well. And 
the list can go on all afternoon. This is a government of 
principles or trust? 
 
(1630) 
 
But of course, now it’s budget time, now it’s budget time, and 
this government now tells us they really, really are going to 
build hospitals and new nursing homes. Trust us, they say. We 
have principles, the Conservatives say, but what they don’t tell 
you, it’s just that our principles keep changing. That’s what 
they don’t tell you. 
 
It seems this government has just never learned that you can’t 
keep switching what you believe. You can’t run a government 
solely on business principles. Government should be a little 
more human and a little more humane. It should have a heart. 
But this PC government has neither a heart nor competence nor 
principles. 
 
The lack of credibility, about which you can believe from this 
PC government, is never more obvious than when it talks about 
the so—called free trade issue. In the budget speech, the 
Minister of Finance blithely states, and I quote: 
 

we believe that the free trade agreement and the 
diversification of the Saskatchewan economy are the most 
realistic approaches to deal with the changes occurring in 
the world economy, and this practical strategy provides us 
with the means to control our future in uncertain economy 
times. 

 
That’s the stated principle Conservatives stand on with respect 
to free trade. 
 
But let’s examine what this really means to people here. As I 
have already pointed out, Mr. Speaker, due to cut-backs, sell-
outs of our fundamental means of production, and private 
contracting of services to outside agencies and corporations by 
this government, we don’t even control what we pay for car 
insurance, home insurance, prescription drugs, or any of the 
most basic items. Our ability to have a say in anything we used 
to own is gone. 
 
An American giant corporation, Weyerhaeuser, headquartered 
in Washington, effectively controls our forest industry. Outside 
foreign corporations now control the marketing of our mineral 
wealth. U.S. drug companies monopolize the prescription drug 
market and drive the prices up. Farmers are captive of the 
chemical corporations and banks, and that list can go on. So 
how is it that we are supposed to negotiate fair trade deals under 
this agreement for Saskatchewan people? The Premier is betting 
on free trade with an empty hand. 
 
How in Heaven’s name do you, in the words of the Minister of 
Finance, and I quote, “capture economic opportunities in the 
international market place”, when it’s that very international 
market place that already owns your resources and services? 
Are these Conservatives on drugs when they’re talking about 
that? Or do you make deals with people . . . and how do you 
make deals with people when they already own what you have? 
It’s one or  

the other. Yet even we accept this convoluted nonsense crafted 
by Conservatives. 
 
There’s another very important factor in the free trade issue. 
The best way to see it is to take the example of the oil company 
tax holiday this Conservative government has provided to these 
corporations. In 1981 the value of oil production was $821 
million. The province received, out of $821 million, they 
received a royalty of $533 million. In 1986, the value of oil 
production in Saskatchewan was $1,174 million — an increase 
of 43 per cent. 1986-87 revenues were only 213 million, not 
533 million — $320 million less, or 60 per cent less revenue on 
43 per cent increase in production. It’s fine to say there’s more 
activity in the oil patch and a paltry few more jobs, but when 
the people who own the resource are getting less than half the 
returns from over $300 million more in oil production, how is 
that benefitting Saskatchewan, I ask you? Well it’s not. 
Saskatchewan people who now pay the second highest personal 
income tax in Canada know these kinds of deals don’t benefit 
them. 
 
What is more important is when you examine all of these so-
called deals this government has made with corporations from 
outside this province. You begin to see what Conservatives 
really aren’t very good at, and that is business deals. Either that, 
or they have some plan in mind. And I believe both of those 
observations to be true, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Isn’t it interesting that with all the tax holidays for these foreign 
corporations, corporate taxes account for only 6.2 per cent of 
budgetary revenues while individual income taxes account for a 
whopping 23 per cent, almost four times as much? Did you get 
a $10 million tax break like Peter Pocklington did this year? 
Did anyone out here in this province? No! Instead taxpayers got 
a 33 per cent increase in flat tax. Seniors, on top of that, get a 
$15 per month increase starting in November, and of course the 
flat tax is levied before family-personal deductions, so you can 
imagine where that $15 to seniors will end up — right back in 
the coffers of the Conservative government. No principles, Mr. 
Speaker. Not only can Conservatives not make good deals for 
the people who live here, I submit it is not in their best interests 
to make good deals for them. 
 
At a rapid pace through a combination of cut-backs, sell-outs, 
mismanagement, patronage and pure unmitigated greed and 
lack of principle, this Conservative government would force us 
into a free trade deal where the Saskatchewan people would be 
the only team playing without a goalie. Not only would the 
Saskatchewan people be playing without a goalie, we’ll have to 
buy our sticks and our pucks and other hockey equipment from 
the opposing team. That’s the free trade deal for the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this most recent budget of this Conservative 
government, coupled with secret, closed-door deals with 
corporations and other governments, has put our Saskatchewan 
and its people at grave and certain risk. Still, these Conservative 
puppets of privatization, cling to their delusion that only 
foreign, or large national, or international corporations and 
businesses make the  
  



 
April 4, 1988 

 

293 
 

decisions; not people, not Saskatchewan people, not 
Saskatchewan people elected by Saskatchewan people for 
Saskatchewan people, but people outside this province and 
outside Canada, the Conservatives submit, can make and 
govern for us — make better decisions and govern for us. 
 
Every major policy of this government has been crafted in some 
large corporate boardroom, not this legislature or in the PC 
cabinet room. This government reminds me of the lines from 
Alexander Pope, and I quote: 
 

Of all the causes which conspire to blind 
Man’s erring judgement, and misguide the mind, 
What the weak head but strongest bias rules, 
Is pride, the never-failing vice of fools. 
 

And that’s Conservatives — weak heads but strong biases, 
coupled with pride, the never-failing vice of fools. 
 
I have said that this government once again wishes to place the 
burden of our broken economy on the backs of the people who 
live here. Our problems are caused by others in the world, they 
say, time after time. But Conservatives have destroyed the 
historic consensus which protected the lives and security of 
Saskatchewan families. 
 
Conservatives are involved in a conspiracy to surrender control 
of our economy to others who do not live here or who are not 
accountable to Saskatchewan people. Privatization, a free trade 
agreement, and blind support of this free trade agreement are 
weapons in the Conservative strategy to permanently divide the 
families of this province and divest the province of control over 
its destiny. 
 
Conservatives have sought advice from right-wing  foreign 
governments in South Africa and Britain, large national and 
international corporations, and others outside Saskatchewan for 
their grand plan. Window dressing contained in the budget 
cannot cover the fact that Conservatives have failed to deal with 
problems at home. They lack principles, they lack credibility, 
they lack competence, and ultimately, Mr. Speaker, they will 
lack the support of the Saskatchewan people come the next 
election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Conservatives continue to maintain we can 
get a fair deal through the free trade agreement, when we have 
nothing left to deal with and no control over any aspect of our 
lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my view that this government has evil 
purposes in mind. It seeks to divide rather than to unite. It does 
not have the fortitude and competence to build on our strengths, 
but instead it builds up our reliance on large corporations so we 
are never able to make important economic decisions for 
ourselves again. 
 
This budget is a hopeless failure in resolving our economic 
problems, but will be a very large success in gathering millions 
from Saskatchewan taxpayers and helping the friends of the 
PCs pay less. 
 

Because of this slanderous and totally incompetent budget, Mr. 
Speaker, I cannot support it and I will not support it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a 
great deal of pleasure that I rise and enter into this debate on the 
budget, the budget that has been presented by my colleague, the 
Minister of Finance and the member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden. 
I certainly would like to congratulate that member for what I 
feel is probably the most comprehensive and the most common 
sense budget that has been presented in this legislature for some 
time. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, this budget is more than just a statement of 
economics or a statement of fiscal responsibility. It is a very, 
very detailed budget, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to advance 
to you, and to members of the Legislative Assembly, the 
argument that this budget represents a balance, a balance of 
choices for the people of Saskatchewan — a balance of choices 
with a bottom line, with a bottom line that will lead us, not just 
into the next year or two but well into the next decade. 
 
And if you look closely at what we are debating today, Mr. 
Speaker, amongst the economic difficulties that we have here in 
Saskatchewan, you’ll find that we, as a province, we face issues 
of which we have to prudently — prudently plan for the future. 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite certainly have a different 
view. 
 
The members of the opposition, Mr. Speaker, in my opinion, 
tend to live in the past. I believe that their comments thus far on 
this budget would indicate clearly to the people of 
Saskatchewan that the NDP still today are living in the past, are 
coming up with solutions that . . . the same old solutions that 
they attempted to come up with in the last few years of their 
administration, Mr. Speaker. And those types of solutions, Mr. 
Speaker, were rejected, and rejected solidly by the people of 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — What we have heard from the 
opposition, Mr. Speaker, is a litany of what I would call scare 
tactics — scare tactics that affect the elderly, scare tactics that 
affect the youth of our province, scare tactics that affect the 
small-business people in our province, and just generally very 
negative, negative comments by the opposition. They have not 
offered any new solutions, Mr. Speaker. But I would put forth 
the case to you, Mr. Speaker, that this budget, as presented, 
does offer many, many new solutions to the problems that we as 
Saskatchewan people face today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan 
realize that difficult choices have to be made. They expect their 
government to make those difficult choices. But, Mr. Speaker, 
the people of Saskatchewan want this government to make 
those choices in a caring and a compassionate manner. They 
expect the choices that we make, that these choices will keep in 
mind the  
 
  



 
April 4, 1988 

 

294 
 

economic realities of today, the economic realities that are, right 
as we speak, reshaping our way of thinking in this country. 
 
By virtue of this budget, Mr. Speaker, this government has once 
again served notice that it is prepared to make those difficult 
choices. But more importantly, this government is prepared to 
allocate financial and human resources in such a manner that we 
will be well prepared to meet the challenges and opportunities 
which the future holds. This budget represents much of that, 
Mr. Speaker, and in short, it has leadership. It is leadership that 
is needed to take our province into the 21st century. That type 
of leadership, Mr. Speaker, does not exist on the other side of 
the House. But on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
leadership is something that we have plenty of, and this budget 
proves beyond a shadow of a doubt that we do have leadership 
on this side of the House. 
 
I wish not, Mr. Speaker, to go into a detailed description of the 
budget itself, but I would like to leave that to my colleagues and 
their respective departments and the respective MLAs to speak 
forth on this budget, how it affects them. But, Mr. Speaker, 
what I will do today is go through in detail some of the 
highlights of the budget as it relates to Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
(1645) 
 
Highways and Transportation of course, Mr. Speaker, is a very 
important department in our government, and this year’s budget 
for Highways and Transportation is indeed a very, very 
important budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to tell you a little bit about the highway 
system that we have in the province of Saskatchewan. It is an 
extensive highway system, Mr. Speaker, and in that highway 
system the people of Saskatchewan, the people of 
Saskatchewan, have invested some five and a half billion 
dollars. In the province of Saskatchewan, I believe, we have 
something like 20-some thousand kilometres of road throughout 
this large geographic province of ours, probably, Mr. Speaker, 
more miles of road per capita than any place probably in North 
America. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget addresses many of the concerns that 
we have with that extensive highway system. You heard, Mr. 
Speaker, just last Thursday, the Minister of finance announce a 
new $30 million enhanced highway rehabilitation program. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that $30 million enhanced highway 
rehabilitation program has been met from the people of 
Saskatchewan with a great deal of optimism. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan, the members on this side of the 
House, are pleased and are happy with an extra $30 million 
over a three-year period of time going into our extensive 
highway system. It is with a great deal of pride, Mr. Speaker, 
that I listened to that announcement. I believe that there is no 
one in this province who is a bigger advocate or who has been 
more outspoken than I on getting more money for our 
highways, Mr. Speaker, we accomplished that as a government, 
we accomplished that together, and those moneys will go a 
long, long ways to fixing our highway system. 

I’m not about to tell you, Mr. Speaker, or the people of this 
province, that that extra $30 million is going to clear up all of 
the difficulties that we have in Highways. But, Mr. Speaker, it 
is a good start — it is a good start on rehabilitating or 
resurfacing some of the many, many paved highways that we 
have in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, specifically, that program 
will allow the department to undertake more than 50 new 
projects, additional projects in the next three years. This year 
alone that new program will improve some 138 kilometres of 
road, and it will create some 600 jobs. This is, Mr. Speaker, of 
course in addition to the department’s $101.3 million 
construction program. Projects from the enhancement program 
and the 30 projects in the regular construction program provide 
for a total or $46 million for pavement rehabilitation this year. 
It is fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that this program represents a firm 
commitment by this government to continue to invest in our 
province’s highway system during difficult economic times. 
 
This year’s total budget for Highways and Transportation is an 
amount in excess of $231 million. It includes $101 million 
construction program, over 87 and one-half million dollars for 
maintenance, and an additional $10 million from this new, 
enhanced highway program. 
 
Saskatchewan motorists, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan tourists, 
the road building industry, the Saskatchewan transportation 
industry, and in fact, Mr. Speaker, all people in the province of 
Saskatchewan, will benefit from this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government understands the importance of our 
provincial highway system. It is illustrated in this year’s very 
extensive capital program. And I wish to give to you, Mr. 
Speaker, and to the members of the Legislative Assembly and 
the people of Saskatchewan, some of the highlights of that 
program. There will be 30 grading projects, 61 surfacing 
projects, 18 bridge project, in fact, Mr. Speaker, more than 
1,000 kilometres will be under construction this fiscal year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — This year, Mr. Speaker, you will see 
more and more of that yellow iron out working in rural 
Saskatchewan and in parts of urban Saskatchewan building 
roads. 
 
I will tell you, Mr. Speaker, that most of this construction will 
be done by private sector firms. And I, at this time, Mr. 
Speaker, would like to pay tribute to the private sector firms 
that we have in the province of Saskatchewan, building our 
roads, reconstructing our roads, resurfacing our roads. These 
contractors, Mr. Speaker, have invested millions of dollars in 
their equipment. These contractors, Mr. Speaker, have had years 
and years and years of experience, Mr. Speaker, these 
contractors themselves are facing difficult times, very difficult 
times. 
 
There is no business today, I don’t think, any more  
  



 
April 4, 1988 

 

295 
 

competitive than the road building industry itself. Mr. Speaker, 
these jobs are tendered out. These jobs are tendered out through 
fair, competitive tender bidding. And, Mr. Speaker, today the 
province of Saskatchewan, because of the competitive nature of 
that industry, are getting good value for their dollar on the roads 
that are constructed today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, it would take me a long 
time to go through the complete project array. I will be tabling 
that, probably some time tomorrow, but I would like to share 
with you and share with the members of the legislature a few of 
the highlights of this construction program. 
 
This year you can expect the completion of many, many 
important construction projects. Firstly, the paving of the four-
laning projects on the Yellowhead east of Lloydminster, as well 
as 16 kilometres west of Saskatoon; in addition, the 23-
kilometre extension of the four-laning on the Trans-Canada 
west of Swift Current to Gull Lake will be completed. The 
grading of the remaining section of No. 41 Highway to Melfort 
will continue early this spring, and we will hope that the 
Melfort to Saskatoon connection will be open for traffic late 
this fall. Resurfacing 50 kilometres along Highway No. 10 
between Balgonie and Fort Qu’Appelle as well as Highway No. 
210 from the junction of Highway 10 to Echo Valley Provincial 
Park will take place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, construction of the new interchange at the 
intersection of No. 2 and 3 Highways north of Prince Albert 
will be completed this fall, and it shall be open to traffic some 
time in November. That new interchange, Mr. Speaker, 
provides easier access to highways both east and west of the 
city, and will greatly improve safety in the area of Prince 
Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the list of projects, once again, is extensive. I do 
have a project listing that will be tabled tomorrow in the 
legislature, and I do know that many MLAs will be looking 
forward to viewing that construction project array. 
 
You will notice in that array, Mr. Speaker, that there is a 
continued emphasis on the resurfacing of our paved highway 
system. In keeping with my comments on the highway system, 
Mr. Speaker, I would now like to turn to the maintenance 
programs contained in the Highways and Transportation 
budget. 
 
On several occasions in this address I’ve stressed the need for 
this government to maintain the system that we have, maintain 
the paved highway system in which we, as people in the 
province of Saskatchewan, have invested billions of dollars. 
There is a need to resurface those paved highways, and this 
government will do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The first step in protecting that highway system, Mr. Speaker, is 
to ensure that essential maintenance is carried out. This budget 
contains provisions for 87 and one—half million dollars for that 
purpose alone. To demonstrate our commitment to maintaining 
our highways, the dollar 

figure for this year’s maintenance budget represents a 28 per 
cent increase since 1982. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, is committed to protecting the 
highway system and maintaining the level of service that the 
Saskatchewan public has come to enjoy, and that proof of 
commitment is in the funding level for highways maintenance 
in this budget. 
 
And at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to pay tribute to 
another sector that works on our highways, and this is the 
public sector, Mr. Speaker, that is working on the . . . primarily 
on the maintenance side of our highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have in the Department of Highways and 
Transportation some 2,000 employees. Many of these are in 
head office, Mr. Speaker, but many of them are the men and the 
women who are out working on our highways in a maintenance 
capacity. I speak of the crews that are out mowing the grass; I 
speak of the crews that are doing the spot sealing; I speak of the 
crews that are doing the crack filling; I speak of the crews that 
do the snow blowing in the winter, putting the sand and the salt 
on our highways. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have come to learn, I have come to learn, 
Mr. Speaker, that those public employees do an excellent job 
for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Those public employees, Mr. Speaker, 
take a great deal of pride in their work, and I know that they do 
a very, very good job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that there should be and there is a good 
mix in this province, Mr. Speaker, of work that is carried out by 
the private sector and other maintenance work that is done by 
the public sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House tend to think of the 
taxpayer and tend to look at the taxpayer and what is the 
cheapest for the taxpayer. And, Mr. Speaker, frankly I think we 
have found that balance where we have mostly professional, 
private sector road contractors building our highways through 
true competitive bidding, and we have public employees, Mr. 
Speaker, providing certain levels of maintenance. It is a good 
mix, Mr. Speaker, and I believe that our transportation system is 
getting better every day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — But, Mr. Speaker, there is more to a 
transportation system than simply highways. And I’d like to 
share with members of this Assembly some of the facts about 
our highway system . . . about our transportation system, pardon 
me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The average cost of transporting most goods in Canada is about 
6 per cent of their market price. But in Saskatchewan, for our 
major exports, that corresponding figure is 23 per cent, and of 
course that is due to our geographic location. But that is almost 
a four-fold difference or a four-fold difference in the average 
cost of transportation as a percentage of market price. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that figure alone demonstrates the key  
  



 
April 4, 1988 

 

296 
 

importance that a transportation system plays in keeping a 
competitive edge in the world market-place. 
 
That is why, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of this government we 
welcome, we welcome federal reform of the legislative 
framework that guides our national transportation system. That 
is why Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, has gained a national 
reputation for being a leader in the implementation of reform 
and finding new and more efficient ways of delivering 
transportation services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to spend some time detailing this 
government’s position on a number of issues related to the 
changing regulatory environment. This budget supports a 
number, a number of innovative solutions that Highways and 
Transportation has developed to meet the challenges that lie 
ahead. First and foremost is the new National Transportation 
Act. It is a very innovative piece of legislation. This new Act 
recognizes the role of transportation in economic development. 
It also ensures that there will be continued access and 
reasonable rates for the northern areas of our province. 
 
As a government, Mr. Speaker, we made our concerns known 
through public hearings, public hearing process that we are well 
satisfied that our input has been favourably received. We will 
monitor the effects of that new National Transportation Act to 
ensure that it is protecting Saskatchewan’s interests. 
 
In conjunction with the new National Transportation Act, there 
is another major piece of federal legislation affecting the motor 
transport industry, that is Bill C-19. Shippers and manufacturers 
have advocated a relaxation in motor carrier regulations in order 
to increase competition and reduce rates. All provinces and the 
federal government, Mr. Speaker, have agreed to relax the 
control on extra-provincial trucking. Bill C-19 puts the 
legislative framework in place so that this may happen. The 
budget that we debate today will not let safety be sacrificed for 
the sake of less regulation, and to that end, Mr. Speaker, we are 
committed to a national safety code. This budget provides for 
the human and the financial resources for that to take place. 
 
Another important step that is currently being accomplished is 
the development of a national set of uniform weight and 
dimension truck regulations. The federal and the provincial 
governments, along with the trucking industry, jointly funded a 
$3 million research program to improve uniformity in Canada 
trucking regulations and to promote highway safety. That study 
focused on the influence of size and weight on truck stability 
and their impacts on our pavements and on our bridges. 
Interested groups, individuals, and the public, had an 
opportunity to provide comments on the report through a series 
of public hearings, and it’s very important to note, Mr. Speaker, 
that the very first of those Canada-wide public hearings was 
held here in Saskatchewan. 
 
In February, the council of ministers responsible for 
transportation and highway safety met and they discussed a 
number of issues facing the transportation industry. At the 
meeting each of the speakers agreed to adopt uniform 
commercial vehicle weight and dimension regulations  

right across the entire country. That agreement that was reached 
will improve highway safety and reduce the wear on Canada’s 
road system. By establishing the minimum level of weights and 
dimensions nation-wide, productivity of the interprovincial 
trucking industry will improve significantly. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on about these types of 
reforms that we have made, but a very important point, Mr. 
Speaker — and I ask the people of Saskatchewan to bear this in 
mind, a very important point, Mr. Speaker — is that when you 
take a look at uniform weights and dimensions across this 
country, when you take a look at a new national safety code for 
the trucking industry right across this country, when you take a 
look at the new less regulated environment in the transportation 
industry across this country, what you are seeing, Mr. Speaker, 
is co-operation, co-operation between the federal government 
and the provincial governments right across this country. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we certainly can say that there has been some 
things that we disliked that happened in Ottawa, and the 
members of the opposition can blow those out of proportion, 
but the fact remains, Mr. Speaker, that there are some 
fundamental things within the highways and transportation 
sector that this government in co-operation with all 
governments across the country and the federal government 
have worked on that are, too, very, very significant benefits for 
the people across this country. It has been a long time in 
history, Mr. Speaker, when there has been a federal government 
that co-operates with the provincial governments right across 
this country and has some solid benefits to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


