


















































May 25, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 May 25, 1988 
 

1547 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills 

 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As chairperson of the 
Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills, I present the 
fourth report of the said committee which is as follows: 
 
Bill No. 7 — An Act to amend The Reciprocal Enforcement 

of Judgments Act 
 

Ms. Smart: — I wish to report Bill No. 7, An Act to amend The 
Reciprocal Enforcement of Judgments, as being 
non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in Committee of the Whole on the said Bill be 
waived. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 16 — An Act respecting the Licensing of Persons 
who Perform Work of Gas Installation or Sell Gas 

Equipment 
 
Ms. Smart: — As chairperson of the Non-Controversial Bills 
Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 16, An Act respecting the 
Licensing of Persons who Perform Work of Gas Installation or 
Sell Gas Equipment, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in Committee of the Whole on the said Bill be 
waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No 5 — An Act to declare a Day of Mourning for 
Workers Killed or Injured in the Course of their 

Employment / Projet de loi No. 5 — Loi relative à la 
déclaration d’un jour de deuil en souvenir des travailleurs 

et travailleuses morts ou blessés au travail 
 

Ms. Smart: — As chairperson of the Non-Controversial Bills 
Committee, I wish to report Bill No. 5, An Act to declare a Day 
of Mourning for Workers Killed or Injured in the Course of their 
Employment, as controversial. 
 
Bill No. 9 — An Act to amend The Fire Prevention Act, 1980

Ms. Smart: — Bill No. 9, An Act to amend The Fire Prevention 
Act, 1980, as being controversial. 
 

Bill No. 10 — An Act respecting the Licensing of Persons 
who Perform Work of Electrical Installation or Sell 

Electrical Equipment 
 
Ms. Smart: — Bill No. 10, An Act respecting the Licensing of 
Persons who Perform Work of Electrical Installation or Sell 
Electrical Equipment, as being controversial. 
 

Bill No. 8 — An Act to amend The Public Libraries Act, 
1984 

 
Ms. Smart: — As chairperson of the Non-Controversial Bills 
Committee, I wish to report Bill No, 8, An Act to amend The 
Public Libraries Act, 1984, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in Committee of the Whole on the said Bill be 
waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Saxinger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure for me to introduce to you, and to the members of this 
Assembly, some people seated in your gallery. Hermann Heister 
is here visiting from West Germany; he’s here on business. Also 
with him is Mr. and Mrs. Keller from La Ronge. The Kellers have 
the Nature Berry — they manufacture and produce gourmet 
blueberry and cranberry. Would you please help me welcome 
these people. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gardner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you, and through you to the members of the Assembly, some 
students we have in today from the Pelly constituency. They are 
26 students from the Fort Livingstone School in the town of 
Pelly, and they’re here today with their teachers, Gwyn 
Shankowsky and Murray Bruce, chaperon Violet Keshane, and 
their bus driver, Art Johnson. 
 
These students I know, being rural folks, are used to getting up 
in the morning, Mr. Speaker, because I passed their bus about 
100 miles from Pelly this morning at 7:30, so I know they were 
up and on the road before breakfast. 
 
I hope they enjoy themselves here this afternoon and have a good 
safe trip home, and I hope that everybody will help me welcome 
them in the usual manner. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!  



 
May 25, 1988 

 

1548 
 

Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my great pleasure this 
afternoon to present to this Assembly 37 visiting students from 
grades 4, 5, and 6 at the Lafleche Elementary School in the town 
of Lafleche. They are seated both in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker, 
and on the floor of the Assembly. I will have the opportunity to 
meet with the students following question period. 
 
I hope they enjoy their visit with us in the Assembly this 
afternoon and have a safe journey home. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
would invite all hon. members to join with me in welcoming 
them, together with their teachers, chaperons, and bus driver, 
Daphne Fogal, Sandy Filson, Charlene Hodgson, and Donna 
Sewell. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce and 
welcome 15 students from Southend in northern Saskatchewan. 
It’s about 135 miles north of La Ronge. There’s 15 students here 
with their teacher, Mr. Stephen Davidson, and also the mayor, 
William Dumais, and also Angelique Clarke. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to welcome them in Cree. 
 
(The member spoke for a time in Cree). 
 
So I would like the legislature to please welcome them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Lay-off Notices for PCS Workers 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My colleagues have 
some questions today on the important drought situation, but in 
order not to break up the continuity of those questions which will 
follow, I have a series of two or three short but important 
questions which I should like to direct, Mr. Speaker, to the 
Minister of Finance, I believe, who is the minister in charge of 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is as follows: is it correct that 
yesterday approximately 200 workers of the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan at the Cory Mine just outside of Saskatoon 
received lay-off notices? Are these lay-off notices, if the story 
that I’ve received is correct, are these lay-off notices to be 
indefinite? Or at least the possibility of them being indefinite has 
been raised by management. And if so, will you be kind enough 
to also advise the House whether or not other PCS (Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) operations are going to be 
similarly affected; if so, where and when? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The advice I have to the hon. member is that 
the lay-offs at Cory are of an indefinite nature. Cory will continue 
to produce the white product. It’s a function of over-supply in the 
various products.

The other mines should not be affected, because what we’ve 
endeavoured to do to bring inventories under control is to allow 
. . . the other mines will continue to work at the 11 months with 
the usual one-month lay-off. The others, as I say, will continue 
to operate for the full normal 11 months. 
 
The other option was, given the inventories, was to reduce the 
activity at all mines to a straight nine months for the year. We 
elected, in light of the need for the white product, to continue in 
the manner that I’ve set out that the other mines should be able 
to operate year round with the one month, normal exception. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I believe this is a new question 
to the minister in charge of PCS in the light of his answer. The 
minister I’m sure will agree with me that with today’s 
confirmation the total number of jobs which have been lost to 
PCS since 1981 approximate about 1,000 now. 
 
In 1981 there was a work-force of approximately 2,267. Today, 
prior to the Cory announcement, the work-force was 1,466. If 
you add two more from Cory, that’s a loss of about 1,000 in this 
period. Certainly it’s a devastating number of Saskatoon 
families, 200 Saskatoon and area families. 
 
My question to the minister is this: why is it, Mr. Minister, that 
it seems to be the policy of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, and your government in particular, that in these 
kinds of circumstances the brunt of the lay-offs, the cut-backs to 
the productions, the job reductions, and the suffering to the 
families fall on those families who are associated with the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, as opposed to being more or less 
evenly distributed throughout the industry? Is it the policy of you 
government to make PCS, in effect, the doormat to the entire 
industry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I can take some offence in the 
fact that it was this government, over the objections of the New 
Democratic Party opposition, that managed to bring some 
stability back into the potash industry world-wide with our 
actions last summer. 
 
Secondly, we have made it abundantly clear to the people of this 
province that the potash corporation will not be run as a social 
welfare agency, as the NDP did. We are trying to, Mr. Speaker, 
and we did it fairly — and I know the press will support what I 
say — that when we undertook the down-sizing of the potash 
corporation last year, we did it management first, Mr. Speaker, 
and we had a significant reduction in management at the potash 
corporation. 
 
There are management employees affected by the lay-off, but to 
argue, as the Leader of the Opposition does, that the lay-offs 
should be 50-50 management and union members, when you 
have a great number of employees and relatively few 
management, Mr. Speaker, I think is unwise. Management, Mr. 
Speaker, there are management lay-offs.  



 
May 25, 1988 

 

1549 
 

Now certainly we regret the need for lay-offs. But in order to 
make sure that the potash corporation and the industry is to 
function, recognizing the world of realities of supply and demand 
in potash, we are simply bringing in our production and our 
inventories in line with the potash demands. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister 
in charge of PCS. He might not have heard me correctly, but I 
did not suggest that the lay-offs be 50-50 as between the 
employees and the management. 
 
However, the minister having made that suggestion, perhaps it 
might be a worthwhile comment for me to make that one good 
permanent lay-off for PCS to have is to lay off your buddy Paul 
Schoenhals, who apparently can’t operate with PCS. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — My question to you, Mr. Minister, directly 
relates to this legislation that you referred to last year, The Potash 
Resources Act and its regulations, and the stability that you say 
that Act apparently presented to the market. Stability for whom? 
The New Mexico producers and privates? 
 
My question to you is this, Mr. Minister: why is it that this Act 
has not been implemented to, in effect, make the pain equitable 
to all of the potash producers? Why is it that The Potash 
Resources Act that you tout as the saviour of the industry, but in 
effect has made Saskatchewan the doormat to the world industry, 
why is it that the Act has not been implemented, and the pain, if 
I may describe it that way, is applied equally or equitably to all 
of the potash producers in this province, and not just simply on 
the families of PCS and the communities in which PCS is 
located? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I believe that one of the other mines 
already announced some lay-offs a couple weeks back, and we 
will expect the normal lay-offs from the other mines during the 
course of the summer, which is traditional. 
 
So I suggest to the hon. member, to simply keep people working 
when there is a surplus of potash is something, of course, you in 
your capacity as former minister responsible for the potash 
corporation did advocate prior to the 1982 election, which helped 
balloon up the surplus as you kept people working even though 
you were simply building up inventories to keep people working 
during the election. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker — and I’m disappointed that the 
member from Quill Lakes is objecting, because the Lanigan mine 
is one of the beneficiaries, Mr. Speaker, under the changes we’ve 
made where we’re trying to maintain the operation of the other 
mines for 11 months of the year, at the request, I might add, of 
the people of Lanigan, Mr. Speaker, that they wanted to see some 
stability. We’ve tried to do this in a fair manner to deal with the 
surplus that we have and the traditional, normal maintenance 
shut-downs which take place during the 

course of the year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, one last question, a 
supplementary to the minister in charge of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. We’re talking here, Mr. Minister 
— at least I am — the issue of equity, and also at some other 
future date, the wisdom of that policy decision of yours on The 
Potash Resources Act. 
 
My question to you is this, sir: why is it that the private potash 
corporations outside of this country in New Mexico are thriving 
and not laying off people; why is it that the private potash 
companies in this province are thriving and not laying off people; 
why is it that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan alone has 
been asked to bear the brunt? My question to you is: where’s the 
leadership in that situation? Tell us what the policy behind that 
is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I do find it disappointing that the former 
minister responsible for the potash corporation is so ill-informed 
as it applies to the potash industry, because let me tell you that, 
one, the policy has had some success in terms of having the price 
increase for Saskatchewan potash nearly 100 per cent in the last 
year. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we have had record sales to China as a 
result of policies of this government and initiatives of this 
government. The sales to the United States are being well 
maintained, notwithstanding the significant price increase. And I 
have advised the hon. member that other potash mines will be 
doing their normal shutdowns, and I believe — I’m subject to 
correction — I believe Kalium already announced theirs a couple 
of weeks back. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we will try and keep the inventories in line with 
sales. We have had record sales. We are producing more, Mr. 
Speaker, but we will keep them in balance so that we are not 
having surplus inventories at great cost to the taxpayer. 
 
Again I’m disappointed that the member from Quill Lakes, when 
now that his town has stability of the mine operating for 11 
months of the year instead of nine, he sits here and objects to that, 
Mr. Speaker. And I’m sure the people in Lanigan are going to be 
terribly disappointed in the New Democratic Party position 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Drought Relief for Farmers 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Agriculture, and it deals with the 
drought problem that we have in Saskatchewan. Now we all 
know that last night there was a little bit of rain, Mr. Minister, 
and we’re all very thankful for that. But despite the marginal 
rainfall in some of the areas around the province, from your 
questions and answers that we’re getting out of you in days gone 
by we see you can’t deal with the problem. So maybe we can give 
you a couple of constructive ideas to take with you.  



 
May 25, 1988 

 

1550 
 

So, Mr. Minister, will one of your proposals be specifically to 
give farmers and ranchers a per head grant to cover the cost of 
transporting livestock and feed due to the drought conditions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that when we were 
going through Agriculture estimates I talked about that money 
would be going directly to farmers and not to truckers or not to 
people who were in the hay business, so that the farmer or 
rancher could be making the decision on his operation or her 
operation, so that in fact if they need to move feed or move water 
or move cattle, they should be doing that as they see fit because 
it will be retroactive. The money, whatever it is, a grant, a loan, 
a combination of the two, federal-provincial, will go to the 
farmers, go to the individual farmers directly as opposed to other 
people in the community. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Minister, my actual question was: will that 
grant be based on per head? Will it be dollars per head so that it’s 
a fair and equitable program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — It very well could be on a head basis . . . a 
per head basis, a cow-calf pair or a combination of various kinds 
of livestock. And you look at the combination of whether it’s 
sheep, goats, cattle, calves, horses, the combination of livestock 
that you could have, and a per head basis is something that the 
livestock producers have suggested may be appropriate, so that 
certainly could be part of the formula. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, here we go again. You 
know, we just can’t get any specific answers out of you, and the 
farmers and ranchers have been waiting for months to hear what 
you’re going to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — So let’s try another one. Mr. Minister, you said 
that the program would be retroactive. Could you tell me, Mr. 
Minister, what the effective starting date of your program will 
be? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the suggestion from the 
livestock industry and others is that you pick a point in the spring 
when you were about to turn your cattle out, and normally do, 
and find out that you don’t have the feed or you don’t have the 
water or the combination of those two, and you say from that 
point on when farmers and ranchers are making those decisions 
and if they have to move it, then you make it retroactive back to 
a point that is reasonable for them. And they’ve suggested that 
we look at that, like when the snow goes and when normally you 
move cattle on the land. 
 
I think we got talking about it here in estimates, where you had 
some suggestion that we move cattle into northern Saskatchewan 
several weeks ago, and clearly there wasn’t the grass; the snow 
was still on the trees; it was not a good time to do that. So you 
don’t want to move so early 

as to look foolish in parts of the country where you’re going to 
have to be opening up pastures that obviously aren’t ready 
because of ice and snow. 
 
So the farmers and ranchers have said to us, pick a time early 
enough in the spring so that you could make the logical decision. 
If you didn’t have the water or the feed, make the move because 
it will be retroactive to that point in time. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. I’d like to ask 
the hon. member to please direct his questions through the 
Speaker, and indicate if they’re new questions, supplementaries. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Yes, certainly, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is again to the Minister of Agriculture, who has been 
unable to answer the last two questions. And I will say to him the 
reason that we were bringing up this matter in estimates is that 
we want farmers and ranchers to know ahead of time what’s 
going to happen, and they still don’t know. That’s why we’re 
suggesting getting something in place for moving cattle. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, we assume that you will be covering the costs 
of fencing and making Crown land available for grazing. Mr. 
Minister, my question to you is: will you also be adjusting crop 
insurance so that we could write off fall crops that are not of 
much value for grain and allow that for grazing? And would it 
also be possible to write off possibly spring crops at a later date 
for grazing if they are not eligible for grain? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, in my conversations with 
the minister of the wheat board, and talking to federal cabinet 
ministers and in conjunction with their own cabinet, I believe that 
the minister of crop insurance will be making a ministerial 
statement today, or an announcement with respect to crop 
insurance as it applies to fall commodities like winter wheat and 
rye, so that we can accommodate the feeding patterns of 
individuals that are facing obviously a crop that is probably not 
going to make it in terms of going to seed but could be used for 
feed, and not to be jeopardized or penalized in crop insurance. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier, 
the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister 
of Agriculture, and I guess that I would ask first of all that the 
minister thank the member from Humboldt for writing the 
drought program for the Conservatives caucus because there’s 
nothing coming from over there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, you’re flying to Ottawa 
today to meet with your provincial counterparts and the federal 
Minister of Agriculture. Now you remember back   



 
May 25, 1988 

 

1551 
 

in 1985 when we had a similar drought, not the extreme that it is 
today — it’s a much bigger area that we’re dealing with — and 
at that time you and your federal counterpart promised a 
long-term program for drought so that never again would we 
have to get into this ad hoc development of programs for 
agriculture when we had a drought like this. I wonder if we can 
expect, tomorrow, an announcement as to what the long-term 
plan has been, seeing you’ve had three years to develop the 
program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, as a result of our 
conversations and the national agriculture strategy, we have put 
in a mechanism that triggers crop insurance payments to be 
increased if you have back-to-back dry situations. 
 
What we’re dealing with now is the livestock, and that is very 
specific that when you need water for livestock, that you can’t be 
waiting for the drought mechanism to set into place through crop 
insurance. So in the national agriculture strategy, we have a 
kicker that goes into place immediately with respect to the crop 
insurance payments that can be increased to farmers in a 
designated area as a result of an emergency. 
 
Now what we’re looking at is the ability to deal with livestock 
which may need to be moved or may need feed or may need 
water, or the combination thereof. And certainly the co-operation 
between the prairie provinces and the federal government is such 
that we’ll be able to provide that kind of mechanism in the very 
near future. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, supplement to the minister, 
the only kicker that farmers are talking about is kicking this 
government out and getting one that will get on with their 
programs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — What I want to say to you, Mr. Minister, is 
that while you’re in Ottawa dealing with your federal 
counterpart, I’m sure you’ll be seeing the Prime Minister. And 
it’s clear now, it’s clear now that there is no long-term plan, and 
I wonder, if there’s none announced tomorrow, will you then be 
asking the Prime Minister for the resignation of Mr. Wise, 
because he’s failed miserably the farmers in Saskatchewan and 
across western Canada? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the hon. 
member is aware of the fact that the Prime Minister is in Europe 
meeting with the various heads of state, putting together an 
agriculture policy with respect to trade so that when they have 
the summit in Toronto, they will be able to deal with some of the 
long-run problems associated with surpluses and low prices for 
farmers. 
 
And in fact, the Prime Minister is one of the first people in the 
developed world, in the free world, to be providing that kind of 
leadership. I congratulate him for making those changes and 
having those initiatives, both in terms of less subsidy and less 
protectionism and freer trade and freer markets.

All of those are going to be very good for people in agriculture, 
and that’s one of the reasons that western Canadian premiers 
support those kinds of efforts. I will not be able to meet with the 
Prime Minister because I believe he’s still overseas. 
 
And with respect to the crop insurance mechanism, I’ve advised 
you that we have now an emergency system that’s there, and as 
it kicks into the crop insurance it allows you to pay out more. 
 
What we’re dealing with now is livestock, not crop insurance, 
and there is a difference. I mean the crop insurance . . . 
(inaudible) . . . and the livestock. So that we can modify crop 
insurance, but that does not keep the livestock sector alive 
because most people, most people when they fill out their crop 
insurance, they’re not looking at the livestock industry. They’re 
in the grain business. And we know that this is a livestock 
problem in particular. 
 
And I would also point out to the hon. member, in 1985 across 
southern Saskatchewan there was a difficult drought situation. 
Now we find that there’s rain, as you pointed out, or somebody 
did, last night. There’s rain in the south-eastern part of the 
province. It’s primarily in the south-west, and that’s what we 
want to focus on, and the beef herds in the south-west corner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Final supplement to the Premier. It’s clear 
now, Mr. Premier, that as the minister of Agriculture you’ve 
failed the farmers on their debt problems over the last six years. 
You’ve failed them now, once again, on the drought problem. 
 
I ask you: when will you come to the point where you develop 
some long-term strategy for farmers in this province so they don’t 
have to wait for political expediency at election time to get results 
from you people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well I can only say, Mr. Speaker, with the 
greatest respect to my hon. colleague that the policies that we 
have designed in co-operation with agriculture have been very 
well received in our province by rural people, in Manitoba by 
rural people, in Alberta by rural people. Clearly the NDP’s 
policies are not well accepted across rural Canada and certainly 
not rural Saskatchewan, or in Manitoba, or in Alberta. 
 
I mean, you lost your seat in Shaunavon constituency because of 
agriculture policies. I will grant you that you can come back into 
Elphinstone and you might be able to be elected there, but the 
NDP agriculture policies are clearly not well respected and you 
know it. You’re trying pretty hard, but you look like you’re 
trying, and that’s your problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, we have been talking   



 
May 25, 1988 

 

1552 
 

mostly about the livestock industry in terms of the drought 
situation in the province, but I want to assure you that many grain 
farmers are also very concerned about the impending drought 
that could be there, in fact last month there were some areas in 
the province that only had 25 per cent chance of getting enough 
moisture by the end of this month to have a crop for this current 
year. And many areas are facing the worst drought in the history 
of the province — there’s no question about that. 
 
And what I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, through you, Mr. 
Speaker, is: what plans do you have in store for the grain 
producers to protect them from the very serious threat of 
drought? And if you don’t have an answer to that, rather than 
asking the federal Minister of Agriculture to resign, maybe we 
should ask the provincial Minister of Agriculture to resign so we 
have a full-time Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — It seems, Mr. Speaker, that they have to 
resort . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps what I 
could do is I could send over to the hon. member the 
communiqués published by the western premiers when we 
reviewed the agriculture situation, talked about soil erosion and 
money to prevent that, crop insurance, deficiency payments to 
back up the farmers, make sure that we deal with the drought 
situation, and meet federally with our counterparts as well as 
across the West — a combination of packages, Mr. Speaker, that 
we believe that have helped us a great deal. 
 
And we will continue to be very, very sensitive to the needs of 
the farmers, and particularly, not only at the local level so that we 
provide money for people to cope with difficult situations, but at 
the international level, Mr. Speaker, where in fact we can see the 
prices come up as a result of policies that obviously the NDP 
don’t understand and they don’t want to promote. 
 
They don’t want to trade; they’d rather have subsidies and 
protectionism. We don’t think that’s going to help farmers, Mr. 
Speaker. And our policies locally, nationally, and internationally 
with respect to food and agriculture have been well received 
across western Canada and indeed across the country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. If the 
main amigos in the province of Saskatchewan can’t answer the 
agricultural questions, I’d like to turn to the Minister of Rural 
Development. 
 
And very straight and to the point, I was wondering if the 
minister will assure us that any crops with less than a seven 
bushel per acre harvest this year would be considered as write off 
or zero production, and will the minister give us that reassurance 
here this afternoon? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Speaker, first of all the regulations and 
the legislation that we work under under crop insurance were 
drafted both at a federal and provincial level, and it’s across 
Canada. The percentage of bushels per acre, or the bushels per 
acre that are used, are set out for across Canada standards. Right 
now I believe it’s five bushels and prorated down to two. 
 
In regards to fall rye and winter wheat, I’ll be making an 
announcement very shortly. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 
 

Changes to Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Policy 
 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Speaker, the Government of 
Saskatchewan has been working hard to respond in an effective 
and meaningful way to the farm producers adversely affected by 
drought conditions which exist throughout the south-west and 
mid-west part of Saskatchewan. 
 
Today I would like to announce that effective immediately, the 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation will be implementing 
the new measures to assist cattle producers facing increasingly 
difficult feed shortages. Farmers affected by drought conditions 
and the resulting shortages of feed will be able to use fall seeded 
rye and winter wheat crops as fodder until June 10 while still 
remaining with the crop insurance program. 
 
This represents a significant change to existing policy and 
procedures which during normal growing conditions would not 
allow producers to graze fall rye or winter wheat and retain their 
crop insurance coverage. This change applies to all winter wheat 
crops which can be utilized for feed, and affects grain farmers 
and cattle producers. 
 
Because the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation 
recognized that not all farm and cattle situations affected by the 
drought are identical, we have built in a number of options which 
will give producers the ability to identify and use the one which 
represents their best interest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s three options which include, one, if a farmer 
has established fall rye or winter wheat crop and he wishes to use 
it as feed, we will allow them the opportunity to: (a) leave the 
crop and harvest the grain as was intended; (b) declare the field 
to be used for fodder, cancel your insurance and be refunded the 
uninsured portion of the premium; or © declare the field to be 
used for fodder and retain the crop insurance coverage. In this 
case they’ll pay the premium. 
 
Other important information farmers should be aware of relating 
to this program are, one, should a farmer choose to use his fall 
rye or winter wheat for fodder and retain coverage after June 10, 
check areas or uncut strips must be left for adjustment appraisals. 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, you’ll be able to use that area as a 
crop or a fodder for his cattle until June 10, then he makes up his 
mind what he wants to do with it. Also if a farmer chooses this 
option, the premium will be paid. 
 
Second, should a farmer choose to use the crop for fodder   



 
May 25, 1988 

 

1553 
 

and cancel the insurance, then a partial premium will be charged 
for the risk carried over the winter. 
 
And third, it is vital that the farmer wishing to exercise any of the 
options available under this program, they must advise their local 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation customer service 
office of their intentions and that an adjustment of the fields 
should take place prior to the use of the field. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan and the 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation will continue to 
monitor the drought conditions that exist within our province so 
that identification of special enhancements or requirements may 
be made and implemented to assist farm producers. We’re 
committed to the agriculture community and we’ll work hard to 
assist farm producers as they work to manage their operations 
while the drought conditions persist. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m glad to see that after weeks and weeks of this side of the 
House begging the government to come to make some decisions 
on agriculture and the drought situation, at least they’ve 
attempted to put something forward. I would hope that this is just 
the beginning, Mr. Speaker, of developing a crop insurance 
corporation that will respond to the severe conditions that we face 
in this province from year to year, whether it be drought or 
insects or other disease. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — I would also hope that the minister would take 
into consideration, despite the fact that he continually says that 
the crop insurance can’t be adjusted because it’s a federal-
provincial program. Well I say that’s a mere technicality when 
farmers in this province are suffering, are suffering from drought 
conditions. And I say if the government wants to make those 
adjustments, they can make those adjustments along with their 
federal counterparts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — I would also just like to again . . . as the member 
from North Battleford suggested that crops producing less than 
seven bushels an acre be written off as zero production for 
farmers to enable them to at least cover some of their costs. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to conclude by saying that we will 
be continuing . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. I’m sure many hon. member are 
having difficulty hearing the member from Humboldt, and I’d 
like to ask you to allow him to speak. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to conclude by saying 
that we on this side of the House will be continuing in the days 
to come to press the government to implement programs 
immediately and not wait until farmers are on their knees and 
then do something so it makes them feel better.

And I think . . . and we’ll continue to do that, and I just hope that 
this government has enough responsibility and enough wisdom 
to listen to us and continue to develop good programs in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 33 — An Act respecting the Registration of 
Leafcutter Beekeepers 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting the Registration of Leafcutter Beekeepers. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 34 — An Act to promote Regulatory Reform in 
Saskatchewan by repealing Certain Obsolete Statutes 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to promote Regulatory Reform in Saskatchewan by repealing 
Certain Obsolete Statutes. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 35 — An Act to Amend The Jury Act, 1981 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 
to amend The Jury Act, 1981. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill ordered 
to be referred to the Standing Committee on Non-Controversial 
Bills. 
 

Bill No. 36 — An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley 
Authority Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 
a Bill to amend The Meewasin Valley Authority Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 37 — An Act to provide for Security for 
Saskatchewan Family Farms 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave of this 
Assembly to introduce an Act providing for the Security of 
Saskatchewan Family Farms, ask for that leave. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I beg to inform the Assembly that His 
Honour the Administrator, having been informed of the subject 
matter of the Bill, recommends that it be considered in the 
Assembly. And I move that a Bill, An Act to provide for Security 
for Saskatchewan Family   



 
May 25, 1988 

 

1554 
 

Farms, be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at 
the next sitting. 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 
 

Drought Conditions in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. And before orders of 
the day I rise pursuant to rule 17 of this Assembly to seek leave 
to move that a matter of urgent public importance now be given 
priority of debate. In accordance with the rules, I’ve provided 
written notice to the Clerk of the Assembly this morning, and I 
believe that the government has also been advised. 
 
I will just take a moment, Mr. Speaker, to state the issue, and that 
is the drought crisis facing Saskatchewan today. More 
specifically, it is urgent and pressing need for the Government of 
Saskatchewan and Canada to take concrete, positive action to 
address the issue and to provide immediate assistance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that all members of the Assembly will agree 
that this is indeed a matter of grave public importance. Livestock 
is threatened, farmers are threatened, communities are being 
threatened, and I believe that it is no exaggeration, Mr. Speaker, 
to say that the agriculture economy of Saskatchewan is being 
threatened. 
 
I also respectfully submit, Mr. Speaker, that this matter is urgent. 
I am aware of previous rulings in this Assembly where it was 
ruled that a matter was not of sufficient urgency to warrant the 
immediate setting aside of other business in order to permit 
consideration of an issue. Today, however, consideration of the 
drought crisis facing Saskatchewan and the pressing need for 
immediate action is indeed urgent. Livestock producers know it, 
rural communities know it, and just yesterday the Assembly was 
advised of the hastily convened federal-provincial meeting to be 
held in Ottawa tomorrow. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, and with all due respect, I urge you to 
acknowledge the pressing urgency of this matter. Question 
period provides only a brief opportunity to seek information from 
government ministers. This urgent issue, Mr. Speaker, warrants 
the substantive consideration of the Assembly today. 
 
Therefore I seek leave, Mr. Speaker, to move a motion along the 
following lines: 
 

That the need for the Government of Saskatchewan and 
Canada to implement immediate measures to assist 
Saskatchewan farmers and communities facing crisis 
conditions caused by drought, now be given priority of 
debate. 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — A notice regarding this matter, proposed for 
priority of debate, was received in the Clerk’s office at 

11:36 a.m. today, for which I thank the hon. member. 
 
I refer all members to rule 17(6) which states that the matter 
proposed for an urgent debate must be in order and of urgent 
public importance. I rule that while this matter is of substantial 
public importance, it is one of a continuing nature. I further rule 
that there are adequate opportunities within the normal 
framework of the parliamentary procedure to debate this issue, 
and thus the request to set aside all the other business of the 
Assembly today is denied. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Education 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, the critic for K to 12 education 
may have a few comments to make yet, or a few questions, but 
today we will be spending, I think, most of the afternoon dealing 
with post-secondary matters. I want to start out by asking a series 
of questions about concerns that have been brought to my 
attention with respect to private vocational schools in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, as you well know, things have changed 
considerably in the private vocational schools situation. These 
changes may have been stimulated by various causes. I think one 
of the causes seems to be, or impetuses was because the Canadian 
job strategy . . . there was some money being made available, 
more money being made available for post-secondary training, 
and as a result we’ve had a lot of new private vocational schools 
established, some of which are in direct competition with the 
technical institutes. 
 
And there’s really no problem with the concept on my part and 
the part of people on our side, this side of the House, with the 
concept of private vocational schools. We’ve always had several 
in the province. I think that the numbers have doubled or perhaps 
increased more than that lately. The schools that were here had 
established good reputations and are quite interested in 
maintaining their good reputations. 
 
I know that I’ve had family members that have attended some — 
one at least, or two of the private vocational schools in the 
province, and they had reported from the schools that they really 
appreciated the program. They thought the quality of the program 
was quite good. However, in recent times, I’ve found that the 
reports I’ve been getting from constituents and a lot of people 
that I know and students who have gone there the reports have 
changed somewhat. 
 
And the other remarks that I will be dealing with today with 
respect to the problem areas, I want to at first, Mr. Minister, 
indicate that it is not my intention and I certainly   



 
May 25, 1988 

 

1555 
 

don’t think it would be yours in our discussion of this to tar all 
the private schools with the one brush, with the bad brush, 
because they are not deserving of that. But there is some element, 
there is some elements in the private schools that I think should 
be discussed, need to be discussed because there is some 
responsibility on the part of your government to deal with some 
of the complaints. 
 
Now let me get a little more specific with the complaints and the 
type of complaints that I’ve heard. They deal primarily with the 
quality of the programs and the quality of the instruction that 
some of the students have experienced, or the lack of quality 
compared to what the students have expected. Students may be 
applying to go to the technical institutes and they find that there’s 
a waiting list. They’ll see an ad for one of the private vocational 
schools, they’ll answer the ad, they’ll get a good sell job. 
Remember, the people are there because they’re into it to make a 
profit. 
 
And when the students enrol, they are enthusiastic at first, and in 
several cases — and I repeat again, not in the majority of cases 
but in too many cases — they’ve found that the quality of the 
program has been lacking. It has been due to, in most cases, 
inexperience on the part of the instructors, or the situation has 
been where the principals or the operators of the schools have 
hired people that are unqualified — either unqualified because 
they have not had any training in teaching or any training in 
dealing with an adult teaching situation, or in some cases not 
even being expert in the field. 
 
Now our people that have come out of high school or out of the 
technical institutes are used to and expect, and I think have a right 
to expect quality instruction, because we’ve developed a scheme 
and a system in Saskatchewan where four years is a minimum for 
any teacher — goes out into the teaching field now, and the 
people that are teaching in our technical schools and the 
universities usually have more than that in works of training. 
 
The technical schools and the institutes and the public school 
system all pay wages which are commensurate with the training. 
People that go to the private vocational schools, which get jobs 
at the private vocational schools, don’t have that kind of wage 
protection, and as a result they are not always able to attract the 
top-notch instructors. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, is: have you received complaints or 
inquiries or concerns of this type, and as a result of those 
concerns, what is it that you are doing about it? 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member, Mr. Deputy 
Chairman, raised some questions about complaints regarding 
private vocational school operations over this past year, and 
certainly I’ve had some raised with me — and I view them as 
serious. 
 
For example, we’ve had, relative to the quality of training, I 
think, six student groups raised that issue, eight on an individual 
basis. Relative to misrepresentation of programs we had a group 
of six and a group of four, and as 

well, four individuals raised that issue with us. Relative to 
credits, marks, and schedules, we had four individuals. 
Unprofessional conduct, a couple of individuals raised that with 
us. Fee refunds, four individuals; and relative to advertising, 
three individuals. So we have had certainly some complaints. 
 
I recall, as well, meeting with operators of these schools — or at 
least many of them — probably about a year or a little over a year 
ago now. They are cognizant of the fact themselves that they 
want to have a high standard and maintain a high standard. They 
too are concerned about fly-by-night operators, if you like, 
damaging their reputation collectively, when indeed many of 
these schools enjoy a fine reputation. But they’re worried about 
all of their reputations being damaged because of a few. 
 
But because I do take this matter seriously, a number of 
initiatives will be under way, are under way, and will be under 
way over the next year. 
 
First of all, for the member’s information, all complaints that we 
get are followed up by the department. As well, an advisory 
committee, including members of the department and school 
operators, will be established to examine such things as needed 
revisions to the Act and regulations, student grievance 
procedures, in-service needs, quality assurance, level of bonding. 
And specifically, I would see the Act and the regulations being 
reviewed to ensure that the department’s role meets the needs of 
the 1990s. 
 
As well, we’ll be making available additional resources within 
the department to increase the vigilance, if you like, of the private 
vocational schools. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, I acknowledge the fact that any 
complaints that have gone to your department have been 
followed up, because I’ve had the opportunity in a couple of 
cases to follow up myself, and I’ve had your staff down, and I’m 
appreciative of that. 
 
The concern that I have here now is the approach that you take 
as a result of the information that we now have at hand, and the 
nature of the complaints, the approaches you’re going to take 
over this next half year or year in order to cut off the complaints 
at the pass. That is, I feel strongly that a lot of the cases where 
students or parents have had to come and say to their MLA or 
directly to the department, that there may have been some other 
way of getting the complaints addressed. 
 
So I want to ask you a couple of specific questions about how 
you’re going to handle this. Are you calling or have you 
appointed any kind of a committee that would be representative 
of the private vocational schools for advice on this matter, or for 
consultation as to how the Act or the regulations might be 
changed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — An advisory committee will be 
established with departmental representation, and operators of 
the private vocational schools represented as well. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Could you give me an indication of when you 
would expect this advisory committee to be   



 
May 25, 1988 

 

1556 
 

appointed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I would say, probably within the next 
60 to 90 days at the outset. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — In the intervening time — now this is 
probably going to take, I would expect, another half a year at least 
or maybe a year until we come up with a new Act and new 
regulations — as I peruse the existing Act and regulations, I 
notice that there really is quite a lot in the Act that gives a 
minister quite a lot of power that I’m wondering whether you’ve 
been using, Mr. Minister. 
 
For example, with respect to the qualifications of an instructor. 
In article 11 of the existing Act it says: 
 

The minister or any person authorized by him may, at any 
time during the business hours of a private vocational 
school, enter and inspect: 
(a) the school; 
(b) the premises (in or on which the school is operated); 
(c) the equipment, and the method of instruction (used in) 
the school; 

 
Would you consider having a regular inspection system set up in 
the interim to try it out to see if that would work? You know that 
our public school systems have a regular inspector system. I’m 
not sure if inspector is the right kind of word. It sometimes is not 
regarded by professionals as the way to go. They would look 
maybe at something, at some type of a collegial supervision, but 
some type of a supervisory practice where this would be held on 
a regular basis in the interim until we’ve got regulations in place 
. . . pardon me, until you have new rules and regulations in place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well as I mentioned earlier, we will be 
making available in the department resources to increase the 
level of support and of vigilance. 
 
I might share a bit of background with the hon. member that 
might give us some indication as to why at least perceptibly we 
have more complaints, and that is that over the last six years the 
number of schools increased about two and half times. It’s gone 
from 16 to 40, and the number of students from approximately 
1,600 to 4,500. 
 
And perhaps if there’s a straight-line relationship between 
complaints and numbers, if you’ve got a 250 per cent increase in 
the students there and in the number of schools, one might expect 
that you would generate more complaints. That doesn’t mean to 
say one ought to tolerate them if they’re legitimate complaints. 
And to that end, because we’ve seen this increase, we’ll be 
shoring up our side in the department over this next year, at the 
same time as this advisory council looks at Act revisions, 
in-service needs, quality control, if you like, and those kinds of 
issues. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — One of the powers that is given to a minister 
here is: 
 

Where, as the result of the inspection of a private vocational 
school, (the minister ) or upon (this is section 12) the 
minister is satisfied that . . .  

 

Section 12(b) refers to prescribing the accommodation and 
equipment necessary for private vocational schools, and refers to 
the means of instruction. 
 
One of the complaints that I’ve had brought to my attention is 
that the facilities in these places are quite often crowded and 
substandard, particularly when compared to the technical 
institutes, because that’s really the basis of comparison; that 
some cases are dealing with equipment where the students have 
to wait in line for a long time to be able to use some of the 
equipment, and in other case where the class-rooms are kind of 
crowded into a commercial space in the downtown area. Now the 
downtown area is usually a good feature, but the crowdedness of 
the spaces, because they are not built for that particular reason, 
sometimes causes problems. 
 
So the question I’m asking: is there some way, or have you got 
any kind of regulations in place, or will you be contemplating 
regulations about the spaces, the kind of spaces and equipment 
needed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well as in the past and as is present 
practice, the fire and the health department do their inspections, 
and I believe they do them annually. Over and above that, this 
past year we as well are spot checking the schools. About 
three-quarters of them have been done to date, and as well, all the 
teachers’ names and their resumes are forwarded to the 
department for our review and approval. So if you’re asking me 
if we’re being more vigilant in increasing our inspection, if you 
like, the answer would be yes. And it’s over and above the fire 
and hell stuff that have always gone, and it’s the spot checking 
and filing resumes and those kinds of things. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — One thing that I think would be very helpful 
is if there was some type of a standard set up for both space and 
qualifications. 
 
See, one of the difficulties when you’re operating a business for 
profit is that if your competition can hire a space cheaper or a 
person cheaper, then of course he’s got the competitive monetary 
advantage. The unfortunate part about this, if this I done 
repeatedly — and this is what the reputable operators don’t like 
to see — if this is done repeatedly, then it lowers the quality of 
education the student receives. 
 
I think that that’s where the department should come in; that there 
should be a certain standard in terms of square feet per person, 
per student; or there should be, perhaps, a minimum standard of 
qualification, as well, set for the instructors. 
 
I know that by doing your monitoring, you will . . . it’ll put 
people on their toes for a minute, and it’ll also give you the 
advantage, I guess, of having the data to go by as to what kind of 
qualifications people have. 
 
But if there were some way of setting a minimum qualification 
for instructors, particularly in some of the areas that are taught in 
technical institutes, so that — because there you’ve got a good 
comparison. Perhaps if a new field comes in, it’s difficult to get 
a qualification in place immediately.  



 
May 25, 1988 

 

1557 
 

But I could see that a standardization of qualifications and space 
would go a long way. And I think that the institutes, that the 
private vocational schools would like it if it was standardized so 
that they wouldn’t feel that they would be undercut by somebody 
just hiring some body off the street, to give them a text book and 
say, here, go and teach this, or somebody in some cases where 
they’ve actually been hired . . . have hired people who’ve just 
graduated from their courses without any practical experience. 
But because they were nice people and because the instructors 
. . . the schools needed somebody; they would hire them 
immediately. And of course it’s the entire . . . and once again I 
would mention that this is not a general practice, and I don’t want 
to give the impression that the entire works is being tarred here, 
but the entire works tends to get tarred if they’re not protected 
from these individual cases. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well just to pick up on your last points 
first, relative to the qualifications of instructors, we have an 
approval process now; there are some qualifications now. Over 
and above that, what we would want to discuss with the operators 
is how continuing education needs of their instructors, in-service 
training, that kind of thing, so they too can stay current. 
 
Getting back to the initial part of your question, when I met with 
the operators, I sensed very much on their part a genuine 
willingness amongst these reputable operators to run schools 
with high standards. They know that in the long haul it is only 
their reputation and track record which will continue to bring 
students into their facilities. So they no more want to either be, 
or be seen to be, fly-by-night operators. 
 
(1515) 
 
And my preferred approach in terms of further standards and/or 
new measures that we might take, or changes to the Act and 
regulations and so forth, my preferred would be to work with 
them because I think their goals are the same as our goals — work 
with them to design a new Act and anything else that might make 
sense. That would be my preferred choice, as opposed to 
unilaterally dictating something. I suppose if I don’t see a 
genuine co-operative approach and some headway being made, 
then I might change my mind. But at this very moment, because 
I sense very much a genuine desire on their part, that would be 
my preferred approach, at least initially. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I would think, Mr. Minister, that I would 
certainly welcome you using, in your department, using a 
co-operative approach with the folks and the operators. I think 
that from the discussions I’ve had with several of the operators, 
that that would go over well. 
 
I want to bring to your attention also another aspect of the private 
vocational schools that I haven’t discussed so far, and that is 
some of the curriculum that they’re offering themselves. 
 
Now what happens here is you get an independent operator and 
the operator sometimes feels, well look, here’s a course in, let’s 
say, travel and tourism, because that’s one that the several used, 
that he thinks he may be 

able to sell to people, to students or prospective students because 
it may not be offered any place else. And it’s consistent with our 
concept of a sort of a mixed economy where a person should be 
able to offer a course of any sort if he can find the students to 
take it. 
 
But one of the difficulties with this particular course was that the 
students were placed in so much of what I would call a “buyer 
beware” situation. Because I’ve had several graduates indicate to 
me that after having taken the course, or relatives of graduates 
saying that after they’ve taken the course, they’ve gone and 
applied for jobs. And whereas somehow they had fixed in their 
minds that this thing was going to get them a job, or get them at 
least closer to a job, they’d go to a travel agency and virtually be 
laughed at. 
 
So in this particular case . . . or to go to a hotel management, or 
a hotel operator, and once again they’d be laughed at and told, 
well if you really want to get into this, you should have gone 
through a different route. 
 
And so another thing that’s really needed here is to be able to 
deal with a situation where the students, or the prospective 
students, are not put into so much of a “buyer beware” situation. 
At least when they come to a technical institute we’ve got the 
research staff at the technical institutes to be able to advise 
students of what the job capabilities are, or availability is. 
 
At least they can say, well, 70 per cent of our last set of grads got 
a job, or 40 per cent, or whatever the number happens to be. But 
there’s some type of a follow-up agency that need to be put into 
place in co-operation with these private vocational schools so 
that students — and that’s I guess on whose behalf we are really 
here — can feel relatively sure that they’re not in a buyer beware 
situation as to the schools that are licensed here in Saskatchewan. 
There’s not much we can do of course about those that are 
correspondence schools sent in from out of province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well relative to travel agents, that has 
been a particular problem area, not just in Saskatchewan, I’m 
advised, but across the entire country. And you say, young 
people, students who are spending some considerable time and 
money taking that course and then finding out that it wasn’t what 
travel agents wanted, or in very real terms the jobs weren’t there, 
and that’s to nobody’s . . . it’s not to the school’s benefit nor is it, 
certainly, to the student’s benefit. 
 
And because everybody recognized there was a problem there, 
meetings have been held with the national association of travel 
agents to find out what indeed it was that they required of their 
employees, what a legitimate and right and proper curriculum 
would look like. And I’m advised that that meeting was 
productive and that now there is ongoing work with the three 
schools in Saskatchewan to put that new curriculum or modified 
curriculum in place. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would imagine 
that you’re quite aware of the fact that there are several students 
who, as result of some of their experiences, have actually taken 
or are in the process of   



 
May 25, 1988 

 

1558 
 

taking one of the vocational schools to court. And also what I 
want to do here, just in closing before I turn this over to my 
colleague from Moose Jaw North, is to put on record just a couple 
of the complaints that some of the students have had so that you 
would have it for your records, and as you go into committee, the 
committee will also be able to put it into for their own purposes. 
 
I have listed some of the things that students have brought, and I 
would like to read them into the record at this time. Their 
complaints, including: the failure to provide the total number of 
course hours that they were advised; that the course was not 
taught by instructors qualified to teach; that much of the course 
content set out in a program outline was not covered; on some 
occasions — in this case it says on numerous occasions — 
students were required to teach themselves; the instructor did not 
have sufficient knowledge to respond to proper questions that 
were put to them by the students; in some cases the preparation 
of classes and organization of the course was not properly 
undertaken. 
 
See, Mr. Minister, we talked about in generalities. These are the 
specifics that the students are indicating. In some cases class time 
was wasted in discussing subjects irrelevant to the duties or to 
the class content. Now this is particularly galling to students 
when they’re paying in the vicinity of 3 to $4,000 a year tuition. 
Specifically, the instruction reasonably necessary to the 
performance of some of the duties of travel counsellor was not 
given. 
 
In some cases classes were dismissed early because they felt . . . 
because the instructors didn’t have their lessons prepared so 
they’d go for their 20 minutes, or whatever, and then leave. As 
the case that you’ve indicated, the travel counsellor course was 
not certified with the Canadian Institutes of Travel Counsellors, 
and that no effort to assist in making . . . in giving suitable 
employment after the instruction was given, where as I guess 
some of the students must have had the feeling that it should be 
given. 
 
Now I just put those things down on record, Mr. Minister, for 
your information, and I would pass this over to my colleague 
from Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, I just have a few very short and concise questions which 
I would like to present to you, and I would anticipate that your 
responses would be equally brief and to the point, Mr. Minister. 
 
The questions which I’d like to raise with you relate to the issue 
of the representation for purposes of bargaining a collective 
agreement for instructors of the Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Sciences and Technology. 
 
Mr. Minister, you will be aware of course that when you 
presented the Bill to this Assembly last year bringing into place 
the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology, 
that at that time there was a clause in the Bill that overrode The 
Trade Union Act and in effect discontinued the collective 
representation of employees of all the technical institutes who 
were to come under umbrella of Saskatchewan Institute of Allied 
Science and Technology.

You’ll be aware that subsequent to that then, Mr. Minister, that 
there were organizational efforts by a couple of bodies to 
represent employees, and subsequently — I believe without 
opposition — the Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union 
was chosen to select the office and clerical employees of SIAST. 
 
However, my questions today art specifically related to the 
procedures that impact on instructors, academic instructors who 
were employed by SIAST. And you will be aware, Mr. Minister, 
that there were two bodies who sought to represent academic 
instructors and made representation to the Labour Relations 
Board, and subsequently the Labour Relations Board determined 
that a vote should be held, and democratically the instructors of 
SIAST selected the Saskatchewan Government Employees’ 
Union as their bargaining agent to represent them for purposes of 
collective agreement. 
 
My questions to you, Mr. Minister, then, in the context of that 
history, have to do with the current impacts of that decision. 
 
I wish to ask you first of all, Mr. Minister, whether it is a 
condition of employment that all SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute 
of Applied Science and Technology) instructors be members of 
SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union); and 
secondly, whether all employees are required to pay union dues 
to SGEU? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As I understand it, all are paying union 
dues and all are in the union. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And if you could just clarify for me, Mr. Minister, 
my question was whether the union membership is a condition of 
employment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, it is. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Further to that then, Mr. Minister — and I 
appreciate the brevity of your response, and it wasn’t all that 
painful, Mr. Minister — I would ask: in order to be a member of 
SGEU adult education branch no. 24, must each instructor then 
sign an SGEU membership card? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As I understand it, yes. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Let me ask 
in addition to that, then: what action must SIAST take if an 
employee does not want to be a member of SGEU? 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — It’s not SIAST that would do 
something, as I understand it, it’s the employee. All members 
must belong, but if they wish not to belong for religious reasons, 
then they must apply to the Labour Relations Board. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And it’s your view, Mr. Minister, that that is the 
only exception which would permit an employee not to be a 
member, a dues-paying member of SGEU? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — That’s the only one that we’re   



 
May 25, 1988 

 

1559 
 

aware of, and I think it’s probably important because this 
question and one other was relative to the SGEU policy. I 
wouldn’t want to ever be construed as deciding SGEU policy as 
the Minister of Education. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think you can rest assured 
that there are a whole lot of folks who would not construe you as 
deciding SGEU policy. 
 
Mr. Minister, let me ask you as well whether all SIAST 
employees must sign specimen cards authorizing employee 
deductions of union fees and also whether . . . will the employer, 
will SIAST advise SIAST employees that they must sign those 
authorization cards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, all employees must sign a card for 
their deductions, but if you’re asking if it’s up to SIAST to ensure 
that that’s completed or whatever, it’s not; it’s up to the union 
organization. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, then will you please advise me as 
to whether SIAST will provide all employees with authorization 
cards for union deduction fees — for deductions of union fees, I 
should say — and would you also advise me as to by what time 
all employees will receive those cards from SIAST? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’m advised that this isn’t the 
employer’s responsibility. But having said that, we have 
apparently assisted in the distribution of them, but it’s not the 
employer’s responsibility, as I understand it. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, then will you tell me whether the 
employer will advise the employees of SIAST that a failure to 
sign authorization cards, as a matter of fact would place their 
employment at risk and result in job termination? And also would 
you advise me, Mr. Minister, at what point that would occur? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As I understand it, the policy is that the 
cards have to be signed within 30 days of the commencement of 
employment. But it’s not our responsibility, it’s the union 
responsibility. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, if an employee refused to sign the 
authorization card in that set of circumstances, is there a point at 
which the employer would terminate the employment of that 
instructor, or would the employer, SIAST, require that that card 
be signed as a condition of continued employment? 
 
I hope I didn’t hear you say that if an employee refuses to sign 
the authorization card for deduction of union dues, and does that 
indefinitely, that that would be acceptable to the employer, to 
SIAST. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — It’s a condition of employment, so 
presumably, if the condition wasn’t filled, they wouldn’t stayed 
employed. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — And let me repeat the question. Maybe I’ll just 
make it a little shorter, Mr. Minister. I do appreciate that this 
exchange is one of brief questions, to the point, and the answer 
is very similar . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Very unusual.

Mr. Hagel: — This is as new style, a new characteristic of these 
estimates that perhaps may become precedent setting, who 
knows? 
 
Mr. Minister, let me ask you: is there a point at which — and I 
repeat the question very simply — is there a point at which, if an 
employee refused to sign that authorization card, that SIAST 
would say: no longer; your job shall be terminated unless you 
sign that authorization card? The opposite of that, Mr. Minister, 
would be that the condition could just go on interminably. So at 
what point would the employer insist that those authorization 
cards be signed, submitted, or employment will not continue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Our best, considered, non-legal 
opinion, I guess, is . . . The question, as I understand it — and I 
don’t . . . I’m presuming it’s hypothetical — is if the card wasn’t 
signed by 30 days, would it go on for 40 days or 60 days or 90 
days? 
 
Now what I’m led to believe is that if the card isn’t signed by 30 
days, then the offer for employment would probably be null and 
void. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — So just to be crystal clear about this, Mr. Minister, 
it would be your view, then, that the employee would be 
terminated if the card is not signed and submitted within 30 days? 
I just want to be clear on this. 
 
These are not trick questions, and they’re not complicated 
questions. I simply wanted, Mr. Minister, to have it crystal clear. 
There are a number of employees who are concerned about this, 
and as you’re aware, there has been a somewhat heated campaign 
for representation. 
 
I think it’s extremely important that all those employees who are 
affected and who are obliged by law to accept a democratic 
decision know what the rules of the game are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’m rechecking with my officials so that 
we can be as crystal clear as possible for you. There may well be 
some situations that are still outstanding before the Labour 
Relations Board that the board has not yet ruled on relative to, 
for example, controllers and managers of human resources on 
each campus, that weren’t exclusions in the legislation but have 
been applied for before the board, that haven’t been ruled on yet. 
And it may well be that some of those, if they’re obviously, they 
probably are over the 30 days, and so they may be not . . . they 
probably are continuing their employment and not been 
terminated because it’s still outstanding or awaiting a ruling of 
the labour board. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Would instructors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the examples I have is controllers 
and managers of human resources. There could be some others, 
but those would be a couple of examples for you. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — I appreciate that possible exception, Mr. Minister. 
I just . . . my question was specifically related to the academic 
staff of SIAST.  



 
May 25, 1988 

 

1560 
 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well not that I’m aware of. I mean, 
that’s maybe not totally crystal clear, but I and my officials aren’t 
aware of any. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, I appreciate that assurance, and I 
appreciate as well the somewhat humble and perhaps atypical 
admission that you’re not aware of absolutely everything. Mr. 
Minister, I want to simply thank you for this very brief and 
factual exchange of questions and answers, and I look forward to 
other exchanges of a similar nature at other times, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — On the same topic respecting conditions that 
affect employees. Before the amalgamation, employees at the 
technical institutes had the opportunity to transfer to the Public 
Service Commission, and vice versa; I would like you to confirm 
that. And I would ask whether you’re making any provisions for 
current employees now of SIAST to transfer, with all employee 
rights and benefits, to the Public Service Commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’m advised there’s no reciprocal 
agreement between SIAST and the Public Service Commission. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well I think, Mr. Minister, that’s something 
that perhaps you would take under advisement. There are the 
employees who of course become sort of pawns in the operation 
here as you amalgamate or switch from one type of employer to 
another, where they’re still doing the same job, find that they 
have, in this particular case, lost something that they had before. 
 
You have been quoted by employees as saying that nothing 
would be changed, but they’re finding that maybe in this 
particular case something has changed. They were also told, I 
understand, that no employee rights would be lost. 
 
So what I’m asking you to do is to see if you could make 
provision, at least on an interim basis, perhaps for two years or 
three years, for those employees who have started to work at the 
technical institutes, at SIAST, who may find themselves 
uncomfortable there and think that they may be able to do a better 
job, or work under conditions where they would be more 
productive, with the public service, but are unable to do so now 
because it would be a switch of employees and a loss of rights, a 
loss of some of the benefits. They may want to go but they’re 
very reluctant to even apply or to go because of the losses that 
they would suffer. 
 
(1545) 
 
The institute itself might even find it a benefit to encourage a 
person who might take that initiative to go, but if there’s no 
transferability of benefits, then of course that’s a deterrent to the 
move. Would you under take to do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the hon. 
member raising this and why he might raise this point about 
reciprocity, but as he can probably as well 

appreciate, this could, or at least potentially could, become an 
issue at a bargaining table, for example. And for that reason, I 
think it would be injudicious of myself to make any comment on 
it. 
 
I think the other point that I would make here is that I think — 
and I can understand this because it’s a relatively new institution 
— but I think the kinds of questions you ask and the expectation 
or the perception that I have from my side of what you think the 
role of the Minister of Education is relative to the Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology, is different than my 
view, because we have now an autonomous institute. 
 
The kinds of questions you ask, I mean, in terms of . . . are not 
the kinds of questions that you would ask of me relative to the 
university, for example. And yet the two institutes have their own 
boards now, a board of governors and a board of directors. 
 
I think maybe you and some of the public have to recognize that 
there has been quite a major change here and that it’s no longer 
an arm of the Department of Education, or advanced education it 
was in the past. It’s an autonomous organization now and so it 
should be, so you wanted it to be, so did many out there. And that 
casts a different light, if you like, on some of the questions — not 
that they aren’t pertinent. It’s just a matter of if we really believe 
in autonomy of the institute, then it’s not for me to start making 
decisions or imposing decisions on the institute unilaterally. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well, Mr. Minister, in this particular case I 
don’t think you’d be imposing anything on the institution. There 
would be a situation where you would be contacting the Public 
Service Commission, which is directly under the control of the 
government, and you would be advising them that there may be 
1 or 2 or 3 people or maybe even a half a dozen or 10 that might 
be able to take advantage of such a provision. 
 
About the autonomy of the institute, I have to ask these questions 
of you, Mr. Minister, because at this stage I understand it’s still 
working under the interim governing board. I also understand 
that your deputy minister sits on the board and maybe you would 
clarify that for me at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well my comment relative to the issue 
— and I understand why you’re raising it — but my answer 
would still be the same relative to . . . I think some could see it as 
interference in the bargaining process, and staking out an opinion 
on something that I really probably, maybe do not have any 
business in staking out an opinion on. 
 
Relative to the board of directors, you can expect an 
announcement very shortly on the board of directors for the 
institute. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I can expect an announcement with respect to 
what on the board of directors — you mean as to when the SIAST 
will become completely autonomous? Is that what you’re talking 
about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, an announcement on who   



 
May 25, 1988 

 

1561 
 

the board of directors are, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, back to the issue that I raised 
before we got to talking about the relationship between the 
department and the SIAST board: what would you advise, then, 
a person who came to you or came to your department and was 
looking for this type of a transfer in the interim until the new 
contract was signed? Is there any kind of advice that you might 
be able to give a person that’s looking for this type of transfer? 
 
I might indicate to you that there are precedents for this type of 
thing in bargaining. I believe, if I remember correctly, I even 
helped bargain as article like that between a school board and a 
joint board when there was a joint board formed and there was a 
shift in governance, which is rather a parallel situation to this one. 
What would you advise to the person who was looking for this 
kind of a transfer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well if an individual has a desire, I 
guess is the best way to put it, relative to the kind of issue you 
raise, as I understand it there is a union structure designed to 
handle that, stewards, etc., and I guess that would be the 
appropriate route for the individual. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I’d like to turn now to discussing some of the 
issues pertaining the university, both universities: one, 
University of Regina here, and University of Saskatchewan. In 
perusing some of the written material and some of the political 
concerns about the universities I noticed that back as far as April 
30, 1986, that your government, amidst a great deal of fanfare, 
announced funding for a building, a students’ union building, 
here right at University of Regina. 
 
It’s my understanding that there was a hundred-guest reception 
held at the university, and that our ruling Conservative Party 
pointed to the contribution during . . . to this particular 
contribution as an example of the government’s commitment to 
the U of R and to the post-secondary education in general. 
 
Mr. Minister, what happened there was that the Premier 
announced that you’d pay half of the cost of a $4.4 million 
students’ union building and the students of the U of R were to 
put up the other $2.2 million. The students’ union have already 
raised 1.9 million; they’ve been working on it since 1965, for 22 
years. 
 
And as well, the Premier added to that that not only was he 
willing to put money in for the building, but he was willing to 
add another $1.2 million for a walkway to join that building to 
the main university complex. And on top of that, the Premier 
promised another 400,000 to convert an old building, that is the 
old students’ union building, into a day-care facility. 
 
So my question to you, Mr. Minister, is: what has happened to 
that announcement, or since that announcement? How are you 
coming along with the building? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The answer is not unlike last year. The 
project has not been cancelled; rather, it has been deferred or 
postponed, and will be considered for 

next year’s budget. 
 
But lest the hon. members opposite think that somehow we don’t 
have a commitment to the capital building at the University of 
Regina, we do. And in fact we’re providing the University of 
Regina with nearly $6 million in capital grants in the fiscal year 
’88-89, which, for the hon. member’s information — and this 
titbit I think you will find interesting, especially the member for 
Regina Centre, for example — the 5.7 million in capital grants 
that we’ll be providing the University of Regina this year is more 
than the previous government provided in its last six years in 
office, what a shameful record. What a shameful record. 
 
So our commitment is clear, whether it’s operating moneys or 
capital grants for universities. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well, Mr. Minister, you may think it’s clear, 
but I think it’s getting fuzzier by the year, because here you just 
tell me it’s going to be postponed for another year. I thought 
maybe you might honour the commitment that you gave last year, 
and I quote here from the Star Phoenix of April 3 in 1987. Now 
this, I think, is 1988, so that would be a year ago where you said, 
and I quote, in the Star Phoenix: 
 

The government’s $2.2 million commitment for new 
student’s union building on campus has been put on hold for 
a year, possibly setting the project back until next year. 

 
This was in ’87. This was in this article where they had a picture 
of the minister and a headline indicating how popular you were 
on campus. It says here, “Hepworth the most unpopular . . . ” 
Pardon me, Mr. Chairman, I apologize. It says here, the Minister 
of Education is the most unpopular man on campus. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, it’s a little amusing to me here at this time, 
but I really want to take this quite seriously. I don’t think it’s right 
for the students or the people of Saskatchewan to be used in this 
manner politically, because clearly what this was, was a political 
promise prior to the election of 1986, and then you hedged on it 
in ’87, and now you’re hedging on it in ’88. Why don’t you come 
clean on the whole thing and tell us exactly when you’re going 
to do it? Or if you’re not going to do it, let the students know. 
Have your priorities changed? 
 
Now it’s not a matter of just having the money. It’s a matter of 
not making the money available for the university’s building 
project, because clearly you had the money. Your Premier said 
that he was making the money available prior to the election ’86. 
I think he just decided to do something else with it. 
 
Now we need to know, Mr. Minister, at what stage, a little more 
definitely, at what stage this is and where and when the students 
can expect you to hold up your end of the bargain. 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ve already told 
the hon. member that the project has been postponed   



 
May 25, 1988 

 

1562 
 

and will be looked at again for . . . in next year’s budget process 
and . . . But to put . . . And the reason for that is, yes, that’s an 
important project, but there are a lot of important projects at the 
university. 
 
I think of things like . . . And I look at the things that we have 
done, our administration has done in conjunction with the 
University of Regina over the last few years. I think of things like 
a $1.6 million commitment to computers; a $1.7 million to Darke 
Hall. I look at $1 million to library acquisitions. I look at 3.45 
million committed to library upgrading. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, just to give you some perspective — 
because you bounce these number around, 1 and 2 and 3 millions 
of dollars — to put them in perspective, the $1 million in library 
acquisitions that we made available to the University of Regina 
last year — a rather novel arrangement — that $1 million was 
more — just that one project, library acquisitions, that $1 million 
— was more than the NDP administration spent at the U of R in 
’81-82 when they spent 800,000 in total; in ’80-81 they spent 
508,000. In one project alone, Mr. Chairman, we spent double 
their expenditure in ’80-81, in one project alone. 
 
And it’s no better as you go down the years: ’79-80 they spent 
less than a million; in ’78-79 it was 690; in ’77-78 it was 560. So 
I don’t think that we need necessarily to be lectured to by the 
NDP about capital commitments at the University of Regina, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well it could be understandable, Mr. 
Minister, if you have to postpone a project, a building project or 
some type of a project, if you weren’t spending and your 
government wasn’t spending like the proverbial drunken sailors 
on other matters. 
 
Now when I’m talking about spending, Mr. Minister, we can look 
at the types of figures that the Minister of Finance has put 
forward. And it wasn’t till after . . . till you reached this sort of a 
bottomless pit after you lost the — which came out to be a 
bottomless pit at the end of . . . after the election, and then all of 
sudden you cut the education spending off. And for example, the 
university renewal and development fund which you announced 
in 1985, you announced $125 million over five years — that was 
’85. And then what happened? It was stretched out to a 10-year 
program. 
 
In the meantime, what happened to oil revenues? Well we all 
know, and that story has been told many times in this legislature 
— and I even hate to repeat it again but I guess maybe I have to, 
Mr. Minister — and that is that the price of oil in ’83, ’84, ’85, 
’86 and ’87 was this — was still at $26, to the nearest dollar, in 
’83 and $26, to the nearest dollar, in ’84 and up to $30 in ’85 and 
then dropped down in ’86 to $13, in ’87 to $17. But none of those 
prices, Mr. Minister, were any lower than the prices prior to ’79, 
none of them were, and yet somehow we managed to keep our 
commitments. The former government managed to keep its 
commitments to the university when the price of oil was down at 
$3 a barrel. Ranging from $3 a barrel, ’70, to $12 a barrel in ’79, 
we managed to do it. 
 
I want to know, Mr. Minister, about what your top priority is for 
building at the University of Regina? Is the top 

priority going to be the student union building, or is it switching 
to fine arts building? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The priorities of the university are set 
in conjunction with the board and the executive officers of the 
university, but let us be totally clear, our commitment must be at 
least 600 per cent better that the NDP’s because we have spent 
more in this . . . we’ll be spending more in this year than the NDP 
spent in six years, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The URDF (university renewal and development fund) — and 
I’m presuming the hon. member was . . . didn’t realize what he 
was saying: did you say the URDF had been stretched out over 
10 years? Well that’s clearly not the case. The URDF has not 
been stretched out over 10 years; in fact, it was a five-year 
program with $125 million in the fund. We have approved to date 
nearly 97 million, with left to come, 28 million. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — If I’m in error on that, Mr. Minister, I 
apologize. I have to double-check that advice again. Thank you. 
 
With respect to your funding and the amount that you’re funding 
the universities, a statement from the university management, a 
commentary from their management in ’85, which I expect you 
have in your files somewhere, states that in 1982 and ’83 the 
operations of the University of Regina as evidenced by the 
financial statements of the University of Regina gave little rise 
. . . gave rise to little concern, rather, both within and without the 
institution. Now that is prior to 1982-83 — 1982-83, little 
concern. 
 
And what they did at the University of Regina is that they were 
in a process of setting up new programs. And they did set up 
some new programs which included the School of Journalism, a 
systems engineering degree program, and a graduate program, 
the Faculty of Administration. Those costs were quite clearly 
foreseeable, and they knew full well that they were going to need 
additional funding for it. And going by the precedence that was 
set by the previous government they . . . once the board of 
governors had made the decision and the senate had made the 
decision to go into those programs, they were expecting that they 
would be funded in the same fashion that they had been by the 
previous government. 
 
But then because of your underspending in the universities, and 
spending elsewhere, the university found themselves 
underfunded to the tune of 4.1 million. That was a deficit they 
ran into. 
 
Now there were a few things that came into play there, Mr. 
Minister, in addition, that perhaps were not foreseeable. They had 
some legal fees, some asbestos problems, some problems with 
the gym roof, but the university went through a considerable 
internal struggle and made adjustments internally, which 
included reducing travel budgets; they froze salaries and other 
. . . restricted the sabbatical leaves, I am told. And in addition to 
that, they substituted sessional or term instructors for permanent 
staff where possible. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you were advised of all of those things   



 
May 25, 1988 

 

1563 
 

by the university. You were also advised that these new programs 
were being put into place. And what concerns me is why your 
government at that time did not act to protect the integrity of the 
University of Saskatchewan, because if you believed that those 
programs were going into place — that is, I should say, the 
University of Regina — if you believed that those programs 
which were going into place, and if you believed in the 
autonomous operation of the university, that they were meeting 
the demands placed upon them by society and that there was need 
for journalism and systems engineering and an administration 
post-grad program, if you believed that, why did you put them in 
a position where they had to consider program cuts, actually had 
to go as far as to consider program cuts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member, Mr. Chairman, 
raises the question of funding to universities. I think it’s worth 
noting, as I have in this House before — but I’ll provide a few 
more details because they’re important numbers — and that is 
that over the last six years funding to universities has increased 
36.4 per cent or $ 46 million. 
 
And some would say, well that’s fine, but relative to other 
provinces we’re not keeping pace. And the reality is the opposite, 
Mr. Chairman. University grants, operating and capital, in 
Saskatchewan, if you look at between ’82-83 and the ’87-88 
fiscal years, our increase, as I mentioned, was over 30 per cent. 
 
In British Columbia it was 1.7 per cent; in Alberta it was 9.5 per 
cent; in Manitoba, 24.1 per cent. And that’s why I have 
consistently said in this House that our increases have exceeded 
those of any other province in western Canada, and that’s 
something that were proud of. That doesn’t mean to say we’re 
going to rest on our laurels or stop here. 
 
And another fact, Mr. Chairman, that I’m proud of is the number 
of children who are now attending, who have the opportunity to 
now attend university in this province, and the number that even 
have the opportunity now to attend a post-secondary institution 
of some sort has increased dramatically. 
 
But relative to the university specifically, when we formed 
government in 1982 there were something less than 15,000 
young people, on the basis of full-time students, attending 
universities in this province, Mr. Chairman, and now that 
number, as of ’87-88, has swelled to over 20,000. You know, it’s 
gone from under 15,000 to over 20,000. 
 
And I say, how fantastic that is that that many young people — 
youngsters, young students, young adults — have the chance to 
take university post-secondary education. I think what a 
tremendous comment on how society views the importance of 
furthering our education. 
 
Some will see it as a problem. I see that as a very, very positive 
step. And in fact some of the schools that I visited in boast 
records of where their grade 12 classes, 70 per cent go on to 
post-secondary education, 57 per cent going on to university, 
those kinds of numbers. I think how far we have come in the last 
two or three or four 

decades. 
 
So the numbers, Mr. Chairman, whether it’s enrolments or 
increases in the budget to universities, are substantive by every 
measure. And the hon. member will say, well these are just . . . 
the Department of Education, the minister is cooking up some 
numbers. 
 
And that’s why I would read again into the record what some 
others are saying about Saskatchewan and what we spend on 
universities. In fact, I believe I sent this article across to the hon. 
member, Toronto Star, April 17, 1988, a chart in there, and this 
article, Mr. Chairman, entitled, “ What we spend on universities; 
estimates for full-time students.” And the source of this is the 
Council of Ontario Universities. 
 
(1615) 
 
And who’s in second place, Mr. Chairman? Saskatchewan. 
We’re not in 10th or 9th or 8th or 7th place across the province, 
or across the county; we’re in second. I guess I wish that we were 
in first. Maybe what that means is that we do a little more with a 
little less dollars than Alberta, who’s in first place. 
 
And these are ’86-87 numbers. But I think that that assessment 
by an independent third party, Council of Ontario Universities, 
put Saskatchewan in second place, Mr. Chairman. I’m proud of 
it. I’m proud that our Premier sees fit to ensure that commitment 
to education, and I’m proud of our party’s commitment to 
education in this province, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — How fantastic it is, Mr. Minister, that our 
students and our universities have made that progress. How 
unfantastic it is that the very university that makes that particular 
progress finds itself being penalized financially for doing so. 
 
I agree with the figures that you give me in terms of what’s 
happened to the student body. And you know and I know that the 
universities, any university is not built in one year or one term of 
government; that it’s a progressive thing and you develop an 
attitude towards university and you provide funding for it. And 
it’s your duty and it’s the duty of this government to provide 
funding for the universities so that the university has a good 
reputation five, 10 years from now. 
 
And that’s my particular concern. Because what happened with 
the University of Regina is as they went into these new programs, 
journalism and systems engineering, as I mentioned, and as they 
increased their credit hours, that’s when their funding was cut. 
That’s when they were told that they had zero budgets and that’s 
when they were told that they had to put up and get that 4.1 
million deficit taken care of internally. They were penalized for 
the progress that they were making. I would think that we should 
be proud of the work that they had done. 
 
Now you see when I looked at the credit hours, which is a good 
indicator of whether this institute . . . whether the university is 
progressing or not, when you look at the credit hours which is 
proportional to the amount of   



 
May 25, 1988 

 

1564 
 

production, I suppose one aspect of the production of a university 
that is over and above the research and the community service, is 
the amount of teaching that they do. And the credit hours at the 
University of Regina increased from 66,000 to 90,000 from ’79 
to ’82. And then it increased again to 97,000 by 1985, and then 
to over 100,000 credit hours in 1987, which is a phenomenal 
increase — a phenomenal increase. 
 
Now the problem is, I would expect that this kind of increase 
could continue not without limit until our population increases, 
but it would continue if the program offerings and the conditions 
of education were allowed to expand at the same time. And I’m 
wondering, as they got crowded up in the University of Regina 
here, and there are times that it’s extremely difficult to get a hold 
of a class-room. You can try and get a class-room any time from 
9 till 2, and I don’t think you’ll be able to book one there. They’re 
over-utilized. If you want a class-room on an ad hoc basis after 4 
o’clock, you might be able to get one, but even then they’re quite 
tightly booked. 
 
The number of student . . . the student-professor ratio is 
increased; the number of people that are taking full-time credit 
hours is increasing. And what I have a difficult time 
understanding, is almost how come this strike didn’t end up here; 
it ended up in Saskatoon? And I have a difficult time 
understanding why you didn’t react to the positive things that 
were happening here, instead of penalizing them with a directive, 
financial directive, which is your prerogative, that the 4.1 million 
has got to be cut internally. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, let me repeat this. What I’ve seen here is the 
credit hours from 1979 to 1985 rose by 69 per cent. That’s from 
the university’s own statement. And since this government took 
over, since from ’82 to ’85, it rose by 29 per cent. Now the 
government grants to that university rose by the same amounts, 
either whether you take the times from ’79-80 to ’84-85, it rose 
by the same amount, as did the credit hours. They were 
proportional to 29 per cent. 
 
But what did happen is that during that same period of time there 
was a tremendous amount of inflation, probably averaging 7 or 8 
per cent a year. What that did is it really eroded the value of the 
operating grant, and the university ended up in a position where 
it had to fund the $4.1 million into the deficit internally. Not only 
that, but the promised building which I discussed earlier had been 
postponed twice now by you. 
 
And my question, and I repeat: why was it that you rewarded the 
university in this particular way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think your essential question there, if 
I heard correctly, is have we kept pace with inflation? And I 
would just point out to you again that total funding over the last 
six years increased by 36.4 per cent. I think you’ll find that that’s 
pretty close to inflation. 
 
The other observation I would make, Mr. Deputy Chairman, is 
that the indices that you might like to pick on to try and make a 
case for underfunding, you know, you 

pick them at random, would be my observation. And I would 
suggest to you that, I mean, universities, education, health care, I 
mean you can always use more money, but you must remember 
we get it from one place, and that’s the people. 
 
And I think compared to other jurisdictions in western Canada, 
compared to the inflation rate, compared to the amount of money 
we spend on full-time equivalents here and across the country, 
by virtually every measure we stack up very, very well I would 
argue. 
 
That doesn’t mean to say that we have some kind of a perfect 
world. But I would suggest to you that the board of governors at 
both universities, along with the administration, turn out high 
quality graduates, and will continue to turn out high quality 
graduates that find work and set up businesses the world over. 
 
In fact tonight I’m looking forward to going back to my old Alma 
Mater to be at their convocation banquet, Mr. Chairman, and I 
think many of us who have graduated from one of these 
universities or in this province, either one of the universities, are 
very proud of them. 
 
And I would remind you of some remarks that President 
Kristjanson made to me when I presented him with the brief 
about a year ago now, bemoaning the fact that because of falling 
wheat prices and falling potash prices and falling oil prices, that 
the amount of money that we had was less than we wished. And 
I was going on and on and on and bemoaning this fact, and he 
looked at me and didn’t say it, but I suppose he parenthetically 
could have added “young men,” but he did not. 
 
You know, we here at the university spend our time looking at 
what we can so with what we do have, as opposed to what we 
can’t do with what we don’t have. And I thought that’s a pretty 
good attitude to take, not only into your job but maybe into your 
life. And I see that happening at our universities. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — The trend that I . . . the difficulty that I see 
with the universities as it relates to government funding is that 
when you argue the figures you either argue, well we kept up 
with the student enrolment, or we kept up with inflation. And 
either one of those in themselves are true. But when you take and 
put both of those together, that is when you end up in a negative 
position, in a decline in terms of government funding going to 
universities. 
 
And as a result, what the universities have had to do is to increase 
the amount of funding that they collect from students. They’ve 
had to increase the tuition fees. Now that is something that is 
clearly under the control of the government, and that is that you 
can decide, by the amount of funding that you give, as to what 
the level of tuition fees are going to be in Saskatchewan at the 
Saskatchewan universities. 
 
And when I look at that, at those numbers, as to what proportion 
of the universities’ funding comes from the students and what 
proportion comes from the government, I find that the student 
proportion is increasing. And quite specifically, in ’79-80, 
students   



 
May 25, 1988 

 

1565 
 

used to pay 11 per cent, 11 per cent of a total revenue of the 
universities. And right now they are paying 18-plus per cent. 
Now that’s a dangerous trend. And I understand, Mr. Minister, 
that it’s your government’s opinion that this figure should go up 
to approximately 20 per cent. 
 
Would you confirm those figures, and would you confirm that 
intent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well just to share with you some of, I 
guess, my government’s thinking on tuition fees, recognizing 
that it’s the university and the board of governors that ultimately 
must grapple with the issue, in the blueprint we put out last year, 
Preparing for the Year 2000 — I don’t know as my view is any 
different than it was last year — we point out there that: 
 

No defined policy has existed in recent time with respect to 
the appropriate contribution an individual should make 
towards the cost of his or her education. 
 
One consequence of this lack of a defined policy has been a 
gradual decline in the cost of adult education borne by 
students. Twenty years ago, tuition fees at University of 
Saskatchewan accounted for about 25 per cent of operating 
costs. Today they account for only 15 per cent. Fees at the 
technical institutes represent only 4 per cent of the operating 
cost, the lowest in the country. 

 
And I’m quoting that from Preparing for the Year 2000. 
 
The approach that I have taken as minister, and as well, my 
officials, who I would commend, has been to work in a very 
collaborative basis with the students — whether it be technical 
institutes, the SIAST student bodies, or the university student 
bodies — to go at this in a collaborative approach, as I said 
earlier, recognizing the autonomy of the board of governors in 
the case of the universities. 
 
And this last year, for example, at the University of 
Saskatchewan, the student president argued the case 
persuasively. The board was considering a 10 per cent increase, 
but because of the intervention of the student president, were 
convinced that perhaps 8 per cent would be more appropriate. 
 
What I intend to generally find is that we have a new kind of 
student, if you like, at these post-secondary institutions. They 
don’t accept the old sort of gibberish some of the classic old 
arguments that you or I might make as politicians. 
 
(1630) 
 
They want high quality education; they want that degree to mean 
something; they just don’t want to be seen part of an assembly 
line. Yes, they want it accessible, but they do want that high 
standard maintained. 
 
And it’s been intriguing to me that over this last year we’ve in 
fact had more than one story emerge where university students 
have taken it upon themselves to put in place funds and trust 
funds to buy equipment and those 

kinds of things that they think are important to their education. 
 
What that tells me is that (a) you know, we ought not unfairly 
expect student bodies to, or students to contribute more than their 
fair share or to solve deficits at universities. But it tells me that 
they’re genuinely interested in doing their part and that’s been, I 
suppose, a very heartening initiative on their part, and it’s a 
relatively new phenomenon over this last year or so. 
 
I find students, student bodies, students as individuals, their 
representatives, their presidents, for example, for the most part I 
find them extremely articulate young people. If find them very 
sensible and rational, unlike, I think, maybe the days when you 
and I maybe went to college. You know, if you didn’t have a 
love-in or a sit-in or a march on something on a weekly basis with 
2 or 3,000 people out, you sort of felt like you weren’t going to 
university. 
 
They’re not into that kind of stuff these days. They’re a very 
serious student with some pretty well-defined goals. They don’t 
buy sort of bafflegab and political rhetoric from you or I or 
anybody else. They draw their own conclusions, and I find them 
very frank and forthcoming and common sense in their approach 
to matters at the university. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — My question, Mr. Minister, is: to what extent 
are you and your government willing to do in terms of switching 
the funding for university funding from the government to 
student tuition fees? As I mentioned, I’ve seen it rise from 11 per 
cent in 1980 to over 18 per cent now. Are you targeting it for 20? 
 
Are you willing, are you aiming in a different direction, or just 
what’s . . . where are you going in this? How far are you willing 
to take it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I don’t know as I want to handcuff 
boards of governors at either university with a policy, if you like. 
We have some expectation and, as we raise with them in our 
briefs, that they ought to have some clear definition relative to 
that. 
 
The other point that’s germane here, I would suggest to you, is 
rather than just necessarily look to the student to contribute more 
— although the share has fallen over the years — whether one 
should look to the student to pay more or to the government, that 
is to say, the taxpayer to pay more. 
 
One other area that we raised in the blueprint last year is for the 
universities to look to the private sector for fund raising to a 
larger degree than they had perhaps in the past, perhaps maybe 
to enjoy some of the kinds of success that we see, for example, 
in some of the American colleges. 
 
And I’m pleased to report to the House that both universities are 
undertaking and/or are in the midst of very aggressive campaigns 
in that area. I think specifically — and I’ve had a meeting with 
the University of Regina — some of their board officials and 
executive officers, a very ambitious project they have under way.  



 
May 25, 1988 

 

1566 
 

I think specifically of meetings I’ve had with President 
Kristjanson and Don Whiteman, the chairman of the University 
of Saskatchewan. I think particularly of the success that they 
have enjoyed in the private sector in raising funds for the 
University of Saskatchewan agriculture college. It’s been very 
heart-warming, and it’s tickled me to see the president so pleased 
with the response. It’s been very invigorating for all who’ve been 
involved, not only in western Canada but as well with the 
corporate fund raising in central Canada, and I think of donations 
like — to that Ag college — donations from United Grain 
Growers, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, even the Weyburn 
Inland Terminal in my own constituency made a substantial 
contribution like something in the order of $10,000. I think it 
speaks well, not only for the university and for agriculture and its 
importance here but in fact for the corporate citizens of this 
province indeed are interested in seeing the continued well-being 
of that institution or those institutions. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — The fact that there are an increasing number 
of corporations and companies in Saskatchewan making 
contributions to the university really speaks well for the 
university, Mr. Minister. It doesn’t answer the question that I 
posed to you and that is, and I’m starting to read between the 
lines as to some of the materials you’re . . . some of the 
statements that you’re making about what’s happening in the 
States and what’s happening with respect to corporations. 
 
Are you saying that you want government paying less and less 
into the proportion that’s spent on universities? Are you saying 
that students can expect to pay more and more of the percentage? 
Are you saying that the students’ tuition is going to go up here in 
Saskatchewan comparable to what it is in many of the colleges in 
the States? Because if that’s what you’re saying, there’s a strong 
concern. I would have a very strong concern about that, Mr. 
Minister. I would have a very strong concern if the proportion of 
the funding for universities that the province was funding was to 
change, because that just . . . particularly in Saskatchewan. I just 
wouldn’t feel that the universities could function without having 
a steady commitment from the province. And the signals that I 
see coming is the signal . . . is the amount of tuition that the 
students are paying. 
 
Now you know what’s happening right now — too many 
students; that in order to take four or five years of education 
they’re going to have to end up with 20 to $30,000 worth of debt, 
whereas . . . and that’s because of the way the student loan 
program has been changed. So sure, the university is getting more 
money from it, but it’s not ending up . . . You’re creating another 
problem while you’re doing this. 
 
And that’s why I’m concerned that the funding not switch in any 
more, so that you’re not increasing it to that ratio of 20 per cent; 
and I still haven’t had an answer from you on that. Have you got 
any kind of a target figure, or . . . Because if you don’t have a 
target figure, am I to assume that there is no limit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Our position . . . I guess the only 

expectation I have is that the board of governors would continue 
to manage the affairs of the university. And I don’t know if I can 
say anything more, Mr. Deputy Chairman, without being 
unnecessarily repetitive. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I’d like to deal briefly, Mr. Minister, with the 
topic of student loans and student bursaries and what’s happened 
in that. A quick look at some of the numbers, and the students 
who are now applying for loans find that loans are quite 
accessible; they’re able to get the loan right now, and they 
appreciate it. And it’s not till about two or three years later the 
students find that the amount that they’ve been lent is building 
up to quite an amount. 
 
And they’re finding . . . Furthermore when they compare with 
what happened to . . . compare with their brothers or sisters 
previous to that, or their classmates previous to that, that they 
aren’t eligible for any kind of loan write-off until they’ve 
borrowed close to $6,000 a year — $5,940 per year to be more 
specific. 
 
And just two years ago, they used to get part . . . they used to get 
bursaries. They were eligible for bursaries once they had 
borrowed only 2,640, and in the year previous to that the figure 
was 2,230, and the year previous to that was 1,100. 
 
So quite clearly the direction that we’re going in is that students 
are ending up with a greater and greater debt. Now they are able 
to go to universities because they’ve got these particular loans, 
but as a result we are creating a group of students, or the system 
is putting students into a situation where I question their ability 
to repay. 
 
If you end up with a $24,000 debt after you’ve gone to university 
or to any four-year course, you’ve got a bit of a debt hanging over 
your head. And I’m wondering whether that student will be 
eligible for any kind of credit at that time. 
 
Now there’s two major problems that I see with that. First, is the 
thing I’ve been talking about, which is the debt load; secondly, 
that as students look at this and saying, $24,000 is what I have to 
repay, that it may serve as a deterrent. 
 
Mr. Minister, is there any effort at all on the part of your 
government to go back to a scheme of a bursary program where 
you wouldn’t have to borrow up to $6,000 before the bursary 
provision popped in, but would go back to the vicinity of, say, 
what it was three or four years ago where it would be a little more 
realistic. The debt the student ended up with would be a little 
more realistic, and it would be easier for them to handle after 
they’re out of the university or their chosen institution. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I don’t know if I can add a lot to 
this debate over and above the time we spent on it last year. I 
think Saskatchewan continues to be a leader across the country 
in terms the assistance we make available, whether it’s 6 per cent 
loans, forgivable loans, special assistance for those who have 
special needs — single parents, natives, disabled, those kinds of 
categories, Mr. Chairman.  



 
May 25, 1988 

 

1567 
 

I know the NDP continue to try and make the case as though it’s 
always the case that somehow you have to borrow $6,000 before 
you get any forgivable portion, but of course that’s not true 
because it depends on the length of the course. For example, I 
could find numbers right at the opposite end of the scale to what 
they’re using which would be equally an exaggeration and a 
generalization. 
 
For example, if you had a 12-week course and a total loan of 
$3,000, well, 2,160 would be payable and 840 would be 
forgivable. So they can find their example to make their point; I 
can find other examples to make quite another point relative to 
that. 
 
But the point that I think I would want members to be clear on is 
that the numbers, in a way, speak for themselves. More and more 
young people are gaining access to post-secondary education. I 
read you the numbers. Full-time students at our universities went 
from 14,000 to over 20,000. I have to think that some of the 
student assistance and programs that we have put in place have 
helped see that any more young people enter our colleges and our 
institutes. And I have no plans on . . . immediate plans on 
changing that, other than to say that the ministers of Education 
nationally are looking at this whole question of student aid rather 
vigorously. 
 
(1645) 
 
I, as well, am advised that I probably should make some 
clarifications relative to an earlier point raised by the member 
from Moose Jaw North, relative to who must join unions and who 
must pay dues and what some of the processed are. They were 
rather technical, or legal-technical questions, and I think some 
clarification is in order because I want to be as crystal clear — to 
use his words — as I can, and it’s unfortunate that he can’t be in 
the House right at this very moment. 
 
And it would be this, Mr. Chairman, that all new employees, and 
I’m referring now to SIAST, all new employees must join the 
union, and all new employees must authorize union due 
deductions within 30 days of employment, as it is a condition of 
employment, and that may not necessarily be any new news. All 
individuals employed at the date of certification — and this might 
be the new news — all individuals who are employed at the date 
of certification have a choice of whether to join the union or not; 
however, all must pay union dues. 
 
And I think that’s where the confusion could come in, that you 
have a choice. All the individuals who are employed at the date 
of certification have a choice of whether they will join the union 
or not, but they do not have a choice on whether they will pay 
union dues or not. They must pay union dues, and I suspect the 
only exemption would be the one I talked about, on religious 
grounds. 
 
Those who become members of the union sign a card that 
authorizes deduction for dues. I think we went through that. 
Those who do not wish to become union members do not sign a 
card, but they send a letter to the employer to authorize deduction 
of union dues. Yes, they don’t have . . . if you were employed at 
the date of certification, you don’t have to join the union, but you 
must pay dues; and rather than sign a card, you send a letter to 
the employer 

authorizing deduction of union dues. 
 
So I read that correction or clarification into the record, Mr. 
Deputy Chairman, so that I can be as correct as I can possibly be 
before this committee. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Will the minister supply me with the figures 
with respect to the number of students who accessed the student 
loan program last year, and this year, and the year previous to last 
year — for the last three years? 
 
I take it . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Have you got another question? I’m 
just getting that. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Yes, I will go on to one other topic here that 
I wanted to cover with you this evening . . . this afternoon, Mr. 
Minister, and that is to deal, to talk briefly about the relationship 
between the role of government and the role of the board of 
governors of a university, and I guess as it applies to university 
autonomy. 
 
Now you know, Mr. Minister, that one of the two main 
characteristics of any university is the academic freedom, and 
another one is the autonomy of the institution itself. We must 
look very carefully to protect the autonomy of any institution, as 
particularly in a relationship that the government has with it, that 
the government does not become . . . or does not infringe upon 
university autonomy. 
 
It has to be that way, Mr. Minister, in order for the university to 
be able to do its function, that is to search freely for truth and 
reality without any kinds of feelings of repercussion from the 
government, or any kind of feeling from repercussion of anybody 
else that might be contributing to the university as opposed to, 
say, business or some other — perhaps an army in some other 
country. 
 
We want to make sure that the purpose of the universities stays 
pure, and that is that they can use their time, without fear, to 
search for knowledge, and that they can critically analyse and 
argue publicly about government policy, about business policy, 
about social policy, and that they feel that they can do so without 
any kind of repercussion whatsoever. 
 
Now it’s only through that kind of relationship, if the university 
can have that kind of a relationship, that old absolutes can be 
challenged — and I think you would agree with me on that, Mr. 
Minister — whether the old absolutes be scientific, whether it’s 
old superstitions in medicine about mundane things like having 
warts removed, or hair replaced or whether it’s old population 
theories like Malthus’ theory which has to be challenged, or 
whether they’re sociological questions — that is even question 
like, do we need wars to maintain our economies. 
 
Now I’m just using these as examples, Mr. Minister, to indicate 
that over the past it’s been our universities and through our 
universities, that myths have been, or things have been proven 
myths that were, one time, absolutes. And the only way that that 
can be done and continued at a   



 
May 25, 1988 

 

1568 
 

university is if the university continues to maintain its complete 
autonomy and that academic freedom is insured. 
 
Now in our university structure, the board of governors there has 
12 people, six of which are appointed by government, and that’s 
the way it’s been for a while. The deputy minister, I understand, 
sits as an observer to some of the meetings. In addition to that 
there are six other people; one is a chancellor who is elected; two 
are elected by the senate; there is a faculty rep, a student rep, and 
then there’s a president. 
 
Now when we were in a situation, as we have been in my lifetime, 
where the universities have consistently been expanding 
programs, it has been the job of this university board of governors 
to choose between positive priorities: should we add to this 
college or add to this college or add to this college. 
 
Now we could be entering an era of deflation. That’s already 
happened in some cases. It’s already happened in some 
industries. And we’re into a situation where the universities may 
be forced to make cuts. 
 
The question that I’m asking you, Mr. Minister, with respect to 
university autonomy and decisions that the universities may have 
to make in the future, God forbid, is: what instructions are you 
giving to your appointees and the people that contact the 
university with respect to university autonomy so that the 
universities do not feel the long arm of government in their 
decision making and priorities with respect to what should be 
offered and what shouldn’t be offered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member has gone on at some 
length about autonomy, which I do respect. I think he’s mixed 
the question of administrative autonomy as opposed to an 
individual’s autonomy at a university to . . . and the academic 
freedom at university. 
 
I guess my view is this, is that it’s your job and mine, the 
government’s job, to determine, if you like, how big the cheque 
will be that we send to the university or to SIAST on a yearly 
basis. And it’s their job — and our job stops there, essentially — 
and it’s their job to take that cheque and to spend it prudently and 
wisely to administer to those funds on behalf of you and I. I 
suppose as long as I don’t cross that line to their territory, 
autonomy is respected, and I suppose provided they don’t step 
over this line into our territory, you and I will be happy. And I 
think that’s . . . I mean, I think that’s historically been the case. I 
would . . . and I think you and I have come to know that as the 
case and respect it as so. 
 
Relative to the numbers you asked for, the number of recipients 
of student assistance, in 1981-82 there were 5,400 students 
receiving assistance; in ’87-88 there were 17,600; the year before 
that, 17,000; the year before that 10,500. So you can see, there’s 
been an increase every year, and a dramatic increase over the last 
six years. 
 
To put it another way, in our universities six years ago, we had 
14,000 full-time students; last year we had 20,000. In our 
institutes six years ago we had 20,000 by one measure or another; 
now we have 40,000. Or another 

way of putting it, we saw a 50 per cent increase in student 
enrolment at universities, 100 per cent increase in enrolment at 
technical institutes, but the number of students receiving 
assistance did more than double or did more than increase by 50 
per cent — in fact, it increased — it trebled. 
 
So I think by using that measure you can see that indeed if there 
were 5,400 students receiving assistance six years ago, as a 
relative percentage of the total student population, that’s a lower 
number than it is today. And so by that measure as well, I think 
you can see that our commitment is there to help students access 
and indeed gain a post-secondary education. 
 
Another number you might be interested in is the average student 
assistance — or the average assistance per student, rather, has 
approximately doubled over the last six years from about 2,380 
to 4,720, and those numbers don’t even include the interest 
write-down, the 6 per cent program or the cost of providing 
provincial loans at no interest while the student is in school 
because those aren’t “expensed” until the student enters into 
repayment. So one could argue correctly that our commitment, 
or the average assistance per student over the last six years, has 
indeed more than doubled. 
 
I think by every measure, as I said earlier, I think the numbers 
make the point: Saskatchewan has a lot to be proud of in terms 
of student assistance relative to the rest of the country. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I’d 
like to ask the minister a question with respect to the shoe repair 
course in Esterhazy. First of all, Mr. Minister, I’d like to ask you 
if I could, if you could indicate . . . if you could in fact confirm 
that the course is being offered again this year? Could you tell us 
when it started, and how many students are currently enrolled in 
that 38-week course; and whether or not the instructor is once 
again, Mr. Harry Flander? 
 
(1700) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Relative to the shoe repair program at 
Esterhazy, the program began on March 14, 1988, with eight 
students in attendance. Two additional students are in the process 
of registering for the course, and Harry Flander is the current 
instructor. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder, first, if the minister 
could tell me why it is that the course is being offered again in 
Esterhazy in light of two points. First of all, Mr. Chairman, I 
point out to the minister that the Parkland community college 
offered that shoe repair course in 1983-84 and made a decision 
not to re-offer it for a number of reasons: one being lack of 
demand; a second being a request, as I understand it, from the 
local Esterhazy council not to offer it again because of a number 
of problems that it had created in the local community. 
 
It’s rather unusual, Mr. Minister, that a local council would 
request that a course not be offered again, partly because of the 
obvious patronage that appeared to be associated with the 
offering of the course. So the first part   



 
May 25, 1988 

 

1569 
 

of my question to you is: why it is that that course then was put 
on by your local campus at Wascana? 
 
And secondly, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you why the course is 
being held at Esterhazy again in light of the fact that the 
evaluation committee that was set up to assess the course 
suggested to you that Esterhazy was not the appropriate location, 
and suggested to you — and I’m quoting here an article from the 
December 1988 Leader-Post in which committee members from 
the evaluation committee are quoted as saying that politics 
played a larger role in the decision to locate that course in 
Esterhazy than did any sound educational planning. 
 
So perhaps you could explain, Mr. Minister, why it is that despite 
the recommendation of the evaluation committee that the course 
not be held in Esterhazy and despite the suggestion from the local 
council that the course not be re-offered and despite the fact that 
last year the only person who was attending the course in its final 
days was the daughter of Mr. Flander, why it is, Mr. Minister, 
that, in light of all of those decisions, you have continued to offer 
the course in Esterhazy when, on the other hand, you’ve been 
making massive cuts throughout the technical institute and 
community college system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, the program offered last 
year at Esterhazy was a pilot project. On completion, Wascana 
institute conducted a program review, including labour-market 
need and student demand. It was decided, based on the review, 
that the program was needed and should continue on a 
year-to-year basis with an annual labour-market review. 
 
And quite frankly, Mr. Chairman, I take objection to opposition 
members continually harassing the town of Esterhazy. He tries to 
suggest that it doesn’t have any support there. We are interested 
in providing more programming to rural Saskatchewan; this fits 
in with that mandate, Mr. Chairman. I don’t know why they 
continue to pick on Esterhazy, or indeed, why would you pick on 
an individual, albeit the daughter? I thought this country had 
freedom from persecution based on who you were. 
 
You see, in a competency-based program, as the hon. member 
would know, is that individuals finish courses at different times. 
Why would you pick on her if in fact she was the last student to 
leave that program because — as other students leave their 
program in a competency-based program? 
 
I think it’s regrettable that you continue to pick on the town of 
Esterhazy and some of the individuals who are involved in this 
program. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:08 p.m. 
 
 


