


















































June 3, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 3, 1988 
 

 
1819 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you, and through you on behalf of 
my colleague, the member for Kindersley, the Minister of 
Justice, a group of 15 grade 8 students from Eatonia. 
 
These students are seated here, sir, in your gallery, and they’re 
here courtesy of the Eatonia Lions Club who have sponsored 
the tour. They sponsor this annually. 
 
As a Lions Club member myself I know many of the things the 
Lions Club do. They are accompanied Miss Thorburn, Don 
Punter, Tim Schul, and Rob Assmus. And as an added bonus 
I’m going to try and arrange a visit to Mosaic for you later this 
afternoon. I’ll let you know later this morning if we can work it 
out. Please welcome these students to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Closure of PCS Mine 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the minister responsible for the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, your buddy, Paul Schoenhals, has 
been talking to the press again, and yesterday what he told the 
press is that while the board of directors of PCS (Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) did not approve the decision to 
shut Cory until its latest meeting, that decision had been made 
by management a long time ago, as he said, last year. That 
proves the point that I think was made yesterday that while you 
sat in this House making statements about how your potash 
resource Bill would save the industry in this province, your 
management people at PCS were already planning to close 
down the Cory mine. 
 
Now, Minister, how do you explain this state of affairs; how do 
you explain the obvious hypocrisy that exists in this case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m sure that the hon. member, Mr. 
Speaker, is referring to, I believe, a front article in the 
Star-Phoenix: “The Cory lay-off plan started last year . . .” At 
the end of that: “Lane raps Star-Phoenix — A-10,” in the back 
pages, Mr. Speaker. It tells you something about the particular 
newspaper and its ability to cover this story. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker — and I’m more than pleased to 
pursue questions along the lines of the operations of that 
newspaper any time you want to ask — having said that, Mr. 
Speaker, I think the hon. member, as a lawyer, knows full well 
that major decisions, such as this certainly is and was, have to 
be made ultimately by  

the board. And management certainly had recommendations. 
 
I mean, there are all sorts of options being considered, whether 
we shut down Lanigan because of the nearly four million tonnes 
of annual productive over-capacity that exists in the potash 
corporation, so I think major decisions . . . and the hon. member 
knows in corporate law, acting for the Bank of Nova Scotia, 
that major decisions of this nature would in fact be made 
ultimately by the board. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
senior management, obviously from your own admission and 
from the statement of Mr. Schoenhals, had made the decision a 
long time before, certainly last year. And yet last year all of you 
people stood in the House and debated on the potash resources 
Bill. All of you people told us that the purpose of that Bill was 
to protect jobs. And yet at that same time your senior 
management, your Mr. Childers and all of his henchmen, had in 
fact made the decision, made the decision, Mr. Schoenhals says 
that the mine would be closed. 
 
Now that’s the hypocrisy I’m getting at. Why didn’t you tell us 
about this last fall? Why didn’t you come clean with us, and the 
Saskatchewan people, and most especially the workers at the 
Cory mine? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, the problem stemming from 
the decision made in 1979 to expand the Lanigan potash 
division of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, so that on 
annual basis we, the potash corporation, has the ability to 
produce four million more tonnes of potash than it can possibly 
sell in its best years, had led to long-term reviews as to how 
does the corporation itself deal with this huge over-capacity to 
produce potash. And all sorts of options were being looked at. 
To argue that a decision of this magnitude is made glibly or 
without a great deal of study, I think the hon. member wouldn’t 
ascribe that to any corporation. 
 
But the ultimate decision of the major decisions of a 
corporation are made by the board, and I think the article, 
although it's buried, and I believe deliberately, by the Star-
Phoenix in its efforts to create some political responses, Mr. 
Speaker, I think is the accurate statement. I know the hon. 
member with some understanding of corporate law would 
recognize the ultimate decision making powers of a board of 
directors. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, you’re a master of 
the red herring. We’re not talking here about decisions in 1979; 
we’re not talking here about the editorial policy of the Star-
Phoenix; we’re here trying to find out why you didn’t come 
clean on this question of the Cory mine in 1987, this last fall, 
when your potash resources Bill was being debated in this 
legislature. 
 
A new question, Mr. Minister. There is the strange coincidence, 
Mr. Minister, of the complete change, the almost complete 
change in the board of directors of the potash corporation, 
between the time these events rose last fall in connection with 
The Potash Resources Act, and  
  



 
June 3, 1988 

1820 
 

this decision to now close the Cory mine. 
 
And my question is simply this: was the dismissal of the old 
board because it balked at approving your management’s 
decision to shut down the Cory mine, and that your new found 
board is nothing more than a rubber stamp for the decision 
made last fall to shut down the Cory mine? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I think that the hon. member is being 
somewhat unfair in his personal attacks on the boards. I think 
that the hon. member’s research staff would be able to tell him 
that there were changes to several of the boards, including 
SaskTel and other Crown corporations in the last, I believe 
since roughly December, January. And there’s been many 
changes on boards, and many of the board members of several 
Crown corporations had been in place for four, five, six years, 
and it’s appropriate to make those changes. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve a question for either the 
minister in charge or perhaps, in this instance, the Premier 
would be kind enough to answer the question for us in the light 
of the questions and the answers offered by the Minister of 
Finance a moment ago. 
 
Is the Premier prepared to confirm to the House that all the 
while that The Potash Resources Act was being introduced and 
defended in this legislature as being the instrument for the 
equitable and fair control of supply and prices so that all 
Saskatchewan producers would be fairly, in effect, treated, but 
all the while, while the government was drafting this legislation, 
introducing it, debating it at length last fall, passing it but not 
proclaiming it, that all the while, that the purpose of that Bill 
being fairness and equity, PCS was planning, the management 
was planning to shut down significant portions of it’s own 
operations in the face of that government-stated policy? And is 
it your position that your minister, as the minister in charge of 
PCS, did not know of management plans, that it all of a sudden 
was sprung on them? Is that your point of view? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, why does the Leader of the 
Opposition and the Star-Phoenix conveniently bury and hide 
the fact that Cominco has just laid off a higher percentage of its 
staff than did the potash corporation, Mr. Speaker? I suggest to 
the hon. member that if the legislation had not been passed last 
year, prices of potash today would be in the 45 to $48 a tonne; 
there would still be the tremendous over-capacity in 
Saskatchewan ability to produce potash, and in the world, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I think that, Mr. Speaker, the legislation, the legislation can’t 
solve the problem of fundamental over-capacity of the industry 
generally, and the potash corporation in particular, where it has 
the ability to over-produce 4 million tonnes a year more than it 
can possibly sell. The legislation can’t rectify that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I suggest, Mr. Speaker, if the legislation had not been 
passed, potash prices would have been $48 a tonne today  

— dramatic losses for the people of this province and taxpayers 
of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to . . . I wish 
the Premier would answer this, but if he refuses to answer it I 
have to direct it, I guess, to the Minister of Finance. 
 
How can the Premier or the Minister of Finance stand behind 
that justification when it is an acknowledged fact that The 
Potash Resources Act has not been proclaimed; there is no 
potash resources board controlling pricing or supply; that the 
price was set by the price leader, PCS (Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) itself — you voluntarily increased the price by 
increasing it domestically and internationally by the corporation 
— that in fact the reduction of supply control was set by 
yourself and is being set by yourself by virtue of these 
cut-backs? How in the world can the minister or the Premier 
stand behind The Potash Resources Act in the face of those 
incontrovertible facts? 
 
The Bill is not proclaimed. Anything that is being taken in this 
regard is being taken by PCS exclusively, and that means that 
PCS families and workers are the doormats of the industry to 
benefit the United States. Won’t you admit that to be the case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I suppose one of the 
difficulties here is dealing with a former minister responsible 
for both the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan and minister 
responsible for the government take-over of the potash industry. 
 
And I’m going to repeat to the hon. member what I said 
yesterday, Mr. Speaker, that in the United States, in the United 
States, Mr. Speaker, in 1985 the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan’s North American market share was 28 per cent. 
This increased to 30.4 per cent in 1986, and increased another 
. . . to 30.5 per cent in 1987. At the end of April, for the first 
four months of the current year, PCS’s share of sales to North 
America by Saskatchewan producers stood at 30.5, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I have to repeat and repeat and repeat that we have been 
increasing sales into the United States, Mr. Speaker, not giving 
up market share. We have been increasing our sales by the 
potash corporation into the United States. We have been 
increasing our sales world-wide, Mr. Speaker. We sold, last 
year, a record number of tonnes of potash, Mr. Speaker. Our 
sales are going up. 
 
Notwithstanding the tremendous efforts to increase sales and 
increase price so that it’s up 100 per cent over a year ago, Mr. 
Speaker, we still have the fundamental difficult problem that in 
1979 that member and his government and his party made the 
decision to have a dramatic expansion in potash production 
capabilities, so that Saskatchewan potash corporation today 
produces 4 million tonnes a year more than it can sell. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have one final question for 
the Premier. I give up on the Premier, because he obviously will 
not address himself to this very important  
  



 
June 3, 1988 

1821 
 

question, although he made a very dramatic speech at the time 
that The Potash Resources Act was being introduced. We heard 
all about that. 
 
I say to the minister opposite, I ask the minister opposite in a 
new question, Mr. Speaker, the following: in the light of the 
fact that you refuse to answer the question, namely, how it is 
that all of this has been effected without The Potash Resources 
Act being implemented? — in view of the fact, the 
incontrovertible fact, that your own management at PCS 
admitted, from Mr. Schoenhals down, has been planning a 
major shut-down at Cory; in view of the fact that everybody 
who knows how government operates knows that you and the 
Premier must have known that — management doesn’t act in a 
vacuum; they inform you. It’s true that the board of directors 
makes the final decision, but you must have known that in the 
fall — isn’t the reality of the situation that The Potash 
Resources Act was a smoke-screen to cover up the fact that you 
had the true intent, which was in effect to dismantle PCS, harm 
Saskatchewan families, and putting it bluntly, mislead the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan. Shame on your for 
doing that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, those that understand potash 
know full well that the passing of the legislation last year had a 
dramatic effect in stability to world-wide potash market and 
pricing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Secondly, we have known, Mr. Speaker, for some time that the 
decision in 1979, made by that member in his capacity as 
minister responsible for the government take-over of potash, 
and as minister responsible then for potash corporation to have 
a dramatic expansion in productive capacity in Saskatchewan, 
has led to a very, very serious problem. 
 
We have wrestled with different ways to do it. We’ve known 
about the problem, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sitting here and saying 
we didn’t. What I say, Mr. Speaker, is he knew about the 
problem. He knew about the problem, Mr. Speaker, because he 
caused the problem. He knew about the problem when he 
personally in 1982, Mr. Speaker, said the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan can run at full capacity, because there was an 
election, Mr. Speaker. That’s where the problems come, Mr. 
Speaker. They have been there for a while. We’ve known about 
them. 
 
Dealing with them, Mr. Speaker, is difficult — it’s very 
difficult, Mr. Speaker. But we’re trying to do it in the interest, 
not only of the corporation and the industry, but all of the 
people of this province, Mr. Speaker. And it’s not easy to solve 
a problem caused by that member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Study of Water Supplies for Power Project 
 

Mr. Lyons: — My questions today, Mr. Speaker, are to the 
minister responsible to the Saskatchewan Water Corporation. 
 
Mr. Minister, several weeks ago your department  

suspended Mr. Stephen Kendall from quoting from a document 
dealing with the South Saskatchewan River Basin. I wonder, 
sir, would you be so kind as to table that document here in the 
House today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, the questions and answers on 
the Kendall affair have been answered very well over a period 
of time, but maybe the member opposite didn’t understand or 
didn’t listen. 
 
The document that Mr. Kendall quoted from was a research 
study that a group that he is heading is undertaking at this time, 
and the report will not be made available to the water 
corporation until at least late 1989 or early 1990. I cannot table 
a document which has not been presented to the water 
corporation at this time, and the suspension of Mr. Kendall 
dealt with a number of things, not just his quoting from that 
document, but rather a wide range of things. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Supplementary. Mr. Speaker, will the minister 
confirm that the water corporation, contrary to what he just 
said, has that document in his possession, given that the 
document, entitled the South Saskatchewan River Basin Study, 
was dated March 13, 1987, and it carries the logo about the 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation and Environment Canada. 
That document exists. You have it, contrary to what you said, 
sir. Will you table it for the House now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, the documents that the 
member is quoting, if he has some document maybe he’ll have 
to table it; I don’t have it and my department doesn’t have it and 
the water corporation doesn’t have it. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the same 
minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, the ability to remember whether or not you and 
your government has documents is well known by the people of 
this province. On May 5 in this House, Mr. Minister, you said: 
 

But as a corporation, i.e. the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation, we’re not considering diverting water out of 
the South Saskatchewan into the Souris, or anything like 
that. 

 
I want to refer you to page 3.7 of the report that you have in 
your possession, wherein it states: 
 

Presently under active consideration is the Rafferty Dam 
and reservoir project. If implemented, this project would 
rely on local runoff for its water supply. However, the 
available draft in the Souris River is not sufficient for 
projected long-term requirements. The future development 
of the Qu’Appelle River to Souris River Diversion, 
therefore, appears to be a viable source of supply. 

  



 
June 3, 1988 

1822 
 

Mr. Minister, the credibility of yourself and your government is 
well known. Come clean. Table that document in the House so 
that the people of Saskatchewan can debate the future of water 
resources, something that is most precious to them. Stop 
playing politics with water. Put that item on the Table so that 
we can all take a look at what your real plans are. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I enjoy the excitement 
the hon. member seems to get into when he gets up to speak, 
but I’d like to advise him that most of the information that he’s 
quoting from is a document that comes back . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The minister is having 
difficulty answering because apparently some other members 
wish to answer. I think he’s been asked to answer; let us allow 
him to answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The document that the member is quoting 
from is a document that was done in a research project back in 
1973 when his government was in power, and that particular 
document made some wild recommendations. Our government 
is not prepared to follow that direction, and I advised him 
before that we were not going to do it, and we’re still not going 
to. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Minister, what you’ve said is contrary 
to the facts of what your own document says. Your credibility, 
however, is well known in terms of environmental circuits. We 
don’t have to deal with that question. 
 
A new question to you, sir, is this: is the reason that you do not 
have sufficient data on water availability in the Souris River 
and in the Moose Mountain Creek the real reason why the 
federal government is refusing to grant a licence to your 
precious Rafferty-Alameda boondoggle? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — The federal government has a process that 
it undertakes before it grants approvals. The minister 
responsible for Saskatchewan Power Corporation has advised 
the hon. member that in his meetings in Ottawa he was advised 
that he would soon have approval for that project. Any talks 
that I’ve had with the ministers in Ottawa would indicate that to 
me as well, that very soon we will see an approval. And I guess 
the best thing that you and I can do is to wait until the federal 
process is complete and the approval is granted. We’ll see who 
is right. 
 

Cancellation of Two-Price Wheat 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Premier in his capacity as Minister of Agriculture, and it has 
to do with the now official cancellation of the two-price 
program for wheat sales that will come into effect, we are now 
told, this week. It will come into effect on August 1 this year, 
that is the cancellation of that program in the wake of the free 
trade agreement. 

I’m interested, Mr. Premier, in the substitute program that has 
been promised to compensate for the loss of two-price wheat. 
And I wonder if you can indicate to me, how much money 
specifically, in compensation for two-price wheat, will be 
coming to Saskatchewan farmers; what’s Saskatchewan’s share 
of that package? When will it be coming? What is the method 
of payment that is going to be used? And does the federal 
commitment extend beyond just one crop year, because it 
would appear from the comments of the federal Minister of 
Agriculture that he is talking about one year of compensation 
only? 
 
Could you provide us with those details since it has now been 
eight months since it was rumoured that that program was going 
to be cancelled? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
compensation for the first year is $227 million, and 80.5 per 
cent of that will come to the prairie provinces, and about 19.5 
per cent will be going to central Canadian . . . primarily 
Ontario. 
 
I’m not sure that I have our share of the prairie provinces, but it 
would be over half, or about half of the 80.5. So we would get 
about half, or pretty close to over $200 million. So the lion’s 
share of the benefit of the $227 million will come to 
Saskatchewan. We’ll get the lion’s share of that, and the lion’s 
share of the residual goes to the West — 200 million, 
approximately, to the West, out of 227. That’s the first year. 
 
The second year they’re picking it up with respect to both 
deficiency payments and western grains stabilization program, 
and they will be paying directly to farmers, as this payment will 
be. 
 
Third, with respect to the question of how the payments will be 
made, I’m not sure that I have the answer to that, other than 
direct cheques. I mean that they send it to the farmer based on 
his acreage and his contribution and his records in the past. 
 
I will say to the hon. member that what we had found 
increasingly was that Ontario was starting to grow more and 
more spring wheat because all of it was domestic. So everything 
that they grew, they got $7 a bushel. And so much of this 
money was going right into Ontario, and it was an incentive for 
them to grow spring wheat or durum wheat because it was all 
domestic and they were picking up $7 a bushel. I believe about 
20 to 25 per cent of the total payments were going to 4 per cent 
of the farmers in the country. We’ve got to change that. Clearly 
it’s a good idea for us to have comparable compensation here to 
our farmers, but to make sure that Ontario doesn’t take the 
place of the spring wheat producers here in the country. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Supplementary to the Premier on the same 
point. Mr. Premier, it’s still not clear from your answer what 
kind of compensation package for the two-price wheat program 
will exist beyond this next crop year. It seems to me you’re 
suggesting that it will be just rolled into other programs. I 
wonder if you could clarify that point in terms of what specific 
compensation will continue for the long term past the 
forthcoming crop year? And secondly, what are the guarantees 
for  
  



 
June 3, 1988 

1823 
 

Canadian consumers that the cancellation of this program will 
in fact be reflected in lower bread prices as has been one of the 
rationales for cancelling the program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well dealing with that last point first, I’m 
sure that Canadian consumers are going to watch bread prices 
pretty closely because they know with the elimination of 
two-price wheat that a certain percentage of the costs are now 
no longer going to be taken into account by the bakers and the 
millers. And so we’ll have a pretty good record of what bread 
prices were prior to the removal of the two-price wheat, and 
then we’ll be able to review it in the legislature and other places 
after the removal of two-priced wheat. 
 
So I would suspect, just because we can all watch it and it is 
public, that we will find out whether the price of wheat went 
down or went up at a less quick or less fast rate — in other 
words, the benefit to the consumers. 
 
Guarantees: I mean, we watch the market-place, and we will 
say, let’s see what happens as a result of your costs going down. 
Your cost going down; why doesn’t the price of bread go 
down? And we will be able to monitor that. 
 
With respect to the amount of compensation, if the federal 
government tops-up western grain stabilization or tops-up the 
deficiency payments to the extent that it benefits farmers here 
like two-price wheat, that’s precisely what you would like to 
have as opposed to the benefit going to Ontario. So what I have 
asked them, and we will be watching along with you, and I’m 
sure lots of farmers across the West, that they indeed put the 
corresponding money there to make sure, given market prices 
and the costs, that money comes out through to farmers in the 
programs that we have now that are seen to be pretty fair in 
terms of the allocation of money across the piece in western 
Canada. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 73  An Act respecting Wages, Hours of Work, 
Vacations, Parental Leave, and other Employment Benefits 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting Wages Hours of Work, Vacations, Parental 
Leave, and other Employment Benefits. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 74 — An Act respecting the Production, Supply, 
Distribution and Sale of Milk 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting the Production, Supply, Distribution and Sale of 
Milk. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF DOCUMENT 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders of the 
day I’d like to table with the House the document that  

I referred to in question period; as well, a copy of the Hansard 
of May 5 in which the minister made the statement referred to 
in question period. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I ask 
for leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 
the Assembly today 39 grades 7 and 8 students from the Kyle 
Composite School. They are seated in the west gallery and are 
here visiting in Regina. I’d like to welcome the students and 
their teachers and their chaperon — Wendy Turner, Wayne 
Darohl and Barb Moore. I’ll be meeting with the students at 
about 11 o’clock on the lawn outside. I look forward to that 
opportunity to meet with the students and to answer any 
questions that they may have. 
 
I would ask the Assembly to welcome these students here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 38 — An Act to 
amend The Residential Tenancies Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The first think I 
want to say this morning, Mr. Speaker, is that renters aren’t 
aware of what is contained in this Bill 38, An Act to amend The 
Residential Tenancies Act. They aren’t aware, obviously so, 
because if they were they would be up in arms against this PC 
government, because this legislation is against renters and 
tenants. This legislation affects people who rent apartments or 
trailer space or the like, in a very, very fundamental way. I’m 
certain that these people aren’t aware of the implications of this 
legislation at the present time and that’s why I’m very pleased 
to be able to speak to this Bill this afternoon. 
 
The issue, the fundamental issue with this legislation is rental 
protection. Protection for renters has gone the way of the dodo 
bird with this legislation. It simply no longer will exist after this 
legislation is passed, if it is passed. 
 
Last night on the television news, many Saskatchewan people 
will have seen a report on an investigation conducted by the 
Office of the Rentalsman, an investigation into a problem where 
a man had moved into an apartment and found out that the 
apartment needed subsequent repair work. He approached the 
landlord and the landlord refused to do that repair work. 
  



 
June 3, 1988 

1824 
 

At that point, the renter went to the Office of the Rentalsman 
and requested an investigation. And the Office of the 
Rentalsman, as it is presently constituted, initiated an 
investigation to ascertain what the facts of the matter really 
were, whether the apartment needed the repairs or not; 
determined that in fact the apartment was in need of repairs, and 
placed an order to the landlord that the repairs should be done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this will no longer happen in Saskatchewan if this 
legislation is passed. It simply will not happen that way any 
more because the Office of the Rentalsman will no longer 
launch investigations on behalf of tenants. And this is a 
fundamental difference with respect to the system of rental 
protection that we now have in place. 
 
So I say to the renters of Saskatchewan that the central issue, 
the heart of the issue with respect to this Bill 38, is an uncaring 
government that betrays Saskatchewan people. And we have 
seen this again and again and again from this government 
opposite. 
 
When it comes to disclosure of the cost of credit, for example 
— another piece of legislation introduced this session — there’s 
no effort to effect actual disclosure of the cost of credit to 
protect borrowers. No, no, quite the opposite. The legislation 
introduced is advanced to protect the interests of lenders, and 
not borrowers or consumers. 
 
And so in a similar fashion, with this legislation, we have 
legislation that is introduced expressly to protect the interests of 
landlords and not the interests of tenants. And I say that is 
typical vintage PC legislation that assists the wealthy and 
ignores those on low income — totally ignores them and 
abandons them to their own resources. And this is 
fundamentally unfair. 
 
I note, Mr. Speaker, that one of my colleagues would like to 
introduce some students, and so I will give leave. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure today to 
welcome to the Assembly, 43 grade 4 students that are seated in 
the Speaker’s gallery. They are from Swift Current, an 
elementary school called Central School. It is one of our oldest 
and our heritage school in our city. 
 
They are accompanied by their teachers, Dallas Kolb and 
Donna Stinson, and I believe they have a chaperon with them in 
the name of Brenna Stolhandske. I would ask all members to 
welcome these students, and I will look forward to meeting with 
them at 11:30. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 38 (continued) 
 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying 
before the introductions that just took place, this legislation is 
vintage PC legislation that protects the  

wealthy and ignores those on low or moderate incomes, 
abandons them to their own resources, which are negligible to 
begin with. They compare not in the smallest degree to the kind 
of resources that landlords have. 
 
Most landlords are not renters themselves. Most landlords in 
this province are people who own property, who own their own 
home to begin with, and then, because they have surplus 
income, can afford to invest in rental property and rent it out. 
These are people who don’t need to be protected, who have the 
resources to provide for themselves and to protect themselves. 
But renters aren’t in the same boat. But this government ignores 
renters. Renters now live in a Never Land of protection with 
this legislation. 
 
We saw the beginnings of this trajectory back in 1984, Mr. 
Speaker, with the introduction of the Rent Appeal Commission 
to replace rent control. At that time, renters were abandoned and 
put progressively more onto the reliance of their own meagre 
resources. Typical Progressive Conservative legislation to 
progressively abandon people to their own resources when 
those resources are minuscule or non-existent. 
 
We saw it with the introduction of rent control in 1984, the 
preference for the landlord. The landlord could now go ahead 
with the abandonment of rent control and raise rental rates and 
only have them reviewed if and when a majority of the tenants 
got together and, as a group, filed their own grievances with the 
Rent Appeal Commission. Prior to that an individual tenant 
could approach the rent review commission and effect 
satisfaction if they had a grievance. The process was made ever 
so much more difficult for renters back in 1984. 
 
Well now we see, in 1988, an extension of this same trajectory, 
abandoning renters. And now all pretence of impartiality is 
abandoned with this particular piece of legislation. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated, this legislation 
effectively does away with any form of enforcement with 
respect to the Office of the Rentalsman. What it really does is 
say that the Office of the Rentalsman is there as a nice sort of 
adjudicatory body, but it’s not really going to enforce any 
legislation or any regulations unless circumstances are pushed 
very, very vigorously by renters. We’ll simply let the landlords 
take control of the situation and assume and trust that they will 
act in the best interests of their renters. Typical PC philosophy. 
Typical PC philosophy to trust those in places of power and 
privilege, and not to protect those who are of moderate means 
or low income. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only is enforcement abandoned effectively, so 
that landlords can do very much as they now please with respect 
to tenants, but we now also find, lo and behold, that the Office 
of the Rentalsman no longer will even conduct investigations. If 
an investigation is to be had, it must come at the initiation of the 
individual renter. 
 
Now this is quite a change because previous to this, an 
individual renter who had a problem with respect to his landlord 
could approach the Rent Appeal Commission . . .  



 
June 3, 1988 

1825 
 

the Office of the Rentalsman. And the Office of the 
Rentalsman, on behalf of the renter, as a result of that particular 
filing of a complaint or a problem, the Office of the Rentalsman 
itself would go and conduct an investigation. They would have 
the time and the resources, fiscally and otherwise. 
 
(1045) 
 
They would have the appropriate experience and knowledge 
and understanding of legal process to go ahead and act on 
behalf of renters to determine very quickly and easily, given the 
resources at their disposal, whether in fact an investigation was 
warranted in the first instance or, if it was warranted, what the 
facts of the matter really were. And that’s a very simply, 
transparent, efficient sort of system with respect to adjudicating 
landlord and tenant disputes. 
 
But that system no longer exists, Mr. Speaker, with this 
legislation. What happens now is an individual tenant must go 
out and conduct their own investigation, marshal their own 
information, check out their own legal rights and 
responsibilities, produce the evidence and the documentation, 
request an investigation, and pay a fee for the investigation as 
well. 
 
Now was there any fee in the previous system that I’ve just 
described? No there wasn’t, Mr. Speaker. There was not a fee 
because that system was fair to people who are renting. And 
this system is not fair to renters. What is required is not only 
that they go out and marshal their own documentation and 
launch an investigation, but now they must reach into their own 
pocket-book and pay a fee to pay for an investigation that they 
themselves are conducting. 
 
Typical PC preference for those in positions of power and 
privilege and an abandonment of the poor and those of 
moderate means. 
 
How many renters, Mr. Speaker — and you know this yourself 
from some of your constituents who rent — can afford that kind 
of luxury? They have enough trouble coming up with the 
money to pay the rent in the first place, and then to pay a 
damage deposit. And then if they want to get the damage 
deposit back, they have to pay a fee. It’s patently unfair. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Speaker, but if that investigation does not 
arrive at a settlement that’s suitable to the renter, and the renter 
would like to appeal it, the renter has an option under this 
legislation to take it to court. 
 
Now how many people of low and moderate means can afford 
to take a rental dispute to Court of Queen’s Bench? I ask you 
that. How many people can afford to take a rental dispute for 
$250 damage deposit or maybe 4 or $500 worth of rent, how 
many people can afford to take that kind of case into the court 
system? It simply isn’t an option of appeal for most 
Saskatchewan people who are presently renting. 
 
A court case on even a small, simple, trivial matter nowadays 
can cost a minimum of $1,000, up to $2,000. And this is for a 
very trivial matter. If the matter is of any  

substance or consequence, the court fees and the legal fees can 
easily run between 5,000 and $10,000. Mr. Speaker, hardly the 
kind of option that is realistic for people on low or moderate 
incomes, but precisely the kind of option that is put forth in this 
legislation by the Progressive Conservative government — 
progressively penalizing people on low and moderate incomes, 
adding insult to injury, abolishing the rent control program, 
substituting, in 1984, the Rent Appeal Commission, and now 
doing away with the Rent Appeal Commission, abandoning 
those on low and middle incomes to their own meagre means. 
Typical Progressive Conservative philosophy. And asking them 
to pay a fee to conduct their own investigation. How wonderful 
this is! 
 
Well it’s not any different from the operative philosophy of this 
Progressive Conservative government with respect to other 
fees. For example, driver’s licences increased by 33 per cent; 
registration fees for personal vehicles increased 92 per cent; 
trailer, the licence fees to register a trailer increased by 73 per 
cent this spring; surcharges for accidents, first accident, 
increased from $50 to $100; replacement driver’s licence — 
you lose your driver’s licence — it used to be $5 you’d have to 
pay for that, now you pay $10; you lose the little sticker off 
your licence plate on your car — it happens to fall of or 
whatever — that doubles in cost now from $5 to $10. 
 
This isn’t nickel and diming, not for people in low incomes. It 
isn’t nickel and diming, Mr. Speaker, it’s taking dollars out of 
their pockets, hard-earned dollars, few dollars that they have to 
spare. Taking those dollars, again I say, with this legislation, 
from renters, as they have from average Saskatchewan people 
time after time after time again. 
 
And as has been noted before in this House, Mr. Speaker, this 
progressive government, yes, progressively has introduced even 
a $25 application for admission fee to technical institutes in 
Saskatchewan. Even to change your name in the province of 
Saskatchewan has now gone up from $25 to $75 — a 300 per 
cent increase in fees, one of 220 increases in fees for services 
by this Saskatchewan government, this Progressive 
Conservative government; and now we have fee number 221. 
 
Well this is bad enough, Mr. Speaker, but when it comes to 
handling of damage deposits, this legislation also introduces 
changes. Very, very few tenants historically, without some form 
of intervention by their provincial governments, have been able 
to secure their damage deposits back from landlords. 
Historically, before the intervention of the Office of the 
Rentalsman, damage deposits have been a gravy train for 
landlords; and the more unscrupulous the landlord in this 
regard, the bigger the gravy train. 
 
Individual tenants usually find it very, very difficult to effect 
the return of a damage deposit that’s to be paid after they leave 
their place of occupancy. They find it very difficult to collect 
this fee when they’ve moved out, not only of the particular 
apartment but, in many instances, outside of the community or 
even outside of the province. And landlords know that. They 
know that they can hold onto the fee for damage deposit unless 
there is some sort of framework put into the legislation whereby 
renters  
  



 
June 3, 1988 

1826 
 

have some advocacy on their behalf by a public agency such as 
the Office of the Rentalsman. 
 
And with the Office of the Rentalsman, historically there has 
been provision — although not as adequate as I would like to 
see — there has been provision for renters to effect return of 
their damage deposit. This legislation changes all of that, and 
makes it more difficult for tenants to get their damage deposit 
back, and far easier for landowners to sit on it. And this is 
expressly in keeping with what I’ve said about other aspects or 
dimensions of this legislation, that it’s patently preferential to 
the interests of the landlords, and against the interests of 
tenants. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, if Saskatchewan renters knew about 
this proposed legislation, this progressive rip-off legislation by 
this government, they would be up in arms, they would be up in 
arms against the unfairness of this legislation. 
 
Now I ask myself, and people in Saskatchewan might well ask 
themself: why then do we find amendments to The Residential 
Tenancies Act? Why would this government want to do such a 
thing as to abandon renters and to take side with the interests of 
landlords? It certainly doesn’t make sense in terms of a positive 
role for any government to protect the interests of ordinary 
people, especially people on low and moderate means. So why 
would the provincial government want to introduce such 
legislation if it had the consequences that I’ve just outlined for 
Saskatchewan tenants? 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, the answer is very simple. It’s part of a 
larger trajectory or perspective that says, this is hands-off 
government; we are going to rely on the forces of the 
market-place to effect a certain equilibrium with respect to 
landlord-tenant relationships, and we’ll trust that things will 
work themselves out in some fashion such that the interests of 
tenants will be looked after in some fashion, and we really don’t 
care in what kind of fashion just as long as we don’t have to 
deal with it. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, this sort of deregulation is part of a larger 
perspective that says we are going to privatize public services. 
And what better way to privatize functions of the Office of the 
Rentalsman, for example, than to abandon the Rent Appeal 
Commission and to abandon renters to their own means. We’ll 
just simply privatize those functions historically done by the 
Office of the Rentalsman and the Rent Appeal Commission. 
We’ll privatize those and put those matters into the hands of the 
folks who are poor and of moderate means, and we’ll just see 
what happens. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, New Democrats know what’s going to 
happen with this legislation. New Democrats know that tenants 
are going to be ripped off by this legislation, and it’s not going 
to be landlords that are ripping them off, it’s this government 
that’s ripping them off with this legislation that’s proposed here 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are gradually awakening to 
what privatization and deregulation is all about. Privatization 
and deregulation is really a progressive preference on the part of 
the provincial government for those in positions of power and 
wealth in  

our province, progressively abandoning the interests of low and 
moderate income people, and progressively favouring those in 
positions of relative wealth and privilege. 
 
The average renter scarcely has the means to launch 
investigations. That’s why we’ve had a Rent Appeal 
Commission and the Office of the Rentalsman who has 
conducted those kinds of investigations. This Progressive 
Conservative legislation is regressive if we look at the interest 
of low and moderate income people. 
 
(1100) 
 
In fact if we look at the interests of average Saskatchewan 
people, I think that average Saskatchewan people want a 
government that is prepared to provide a basic framework of 
stability and fairness for everyone in the province, and to not 
show preference for those in positions of power or wealth or 
privilege. 
 
This legislation is really part of what I would call the backwards 
plague that has affected the province of Saskatchewan since 
1982. It reflects typical PC preference for those in positions of 
power. It’s a throw-back to the days of rugged individualism 
and the selfish ethic of the strong, which I call the jungle 
morality. Let the strong survive, let the landlords thrive. And if 
they want to rip off renters in the process, we’ll be partners to 
them, this Progressive Conservative government — we’ll be 
partners to that kind of rip-off. In fact we’ll even grease the 
skids for it; we’ll facilitate it with this Bill 38, a Bill to amend 
The Residential Tenancies Act. 
 
We aren’t going to enforce residential tenancies legislation. No, 
far from it. The Office of the Rentalsman won’t have anything 
to do with that any more. Landlords can do anything they want. 
We aren’t going to conduct investigations any more. Far from 
it. Far be it from us, the Progressive Conservative government, 
to do that kind of advocacy on behalf of average Saskatchewan 
people. They can do that for themselves. Thieves! 
 
Far be it from us to staff a complement of investigatory staff in 
the Office of the Rentalsman. Individual Saskatchewan people 
can do that for themselves. In fact they’d better do that for 
themselves because we don’t care about them. We’re a 
Progressive Conservative government. We care about the 
wealthy and the rich and those in positions of power and 
privilege, like landlords and huge real estate corporations and 
holding companies that will rip off renters and do whatever they 
want. We’ll look after the interests of the slum lords, and we’ll 
abandon the tenants of their own means. We’ll charge them fees 
for their actions. 
 
We don’t care about people having to pay damage deposits and 
not getting them back. All the more for the rich and wealthy and 
the powerful and the privileged. All the more for landlords. 
Some sort of protection of Saskatchewan people! This is a 
backwards plague. This legislation is an abomination. It really 
is sickening. 
 
And I say again, Mr. Speaker, if Saskatchewan tenants become 
aware of this legislation, if the cat is let out of the bag, they will 
be up in arms with this Progressive  
  



 
June 3, 1988 

1827 
 

Conservative government. And I can certainly say that on this 
side of the House we intend to make Saskatchewan renters 
aware of the implications of this legislation, which is no less 
different or no less important to them than the abolition of rent 
control back in 1984. 
 
One final note, Mr. Speaker. No mention has been made by 
myself yet about what is going to happen to the staff of the 
Office of the Rentalsman. What’s going to happen to the 
investigatory staff in the Rent Appeal Commission who 
presently have been conducting investigations if, in fact, 
Saskatchewan tenants are going to be doing the investigations 
themselves? In effect, they aren’t going to be doing them; they 
don’t have the means to do them. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The staff will be working for welfare. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — My colleague says that the staff might well 
be working for welfare. Currently it’s my understanding that 
there are some four people, investigatory staff, in the Regina 
office of the Office of the Rentalsman; there are apparently 
some six staff in the Saskatoon office; and in the Prince Albert 
office one staff person, for, as far as I’ve been able to 
determine, a total of 11 investigatory staff at the present time. 
 
Does this legislation mean that these staff people presently 
conducting investigations are going to be privatized and put 
back into the market-place to find new jobs? I think so, Mr. 
Speaker. I think with this legislation we are going to see the 
elimination of another 11 jobs in the province of Saskatchewan. 
So it’s not just an abandoning of Saskatchewan tenants, it’s an 
abandoning of public employees to their own means. This 
government doesn’t care about their livelihood or their career as 
public servants. It doesn’t really care for that any more than it 
cares for the interests of tenants and renters. This government is 
quite content to see to it that these people find other work, even 
if it has to be work for welfare. 
 
And I for one, and I think, I — I know I speak for other 
members on this side of the House — say that New Democrats 
appreciate the professional work of a committed public service. 
People who have a wealth of experience and understanding, for 
example, in the Office of the Rentalsman, ought not to be 
privatized. They, in fact, ought to have the opportunity to act on 
behalf of Saskatchewan renters to conduct investigations on 
their behalf and to provide a public service which most 
Saskatchewan people are ill prepared or equipped, in terms of 
their education or their financial circumstances, to provide for 
themselves. And that is precisely the rationale for a professional 
public service, paid for from the public purse, to do more 
efficiently and effectively, in cost terms as well, what individual 
Saskatchewan people cannot ordinarily do for themselves. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of fundamental issues 
with respect to this particular legislation to amend The 
Residential Tenancies Act. There are fundamental issues of 
fairness of the role of the provincial government with respect to 
protecting those who are on low and moderate incomes. 

There are questions regarding the deregulation of various public 
services. There are questions of employment as well. And I 
think that given the kinds of arguments that I’ve advanced here 
this morning, that there is no way that our side of the House can 
support this particular legislation to amend The Residential 
Tenancies Act. 
 
This is bad legislation for the interests of ordinary 
Saskatchewan citizens; it’s preferential, and we have no option 
but to oppose it. What it really does, Mr. Speaker, is to let rental 
protection go the way of the dodo bird, all in the name of 
Progressive Conservative philosophy. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
piece of legislation regarding The Residential Tenancies Act is 
being brought in by the Minister of Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs, the member for Saskatoon Mayfair. And it’s a deep 
disappointment to me that a member from Saskatoon would be 
prepared to bring in legislation that would so hurt so many of 
the people who live in the largest city in Saskatchewan. And as 
the MLA for Saskatoon Centre constituency, where 70 per cent 
of the people approximately are renters, I want to have a fair bit 
to say about this piece of legislation that’s before us. 
 
Now I recognize that probably one of the reasons for this piece 
of legislation to abolish the Rent Appeal Commission is 
because over the last couple of years the numbers of appeals 
that have come before this commission have decreased. And it’s 
no wonder that they’ve decreased, because people have had 
such a very hard time putting an appeal forward and getting any 
resolution in favour of their concerns as tenants. So it’s no 
wonder that this is coming forward from that perspective, but 
there’s a lot of reasons why this legislation upholding a rent 
appeal commission should be kept in place, and I want to refer 
to those points as I speak to you. 
 
The files that the Minister of Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs, the member from Saskatoon Mayfair, inherited from 
the former minister for Consumer and Commercial Affairs, 
contain a great many numbers of letters expressing concerns 
from constituents in Saskatoon Centre. And I’m very 
disappointed the minister didn’t take the time to read those 
letters and to look at the conditions that people are fighting 
against in Saskatoon when they’re tenants in the apartments, 
particularly in the downtown area that I represent. 
 
Instead, as part of the PC team, as part of this Tory government 
which is attacking average people and low income people in all 
sorts of ways, the Minister of Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs, the member from Saskatoon Mayfair, has agreed to go 
along with this backward step into a philosophy that comes 
straight from 100 years ago, from the 1890s. 
 
It’s a philosophy where the rich are right and the rest are 
worthless. It’s a philosophy that I, as a New Democrat, am very 
pleased to oppose in every way I can. It’s a philosophy that 
hurts so many of the people in our province; it’s a philosophy 
that doesn’t deserve one  
  



 
June 3, 1988 

1828 
 

ounce of credibility; it’s a philosophy that allows a government 
to bring in this kind of attack on tenants, which my colleague, 
the member from Saskatoon Sutherland, has so eloquently 
described. 
 
But it’s not surprising that this government opposite brings in 
this kind of legislation, as they are favouring the rich, seeing the 
rich are right and the rest are worthless, as I’ve said earlier. 
They have little awareness of other people’s realities even 
though they stand up in this House and constantly talk to us 
about the need to come to terms with reality. I wish they would 
just take one minute to come to terms with reality, the reality of 
the lives of the people in this province. I wish they would put 
the people first in this province — the people on average 
incomes, the people on low incomes, the people that are hurting 
so badly under all the attacks from this government. 
 
And I just wish for one minute the member for Saskatoon 
Mayfair had looked in his files, had read the letters from people 
in this province regarding the rent issues and the power of 
landlords. And I wish that he at least had taken some 
consideration into account on behalf of the people. 
 
Instead of that, we have a government that thinks that 
everybody can afford to buy their own home and should be in 
their own home. I’m sure that’s part of their philosophy, 
because how could the Minister of Social Services say that 
people who are hungry should be planting a garden? To have a 
garden you have to have a home; you have to have earth around 
your home in order to be able to do something like that. And 
here we have people living in the cities, particularly, who have 
access to very small rooms, many of them on top of stores in 
the downtown area of Saskatoon, and they’re being told by this 
government to go plant a garden if they’re hungry. Go plant a 
garden. 
 
The other day we had another example of it when we 
complained of the fact that the Minister of Social Services had 
taken away the transportation allowance for people on social 
assistance. And this is all part of the same philosophy, Mr. 
Speaker. The Minister of Social Services said, oh they can pay 
their taxi fares to go to the doctor and then they can submit a 
receipt to Social Services. But oh, they can’t submit a small 
receipt; they have to wait until it piles up, then they submit a 
receipt for $20 and get the money back. And he said they don’t 
want to pile up a number of small receipts like 75 cents or $2. 
And I was horrified when I heard him say that, because he’s 
referring to taxi fares . . . to people who are sick, who have to 
get to medical attention. And there’s no place in Saskatchewan 
where you could take a taxi for 75 cents for the last 30 years, 
I’m sure. Certainly now you can’t. 
 
(1115) 
 
And I want to get on to the issue of The Residential Tenancies 
Act. The government opposite, the Deputy Premier, is saying, 
get on to the issue of this legislation. He’s completely incapable 
of seeing the connections between the items that I’m talking 
about, the concerns of people on low income and the need for 
support from this government opposite for people on average 
and low incomes in this province, and the need for the 
government to put people at the heart of government.  

And if he can’t see the analogies that I’m making, that’s just 
part of the problem. 
 
They want to divide everybody up in little issues, into little 
boxes that have no connection with anything else. And this 
piece of legislation has connection to all the issues that this 
government is putting forward — to the privatization, to the 
deregulation, and to the attack on people. That’s what we’re 
addressing on this side of the House. That’s what we’re 
concerned about. And if they can’t see the analogies, it’s just 
because they either haven’t learned from the realities of other 
people’s lives, if not their own, or perhaps they’re too dumb. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve said that this issue is a big concern in 
Saskatoon Centre. I’ve told you that 70 per cent, approximately, 
of the people who live in Saskatoon Centre live in rented 
accommodation, as they do in many other areas of this 
province. 
 
They do that for two reasons, one of two reasons: either they 
can’t afford to buy a home, and the cost of housing is going up 
constantly, or they have chosen to live in rented apartments 
because they’ve no longer got the physical strength and the 
resources needed to maintain themselves in their own homes. 
 
In Saskatoon Centre a great number of people who have moved 
into the downtown area are senior citizens or over the age of 60, 
and they have chosen to move into the downtown area of the 
city for the amenities that are downtown, for the resources that 
are there to help them in their older age to provide them with a 
reasonably good life. And I have had so many constituents who 
have been so hurt by rent increases over these last years. 
 
With the failure of the rent control system, the overturn of the 
rent control system in 1984, many, many people, older people, 
have been badly hurt. And when I first was nominated as a 
candidate in 1985, before the election I received all sorts of 
submissions from older people in the downtown area where 
their apartment rents were going up and going up and going up. 
And they were in a panic, some of them even with heart 
conditions, older people, in a panic. What were they going to 
do? 
 
They had to move out — they had to move out. They had to 
move away from the downtown area of the city where they 
could walk to the public library, where they could be in a park, 
where they could walk to the stores. And they had to go to 
apartments on the outside of the city where the rent was 
cheaper, and where they could sit and live in loneliness and 
isolation on the outskirts of the city where the bus 
transportation is poor and the costs of living are higher. But just 
in order to pay for a roof over their head, an essential service in 
Canada, an essential, basic need — housing — just to pay for 
housing, they had to go to the outskirts of the city because the 
rents are going up. I’ve had many, many constituents with that 
problem. 
 
Another problem that they had, and the Minister for Consumer 
and Commercial Affairs, the member for Saskatoon Mayfair, 
should be aware of this in his files — problems of the landlords 
increasing the rents for all sorts of reasons which tenants have a 
right . . . have had a right to appeal to the Rent Appeal 
Commission. 
  



 
June 3, 1988 

1829 
 

They get their carpets, their worn-out carpets in their apartment 
buildings replaced, and the landlord calls it an improvement. 
They get the plumbing system replaced when it’s not providing 
hot and cold running water any more, has to be replaced — the 
landlord calls that a major improvement. And The Office of the 
Rentalsman has allowed the increase, based on repairing 
something like a plumbing system or a heating system. 
 
In one apartment building, in a tornado, the railing blew down 
into the street. The tenant’s rent went up to replace that railing, 
and the landlord said he had to replace it with a safe one, a safe 
railing. 
 
Now in the first place, he shouldn’t have an apartment building 
with unsafe railing five storeys up that came flying down on 
people’s cars, and luckily didn’t hurt anybody. But this piece of 
equipment that had to be replaced was considered an 
improvement, and the rents went up. And there were many 
tenants in those apartment buildings who were very concerned, 
who made an appeal to the Office of the Rentalsman. Their 
appeal was rejected because the rent review system is very 
weak already. But they could at least have taken it to the Rent 
Appeal Commission. Now they don’t have that. Now they don’t 
have that with this new legislation. 
 
Many of them have to face evictions when they question these 
increases in rents and the reasons for the increases in rents. If 
you complain if your roof is leaking, the landlord says, get out; 
go find another place — instead of repairing, instead of making 
basic repairs. 
 
And I say that people who are paying the high rents that we 
have in Saskatoon and other parts of the province deserve to 
have places where the stove works, the fridge works, the carpets 
are in repair, the plumbing works, the heating works. Those are 
all services that we take for granted in our country and in our 
cities here and in our province. And those are services that 
people should be provided with. 
 
Now the tenants have always found it very difficult to lobby as 
a group. They form tenants’ associations, but people move; the 
tenants’ associations are not strong. 
 
The association of the landlords, on the other hand, is 
particularly strong, and I’m sure the association of the landlords 
have put pressure on the government opposite to bring in this 
kind of legislation which so favours the landlord and puts 
everything away from any government protection for the 
tenants. 
 
That is a very unfortunate development, but it’s part of an 
ongoing development, as I’ve already pointed out. The 
landlords have been favoured by this government opposite since 
they came into power. And let me tell you who some of those 
landlords are in Saskatoon Centre. Those landlords are not the 
nice guy down the street who happens to have a house and own 
an apartment block, three-storey apartment block. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They’re probably all Tories. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Pardon. They’re all Tories. These landlords that 
we’re dealing with in the centre of Saskatoon are big  

holding companies, big speculators. These buildings change 
hands over and over again. They’re managed by companies in 
Saskatoon who sometimes will not even release the name of the 
landlord or the owner, themselves. So the tenants have a very 
hard time finding out who they’re dealing with, and likely as 
not they’re dealing with a management company that’s very 
indifferent to their concerns. They don’t care if people have to 
pack up and move; they don’t care if people get evicted. 
 
They say the rates are relatively low in Saskatoon; people are 
always looking for accommodation. As the population ages 
there are going to be more and more people looking for rental 
accommodation, feeling that they must move out of their 
homes; they can’t maintain their homes any longer. More and 
more people will have to be renting. More and more people will 
be needing protection. 
 
They can’t be left to the whims of the landlords because we’ve 
seen what’s happened there. The landlords will gouge people 
for every penny they can get unless they are controlled by the 
government. I don’t say this just as my own whim. I don’t say 
this as my own opinion. 
 
Look at the facts. Look what’s happened in Saskatchewan in the 
past. Look what’s happened all over North America and Europe 
in the past, before government legislation was brought in to 
protect ordinary people. The people with wealth and power 
always took everything they could get. People had to work long 
hours before there was legislation brought in for an eight-hour 
day, and people had to put up with wretched living conditions, 
and they have done that in the past in Saskatchewan. 
 
And one of the reasons why the New Democrats brought in rent 
controls was with the development particularly of the high-rise 
apartments, built especially for exploitation — for what you 
might call profit — exploitation on the basis of people’s need 
for housing. People were being gouged. We needed to have a 
balance. We needed to have a rent control system. We need a 
Rent Appeal Commission. We need these and we need them to 
be strong. We need them to be well staffed. 
 
The idea of people who are 75 years old having to get together 
to do their own investigation of the landlord and of the issues, 
and to have to then take it to the Rentalsman and pay a fee on 
top of it in order to be heard, and then if they’re not satisfied 
with the decision, to look at having to go to litigation and civil 
court — that’s ridiculous. You shouldn’t even put that in the 
legislation. I don’t know who that would protect. It costs 
thousands of dollars to do that. 
 
It just gives you a kind of front so you can say, oh well, we’ve 
provided them with an alternative. Good heavens! That’s not an 
alternative. That’s not a choice. But it’s like so many of the 
choices that you people put forward. It’s got no substance at all 
for the people in the constituency that I represent. There’s 
absolutely no protection at all for people. 
 
There’s far more issues. There’s issue of the damage deposit 
which has always been taken by the landlords as  
  



 
June 3, 1988 

1830 
 

a means of getting a little more money out of people. The rent 
every month is supposed to cover the wear and tear on a 
building, but now the landlords have always taken damage 
deposits on top of that, and have always kept them, under some 
excuse or other. Even for the tenants, even for the older women 
who live in Saskatoon Centre who are so very gentle and 
careful with the accommodation that they rent, even those 
people are being told they’ve done damage to the point where 
they can’t get their deposits back. 
 
And I’m not surprised that the government opposite doesn’t 
hear the kinds of points that I’m making because I have been 
appalled over and over again to hear how little they trust the 
people of the province. Somehow the people, whether they’re 
tenants or whether they’re workers, talking about what Paul 
Schoenhals has said to them in terms of confronting them with 
the lay-offs at the Cory mine, and the chairman of the potash 
corporation says something to them. 
 
This government doesn’t believe what they say. It doesn’t trust 
the welfare recipients to be giving the truth and to be having a 
struggle to live on — what? — $300 a month. Nobody can live 
on that. And yet you hound them with RCMP-type 
investigations because you don’t trust them. And you don’t trust 
the tenants to have been telling you the truth if they’re having 
problems with the landlords. Instead you trust the landlords. 
And you bring in legislation that even makes it more difficult 
for tenants. 
 
It’s just such a clear example of the difference between the 
philosophy of the New Democrats and the philosophy of the 
PCs. The Tory government is favouring, as I’ve said, the rich. 
The rich are right; the rest are worthless. The rest have no 
dignity, they have no respect, they have no consideration. 
 
You should have been strengthening the rent controls, 
especially as a member for Saskatoon Mayfair where some of 
your constituents are renting. You don’t have the same number 
of high-rises as I have, but you have a number of people on low 
income and a number of people renting. You should be 
supporting them, not bringing in legislation that makes it more 
difficult. 
 
Now I know you’re going to argue that this is just a 
housekeeping issue; that’s nobody’s using the Rent Appeal 
Commission any more; decrease in the number of concerns that 
go before it. Remember what I’ve told you. Remember the way 
the Office of the Rentalsman has not listened to the concerns of 
the tenants. 
 
And many, many issues that should have been resolved on 
behalf of the tenants, have favoured the landlord already, 
because your Office of the Rentalsman and other places have 
been staffed by patronage partly, staffed by people who support 
your philosophy whole-heartedly and don’t mind beating up on 
the poor people. People in Saskatoon Centre have the lowest per 
capita income of any of the constituencies in this city. 
 
But your system has already worked so hard against the tenants. 
Why did you bring in another piece of legislation to do the 
same? It’s just part of your continual failure to recognize the 
realities of the lives of people in this  

province and in our cities, particularly, where there is more 
rental accommodation than in the rural areas. It’s all part of that 
failure to recognize reality. 
 
And when I hear members opposite stand up and tell us that we 
don’t know about reality, I say to them, come for a walk with 
me in downtown Saskatoon. Come and talk to the tenants who 
are renting in these big apartments. Read the files, Mr. Minister, 
with the letters that have come from the constituents in 
Saskatoon and Regina, Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, and other 
areas where the rent issue is an ongoing sore, a running sore for 
anybody who needs to pay someone else rent in order to have 
some accommodation. 
 
(1130) 
 
The issue of rents and rent controls, the power of landlords, the 
failure of the appeals commission, the failure of this 
government to protect people, to step and to regulate and to put 
in force provisions that would help people who are already 
without power and without the strength that comes when you’ve 
got lots of money, the role of the government should be to put 
people at the heart of their legislation, to be concerned always 
that the people with the lowest incomes have at least some 
protection and some care and some compassion. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I’m really sad and shocked that you have 
seen fit not to do this, not to care, not to express compassion. 
You continually, as PCs, want to say that you care, and then 
you do things like this that demonstrate that you don’t at all. It’s 
by your actions that you’re judged, not by your words. 
 
You can have all sorts of rhetoric. You can have all sorts of hot 
air. You can talk on and on about the wonderful things you’re 
doing, but it’s the actions, it’s actions like this legislation that 
show exactly where you’re at, exactly who you support, exactly 
who you don’t care for and who you have no compassion for. 
 
It’s just this kind of legislation that attacks consumers and 
tenants, that demonstrates so clearly the difference between us 
as New Democrats and you as PCs; why I’m proud as a New 
Democrat to represent Saskatoon Centre constituency, to raise 
these issues on behalf my constituents, to raise it on behalf of 
all the other people in Saskatchewan who are renting and who 
have experienced the anxieties and the pain of having their rents 
go up, their costs go up in all sorts of other ways, and they 
haven’t got the money to cover it. They move or they suffer. 
 
But housing is a crucial essential need for all of us. It’s one area 
where we must have strong legislation to protect those who are 
so vulnerable. And nothing shows that need more, and the 
difference more between our party that are prepared to fight for 
these things, and your party that would let this kind of 
legislation go forward and people get hurt. 
 
I am opposing this legislation, as my colleagues are. I’m 
expressing very grave concerns about what’s happening to 
people in the area of their housing needs, in the area of their 
rents, in the area of their access to some appeal  
  



 
June 3, 1988 

1831 
 

process that would have some teeth to it, that would give them 
some support, that would help them to bring their case forward 
in a way that would be heard and understood by people who 
care, instead of the kind of jungle living that now is being 
forced on people. 
 
As my colleague from Saskatoon Sutherland so very eloquently 
expressed, it is a jungle mentality. It is a mentality from the 
1890s. It’s not going forward to any sort of progressive 21st 
century. It’s going right, right back — right back to the days 
when people with money had lots of power, still have lots of 
power, and they certainly don’t need any more power given 
them by the legislation of this government. 
 
Mr. Minister, I am opposing, as the member for Saskatoon 
Centre, this kind of legislation coming down on people in our 
city, a city you and I both represent. I am opposing it on behalf 
of all the people in Saskatchewan who are tenants. I think it’s a 
bad piece of legislation. It’s just another move in the direction 
of deregulation. It’s just another move of saying the rich are 
right and the rest are worthless. 
 
I know my colleague from Regina Centre has a lot to say on this 
issue as well. I’m very pleased to sit down now, in opposition to 
this legislation, and turn the debate over to him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. When I spoke in 
this debate earlier, before adjourning it, Mr. Speaker, the 
member from Souris-Cannington seems to have missed those 
pearls of wisdom that I dropped earlier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I spoke for a few minutes, indicated I had some 
concerns about the legislation, and then adjourned it. Having 
given the legislation some scrutiny and having had a chance to 
look at it, I may say my worst fears are confirmed. 
 
Mr. Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes once said that equal laws 
applied to unequal people is in itself a form of discrimination. 
Deregulation applied to parties which are not equal is a form of 
oppression. This is a form of deregulation. I want to associate 
myself with the remarks of the two members from Saskatoon. 
 
This is deregulation among parties which are not equal. There is 
no pretence here that tenants are in an equal position with 
landlords. I have no special brief for tenants and no special axe 
to grind with landlords, but I do believe that this legislation is 
going to make it much, much more difficult for tenants to 
enforce their rights. 
 
Previous to this legislation being brought in in the early 1970s it 
was . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I’m glad the member 
is agreeing because I want to take a few moments to tell him 
why he’s agreeing. He may be . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
The member from Souris-Cannington may be in some doubt as 
to why he is agreeing. I’m going to take some time to assist him 
so he’ll know why he thinks the way he does. 
 
I think the member from Souris-Cannington is just blindly  

agreeing with everything I say, and I want the member to think 
this thing through without just that sort of blind obedience. 
 
Mr. Speaker, previous to this legislation being brought in, in 
1972 I believe, there really was no effective means by which a 
tenant could redress complaints. Tenants in urban areas 
virtually lived at the will of the landlords. 
 
I’m afraid, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this is taking us back to 
that day. This is going to make it so difficult for tenants to 
enforce their rights that I think we’ll have no effective means of 
doing it and we’ll be back to the day when tenants took 
whatever landlords dished out, and if they didn’t like it, they 
moved. The vast majority of tenants did move quite frequently. 
Once every two or three months everybody moved, and 
eventually after half a dozen moves you’d get tired of that and 
you’d buy a house. 
 
This legislation, when it was brought in, did redress the balance. 
It gave tenants an effective and I think a fair means of enforcing 
their rights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no one pretends, except perhaps the minister who 
introduced the legislation, no one pretends that tenants and 
landlords have any sort of equality. Landlords inevitably enjoy 
a higher income, almost inevitably enjoy a higher income than 
tenants. Tenants are often . . . they’re often young. 
 
Two kinds of people make up the vast majority of tenants: the 
very young and the very old. There are some people between 
the ages of 25 and 60 who are tenants, but they are largely fairly 
high income people. The vast majority of tenants are the young 
and the old. Their incomes are modest and they are in a very 
poor position, partially because of their youth and because of 
their age, to enforce their rights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition, tenants have the difficulty in going 
through the process. The landlord is going to have the suite, 
he’s going to have the block, he’s going to be there. The tenants 
are, without the assistance of the legislation which is being 
repealed, the tenants are in the position where they have to go 
invest a great deal of time in a process which they don’t 
understand, with uncertain results. Landlords face perhaps the 
same uncertainty of results, but they understand the process 
because they’ve been through it many times. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s my general comments, that this 
legislation is predicated on the assumption that landlords and 
tenants are equal. They are not equal either in income or in their 
awareness or knowledge or understanding of the system. The 
landlords are both wealthier and well informed. By and large, 
tenants are neither. 
 
Specifically, Mr. Speaker, with respect to deposits, the 
legislation was intended to redress a problem that had existed as 
long as security deposits had been in existence. The vast 
majority of security deposits went into the landlord’s pocket 
when the tenant rented the suite, and never came out again, 
whatever the equity. And if the tenant complained, the landlord 
could usually find a scrape or scratch somewhere that he would 
claim  
  



 
June 3, 1988 

1832 
 

justified keeping the deposit. This was intended to redress that, 
and I think largely did. The landlord was required to keep the 
deposit in a separate account, in a trust account, so-called. It 
didn’t go into his pocket and therefore it didn’t get spent and 
was therefore available to be repaid. 
 
One of the practical problems, without having a trust account, is 
that the landlord often doesn’t have the money. It is gone and 
spent. Was required to pay interest on it — I think that 
provision to a large extent was ignored. The sums with respect 
to $150 deposit were fairly small unless the tenancy carried on 
for a long period of time. 
 
The most important provision, however, was the provision that 
the landlord had to give notice to the tenant within 10 days of 
the termination of the lease. If he intended to keep the damage 
deposit, he had to notify the tenant of that fact and notify him as 
to why. If he didn’t give the notice, he couldn’t keep the deposit 
whatever damage was done to the suite. If the two . . . if we’d 
been dealing with two equal parties, that would have sounded a 
little harsh, but of course we’re not. 
 
Landlords . . . it’s their business. As you, Mr. Speaker, know 
the vagarities of farming, as I understand the calling of the 
practice of law, so landlords understood their business. It was 
their business. They understood that; tenants rarely did. Any 
more than my clients understand the law, or the people who buy 
bread in the grocery store understand the problems in farming, 
nor did most tenants understand the business with respect to 
rental accommodation. 
 
Now this has been changed in two important respects. One is 
that the landlord no longer automatically loses the damage 
deposit if he doesn’t give notice. We’ve provided one more 
hurdle, and I think a fairly high hurdle, for the tenants to climb 
over. They first of all have to find out from the landlord why he 
kept the damage deposit. That can be a fair chore with a 
landlord who wants to avoid a tenant. 
 
Secondly, the tenant can no longer pick up the phone and say to 
the Rentalsman, I’m sorry, but my deposit was not returned, and 
I didn’t get any notice. They generally won’t say that. They’ll 
generally say, I never got my damage deposit back, and I don’t 
think there’s any damage to the suite. They can no longer do 
that. They’re now going to get a response from the other end of 
the phone saying, well if you feel that way, then you have to 
come down and fill out an application form; there is a deposit 
fee to be paid, and we see in the legislation provision for 
charging a fee. 
 
I’m not sure what sort of a fee is going to be charged with 
respect to a damage deposit of $150 or so, but whatever it is, 
it’ll be a fair discouragement. The tenants will be intimidated by 
the process of having to come down and fill out an application 
form. They’ll be intimidated by the sheer process of knowing 
there’s going to be a hearing. They’d have to go to the hearing; 
the onus is on them to prove they didn’t get the deposit back. 
And if they got notice, they’ve got to prove that the reasons 
given by the landlord weren’t valid. I think, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, very, very few will try. 
 
The provision which is more obnoxious, however, is the  

new section 35 which provides with respect to enforcement of 
rights. I think the member from Saskatoon Centre and the 
member from Saskatoon Sutherland have described this 
legislation accurately. I think there is now no enforcement and 
no investigation. 
 
(1145) 
 
In form, what the government has done is to do away with the 
Rent Appeal Commission. In substance, what I think they’ve 
done is to do away with the Office of the Rentalsman. Members 
will understand that there was an Office of the Rentalsman 
which dealt directly with tenants, assisted them in enforcing 
their rights. The Office of the Rentalsman . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Question. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I see the member from Souris-Cannington 
is wanting to call a question. I am not convinced, and I say to 
the member from Rosetown, I am not convinced that the 
member from Souris-Cannington understands why he’s 
agreeing with me. And I want to make very sure that he knows 
why he’s agreeing with me because I think he’s just doing it out 
of blind loyalty. 
 
An Hon. Member: — This is the worst speech I’ve ever heard. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Is it? Well that’s interesting because I 
wasn’t aware the member from Kelvington was listening to 
what I was saying. It comes as news to me that you were 
listening. You certainly weren’t acting like it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to enforcement of rights, in form, 
what they’ve done is do away with the Rent Appeal 
Commission. In substance, what they’ve done is do away with 
the Office of the Rentalsman. The legislation does away with 
the Rent Appeal Commission and then restructures the Office of 
the Rentalsman beneath that, and in fact turns it into a Rent 
Appeal Commission. 
 
Thus the tenants are now in the position of having no Office of 
the Rentalsman to go to. What they have is a commission to go 
to if they have any complaints, whether it be peeling paint, no 
heat in winter, a broken window that they won’t fix, locks that 
can’t be fixed. If there are any of those complaints, it can no 
longer go to the Office of the Rentalsman. They have to go 
down and fill out an application form. They’ve got to go prove 
it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to associate myself with a comment that 
was made by the member from Saskatoon Centre. She 
suggested to members opposite that they ought to take some 
time and go through some of the suites in the inner city. They 
really should be done. For anyone who has not done that, it is a 
telling experience. 
 
The vast majority of landlords are honest business men who 
give fair value for the dollar, but for some reason or other which 
escapes me, the business of rental accommodation attracts some 
unsavoury people. It is a business which, I’m not sure why, but 
it attracts some unsavoury people who want to make a fast 
buck. They take accommodation in which, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
think you’d leave a dog. It does indeed attract some unsavoury  
  



 
June 3, 1988 

1833 
 

people. I’m reminded of that when I have to stand here and look 
at members opposite. Mr. Speaker, the business attracts 
unsavoury people. 
 
I can take members on a tour of my riding. I can show them 
accommodation which is neither sanitary nor safe. I can show 
them accommodation in which, quite frankly, you wouldn’t put 
livestock. It is just not fit for man or beast, but people live in it 
because it’s better than a park bench, and that’s the only 
alternative. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, is going to exacerbate that problem. It’s 
going to make it much, much more difficult for the tenants to 
enforce their rights, to get locks put on the doors, to get heat in 
winter, to get windows put back in which are broken, to get 
walls painted, to get cracks filled in, and to get places cleaned 
up. It’s going to make it much more difficult for tenants to do 
all of those things. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, is deregulation at its very worst — 
deregulating an industry which is notoriously prone to an 
inequality of a bargaining position. Ever since there have been 
rental accommodation, certainly in North America, we’ve had 
problems with slum landlords, to use the phrase. We have them 
in Saskatchewan, and this, Mr. Speaker, is going to make their 
operation much, much more viable and much, much easier to 
carry on. 
 
For all of those reasons, Mr. Speaker, I will be voting against 
this legislation, and I urge all members opposite to do the same. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 
referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 62 — An Act respecting Securities in Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The financial sector of our economy 
has become international in scope, Mr. Speaker. Companies 
raise capital not only locally but nationally and internationally. 
This trend has put pressure on the securities regulators in 
western world countries to allow that flow of international 
capital to proceed, and yet maintain enough control on the 
market that it proceeds in keeping with the basic principles of 
securities regulation. 
 
While the law has evolved in Canada to meet with these new 
pressures on the capital markets, it is the goal of securities 
regulators to protect the members of the public who invest in 
securities, and hence, through a legislative framework, create a 
market-place in which the public has confidence. 
 
The goals of protection of the public and confidence in the 
market-place are achieved throughout by four main principles 
of regulation: (1) only honest and knowledgeable people can 
sell securities; (2) when initial purchases or securities are 
offered to the public, potential investors should have access to 
be able to rely on a  

truthful, complete, and understandable document; (3) buyers 
and sellers on the secondary markets should have equal access 
to information, and hence have equal opportunities to be well 
informed; and (4) persons taking undue advantage of the 
investing public should be held to account. 
 
In keeping with these principles, Mr. Speaker, The Securities 
Act, 1988 provides for the registration of persons and business 
to ensure that they are honest and of good repute and well 
informed; (2) they provide for review of selling documents for 
securities issued to the public to ensure full, true, and plain 
disclosure is made, and that there is a basic fairness to the sale; 
(3) they provide for requirements to file financial information 
on an ongoing basis, plus special information for special events 
as they occur throughout the business year; and (4) they provide 
for deterrents to fraudulent practices. 
 
With the passing of The Securities Act, 1998, this Act will 
represent the most current thinking in securities regulation in 
Canada. It represents the compilation of advances made in 
securities regulation in other major jurisdictions in Canada. 
 
With the passage of this new Act, four major objectives will be 
accomplished: (1) we will become uniform with the capital 
markets in other jurisdictions. Uniformity of legislation assists 
issuers who wish to raise capital on a national scale by ensuring 
that rules of each jurisdiction are the same. Saskatchewan 
issuers are then able to compete on a national scale for capital 
markets, and as they mature and grow, they can do so, having to 
deal with the same rules as everyone else. In addition, 
Saskatchewan investors are given the same remedies and degree 
of protection that investors in other provinces have been given. 
 
(2) The new Act will promote efficiency in the capital markets 
by streamlining the procedures involved in issuing securities 
across Canada. It strives to eliminate the inconsistencies and 
problems found in the existing Act. 
 
The third objective is to provide Saskatchewan small business 
with flexibility in raising capital. There are a number of 
exemptions to the basic registration and prospectus 
requirements that allow small businesses in Saskatchewan to 
raise start-up capital without having to meet the full 
requirements of the Act. 
 
The Act has compensating safeguards in place to protect 
investors, such as reviewed offering memoranda and limits on 
the number of purchasers. But it does afford the Saskatchewan 
business man an opportunity of entering the market. 
 
And (4) the goal of securities regulation is to protect investors 
who acquire securities through a public distribution. This Act 
enhances investor protection; in particular, the legislation 
focuses on small investors who don’t have the resources to 
protect themselves in capital markets. 
 
The new Act expands the protection to investors into the 
secondary market because of the requirements for more and 
continued disclosure of financial information. As a  
  



 
June 3, 1988 

1834 
 

result, all holders and issuers of securities, and all potential 
purchasers of those securities should have adequate information 
to make a reasoned investment decision. 
 
As you can appreciate, looking at the size of the Bill before this 
House, the legislation respecting securities is complex and 
technical. Let me deal briefly with the concepts that are 
introduced in this legislation. 
 
With our aim of providing enhanced investor protection to 
investors in Saskatchewan, the new Act introduces the closed 
system. Under the closed system, not only are the initial 
distributions of securities regulated but the subsequent trades in 
the secondary market are also regulated. The existing Act does 
not control secondary trades; therefore, an issuer may have 
found an exemption in the existing Act, and the purchasers of 
those securities could resell them without any restrictions under 
the Act. 
 
The new Act corrects that situation. As part of the introduction 
of the closed system, a broader range of exemptions are 
introduced. Also, for the sake of uniformity, most of the 
exemptions compare to exemptions available in other 
jurisdictions. These exemptions give issuers greater opportunity 
to bypass the prospectus and registration requirements to 
purchasers who the commission considers have resources to 
look after themselves . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And I 
know that the member for Regina Centre is learning a great deal 
by sitting there and absorbing all that’s being said here today. 
 
In addition to those exemptions, Saskatchewan businesses are 
provided with exemptions to reduce regulation and make the 
acquisition of capital easier. Exemptions such as the 
incorporators exemption, the seed capital exemption, 
government incentive exemption, and close business associates 
exemption are examples of these. These exemptions would 
allow Saskatchewan businesses some access to the capital 
markets without having to file a full prospectus. 
 
Reporting issuer is a key term that is used throughout the Act. 
Basically, reporting issuers are a class of issuers who have 
distributed securities to the public and who are under a statutory 
requirement to provide continuous timely disclosure of 
information about their activities and financial status to the 
public. 
 
This class includes all Saskatchewan corporations which have 
filed a prospectus with the commission. The status of a 
reporting issuer is important under the closed system for 
determining whether first-rate provisions of the Act need to be 
applied to a particular security. There’s also an advantage for an 
issuer to become a reporting issuer in order to create a broader 
market for its securities, and also to facilitate a quicker entry 
into the market once that status has been reached. 
 
The new Act upgrades and modernizes the continuous 
disclosure requirement placed on issuers. These provisions 
ensure that the market-place professionals and investors have 
all the current information available about an issuer. 

Reporting issuers are required to file annual, audited financial 
statements and interim quarterly statements. A new major 
provision provides for timely disclosure of a material change in 
affairs of a reporting issuer. When a material change occurs, a 
reporting issuer is required to issue a press release explaining 
the material change, and to file a copy of that press release with 
the commission. In the event that the commission believes that 
the change is not adequately disseminated, the commission can 
take steps it considers necessary to give adequate publicity to 
the change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, despite the size and number of mutual funds and 
peculiar issues associated with them, mutual funds are not 
recognized by the 1967 Act. The new Act, however, does 
introduce a distinct set of rules to govern mutual funds and to 
provide protection to investors in their securities. 
 
Because of the nature of the investment, business of a mutual 
fund, conflicts of interest, and problems in self-dealing may 
arise, involving the mutual fund’s management company, its 
portfolio manager, and its distribution company. Other 
provinces have developed a uniform set of legislative rules to 
regulate mutual funds, and the new Act adopts these rules. 
Requirements for filing regular information, rules to control 
self-dealing by mutual fund management companies, and other 
similar remedies are provided under the Act. 
 
The principles behind the major changes to the take-over bid 
rules are that all holders of the same class of securities be 
treated equally, and that adequate relevant information be made 
available on a timely basis to all security holders to whom the 
offer is made. These changes conform to the uniform scheme in 
place in Canada, including any recent amendments to the 
Ontario legislation which has been brought about by experience 
they have had with take-overs. 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the principle behind insider trading rules is that no 
one with knowledge of information that is not public should 
benefit because of that information. The new Act significantly 
broadens the scope of who is an insider. It is expanded to 
include directors and senior officers of subsidiaries, and also 
includes professional advisers who have access to confidential 
information. The penalties are significantly increased for those 
who do not comply with this requirement. 
 
Significant liabilities have been created for contravention of 
insider trading and self-dealing rules for mutual funds, but the 
Act also provides for greater penalties for contravention of the 
Act. The Act specifies greater monetary fines and prison 
penalties for contravention of the Act. 
 
Other important remedies are expanded in the new Act. The 
right of withdrawal after purchase of securities has now been 
extended to an offering memorandum in addition to a 
prospectus. Rights of rescission or the opportunity to rescind a 
contract are significantly increased for misrepresentation of a 
material fact. In fact, the Act gives the right for damages or 
rescission for  
  



 
June 3, 1988 

1835 
 

misrepresentation now against even more people than the 
previous Act and also extends the limitation period for 
rescission action — in eastern Canada is the provision that 
gives a purchaser of securities, under prospectus or an offering 
memorandum, the right to rescission or damages against the 
seller if there has been a misrepresentation in the sale’s 
literature. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, securities commissions in Canada 
and Saskatchewan have always had the responsibility of 
seeking a balance between the business community’s need to 
have relatively easy access to capital against the need to protect 
the interest of the investor. This legislation seeks that balance. It 
recognizes that financial markets are national and international 
in scope, and there are people in the market who have the 
resources to protect themselves, but it also recognizes that there 
are investors who need the protection that this legislation 
affords. 
 
Timely and adequate disclosure enhance civil remedies and 
increase penalties on contravention; assure that special investor 
needs are protected. The investor who wishes to enter the 
market does so being able to determine through adequate 
information what his best investment should be. 
 
I’m sure the member for Regina Centre is much more 
enlightened than he was only a few brief moments ago and I, 
therefore, Mr. Speaker, move second reading of The 
(Saskatchewan) Securities Act, 1988. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. I want to make a 
few comments, then I’m going to adjourn the debate on this 
Bill. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a difficult Bill. It’s long, the 
subject matter is esoteric in nature, it is understood by only a 
few people in its detail, but the importance of this Bill, I think, 
cannot be over-emphasized. 
 
I think I might have had trouble, Mr. Speaker, making that point 
five years ago. The last five years, however, in Canada, and in 
Saskatchewan in particular, witnessed some major problems 
with respect to the sale and regulation of the securities business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the administration of this legislation leaves a good 
deal to be desired. This government, and the member from 
Maple Creek in particular, for reasons that I suppose we’ll 
never know, fired a very competent chairman of the securities 
commission, Ken Stevenson. Since that time, Mr. Speaker, and 
I think partially as a result of that, we have had nothing but 
difficulty with respect to the area of securities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have witnessed any number of abuses, the 
most recent of which is Principal Trust. A mediocre 
administration of the securities business should have prevented 
that. Any company which is unable, as we now know, unable to 
provide audited financial statements for over two years, should 
not be selling securities in the province of Saskatchewan, and 
that’s what was happening. Principal Trust was unable to get an 
unqualified financial statement for the 1985 year, and they 
didn’t file any statements, Mr. Speaker, and nobody  

asked them to, and they continued to sell securities in this 
province for over two years. 
 
While I hold no brief for the province of Ontario, whose 
populace has suffered under a Liberal and Conservative regime 
for some decades, one can at least say, with respect to the 
province of Ontario, the security commission in Ontario didn’t 
let them sell, and nobody in Ontario got hurt when Principal 
Trust collapsed. 
 
And if our legislation had been properly administered and 
properly enforced, nobody in Saskatchewan would have got 
hurt. But what happened, it wasn’t being administered, it wasn’t 
being enforced. Companies didn’t file financial statements and 
nobody seemed to care, and the company went broke and an 
awful lot of people got badly hurt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not a trifling problem. When something 
happens in the securities business, tens of thousands of people 
lose tens of thousands of dollars. This is — as I heard a senator 
on the Detroit channel say, with respect to a different issue — 
Mr. Speaker, this is a tall cotton. The securities business is tall 
cotton. There is an enormous amount involved, and to this date 
it’s been very badly handled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we witnessed Pioneer Trust; a whole lot of 
mistakes were made with respect to Pioneer Trust, and I don’t 
intend to go through them all now, but one of the mistakes that 
was made with respect to Pioneer Trust was the securities 
business was not vigilant in enforcing and regulating the sale 
and conduct of that business. Neither was the Consumer Affairs 
department. And of course more than one cabinet minister got 
into the act and made the problems much, much worse than 
they would have been. 
 
But I am convinced, Mr. Speaker, that if the member from 
Maple Creek had left Ken Stevenson as chairman of the 
Securities Commission, had she given him the encouragement 
and support he needed to do the job, I am convinced that we 
might have avoided the problems with Pioneer Trust, and I’m 
darned sure we would have avoided the problems with Principal 
Trust. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that this particular piece of legislation does 
not cause rioting on Albert Street. No one in Indian Head starts 
throwing bricks at the member from Indian Head over this 
issue. They’ll do it over a number of other issues, but not 
perhaps over this particular one. But, Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t 
. . . the fact that the public don’t understand this business 
doesn’t mean it’s not important. It is important. 
 
While they don’t understand the regulation of the business, the 
vast majority of them invest their life savings. And they invest 
their life savings assuming that they are going to look after it. 
Who’s they? They’s us. We are the people whom they trust to 
ensure that the securities business is safe, sound, and there’s no 
fraud involved, and that their life savings are secure. And I say 
to members opposite, we haven’t been doing that in the last five 
years. In the last five years we’ve been negligent, the people 
have gotten badly hurt. 
  



 
June 3, 1988 

1836 
 

Mr. Speaker, that’s happened elsewhere as well. We just 
witnessed the brokerage firm in Ontario, Osler, who went 
bankrupt. Indirectly, a number of Saskatchewan people are 
going to feel it because the major loser was the co-operative 
credit society, central bank of the credit unions. And indirectly 
credit union members in Saskatchewan are going to feel that. 
Now that’s outside the jurisdiction of the Saskatchewan 
Securities Commission because so far as I know they were not 
conducting business in this province. But again it underscores 
the importance to the average citizen, the regulation of the 
securities business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no question but what the old Act needed to 
be revised. Much of that Act has long since passed into history. 
Indeed the former member from Elphinstone, the former leader 
of the opposition, played a major role in drafting that legislation 
when he was chairman of the Securities Commission back in 
the early ’50s, and it had undergone very few changes since that 
date. 
 
Some of the comments made by the member from 
Souris-Cannington when he read the speech that . . . I’m not 
sure if it ever went through the mind of the person who wrote it, 
but I know it was given in this Assembly without ever having 
gone through the mind of the member from Souris-Cannington. 
It was obvious he did not have any idea of what he was talking 
about when he was reading that speech. However, the speech 
was written by officials in the department, I’m quite sure, and I 
don’t take issue with much of what that speech said, actually. 
 
There were many problems with the former legislation. It has 
long since been a requirement of the Toronto Stock Exchange 
and all the other stock exchanges to provide shareholders with 
quarterly reports. Those standards are among the highest in the 
world. Now that was not reflected in our legislation. Our 
legislation talked about . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m 
missing the pearls of wisdom being dropped by the member 
from Wilkie. I know that I’m much the poorer for it, but he’s 
not speaking plainly enough for me to hear him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the problems with the old Act was that the 
Act only called for an interim report after six months. It’s now 
become common practice for two decades because of the 
requirements of the Toronto Stock Exchange to provide them 
quarterly. That should be in the legislation. The member from 
Souris-Cannington mentioned mutual funds; that wasn’t 
mentioned either. The whole problem, Mr. Speaker, something 
not mentioned by the member from Souris-Cannington, the 
whole problem of insider trading and use of inside knowledge 
which has become such a serious problem in recent years, was 
not mentioned in the Act at all. 
 
So those are some of the things the Act is dealing with. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve gone through the Act. There will be a number of 
questions which, I may say, I’ll have in committee of the whole. 
Unless I misunderstand it, some of the drafting in this new Bill 
is very poor, but we’ll see. Perhaps I misunderstand it. 
 
It is, however, a long Bill. That speech, so eloquently and  

thoughtfully given by the member from Souris-Cannington with 
such emotion, deserves to be considered. I want to consider that 
in the light of the Bill. I therefore, Mr. Speaker, beg leave to 
adjourn the debate on this legislation. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 55 — An Act to establish the Public Participation 
Program 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Public Participation Act. In a 
straightforward way, Mr. Speaker, this Bill sets out the purpose 
of public participation, the role of the Department of Public 
Participation, protection offered employees of the Government 
of Saskatchewan, and the protection of the public interest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a co-ordinating Bill for specific 
government-wide purpose — to build this province and allow 
for increased participation by Saskatchewan men and women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill does not override any other legislation; it 
is complementary legislation. All existing legislative authority 
remains in the legislation. Mr. Speaker, this government has 
created a watch-dog with protections to ensure the public 
participation process is fair and is open. 
 
Many specific initiatives will be brought before this Assembly 
for public debate. Where share offerings are made in Crown 
corporations, approval legislation will be passed. The SMDC 
(Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) Bill is before 
the Assembly at this present time. And Saskoil, as you know, 
previously came before this Assembly. We will continue this 
open tradition. Documents will be tabled under the public 
participation program for all to see. 
 
(1215) 
 
Mr. Speaker, my powers as the Minister of Public Participation 
are those of facilitating the government process — developing, 
protecting, co-ordinating, promoting, reporting, and consulting. 
Existing statutory authorities remain and will be used to build 
and allow participation to happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of the public participation is to 
stimulate economic growth in Saskatchewan, create new 
investment and jobs, and allow for increased participation by 
the public and employees. This will be achieved by providing a 
set of new opportunities and new challenges to all 
Saskatchewan men and women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more than ever before, Saskatchewan is becoming 
a place where individuals can invest in their own province and 
participate directly in its growth. In Saskatchewan we have a 
proud pioneering heritage, and by building upon this reputation, 
public participation will utilize our resources more effectively 
toward the growth and development of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, public participation will provide new  
  



 
June 3, 1988 

1837 
 

opportunities for public employees to buy into a service now 
provided by the government and deliver it as an owner of the 
operation. Becoming involved in the ownership, as well as the 
delivery of public services, will allow employees to advance 
their talents and expertise without restriction towards expanding 
their careers and improving the quality of service provided to 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, public participation will provide new 
opportunities for all Saskatchewan men and women to acquire 
real ownership rights in the Crown corporations, and invest 
directly in the future economic growth of Saskatchewan 
through widespread bond and share offerings. We have the 
skills, the people, and the savings in Saskatchewan. Let’s form 
a partnership and build this province. That’s the Saskatchewan 
way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, public participation will provide new 
opportunities for Saskatchewan businesses and industry to 
expand and grow through the contracting of government 
services. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, public participation will provide new 
opportunities for our province to further develop government 
resources through the attraction of new investment and 
resources into Saskatchewan. 
 
In speaking of the many opportunities public participation 
presents to Saskatchewan men and women, I should mention 
what public participation has already done for our province. 
 
Firstly, Mr. Speaker, I would like to mention some of the new 
investment that public participation has brought to 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, in coming to Saskatchewan, 
Weyerhaeuser Canada Ltd. injected $250 million of new 
investment directly into Saskatchewan that was put toward the 
construction of a new paper mill. Now our province is 
positioned as a major player in the forest industry with one of 
the most technologically advanced facilities of its kind in the 
world, Mr. Speaker, right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another example was the recent sale of the 
Saskatchewan Minerals corporation. Its purchase by two 
respected private sector companies brought $15.9 million of 
new investment directly into our province. And Premier 
Saskatchewan Incorporated, the new company now located at 
Carrot River, plans to invest an additional $2.5 million to 
expand and to modernize that facility. Premier Saskatchewan 
Incorporated also announced their plans to fund a three-year, 
$500,000 product research project at the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is through new investments such as this that new 
jobs and new opportunities are created for Saskatchewan men 
and women. And new jobs, Mr. Speaker, is another thing public 
participation has brought to the province of Saskatchewan. The 
newly formed WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation, resulting 
from the merger of SaskCOMP, a portion of SaskTel, and two 
private sector companies, has already in the last two months 
created 50 new jobs and is expected to create 200 more, the 
majority of them in the province of Saskatchewan. 

This new computer company has already received $6 million in 
out-of-province contracts that would not have been possible if it 
had stayed a Crown corporation. Weyerhaeuser has also created 
new jobs. As of March 16, 1988, 692 people were working on 
the construction site of the new paper mill. And when complete, 
Mr. Speaker, it is estimated that over 150 permanent positions 
will be created to operate that mill in Prince Albert. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Shellbrook-Torch River. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Shellbrook-Torch River, that’s right. 
Many of the people in that area will benefit from this initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, guided by the principles of protecting employee 
rights, protecting the public interest, protecting our standard and 
quality of service, and protecting the proper role of government, 
public participation will build a stronger Saskatchewan. It will 
diversify our economy. It will create new investment, new jobs, 
and new growth for Saskatchewan people, for Saskatchewan 
business and for Saskatchewan industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Department of Public Participation has been 
established to develop and co-ordinate the government’s public 
participation program. Our mandate is to ensure that the 
interests of the people and the Government of Saskatchewan are 
fully protected. In carrying out this forth, the department will 
closely evaluate all public participation initiatives provided by 
criteria and guide-lines. All initiatives will be brought forward 
for government approval. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said before, central to public participation is 
the protection of employees, the public, and the government. 
Developed as a job creation initiative, this Bill contains specific 
legislative protection for government employees who may be 
affected by public participation initiatives. 
 
It should be noted first and foremost that this Bill recognizes the 
rights afforded employees in The Trade Union Act and their 
collective bargaining agreement. This Bill not only does not 
take any of these away, but rather it enhances employer rights, 
provides various protection, continuation of pensions and 
benefits, and provides them with preferences to encourage 
employee buy-ins to service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it should also be noted that unionized employees 
who do not wish to partake in opportunities that exist shall have 
the protection I have set out, solely as an option provision is 
made for early retirement on the same terms and conditions 
previously given. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the first time in our province the public 
participation initiative will provide Saskatchewan men and 
women with the opportunity to acquire real ownership in the 
Crown corporation. Encouraging Saskatchewan people to invest 
in our economy through bond and shares and debenture sales 
will build Saskatchewan using our own resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask my legislative colleagues, why should  
  



 
June 3, 1988 

1838 
 

Saskatchewan men and women be forced to invest outside the 
province and contribute to the growth of areas in other parts of the 
country? And as a government, why should we always borrow 
money from the big banks in the East, in New York and in Europe 
and in Japan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we intend to increase the availability of bonds and 
debentures, and there will be . . . continue the development of 
large, Saskatchewan publicly trading companies which will 
encourage widespread Saskatchewan participation and ownership. 
This will facilitate increased direct ownership by the people of 
Saskatchewan in our Crown assets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the benefits to Saskatchewan men and women from 
this are twofold. Firstly, Saskatchewan people will be permitted to 
have direct real ownership and participation in the Crowns that 
will allow them to share in the growth of our province. And 
secondly, this will develop a much needed capital market in 
Saskatchewan, thereby creating the investment necessary to 
provide the growth and jobs we all desire. 
 
Public participation will create employment, business, and 
investment opportunities, from Crown services, facilities, and 
assets. Mr. Speaker, public participation will ensure that the 
standards and the practices of new forms of service delivery, 
through contracting of services, will meet or exceed acceptable 
levels. Mr. Speaker, this department will evaluate initiatives, 
keeping in mind that it is the protection of employees, 
Saskatchewan residents, and the public interest that is paramount. 
 
Employment, business, and investment opportunities will diversify 
and build the Saskatchewan economy. Our dollars can work more 
directly toward the growth and development of Saskatchewan and 
create new jobs at home, and that's good public policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, governments throughout the world have sought ways 
of achieving improved service at lower costs. Countries as diverse 
as China and Australia, Great Britain and France, Sweden, New 
Zealand, have all closely reviewed their options to deliver a public 
service and the need for government to own and directly manage 
its Crown assets. 
 
In Saskatchewan we have a tradition of leadership and innovation 
in government. We also have a unique history and special 
circumstances. This Bill creates a department that will develop 
these emerging global directions and public policy to meet our 
own special needs and circumstances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you well know when people co-operate they 
participate in building things, big or small, and we all share in the 
benefits. And, Mr. Minister, that's the Saskatchewan way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to move second reading of Bill 55, The 
Public Participation Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to respond 
this afternoon and then adjourn the debate. I  

want to respond to the comments made by the minister of 
privatization in Saskatchewan. 
 
The fact, Mr. Speaker, is that there is and there has been no public 
participation in anything that this minister or this government has 
introduced or done under that misnomer. What we are considering 
here today is a right-wing privatization Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And I think anyone who will have watched 
or heard the minister will have noted a number of things. But one 
thing that they will have noted I think, in particular, is that in all of 
the time that he took to speak on it, he said nothing about the Bill 
itself. He spent all of his time with the usual Tory rhetoric about 
what they call public participation without addressing what the 
Bill is all about. So on his behalf, Mr. Speaker, this afternoon for a 
while, I want to do that because I think it's clear, it's important that 
the public knows what this Bill is all about. 
 
Let me begin, Mr. Speaker, by saying this. This government's 
privatization Bill is clearly one of the most insidious and alarming 
Bills ever introduced in this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — The minister’s attempt at soothing and 
reassuring and comforting, as he attempted to justify this 
Conservative privatization policy and this privatization Bill is 
almost laughable. But his attempt at soothing words could not 
mask the sinister nature of this ominous omnibus Bill. 
 
With this privatization Bill, Mr. Speaker, the government is 
seeking to give to itself broad sweeping powers to do anything it 
wants, whenever it want to do it, however it wants to do it, behind 
secret and closed cabinet doors without any public accountability, 
and that’s wrong. And that’s wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now let’s just address some of the things that the minister said. He 
tried to talk about the purpose of the Bill. But the purpose of the 
Bill is simply one, and that is to sell out Saskatchewan. That's the 
purpose of this Bill. 
 
He mentioned the rhetoric in rhetoric terms, the role of this Bill. 
Well I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, it's becoming more and 
more evident with the operation of this government in this House, 
that the role of this Bill is to hide what the government is doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — The role of this Bill is to hide what the 
government is doing and turn over unnecessary and dangerous 
power into the hands of the cabinet — power that should be vested 
and always has been vested in this Legislative Assembly with the 
representatives of the people to deal with it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
June 3, 1988 

1839 
 

(1230) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — We heard those words of allowing 
increased public participation. And I simply ask, give me one 
example, Mr. Minister. You have been into this privatization 
scheme of yours for some two years now, and you started before 
1986 to some extent, and yet there has been no example of the 
so-called public participation — not one. 
 
An Hon. Member: — WESTBRIDGE? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Is WESTBRIDGE public participation? 
No, it was a cushy deal. It was a cushy deal between some 
Conservative cabinet ministers and some of their Conservative 
friends. And there is a list that goes on. There has been no public 
participation. 
 
I heard the minister talk about, the Bill will require the tabling of 
documents. Well, Mr. Speaker, we've had a lot of experience with 
this government's tabling of documents. They don't table the 
documents even though the documents are required by law to be 
tabled. They wouldn't table the Public Accounts for months. They 
refused to provide to the Provincial Auditor information that he 
must have to do his Provincial Auditor's report. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — That's not coming from me, Mr. Speaker, 
that is coming from the Provincial Auditor who says he can't get 
his job done because this government is hiding information, and 
refuses to give it to him because they think it's politically 
dangerous. 
 
We've had experience about the tabling of documents by this 
government. There are two Crown corporation's reports, the 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance, or is it the SPC — I think 
it's government insurance — and Crown investments corporation, 
that were not tabled by the time that the law said they ought to be 
tabled. And to this day we still don't have the Crown Management 
Board annual report, although it ought to have been tabled many, 
many weeks ago. That's the experience with the tabling of reports. 
 
But let's consider it from another perspective. The minister says 
they will be tabling the annual reports. But that will not provide an 
opportunity for the public or this legislature to consider the act of 
doing a certain privatization that the government is doing. All it's 
going to do is after the fact, a year or two years later, when all of 
the damage is done, give them an annual report and say, here is 
what we've done. 
 
Now that's irresponsible. That is a government that's hiding behind 
this legislation because it knows that it has to sneak these things 
through because the public is no longer accepting even their 
rhetoric. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — The minister said the other day, yesterday 
in the press conference, he said, well we've been doing it anyway. 
Well if they're doing it anyway, Mr. Minister, if he is really being 
honest — and I question  

that — if he's really being honest about the government being able 
to do this anyway, then why this Bill, unless there is some sinister 
purpose behind it? And the sinister purpose, as that minister is so 
capable of carrying out, is simply to hide what they want to do 
from the public and taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well the minister is getting a little sensitive 
about this because he doesn't like to hear the truth. He'd rather talk 
about the untruth that this government talks about. 
 
I heard the minister talk about growth. Well isn't that a joke, isn't 
that a joke. This privatization scheme of theirs is supposed to 
create growth. I ask you, was there growth in SED Systems when 
it was privatized? That's one example. No. Seventy families were 
left without any income because 70 people in SED Systems were 
laid off. 
 
Was there growth, Mr. Speaker, in management opportunities in 
Saskatchewan because of that privatization? Absolutely not. 
Because the management of that company, that important 
high-tech company is now in the city of Toronto and no longer in 
the city of Saskatoon. Now this is the minister's definition of 
growth. 
 
Now that's strange kind of language in the English language that 
only Conservative cabinet ministers can possibly understand. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Doublespeak. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — As my colleagues say, it's nothing less than 
doublespeak. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And you know, they talked about growth 
when they privatized Saskoil. It was going to do wonderful things. 
And immediately after the privatization of Saskoil, 25 per cent of 
the staff in Saskatchewan lost their jobs. That's their definition of 
growth. 
 
Now I heard the minister say this: why should Saskatchewan 
people have to invest outside Saskatchewan? Well then what 
happened when you privatized Saskoil, Mr. Minister? Why is it 
now doing all of its investment outside of Saskatchewan and 
Alberta? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now what kind of nonsense is that unless it 
is meant only to do exactly what this Bill is intended to do, and 
that's to mislead and to hide and to misinform. 
 
Now I ask the minister about one more example. Where is the 
growth in the privatization of the dental plan — the children's 
dental plan? Is his perverted definition of growth the firing of over 
300, some 400 dental nurses, dental therapists in Saskatchewan? Is 
that his definition of growth? People who worked hard on the 
promise of a great future, dedicated people who went and became 
professionals because of this future, and in one fell  
  



 
June 3, 1988 

1840 
 

swoop, because in the name of privatization this government 
wiped out the profession when they wiped out the program that 
was so important to those children in Saskatchewan, tens of 
thousands of whom will never see a dentist until it's too late. That's 
the result of wild, wide, ideological charge into privatization. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And the evidence is there everywhere to 
see. It's there everywhere to see, and that's why now, in spite of the 
fact that the minister has said they don't need this Bill, they are 
bringing it in, because they know they can no longer do it openly, 
where the public will be able to be the judge. And they want to 
sneak it in in the dark of the night, behind closed doors of the 
cabinet room, so it's implemented, and the public will be able to do 
nothing about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — It was almost . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . While the member, the fresh new introducer, is now sitting in 
his seat and talking, I hope he gets up in this debate and answers 
some of these questions. He will have his opportunity. He does not 
need to speak from his seat, Mr. Chairman . . . Mr. Speaker . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I will like to have him get up, as my 
leader says, and stand up in this House and explain why they had 
to bring in the expert from Great Britain to tell them how to do 
this, when the people of Saskatchewan, historically and ever since 
the beginning of this province, were quite able to build one of the 
best provinces in Canada by using their own hands, their initiative, 
their expertise, and their determination to build this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now instead of using that initiative and that 
commitment, what do they do, this member from Wascana who's 
still speaking from his seat? They have to go over to good old 
England and ask Margaret Thatcher to send her professional 
adviser to advise them how to institute the British system on 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it doesn't work. It doesn't carry over and translate just 
like that, because we are different. We are, in many ways, better, 
because we started in a new era. And what this government is 
doing is deliberately undermining it and destroying it, and it's 
wrong. 
 
If they were so proud of it, if they were so proud of this, and if 
they thought that it was publicly acceptable, they wouldn't need 
this Bill. They would be able to come into this Legislative 
Assembly and introduce the program or the legislation for each 
individual initiative of theirs, have it publicly debated, and 
proceed. 
 
But if they do it that way, they know that it will be rejected so 
they've got to do it this way. They've got to do it in secrecy. 
 
Now it was almost painful — it was painful — to listen to the 
minister talk about the great new investment that's going come 
from this. Well, Mr. Minister, you should do  

some of your own research and stop only reading from the speech 
that somebody in the Premier's office wrote for you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where is the new investment? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well open your eyes. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Under . . . okay, let me tell you this. Mr. 
Minister, and Mr. Speaker, since . . . in the last two years, in the 
last three years there are 2,000 fewer manufacturing jobs in 
Saskatchewan today than there was three years ago. Now that's 
new investment? The minister can't argue about that. Over three 
years we've lost over 2,000 manufacturing jobs because of their 
open business and privatization policies. And they say what a 
wonderful thing it's going to be. 
 
I ask the minister, before he speaks again, if this is so great: what 
has happened to the people who used to work for the post cutting 
operation in northern Saskatchewan which was shut down by this 
government this week? That's privatization. What happened to the 
70 employees of SED Systems who no longer have a job because 
of this privatization policy that was going to bring about all of this 
investment? 
 
If there is going to be all of this investment, what happened to the 
investment by Saskoil which is now in Alberta? What happened to 
the 25 per cent of the employees who were fired — who were 
fired — by this government when it privatized Saskoil? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I am a representative in the city of Regina, 
Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Isn't is interesting? 
Isn't it interesting? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. If I may make a personal 
comment, Mr. Speaker, I happen to be a member, one of the 
members, from the city of Regina. In this city, as in all across 
Saskatchewan, there have been some very painful examples. 
There have been some very . . . Mr. Chairman, do you mind 
calling them to order so that we can proceed? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this privatization policies of this government has 
shut down the only meat processing plant of any larger 
significance . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Obviously this Bill 
is going to generate a great deal of interest, and there will be many 
members who will wish to speak on it. However, you'll have your 
opportunity in due course, and at this time I would like to allow 
the member for North East to continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. You know, Mr. Speaker, it is 
rather interesting to note the way the members react opposite, the 
government, Conservative members, when they've been caught in 
their own dishonesty. 
  



 
June 3, 1988 

1841 
 

They have this interesting reaction when the truth is being told. 
When they're caught in telling . . . in not being honest with the 
public of Saskatchewan, they try to do what they do with 
advocacy groups. They try to do what they do with professional 
public servants who provide recommendations saying what's right 
and what's wrong and they should make a judgement on them. 
They try to intimidate and not give them the platform to speech. 
Now that's very interesting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now in the city of Regina, as I was saying because . . . before I 
was so rudely interrupted by the minister in charge of privatization 
and the member from Morse and the member from Wascana, the 
Intercontinental meat processing plant was shut down after this 
government was elected because of their glamorous and 
tremendous privatization policies. We have hundreds of families 
in this city of Regina who have been without work because of the 
firing of the dental nurses and other people involved. 
 
Now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . here goes the minister again. 
And they've talked about: well, what about the upgrader in 
Regina? Well you know, Mr. Speaker, isn't it interesting that while 
they argue in favour of this privatization scheme of theirs, the oil 
upgrader in Regina was built by public money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Speaker, it was built by public 
money. It was built by money backed by the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, and that's the Saskatchewan way, the involvement 
of the co-operative sector, the public sector and the private sector 
and not putting all of your eggs into the Oliver Letwin basket and 
hope that somehow it'll work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I am surprised — 
maybe I shouldn't be surprised because I know the attitude and the 
nature of this government — but I am somewhat amazed that the 
minister would not have addressed some of these things in a more 
detailed way, because he wants . . . and I suggest it is because he 
wants to treat this Bill in the same way as this Bill is intended to 
allow the government to treat all of the rest of what's going to 
happen in Saskatchewan — secretly, quietly, and hiding it behind 
certain powers that they have. 
 
(1245) 
 
They don't want the public to know. Today is the 52nd day of this 
legislature. It's the whole strategy of the government, the whole 
mentality that's over there. Today is the 52nd day. For 52 days this 
legislature has been sitting, and on the 50th day of the sitting, two 
days ago, the government finally thought that maybe they should 
introduce this Bill, as a lot of other legislation, all in keeping with 
their sneaking up on people with their secret approach so that there 
is no public debates. They think that by introducing it on June 1, 
that somehow the public is not going to become aware of what 
they're trying to do, and I say to you, Mr. Speaker, it won't work. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — It won't work because we won't let it work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — It won't work because the people of 
Saskatchewan have caught on to their ways. And the by-election 
in Saskatoon Eastview and the by-election in Elphinstone was 
solid proof of that, and they still haven't listened. They still haven't 
listened. 
 
Now there are some questions here that the people of 
Saskatchewan are entirely justified in asking. What are they trying 
to hide? Why is it that the government's afraid of public debate? 
Why is it afraid of public scrutiny? Why does this government 
want these broad, sweeping powers to enable it to implement its 
privatization policy in private and in secret? What secret agendas 
do they have which they have discussed in their cabinet room and 
in their caucus? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Stay tuned. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, you know, the member from 
Wascana confirms what I'm saying when he says, stay tuned. He 
says, stay tuned. He is saying, yes, there is a sinister plot here; yes, 
there is a secret agenda here; and stay tuned, and a year after we 
do it we'll give you an annual report and we'll tell you what we've 
done. You know, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people have already 
seen just how much hardship this government can impose. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, with the indulgence of the 
House, I'd like to ask for leave to introduce some students that are 
in the gallery. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to 
introduce eight students from Broadview that are here with us this 
afternoon. They're accompanied by their teacher Karen Reed, and 
their chaperon Wanda Chester. And it's indeed a pleasure to see 
Wanda here as she was once a student of mine in Wolseley. 
 
So I want everyone here to welcome all the students here in the 
traditional manner, and I'll meet you outside on the lawn once we 
finish what's going on in here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
welcome the students here from Broadview. I'd like to say to the 
students that the debate that they are witnessing is an historic 
debate in this legislature, one which will have ramifications 
throughout history in terms of their future and the future and the 
history of this province. I hope they  
  



 
June 3, 1988 

1842 
 

listen attentively, and I hope in fact that it will be an instructive 
and an interesting time for them all. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No 55 (continued) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Welcome to the 
visitors as well. 
 
When I took my seat I was just beginning to say how the people of 
Saskatchewan, they have already witnessed the hardships that this 
government has and continues to impose on them, how many 
families have been seriously hurt. And all of this when the 
government gives itself sweeping powers to act in secret. 
 
I'm sure that every member in this House will remember, and 
many people in Saskatchewan will remember, the government's 
sinister and secretive Bill 5 which was introduced in December of 
1986, I believe it was. This Bill gave this government 
unprecedented powers to act in secret. And what has been the 
result, what has been the result? 
 
Well, here is some — this is just a small amount. As I mentioned 
earlier, 400 dental plan workers were fired and the children's 
dental plan was wrecked because the government gave itself that 
power. And they did this without a sitting of the legislature or 
without accounting to this Assembly. They did it by calling these 
people in by surprise into a room and telling them: you're fired; 
you're fired. One hundred and fifty technical institute instructors 
have been fired because of this new great powers that the 
government gave itself under Bill 5. 
 
We have seen reduced government services, and we have seen 
higher taxes, and we have seen crushing debt and our deficit 
growing every month and every week. We have seen an attack on 
medicare, and the privatization of medicare that has resulted in at 
least 11,000 people waiting to get into the hospital beds of 
Saskatoon alone. That's what they've been able to do with these 
new powers they've given unto themselves. 
 
It is a betrayal of Saskatchewan people that they have imposed. 
Now they come to this House, after those devastating experiences, 
and they ask this legislature to pass this new Bill which will give 
exactly the same powers with respect to government services and 
Crown corporations when they want to privatize them. 
 
Now the experience is very clear that this power in their hands or 
any government's hands is too much power and causes grief and 
pain and suffering and a destruction of the Saskatchewan 
economy, because if any one of those members can stand up and 
show us how the Saskatchewan economy has been growing in the 
last few years, I think there will be a lot of people who want to 
listen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Those were the consequences of this 
government's last attempt to give itself broad and sweeping 
powers to act in secret behind closed cabinet doors. 
 
Now the minister of privatization proposes to go even further. He 
wants to be able to sell off major Saskatchewan public assets and 
services. He wants to do it without public tendering, without 
public discussion or debate, without accountability to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when the Saskatchewan public, the men and 
women and families of our province, examine this Conservative 
privatization record, they see one consistent pattern, one consistent 
pattern up to date — every single privatization deal has meant 
either lost jobs, lost revenues and assets, reduced public services, 
or lost control of our destiny to outside corporations and investors, 
or all of them together. That is what has been the result of all of 
their privatization efforts. Their record is a sorry, sorry record. It's 
a record of failure. 
 
And I invite those members who want to get into this debate from 
their seats, I invite those members opposite to enter this debate, 
and I ask them to try and justify the government's privatization of 
things like the children's dental plan and those kinds of other 
losses that we've had. 
 
I invite them to explain why it is the PC policy, carried much 
farther even in this Bill, that the big beneficiaries, the winners, 
should be the big corporations of eastern Canada and south of the 
border in the United States, outside investors and Tory hacks and 
friends of Conservative Party cabinet ministers, instead of the 
people of Saskatchewan. I wish they would get up and explain 
that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is an ominous and sinister Bill. It is 
rewriting the very parliamentary process which the people of this 
country and people before them in other countries have built up. It 
is an attack of that democratic parliamentary process. It is a 
transferring of power from the legislature and the people into the 
hands of some politically motivated, greedy cabinet ministers who 
want to line the pockets of their friends. 
 
That's wrong, and that's why, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is going to be 
riding on some very rough water in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — And this Bill will not be accepted by the 
public of Saskatchewan. And that's why, Mr. Speaker, we're going 
to oppose, in every way available to us, this legislation, and that's 
why there are many other members of this opposition, the New 
Democratic Party, who want to speak on this Bill. And that's why I 
now adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:55 p.m. 
 


