


















































June 15, 1988 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

June 15, 1988 
 

2135 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Communications 

 
Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the Standing 
Committee on Communication, presents the second report of the 
said committee which is as follows: 
 

Your committee has considered the reference of the 
Assembly of March 22, 1988 and as referred on May 19, 
1988, namely the recommendation of the Public Documents 
Committee under The Archives Act contained in the 
retention and disposal schedules comprising sessional paper 
no. 84 of the second session of the twentieth legislature. 

 
Your committee recommends to the Assembly that the 
recommendations of the Public Documents Committee on 
schedules nos. 275, 276, 277, 278, 279, 280, 281, 282, and 
283 be accepted. 

 
Mr. Gerich: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move a motion at this 
time: 
 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 
Communications be now concurred in. 

 
Seconded by the member from Yorkton. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re honoured 
today to have a very large group of students from Swift Current. 
There are 40 seated in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker, and they 
come from two schools in Swift Current — grades 4 and 5 from 
Dickson School and from St. Pats. 
 
They are accompanied today by two teachers, Mr. Delmar 
Wagner and Mr. Tim Romanow. I don’t know if it’s some 
relative or not, but perhaps when I meet with them I can find out. 
 
They also are accompanied, Mr. Speaker, by three chaperons: 
Glenda Elliot, Lorna Spencer and Mildred Martins. I hope the 
students today enjoy question period, and I look forward to 
meeting them at 3:30. I would ask all members to please welcome 
them. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I take pleasure in 
informing you that I have the opportunity of a double 
introduction this afternoon of two different schools. Firstly the 
school that is here in the west gallery, grades 11

and 12 from town of Hepburn; 28 students accompanied by their 
teacher Bob McDougall; chaperons Mrs. Schroeder, Mrs. Dirks, 
Mrs. Goertzen, and Mr. Schroeder as bus driver. 
 
The school of Hepburn and the community of Hepburn has a 
special place in my life, Mr. Speaker. That is where my teaching 
career began back in the ’50s and I remember teaching grade 7 
and 8 classes in a brown, old brick building, and I have many 
pleasant memories from those days, Mr. Speaker. I appreciated 
the royal manner in which the citizens of Hepburn treated me 
back in the teaching days and as they are treating me now in my 
political life as well. 
 
So it gives me a great deal of pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to ask the 
members in the House to give them the usual welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, in the east gallery, 
on behalf of my sister constituency to the east of mine and the 
member of the constituency of Kinistino, I would like to 
introduce 10 grade 11 and 12 students from the St. Benedict 
School. They are accompanied by their teacher Dan Cooke, and 
chaperon Joan Martin. 
 
I trust that these students will find the proceedings in the 
Legislative Assembly this afternoon both informative and 
interesting, and I wish all students a safe trip home. Would you 
please welcome the students from St. Benedict. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Regulation of Store Hours 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to address 
my question to the Premier and it deals with a matter of 
government policy, and therefore I think it is appropriate that he 
respond. 
 
Mr. Premier, the Canadian Federation of Independent Grocers 
has written a letter to all MLAs in the Legislative Assembly and 
has expressed deep concern about your proposal to abdicate 
provincial responsibility for store closing or a common pause day 
throughout the province. 
 
I quote from the letter, Mr. Premier, because I think it is relative 
and extremely important. They say that: 

 
. . . what is at issue is much greater than mere commerce, 
but the very essence of the Saskatchewan society that we 
wish to live in and pass on to our children. 

 
Now, Mr. Premier, this group and a large coalition of community 
people, church people, and business people have asked that you 
put aside the proposed legislation to abdicate provincial 
responsibility for regulating store hours and the common pause 
day, and that there be an all-party committee that will hold 
hearings throughout 
  



 
June 15, 1988 

 

2136 
 

the province to get public input. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Premier, have you considered this suggestion, and 
are you prepared to agree that there should be an all-party 
committee and that you will stand this legislation until those 
hearing have been held around the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, the issue of store hours has 
been around not only Saskatchewan but Canada for an awful long 
time, and everybody in every jurisdiction has been looking at it. 
And it’s a very difficult thing to process properly, I suppose, but 
the consumer is saying hold it now; there’s a whole lot of moms 
and dads out there, double-working families, that find it very 
convenient to shop on Sundays. There’s a whole lot of 
single-parent families now that find it convenient to shop on 
Sundays. 
 
And as a result of changing times that were not with us a decade 
ago, something had to be done to accommodate what we believe 
is going to be the best of several worlds, Mr. Speaker. Number 
one, the consumer — we’re certainly thinking about them. 
Number two, the local autonomy at the local level. We believe 
we’re taking a leadership role, hardly an abdication. We’re 
saying that if some local community wants to uphold their 
tradition in their community, then so be it. By virtue of the 
legislation that we’ve presented, the autonomy of the smaller 
communities is protected, and they can uphold their traditions or 
in fact do what their local community dictates to them. 
 
The matter of the all-party committee has been tried 
unsuccessfully in other provinces, and why should it work here? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Premier, I’m going to ask . . . Mr. 
Speaker, I’m going to ask the Premier again the question which 
he would not answer the first time, and I’m going to ask him a 
question that is somewhat different, but related, because I think 
this matter of such importance is of such importance that the 
Premier ought to be able to speak for the government. 
 
Mr. Premier, the Reverend Bill Portman, who’s the chairman of 
this coalition which is growing throughout Saskatchewan, very 
rapidly, has said that we believe that the Minister of Urban 
Affairs has misread public opinion and particularly misread 
business opinion. Now, Mr. Premier, your shopping hour 
legislation is not serving Saskatchewan small business, it is not 
serving Saskatchewan families. It is only serving the interest of 
large out-of-province chain stores. I ask you, therefore, Mr. 
Premier: instead of serving those interest, why doesn’t your 
government serve the interest of Saskatchewan people, and why 
don’t you pull this Bill and do what’s right and hold public 
hearings so that those people can tell you what it is that they wish 
to have? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to hear the 
members of the opposition. I believe that the public have

spoken, certainly in Regina, by virtue of the plebiscite that was 
held last fall. And it’s interesting to note that in their travels to 
the SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 
conferences that they attend as opposition, they say to SUMA, 
yes, we’re going to have a common day of pause, But I believe 
that they say other things in the cities. 
 
And when they start talking about small business, Mr. Speaker, 
the NDP, you know, hardly represents small business. They 
never have; they never will. Why are they trying to fool people 
now into thinking that they’re the saviours of small business. The 
Regina Manifesto hasn’t been changed. Right there, clearly it 
says that they’re not in favour of business; they want to 
nationalize everything, so to stand up here and say that they 
represent small business is not accurate. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you know, time after time we see articles as 
this editorial that says, “Is Saskatchewan open for business?” 
And granted, Sunday opening takes a bit of getting used to at 
first, but once in place, the people of Saskatchewan would never 
go back. And it closes and it says — here’s the key, Mr. Speaker: 
 

If anyone does not want to shop on Sundays, they don’t 
have to. If businesses don’t want to open on Sunday, they 
don’t have to. But if they should do, shouldn’t they be 
allowed to? The churches have not emptied in Alberta, the 
stores are still operating, the people are still working, and 
possibly it’s time Saskatchewan did the same. 

 
That’s an editorial taken out of a large paper close to the Alberta 
border. 
 
And I had a very good meeting with the Reverent Bill Portman, 
as the member ascribed to in his question, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 
just responding to that meeting. And we had a good, frank 
discussion. That coalition, which was just recently formed, which 
is not huge, but which they would like to gather some support of, 
they’re going about their work. Some of the ideas that we 
discussed in this frank, open discussion were good, and those 
ideas are being transferred to the municipalities. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister. This is . . . 
The insensitivity of this minister has now grown beyond the point 
of being believable. The minister stands up and tries to make a 
political argument about an issue that is of such importance that 
it will literally undermine the existence of many rural 
communities in Saskatchewan and reads some letter from next to 
the Alberta border. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you are so positive that you are getting support 
for this legislation, then why are you afraid to hold public 
hearings throughout Saskatchewan? And why won’t you get off 
this stubbornness of yours and hold those public hearings so that 
the people of Saskatchewan have an opportunity to have some 
input, so that they can tell you what they want, instead of you 
ramming it down their throats? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been holding hearings 
on this issue for the last two years. We go to chamber of 
commerce meetings throughout this province 
  



 
June 15, 1988 

 

2137 
 

— something that the NDP does not do, something that the NDP 
is not familiar in doing. Something that the NDP does not 
understand is small business, and certainly the business 
community is all over the lot on this thing, as you would suspect. 
 
But when you go out and tell rural Saskatchewan one thing, why 
don’t you stand up and tell the people of the city of Regina that 
you’re going to close Superstore, you’re going to close Safeway, 
you’re going to close Bi-Rite Drugs? That’s the very problem. 
You can’t keep Superstore in Regina open or closed at your whim 
and create a level playing-field for the small-business community 
throughout the province. You don’t understand business. 
 
The rural business operator will survive very nicely. Do you 
know that there are communities in this province that are still 
closed Mondays? And they don’t care about the cities. They 
don’t open evenings, and the cities are open in the evenings. You 
know why they survive? Because we’ve got an awful lot of faith 
in the business community, not only in the cities but in rural 
Saskatchewan. They will survive, and we’re trying to give 
everybody a level playing-field. We’re trying to give the 
communities a playing field, and most of all we're trying to give 
the people in Saskatchewan a level playing field. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Rafferty Dam Project 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My question 
today is to the Deputy Premier. Mr. Deputy Premier, a little more 
than two months ago, on April 12 to be exact, I asked you a 
question concerning the costs of the coffer-dams that you’re 
constructing at the Rafferty dam sit. At that point in time, you 
said you would take notice of the question and get back to me as 
soon as possible. 
 
Now I trust that over two months is sufficient time to be able to 
find the information. I wonder, sir, would you mind tabling that 
information in the legislature here today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, as you know, I’ve been 
trying to get recognized in question period for a long time to 
answer that question, to answer the question that I took notice of 
on April 12. I remember distinctly taking notice of that question, 
Mr. Speaker. But having had all that difficulty in getting 
recognized, I seem to have misplaced the answer, and I will 
undertake to get it today and present it to the House tomorrow, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

Cost of Power from New Plant 
 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my question is directed to the same 
minister, who chooses to make a joke of providing information 
to the people of Saskatchewan about a billion dollar project being 
undertaken by this government.

Mr. Minister, on May 12 another question was asked of you, to 
which you took notice, promised that you would bring the 
information back to this House concerning the cost of the power 
that would be produced at the Shand project. 
 
Mr. Minister, why have you not provided that information to this 
House, and will you provide it today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The cost of the power, Mr. Speaker . . . 
I remember the question. It was on May 12, and it was some 
convoluted question from members opposite that was dealing 
with . . . I think it was page 2 of the environmental impact study 
on the Shand project, or the Rafferty project, where it said that 
the cost of power was going to be something like 10 cents per 
kilowatt-hour . . . no, per . . . yes, 10 cents per kilowatt-hour 
based on the yardstick that was used in what they call a levelized 
calculation. 
 
Now I think we’re going to have to go back to Hansard because 
I remember distinctly answering that question in the House. And 
I’ll look up . . . I’ll find the date. I’ll find the date and I’ll give it 
to you. 
 
But what levelized costing is, Mr. Speaker, is a yardstick used to 
compare apples and oranges. The yardstick that you calculate 
thermal plants on, that have maybe a 30-year life and an 
insignificant capital cost, in comparison to a hydroplant that 
might have a 75-year life and a very, very significant capital cost, 
are different. 
 
So they have this levelized cost — and you were comparing 
Manitoba to this levelized formula that the engineers use — and 
it said something like 6 cents compared to 10. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, the opposite is true. At the end of a 12-year contract that 
we negotiated with Manitoba, the cost of Manitoba power would 
be twice as much as Shand Power. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Dental Services for Gravelbourg 
 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, On March 25 in this 
House you told us that an announcement would be made shortly 
regarding a new dentist for Gravelbourg. 
 
It’s almost four months from that date, Mr. Premier. If there’s 
been an announcement, the people of Gravelbourg have not heard 
it, and we would like to know, Mr. Premier, when you’re going 
to make that announcement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the question, 
and I know you will note as well, that the . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, Order, order. The minister is attempting 
to answer the question but has some competition, so I’d like to 
ask your co-operation in allowing him to answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
  



 
June 15, 1988 

 

2138 
 

Speaker. As you will know, Mr. Speaker, and the members of the 
House will know, the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
asked a similar question the other day, and legitimately, and he 
received his answer. I will give the answer in a little bit more 
detail to the hon. Member from Lakeview and for the benefit of 
the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 
I had said in the House on several occasions that we would make 
arrangements to have a dental service in Gravelbourg, and I had 
said that before. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, we made those 
arrangements and we had two dentists. And we still have two 
dentists, one from Regina and one from Assiniboia, who are 
prepared to open a satellite office, and the arrangements have 
been made. But, Mr. Speaker, the people in Gravelbourg, through 
their economic development committee, and I believe the mayor 
is somewhat involved in this, have refused both of those dentists 
coming to their community in the form of a satellite service 
because they are searching out a full-time dentist. And they have 
said full-time dentist or no dentist at all. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the arrangements were made. The 
Department of Health has been involved in making those 
arrangements with the College of Dental Surgeons. Two dentists 
— not one, but two dentists — have said that they will go to 
Gravelbourg on very short notice and be there. But, Mr. Speaker, 
the ball is clearly in the court of the people of Gravelbourg. 
 

Shortage of Radio-Therapy Technicians 
 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. 
Mr. Premier, on May 4 of this year I brought to your attention the 
case of Muriel Gustafson, a woman who lives in Elrose and she’s 
a cancer patient. This woman’s complaint was one that she had 
to wait several months in order for her to receive radio-therapy 
treatment at the Saskatoon Cancer Clinic. 
 
At that time you told me that you would be doing some research 
on the case and bringing information forward. I’m wondering if 
you now have that information, now that it’s well into June? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’m just looking through my notes for the 
particular case, and I say to the House, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have 
it, but I will undertake to give it to the member tomorrow. Okay. 
 

Child Poverty in Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, on May 3 
you were asked about the shocking information from the 
National Council on Welfare, which shows that some 64,600 
children in Saskatchewan live in poverty today. You wouldn’t 
take the federal government’s word for that figure, Mr. Speaker, 
Mr. Premier. You said you had to review the report and study the 
situation. 
 
So will you tell us today, Mr. Premier, how many children in 
Saskatchewan are living in poverty, and can you confirm that we 
have the second highest rate of child poverty of any province in 
Canada; that in fact the figure

of 64,600 children living in poverty underestimates the situation 
in that children living on Indian reserves, children of status 
Indian families, are not included in that figure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it should not surprise 
the members opposite that with the agricultural situation in 
Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan still being primarily an agricultural 
province despite the efforts we've made to diversify this 
province, that incomes in Saskatchewan would be down does not 
surprise me, Mr. Speaker, that the incomes of my constituents 
who live on farms are down, and statistically it may show that 
they are living in poverty. The question is, where do you draw 
the line on poverty? 
 
Yes, the people of rural Saskatchewan are living without cash in 
their pockets, and they are trying to survive the best they can 
through low prices and drought and all of the other things. And 
it is possible that that kind of economic difficulty may reflect in 
the economy of small towns and cities, so statistically it is 
possible that if you take the National Council of Welfare of 
Canada’s calculation, Saskatchewan’s rates may be up. But we 
do pay the highest rates for families with respect to welfare in 
Canada, so those people that ask for assistance and need 
assistance get the highest rates in Canada. 
 
This government has done a lot to diversify the economy, to 
assist agriculture, to assist with drought, and this government is 
doing everything possible to assist the people of Saskatchewan. 
And I don’t think that we can accept the statistics of the Welfare 
Council of Canada as being an accurate reflection of the actual 
life-styles of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, your 
minister has refused to accept the figures of the National Council 
on Welfare as representing the true poverty picture in this 
province. And we say, Mr. Premier, that that’s a shocking 
condemnation of the view that your government takes to the 
terrible plight of children in this province today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Premier, we have 17,000 children in 
Saskatchewan depending on the food banks of this province 
every year. And my question to you, Mr. Premier, is: in light of 
the fact that your government hasn’t increased social assistance 
rates to families with children on penny since 1982, and in view 
of the fact that you have, Mr. Premier, only increased the 
minimum wage of wage earners supporting children by 25 cents 
an hour in six years, will you now, Mr. Premier, give us your 
commitment today that you will increase welfare rates 
immediately to families with children; that you will immediately 
increase the minimum wage so that earners who are supporting 
children can make enough to support their families; and that you 
will, Mr. Premier, immediately implement a policy of a school 
lunch or a school breakfast program so that the hundreds of 
children 
  



 
June 15, 1988 

 

2139 
 

in this province that are going to school hungry every day can at 
least get a decent meal in the class-room so that they can pursue 
their studies and live in some kind of dignity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, when the net farm income 
in Saskatchewan goes down to zero, you would anticipate that 
there would be difficult times with respect to farms and that the 
statistics would not be very good. This government has realized 
that difficulty and has assisted agriculture in every way possible, 
and that the people in rural Saskatchewan living with zero and 
negative incomes on their farms are still quite adequately taking 
care of their children. I am out there, and I see it every day that 
the people of rural Saskatchewan are feeding their children 
regularly and are taking care of their children, despite the 
difficulty of surviving where half of the people in this province 
survive in an area where the net farm income is zero. 
 
So with respect to the opposition’s suggestions of raising the 
welfare rates, we already have the highest rates in Canada. The 
people I am referring to, the people that you were referring to as 
statistics, are not on welfare. They are taking care of themselves 
as best they can, and the government is helping them as best the 
government can. We are all in this together, and we cannot single 
out particular families and say they should get more help than 
other families. 
 

Hold-back of Fee by SGI 
 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A question to the 
minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance). Last Thursday in this House you took notice of a 
question of yet another unfair PC tax, a hold-back charge of $35 
when a person returns their licence plates. You hold back on the 
gas tax rebates; you hold back on drug rebates. Can you confirm 
this hold-back fee an tell the people of Saskatchewan how you 
can justify it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Yes, most certainly, Mr. Speaker, I can 
explain the reason for the fee. If someone turns in their licence 
plate early, prior to the expiry of that plate, there is a fee of $25 
held back for administration and $10 in the highway fund. 
 
The reason behind this, though, is what I’d like to explain, Mr. 
Speaker, is that what we found was happening, that there were 
many people that were looking at the opportunity to make a quick 
flip; in other words, that they anticipated that there would be an 
increase, an increase in their licence fee. They would then go and 
cash them in early so that they could insure at a lower rate. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that’s fair to the people of 
Saskatchewan. That’s trying to take advantage of a loophole that 
was there. So we put this in to try and deter from people using 
that type of loophole which just causes other people’s rates to be 
higher. And I think that’s in the best interests of the drivers of 
Saskatchewan.

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The piling on of 
$35 more is not in the interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — A great many people turn in their licence plates 
because they choose to license their vehicles for only a portion 
of the year — seasonal vehicles such as trailers. Why are you 
penalizing these people because they can’t or they won’t license 
their vehicles all the year? Why are you having your hands in the 
pockets of Saskatchewan people once again? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Obviously, Mr. Speaker, the member 
opposite failed to understand what I was explaining to him. It was 
simply that there were people — and if he support this, stand up 
in this House and say so — but there were people who were 
taking advantage of the loophole where you could go in a week 
before there would be a renewal, if you thought your licence rate 
would be higher, and flip it, and therefore insure your car at a 
lesser rate than anybody else a week or two after when they 
would come through. And to deter that, we put in a fee of $35. 
 
I think that’s fair. That has Saskatchewan motorists paying the 
same amount, and that is plugging loopholes of people who are 
trying to take advantage of the system. 
 

Answers from Ministers 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I direct a 
question to the Premier. Mr. Speaker, we have seen here the 
performance of a government this afternoon that has completely 
lost touch with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I say in my question to the Premier, first 
of all you display how you have a complete disregard of 
Saskatchewan people with regard to store hours, and their 
opinions matter not at all. Then we ask some seven questions 
about information that has been asked many, many weeks ago. 
In almost all cases, your ministers have not been prepared to 
answer them. 
 
Your government has a complete and blatant disregard for its 
obligations to this legislature and to the people of Saskatchewan 
to provide answers. And so I ask you, Mr. Premier: will you stand 
up for your responsibility as the chief executive officer of 
Executive Council and instruct your ministers to start giving full 
answers to this House to the questions which the public has a 
right to know, and exercise their responsibility as ministers of the 
Crown, rather than political activists only on behalf of the 
Progressive Conservative Party? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the 
  



 
June 15, 1988 

 

2140 
 

people in Saskatchewan, and indeed the people in the gallery, 
found this question period quite interesting. 
 
We have some very serious questions with respect to drought; 
serious questions going on at the national level that have an 
impact on Saskatchewan with respect to free trade and French 
language. We have all kinds of issues, evidently, that are very 
serious with respect to public accounts and Provincial Auditor 
and other. And do they raise one of them, Mr. Speaker? Not one 
of them. 
 
And each of these ministers has responded to things that they 
would bring up with respect to specifics that would go back to 
something that you’d get in Crown corporations. And then they 
would ask another very specific question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can just only say to the hon. Members, if you are 
concerned about agriculture, if you’re concerned about farm 
income, if you’re concerned about families, then you would be 
concerned about drought, you’d be concerned about trade, you’d 
be concerned about access to markets. 
 
I stand in here and I talk about other governments that we take 
on in terms of subsidies, because we have to come with 
deficiency payments, and they laugh at it; they say it isn’t even 
relevant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you the people of this province know that 
we trade. We know that we deal with the constitution. We know 
that we deal with Meech Lake. We know that we deal with jobs 
and seniors and children, and people all across this province 
know that; and you stand in here and you say, well, Mr. Speaker, 
deal with what’s relevant — what’s relevant are the things that 
matter to people, not just what matters to the NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 
 

At 2:37 p.m. His Honour, the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 7 — An Act to amend The Reciprocal Enforcement of 
Judgments Act 
Bill No. 8 — An Act to amend The Public Libraries Act, 1984 
Bill No. 16 — An Act respecting the Licensing of Persons who 
Perform Work of Gas Installation or Sell Gas Equipment 
Bill No. 5 — An Act to declare a Day of Mourning for Workers 
Killed or Injured in the Course of their Employment/Loi relative 
à la déclaration d’un jour de deuil en souvenir des travailleurs et 
travailleuses morts ou blessés au travail 
Bill No. 6 — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments 
to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of The Regional 
Colleges Act and The Institute Act 
Bill No. 9 — An Act to amend The Fire Prevention Act, 1980 
Bill No. 10 — An Act respecting the Licensing of Persons who 
Perform Work of Electrical Installation or Sell

Electrical Equipment 
Bill No. 11 — An Act to amend The Ophthalmic Dispensers Act 
Bill No. 12 — An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act, 
1981 
Bill No. 13 — An Act to amend The Denturists Act 
Bill No. 14 — An Act to amend The Dental Profession Act, 1978 
Bill No. 15 — An Act to amend The Optometry Act, 1985 
Bill No. 17 — An Act respecting the Inspection of Gas 
Installations and Gas Equipment for Consumers 
Bill No. 18 — An Act respecting the Inspection of Electrical 
Equipment, Installation and Material 
Bill No. 40 — An Act to amend The League of Educational 
Administrators, Directors and Superintendents Act 
Bill No. 27 — An Act to adopt the Model Law on International 
Commercial Arbitration 
Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend The Matrimonial Property Act 
Bill No. 29 — An Act respecting the Convention Between 
Canada and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland providing for the Reciprocal Recognition and 
Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters 
Bill No. 01 — An Act to incorporate the Stephen and Michelene 
Worobetz Foundation 
Bill No. 02 — An Act to amend An Act to incorporate Full 
Gospel Bible Institute 
Bill No. 30 — An Act to amend The Research Council Act 
Bill No. 34 — An Act to promote Regulatory Reform in 
Saskatchewan by repealing Certain Obsolete Statutes 
Bill No. 35 — An Act to amend The Jury Act, 1981 
Bill No. 51 — An Act to amend The Enforcement of Foreign 
Arbitral Awards Act 
Bill No. 52 — An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act 
Bill No. 57 — An Act to amend The Attachment of Debts Act 
Bill No. 66 — An Act respecting Justices of the Peace / Loi 
concernant les juges de paix 
Bill No. 67 — An Act respecting a Traffic Safety Court for 
Saskatchewan/Loi concernant le Tribunal de la sécurité routière 
de la Saskatchewan 
Bill No. 22 — An Act to amend The Wakamow Valley Authority 
Act 
Bill No. 23 — An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 
Bill No. 36 — An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley Authority 
Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, by leave of the 
Assembly, that we take a short recess till approximately 4 
o’clock, but in any event that we be called by the five minute bell. 
 
Leave is granted. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — With the agreement of the House we will now 
take a short recess. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
  



 
June 15, 1988 

 

2141 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Andrew that Bill No. 37 — An Act to 
provide for Security for Saskatchewan Family Farms be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity 
to get involved in debate on second reading on Bill 27. Mr. 
Speaker, I think it’s fair to say that the Act will be better known 
to farmers for what It doesn’t include, as opposed to what it does 
include. Obviously the Bill, in dealing with the security of 
farmers, doesn’t deal with the major issue that has been identified 
not only by farmers but by farm groups and, I suppose more 
interestingly, by the Conservative caucus itself. 
 
And many of us will remember the dog and pony show last year 
when members of the Conservative caucus went out at taxpayers’ 
expense and wandered around the province, spending taxpayers’ 
money like drunken sailors, pretending to be interested in the 
debt crisis. 
 
I have here a copy of the report that they did when they came 
back to the legislature, back to Regina, called Farm Finance for 
the Future, MLA committee report. And Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
that document I have here, that MLA committee on farm 
financing included the Minister of Rural Development, the 
member from Kelsey-Tisdale; the Legislative Secretary to the 
Minister of Agriculture, the member from Thunder Creek; the 
member from Wilkie; the member from Rosthern, and the 
member from Shaunavon. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t think any of those members who 
claim to be so interested in farmers have even taken the time to 
rise in their place and speak to this Bill. I don’t think any of them 
have. I may be wrong because I was out for several days with 
colleagues of mine on a drought tour in southern Saskatchewan 
and they may have talked and spoken in this second reading 
debate on Bill 37, but I don’t think any of them who claimed to 
be interested in the farm plight and the debt crisis have taken even 
a moment of their time — some of them who are in the House 
now — and I would challenge them, when I sit down, to rise in 
their place and explain how Bill 37 deals with the problem that 
even they identified in their tour. And to that point . . . 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. I think the hon. 
Member just went through the process of identifying the five 
members who were on that farm finance tour and then proceeded 
to indicate that some of them were in the House. I do believe that 
he should be brought to order on that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Members are not to make 
reference to the absence or presence of other members in the 
legislature. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure if you were 
speaking to the member from Rosthern, who just indicated he 
was in the House, and I would agree with you that that’s not the 
proper procedure. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. The member for

Regina Elphinstone just made reference again to a member that’s 
in the House, and I just said that members are not to make 
reference to member in or out of the House. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to get 
hung up on your ruling as to whether people are in their seats or 
not because I agree with you that’s not what the debate is about. 
If the member from Rosthern would quit interrupting and allow 
us to continue the debate on Bill 37 which deals with the plight 
of farmers, the thousands of farmers who are going bankrupt as 
a direct result of the inactivity of this government, a government 
that has been in power now for six years, six years, six long, lean 
years on the farm in Saskatchewan, where we’ve seen record 
numbers of farmers biting the dust and going broke. 
 
And I say again that we were not opposed to the dog and pony 
show that went out and toured the province and went around and 
spoke to farmers, got opinions about debt financing — we 
weren’t opposed to that. We believed that when the committee 
went out it should have been an all-party committee; that if 
you’re going to pay for it out of the taxpayer’s dollar that you 
then should include opposition members. And this has been done 
in the past; it’s been done a number of times out of this legislature 
— all-party committees. 
 
We would have argued that the Conservative Party should have 
paid for the dog and pony show when they went out because it 
included only Conservative caucus members, but I do believe 
that having spent the taxpayers money and delivered a report to 
the legislature, that you would have thought that some of those 
members who were on the committee would have had the 
courage of their conviction to stand up and say that Bill 37 is 
good, if they believed it. I don’t know how they could, and that’s 
probably why they’re not getting involved in making speeches 
defending Bill 37, but not one of them is taking the time or the 
effort to stand in their place and offer up solutions to the farm 
crises in this province. 
 
And I say to you that when we were doing our tour of the south 
and west side of the province where the drought is the worst and 
where farmers are facing debt the same as they are in the rest of 
the country, that one of the things we heard loud and clear was 
that when the Conservative members came out to the area, if it 
wasn’t in an orchestrated fashion where they controlled the 
meeting and question period, they simply haven't been out 
talking to the farmers. They simply haven't been out there. 
 
In fact, in one of the communities we were in, the people of the 
council told us they hadn’t seen the Conservative member since 
he was elected, and that they were very disappointed and also 
very pleased with the fact that the now Agriculture critic of the 
New Democratic Party had organized a tour of that part of the 
province and were listening to their concerns. 
 
And I think if you look at the front page of the Ponteix Tribune, 
and if you look at the Swift Current Sun, you’ll find that even the 
press people are beginning to wonder about this Conservative 
government and their lack of support for farmers. And they’re 
beginning to say that the promises made in 1982 to support the 
farm community, 
  



 
June 15, 1988 

 

2142 
 

the business community, and then again in 1986, simply isn’t 
working any more; that the promises were nothing more than that 
— they were idle promises, and farmers continue to go broke and 
go bankrupt at record numbers. 
 
And I think the record, as put in the Hansard by member from 
Quill Lakes last day on this very issue, in terms of farm 
bankruptcy, clearly indicates that. And he said that there were 
2,251 foreclosures filed, and that of those, the farm security 
board had allowed only 106 of them, that they should not be 
foreclosed. This is what the Conservative government has done 
to protect the farmers. 
 
And I say to you, while we’re not opposed to Bill 37, it simply 
doesn’t do the job, and nor will it do the job, even with the 
amendments that have been made. And I indicate clearly, Mr. 
Speaker, that it’s not that we’re opposed to the Bill. And we’ll be 
making amendments to it when we get to the committee stage to 
try to strengthen the Bill to protect farmers, but in its present form 
it simply doesn’t go far enough. 
 
Now saving 106 farmers out of 2,200 is a start in the right 
direction, we agree with that, and therefore we’ll be supporting 
the Bill. But it simply does not allow for the protection of farmers 
and the headlines that the Tories are trying to grab by introducing 
Bill 37. 
 
(1615) 
 
And I say to these five members — and I want to go through them 
again: the member from Kelsey-Tisdale, who was on the tour, 
and the member from Thunder Creek, the member from Wilkie, 
and Rosthern, and the member from Shaunavon — I challenge 
them to stand in their place and give a speech about defending 
the farmers in Saskatchewan. Not one of them has spoken on Bill 
37. 
 
Now you can see that there have been a large number of New 
Democratic MLAs who have spoken to and expressed concerned 
about the lack of debt protection for farmers. And I say again, in 
many ways we agree with the concerns that you people identified 
when you were out talking to farmers. But I guess what I can 
hardly believe is the weakness of this group of members who 
went out on the tour, identified the debt crises, and then didn’t 
have any power within their caucus to implement their 
recommendations to deal with the debt of farmers. 
 
Because I say to you: protect the farmers for three years, even 
those that you don’t repossess and foreclose on. If you don’t deal 
with the debt problem, as they identified in their report, how can 
those farmers possibly survive? And I think it’s clear that if a 
farmer today has 2 or $300,000 in debt and they can’t afford to 
make their payments on that debt and you protect them for the 
next three-year period and they end up with $400,000 in debt, 
because the government failed to come forward with a program, 
what is the solution? What have you solved? You haven’t solved 
anything. 
 
And the simple fact is that what they’ve done with Bill 37 is to 
freeze a lot of credit that would be allowed to farmers through 
the lending institutions in Saskatchewan. And I think the clearest 
example of that was their own federal

lending agency, the Farm Credit Corporation, who last week 
announced that they were no longer going to be lending up to 100 
per cent of the value on the home quarter; that in fact they would 
be reducing the lending power of the home quarter to a maximum 
of 25 per cent. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you will know that in many cases the 
Farm Credit Corporation will probably be looking at ceasing any 
kind of lending power on the home quarter. 
 
And I say again that this has sent a clear message to the credit 
unions and the banks in the province, that farm credit is going to 
be drying up. And this is bad news not only for farmers, many of 
them who up to this point have had solvent operations, have been 
making their payments but used their home quarter to finance 
their farming operation year by year — these people depend on 
that kind of financing, interim financing, operating loans, in order 
to buy their fuel and buy needed equipment for harvest and that 
sort of thing. If they can’t go to their credit union and use their 
home quarter as security, many of them will then fall into the 20 
or 30 per cent and raise that number of those farmers who have 
become insolvent. 
 
And I say to the members opposite that you should consider the 
implication and the problems that this has caused for many local 
credit unions and many banks in the province of Saskatchewan 
in terms of their lending policy and indirectly caused for the 
farmers, who will no longer be able to use that portion of their 
farm as security when they go for operation loans. 
 
We have had many phone calls from farmers who are telling us 
that this Bill is not solving their problem but is causing a problem 
for them. 
 
So I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I suppose you, yourself, 
and the other members when you’re dealing with this Bill in 
caucus — and I know it’s not going to be passed today; we’ll go 
through second reading, and I would challenge the members 
opposite to get involved and give speeches saying how the Bill is 
inadequate — but that when you come to committee, that you 
have a caucus meeting to discuss how this Bill could be 
strengthened. 
 
And I would imagine that the member from Shaunavon and the 
member from Morse, who have a good number of people who 
are facing bankruptcy, and I think they are, I think that it’s 
important that you stand up in caucus and defend the position of 
farmers in your community, because you simply haven’t done it 
with Bill 37. 
 
I find it hard to believe, that having been out on the tour, that the 
member from Shaunavon would then go ahead and write up a 
Bill like Bill 37 that simply doesn’t deal with the debt problem 
of farmers, when he clearly identified in the report that the 
biggest single issue was the massive $6 billion debt that farmers 
hold in this province. And then to bring in a Bill that doesn’t 
include one cent of help for farmers, seems to be a strange 
solution. 
 
And I think what has happened here is that once again the 
members who sit in the front benches of the government have 
hoodwinked the back-benchers. And this has 
  



 
June 15, 1988 

 

2143 
 

happened a great number of times with this government, where 
the members in the back rows simply don’t understand the 
process of government and how Bills are brought forward, or 
they don’t believe in protecting the farmers of their 
constituencies. 
 
And I say to you, that even in the crassest political terms, you 
really should look at what you’re doing because the farmers in 
your areas are watching, and watching very closely what you are 
going to be doing to solve that debt problem. Any polling that 
has been done in rural Saskatchewan clearly indicates that the 
debt issue is what farmers are concerned about. 
 
Now you can talk to them about a million dollars or $12 million 
for digging dug-outs, but that isn’t what concerns farmers out in 
rural Saskatchewan today. I have yet to have one farmer phone 
me and say the problem on their farm is that they don’t have a 
dug-out. I have yet to have that expressed to me, and I would be 
surprised if the critic or other rural members on this side of the 
House have had one constituent who has raised the issue of the 
lack of dug-outs. 
 
But yet this is what the Premier, the Minister of Agriculture, and 
the caucus members come forward with as solution to the 
problem that farmers are having this spring. In fact what they’re 
saying is that the problem isn’t the lack of dug-outs or the lack of 
wells; it’s simply that there’s no water in the dug-outs. And 
digging more of them isn’t going to solve that problem. 
 
So I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I think this Bill, while 
it is a bit of a loaf, simply doesn’t even look at the fundamental 
problem facing the farm community — it doesn’t even touch it; 
that the $6 billion debt that is there today, after Bill 37 is passed 
and we all go away from this legislature, that the simple fact is 
that the problem will still be there, in spades. The $6 billion debt 
will still be there; farmers will still be there with no means to pay 
their debt. And you may have saved 106 out of 2,000 who were 
facing foreclosure, but your political problem in rural 
Saskatchewan is very much still there, and you’re going to have 
to deal with it. 
 
I want to say as well that, when we look beyond, when we look 
beyond the debt of the farmer and to the farm family, some of the 
things that this Bill doesn’t deal with and some of the things that 
this government isn't dealing with — in fact, are ignoring totally 
— one of them is the social fabric of rural Saskatchewan that is 
being destroyed by the lack of a program. 
 
We’ve been through literally hundreds of towns in rural 
Saskatchewan over the last couple of years, where Main Street, 
Saskatchewan is literally falling apart because of a lack of effort 
to protect the farm families and, indirectly, the small-business 
people. 
 
I know in my home town of Shaunavon, and I know in the town 
of Eastend, a number of businesses that have closed their doors 
and left those towns because the farm economy is basically 
collapsing, and this at a time when the government says that 
they’re doing all that they can. Well you’re going to have to 
convince the farmers and the business people of rural 
Saskatchewan that this

government is doing anything to protect the rural community. 
 
I use the example in the Shaunavon constituency of the number 
of people who left that constituency between 1982 and 1986 — 
between 1982 and 1986. There were 800 less voters, 800 fewer 
voters in the Shaunavon constituency in that period of time. A 
full 10 per cent of the people in that rural constituency had moved 
out over that four-year period, and I would be surprised if that 
trend hasn’t accelerated over the last two years, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And I say to you that the problem has to be dealt with — the 
problem of farm debt, because if it isn’t, we’re going to see that 
kind of an exodus from rural Saskatchewan the likes of which we 
haven’t seen since the last time we had a Conservative 
government provincially, that back in the 1930s. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you will probably not remember that era, 
but you will have read the history of how the Conservative 
government in Ottawa, during the period from ’29 to ’34, and in 
Saskatchewan during the same period, ignored rural 
Saskatchewan during the Depression — totally ignored rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Again that is happening. The only difference now is the 
Conservative Party of Saskatchewan can afford more media — 
12, $20 million a year to put out propaganda about all the things 
that are happening for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
But anyone who looks at the fabric of rural Saskatchewan will 
know that there’s nothing more that advertising that is going on, 
that the number of farm families is decreasing at record numbers, 
the number of small-business people is decreasing and what 
we’re looking at is a problem of a $6 billion debt that hangs over 
the heads of farmers and this government hasn’t got a cent in Bill 
37 to deal with that crisis. 
 
I wan to turn to on other aspect of the Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and that is the section that deals with foreign ownership of 
Saskatchewan farm land. You’ll know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
the limitations on ownership of . . . foreign ownership of farm 
land is very strict at the present time in Saskatchewan. And I 
think that there would be very few farm groups or farm families 
who would be pushing the sections of this Bill to open up large 
tracts of farm land in Saskatchewan to foreign ownership. 
 
We saw what happened in the 1970s and we know why the farm 
ownership Bill was brought in, to restrict the number of acres that 
were owned by non-residents. And when we come to this section 
in the Bill, we will want to look at putting forward constructive 
ideas that will change the Bill so that we don’t move back to a 
position of having large numbers of acres owned by people who 
live outside the province. 
 
And you will know that part 6 of the Bill, the farm ownership 
section, Mr. Deputy Speaker, allows for a drastic increase in the 
number of acres that can be owned by non-residents of the 
province, in fact increases to 320 acres the amount that can be 
owned by individuals from 
  



 
June 15, 1988 

 

2144 
 

outside the province. Now you can see small companies of 15 or 
20 people getting together and each of the owning 320 acres, how 
very quickly we will see large tracts of land once again bought 
up by foreign landlords. 
 
And I say to you, I can’t understand where the pressure for this 
is coming from. And when we get to clause by clause discussion 
of the Bill, we’ll be asking the minister who will be bringing the 
Bill through, where the pressure has come from — whether it’s 
come from the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, from the wheat pool, from Credit Union Central, 
who is demanding that we have more foreign ownership of our 
farm land in the province. Maybe the member from Yorkton has 
the answers, or maybe the member from Morse. Maybe they have 
friends in some foreign country who want to come here and 
purchase farm land. But there are provisions already within the 
Act that allow for special circumstances. And to have a blanket 
policy that allows every foreign resident to hold 320 acres seems 
to be inappropriate at this time. 
 
So with those few comments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say 
to you that while we will be supporting the Bill, the little bit that 
there is here, I want to say very clearly that the main problem 
facing farmers – the $6 billion in debt — simply isn’t in the Bill. 
There’s not 1 cent to help alleviate that problem. 
 
And instead there’s an attempt to dump on the backs of credit 
union members and farm families, the responsibility that — when 
the tour was taking place of the Tory caucus — they said they 
would solve. And I believe that they are simply neglecting their 
duty, even that they identified while they were out on tour last 
year. 
 
So with that I want to say that I look forward to members of the 
Conservative caucus getting up and going through the Bill and 
telling us why there is no substance and why there is no money 
for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 56 — An Act 
respecting the Reorganization of the Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. First let me 
say that I appreciate the opportunity to respond to this particular 
piece of legislation, Bill No. 56. And let’s be clear on what this 
Bill is. 
 
This Bill is not an Act to reorganize SMDC (Saskatchewan 
Mining Development Corporation), this Act is an Act to privatize 
the Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation. 
 
(1630) 
 
Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation, for the interest 
of those who may not know, is a company that is actively 
involved in the mining of Saskatchewan uranium. It’s involved 
in the mining of Saskatchewan

gold, and it’s involved in the mining of a number of other hard 
rock metals, in particular copper and silver, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the minister responsible for this Bill, the member from 
Moosomin, made it clear the other day that the purpose of this 
legislation was to roll Saskatchewan Mining and Development 
Corporation in with Eldorado Nuclear, which is a federal Crown 
corporation, and the purpose was to make these two particular 
companies stronger than either corporation could have ever 
imagined before. That’s to quote the minister. 
 
He also said that he wanted to ensure that the head office of this 
world-scale resource company was headquartered in 
Saskatchewan, and he also wanted to make sure that the 
government no longer had ownership in this particular new 
company. 
 
Saskatchewan Mining and Development Corporation was a 
company set up by the provincial government in the early 1970s. 
Over the years this company has become a world-class leader in 
the mining of uranium. This is a company that has over $1 billion 
in assets; it’s a company that returned to the people of 
Saskatchewan, in this year alone, $60 million. It paid a dividend 
to the provincial treasury of $30 million, and the return on equity 
for this particular company was 20.2 per cent. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in previous years this company has netted for 
the people of Saskatchewan $15 million in 1986, $15 million in 
1985, and lesser amounts in the three years prior to that. This is 
a very profitable company. 
 
Now I want to talk about Eldorado Nuclear. This is the company 
that, a federal Crown corporation, that SMDC is being merged 
with. Here is a company that has assets in the neighbourhood of 
$915.9 million, but its long-term debt, Mr. Speaker, its long-term 
debt is close to $420 million. This is a company that has had an 
accumulated deficit since 1981 of $144 million. This is a 
company that lost $57.2 million in 1985 and $64.3 million in 
1986. This company, Eldorado Nuclear, is not a good example of 
public ownership. Saskatchewan Mining and Development 
Corporation is. Saskatchewan Mining and Development 
Corporation is because it has returned to the people of this 
province a significant amount of money to pay for important 
public programs like health and education. 
 
Now why does this government want to privatize the 
Saskatchewan Mining and Development Corporation? This 
government is ideologically committed to the right-wing 
philosophy of people like Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan. 
They are committed to the philosophy of privatization and 
privatize at all costs. That’s what this government’s committed 
to. This government will privatize at any cost regardless of 
whether there are jobs lost for Saskatchewan people, regardless 
of whether revenues are lost to the provincial treasury, and 
regardless if Saskatchewan people lose control and ownership 
over vital Saskatchewan resources. 
 
Now I want to talk about what this deal means. This deal allows 
for the following: Saskatchewan Mining and 
  



 
June 15, 1988 

 

2145 
 

Development Corporation up until now has been a wholly-owned 
corporation of the people of this province. This is a 
Saskatchewan corporation. Profits that are paid out of that 
company do not go to shareholders outside of Saskatchewan; 
they go to the people inside of Saskatchewan; they go to the 
provincial treasury to pay for important programs like health and 
education. 
 
This government, along with its federal counterpart, the 
Mulroney government, has decided that they want to privatize 
this particular company. And this is what they’ve agreed to do. 
They’ve agreed to limit the foreign ownership, apparently, once 
this thing is placed on the stock-market, to 5 per cent for any one 
particular shareholder to an aggregate of 20 per cent. They’ve 
agreed to limit the ownership of any particular stock of one 
particular group to 25 per cent. That’s what they’ve said. 
Conceivable, we could see in the future, four institutions or four 
individuals owning this particular company with a 25 per cent 
ownership figure, or we could see a major portion of this 
company owned by foreign interests — 20 per cent, as they say. 
 
We have no guarantees after the seven-year period that these 
kinds of provisions will apply. There are no guarantees in the 
legislation that has been presented in the House of Commons and 
no guarantee in the legislation that has been presented here. So it 
is possible, Mr. Speaker, that after the seven-year period, 
Saskatchewan Mining and Development Corporation and 
Eldorado Nuclear could be owned by one particular company, or 
two or three particular companies. There are no guarantees that 
it won’t be owned by people outside of Canada, and there are no 
guarantees that it won’t be owned by people outside of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well the minister of privatization has trotted out a little poll the 
other day, a poll that was done by Decima Research. Decima 
Research, of course, is the Conservative Party polling 
organization. Here is a poll that was done for approximately, I 
would suspect, at least 80 or $90,000. There are 120 questions 
asked to over 1,000 people. 
 
Now this polling was not done at the expense of the Progressive 
Conservative Party. This polling was done at the expense of the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. And the Saskatchewan taxpayers have 
not yet seen the wording of the poll, and they have not yet been 
told or informed how much that particular poll cost. Now this 
poll was done to further the ideological agenda of the Progressive 
Conservative Party. That’s why that poll was done. That poll was 
not done in the interest of Saskatchewan people. 
 
But we’ve had to decipher through the media exactly what the 
content or the results of this polling was. And there seems to be 
three things that have become clear. Saskatchewan people are 
opposed to privatization when it means job loss; Saskatchewan 
people are opposed to privatization when it means loss of revenue 
to the provincial treasury; and Saskatchewan people are opposed 
to privatization when it means loss of control over our own 
industries here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And privatization by this particular Progressive Conservative 
Party, up until now has meant either job

loss, it has meant the loss of revenues, and it has meant loss of 
control over our own particular provincial economy. 
 
Now what we see here with this privatization of SMDC, here is 
a company that is a major player in the North, a major mining 
player in the North. It has over $1 billion in assets. It’s a company 
that has returned over $60 million in this year alone, to the 
provincial treasury — $60 million, a 20.2 per cent return on 
equity. 
 
When this company is privatized, when this company is 
privatized members opposite, and if this company should pay 
dividends, those dividends will not be paid to Saskatchewan 
people. Those dividends will be paid to people outside of 
Saskatchewan and even outside of Canada. That is loss of control 
over our own provincial economy by having this particular 
privatization deal. 
 
This particular privatization deal, in the legislation, has no 
guarantees in terms of environmental safety requirements. There 
are no guarantees whatsoever. Bill C-121 in the federal House of 
Commons does not refer to the environment, and neither does 
this Bill. There’s no reference, we have no guarantees that this 
privatized company which will be owned and controlled by 
people outside of Saskatchewan, will protect our environment. 
And the environment in the North is sensitive and requires 
protection, particularly when we’re dealing with uranium. 
 
There are no guarantees in this particular piece of legislation that 
workers’ occupational health and safety will be protected. There 
is no reference to workers’ safety in either Bill C-121 or this 
particular piece of legislation. 
 
My question is, how will the surface lease agreements be 
affected? How will affirmative action be affected by this 
particular privatization and merger of SMDC and Eldorado 
Nuclear? We have no guarantees that research and development 
investment will be made here in Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
In short, there are a number of important public policy questions 
that have not been dealt with in this legislation. We have nuclear 
development questions. We have environmental questions. We 
have public policy questions that are not addressed in this 
legislation. 
 
And like all the other pieces of privatization that we’ve seen, this 
creates a longer term poorness of this province, because we give 
up our ability and our right to own and control the development 
of our own natural resources. Natural resources are not infinite, 
ladies and gentlemen of the members opposite. They are not 
infinite; they are finite. And it’s important that the people of this 
province own and control those natural resources, and own and 
control the development of those natural resources. 
 
It’s important that Saskatchewan people determine their own 
economic destiny, and you people seem hell-bent and determined 
to get rid of our control over our own economic destiny. We have 
seen it time and time again. 
 
Saskatchewan oil, privatized — 75 per cent of the shares are 
owned by people outside of Saskatchewan; 25 per 
  



 
June 15, 1988 

 

2146 
 

cent of the labour force fired within one year of that particular 
privatization. 
 
Weyerhaeuser comes in and gets the PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp 
Company) pulp and paper plant in northern Saskatchewan for 
absolutely nothing — absolutely nothing. There is apparently 
some $248 million loan guarantee to PAPCO. They have not paid 
any money, as I understand it, on the . . . they have not paid any 
money on that loan. Not 1 cent has been paid on that loan, yet 
PAPCO had a 77 or $80 billion return last year on our forests. 
That’s what happened. 
 
Had that been in public hands, that 77 or $80 million of profits 
could have been turned over to the provincial treasury to pay for 
the prescription drug plan, to pay for the school-based dental 
program. That’s what could have happened, but they’ve decided 
to reward their friends in big business. They’ve decided to reward 
their international friends in the United States of America. That’s 
what we’ve seen with privatization. 
 
Saskatchewan Minerals is another example. It’s another example 
of giving up ownership and control over our own economic 
destiny. They gave away a plant, two plants, to two companies 
that are outside of Saskatchewan — one in Quebec and one in 
Ontario. Here was a company that returned to the people of this 
province, money to pay for health and education, for instance. It 
paid to the people of this province over $50 million, and they sold 
that Sask Minerals for less than $16 million. Well how foolish. 
Why would you sell the best quarter, the best quarter? I think 
there are some farmers over there, sitting here. You don’t sell 
your best quarter in hard economic times. You don’t do that. That 
quarter is your economic future; that quarter is your economic 
future. 
 
And you people like to think of yourselves as high financiers and 
big-business people, and hob-nobbing with the big shots in this 
country. That’s what you like to think of yourself. You like to 
think of yourself as high-fliers and high financiers, high rollers, 
but you wouldn’t know a good business deal if it looked you 
straight in the face. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — You don’t sell off the best quarter of the family 
farm in tough economic times. You don’t do it. That best quarter 
is your future, and you know that. You know that. 
 
And I want you to know this, ladies and gentlemen over there, I 
want you to know this. Weyerhaeuser was a give-away of our 
forests. Seventy-seven million dollars in profits last year could 
have been paid into the provincial treasury. Saskoil was a 
give-away of our oil and natural gas. Seventy-five percent of the 
people that own that company now live outside of Saskatchewan 
– outside of Saskatchewan. It paid over $27 million in profits last 
year. Did that money stay here in Saskatchewan? No, it did not. 
Did the people who got the benefits of that profit, did they pay 
taxes here in Saskatchewan? No, they did not. 
 
So what you are doing by privatizing whatever you see, you are 
giving away jobs, you are giving away revenues,

and you are giving up ownership and control of our economic 
destiny. That’s what you’re doing. You are so blinded by private 
enterprise that you don’t understand the history of this province. 
You simply don’t understand. The history of this province is one 
of co-operation, it’s one of private enterprise, and where 
necessary, public involvement. That is the history of your 
province. 
 
You can’t tie your wagon to only one engine of the economy. It 
simply doesn’t work. But you are so blinded by your ideology 
that you’re not prepared to be practical. 
 
The Minister of Public Participation has been running around this 
province having meetings, telling people how necessary to sell 
out their future and sell off their assets. And he says, public 
participation, the Saskatchewan way. What nonsense! What 
nonsense. Public participation, the Saskatchewan way. 
 
(1645) 
 
Privatization, that’s what this is — privatization. And it is not the 
Saskatchewan way, it is the way of the Progressive Conservative 
Party of Saskatchewan. That’s what way it is. It certainly is not 
the way of Saskatchewan men and women. It’s not the way of 
our grandparents; it’s not the way of our parents; and it’s not the 
way of our young people. 
 
And you people are prepared to give up whatever is necessary to 
further your own political agenda to further the means and ends 
of your own political friends. You’re prepared to do whatever is 
necessary to reward your friends and you’re prepared to sacrifice 
the people of this province on the altar of free enterprise. But it’s 
really not free enterprise, because you don’t believe in 
competitive tendering; you don’t believe in the system where 
people are free to have access to the market-place and not be 
rewarded just because they happen to be Conservative Party 
supporters. 
 
There are business people all over this province that are sick and 
tired of the way you people do business, and we hear from them 
daily. And they used to be Conservatives. They used to be 
Conservatives, but they are sick and tired of having to know 
someone or have a blue card or have access to some cabinet 
minister in order to get any access to government work. They’re 
sick and tired of that. They’re sick and tired of the way you 
people are handling the affairs of this province. 
 
And it seems to me that you are alienating the very people that 
you pretend to represent. You do not represent small business in 
this province; you represent big business, and you represent a few 
Tory faithfuls. That’s who you represent. 
 
Now Saskatchewan Mining and Development Corporation . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Like Weyerhaeuser. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Yes, and you represent Weyerhaeuser. Yes, 
that’s true. Yes. We acknowledge that. You represent Peter 
Pocklington and George Hill and Paul Schoenhals and all of the 
other defeated Conservative Party members 
  



 
June 15, 1988 

 

2147 
 

from the last provincial election. They got jobs; they got jobs. 
That’s who you represent. 
 
And I wouldn’t be very proud of it. I wouldn’t be very proud of 
it because the people of Saskatchewan know what you people are 
all about. They know what you’re all about. They know that all 
you’re interested in doing is furthering your own ends. You’re 
not interested in looking after the legitimate needs and concerns 
of Saskatchewan people. They’ve caught on to you. They caught 
on in the by-elections that occurred in Elphinstone in Regina and 
Eastview in Saskatoon. They know what you folks are all about. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, getting back to Saskatchewan Mining and 
Development Corporation. As I said earlier, this mining 
corporation is involved in the mining of uranium in 
Saskatchewan, but it’s also involved in the mining of gold in 
Saskatchewan. And the gold potential in this province is 
unbelievable. And as all members know, an ounce of gold is 
going at over $500 an ounce. 
 
I just want to talk about one particular find — one particular gold 
find the SMDC is involved in. It’s involved in the Flin Flon area. 
And if you refer to the annual report, they estimate that at 
282,000 tonnes with an average grade of 0.44 ounces per tonne 
— and we’re talking about gold, and a 2.2 ounce per tonne, and 
we’re talking about silver, this particular mine has a tremendous 
potential; this mine has a potential of close to $1 billion — $1 
billion. And this government’s going to sacrifice it, all in the 
name of its own particular ideology, all in the name of 
privatization. That’s what this government’s prepared to do. 
 
They’re prepared to sell off an asset that the people now own and 
control, that returned over $60 million to the people of this 
province last year. With the elimination of the long-term debt of 
$300-and-some-odd million by the year 1990, this is the 
company that has a tremendous potential in terms of providing 
revenue to the people of this province to pay for the kinds of 
things that this government doesn’t seem to want to pay for. 
 
This government regularly says it doesn’t have revenues. It 
regularly says, oh, we have to cut back on health care spending; 
we just don’t have the revenues we used to have. They say they 
have to cut back on health and education and social service 
spending. There are hungry kids in this province, for Heaven’s 
sakes. There are hungry kids in this province, and the government 
says they don’t have revenue. 
 
But they do have revenue. They just have to learn how to find it. 
They have to learn that you can’t give away the very assets that 
are indeed your future and can return to the people of this 
province a significant amount of money, because when those 
assets are gone, those assets are gone. The revenue from those 
assets will be no longer, and it makes no economic sense. 
 
Let’s just think about this for a minute. These people want to sell 
off SMDC. It has assets of close to $1 billion. It has a long-term 
debt of $318 million. That’s SMDC. Eighty-five per cent of the 
uranium that SMDC is involved in is contracted to the year 1995, 
I believe — that’s what I

understand. 
 
Here’s a company that will no longer have its long-term debt as 
of 1990 or 1991. We’re not sure that they’ll ever recover our $1 
billion in assets, because we’re not sure how these assets are 
going to be evaluated. We’re not sure what these assets are going 
to be valued at when they decide to float the shares. So we are 
taking a tremendous risk; we, as the taxpayers, are taking a 
tremendous risk. 
 
Let’s say we get $500 million for SMDC — let’s say we get that. 
We’ll give them that much. Here is a company that by 1995 could 
easily return $500 million to the people of this province in terms 
of retained earnings, in terms of dividends — easily. Here is a 
company that’s involved in gold mining. It’s joint-ventured gold 
mining all over the northern part of Saskatchewan. Here’s one 
particular mine in Flin Flon that may well bring in close to $1 
billion alone, and these guys are going to give it away; they’re 
going to sell it off. 
 
They regularly talk about how they don’t have money — they 
don’t have money. I understand Conservatives somewhat. I 
understand the privatization agenda. I understand their 
right-wing philosophy. But it seems to me that if you’re a 
government of the province of Saskatchewan, you have to have 
a political agenda, and I think they do. But you also have to have 
some money; you have to have some revenue in order to carry on 
your political agenda, and this is a government without money. 
This is a government that is in the problem that it’s in because it 
does not have money. 
 
They have alienated everybody in Saskatchewan because they 
don’t have money, and why don’t they? It’s because they’re 
incompetent. They sell off Saskoil, which raises money; they sell 
off Weyerhaeuser, which raises money; they sell off parts of 
SaskPower that raised money, the natural gas division of 
SaskPower; they sell off SaskCOMP; they sell off Sask Minerals; 
and they sell, sell, sell, sell, sell. 
 
And where do they expect to get the money? From the taxpayers? 
Quite frankly, the taxpayers are sick to death of being taxed. 
They’re sick to death of the flat tax. They feel as though they’re 
overtaxed. I don’t think politically you can raise much more 
money from taxpayers. I know that you’re nickel-and-diming 
them to death . . . I guess it’s dollar and five-dollaring and 
ten-dollaring it to death, in terms of all of the licences and fees 
that have been increased. And people have caught on to that little 
scam. They’ve caught on that every time you get your birth 
certificate, it costs you some money, and every time you get a 
marriage certificate, it costs you some more money, and SGI — 
and on and on and on it goes. They’ve caught on to that — the 
fishing licence, a hunting licence. 
 
Oh, it’s more that $5. If you want to change your name, it’s 
significantly more than it used to be. So you’ve got a dollar here, 
a dollar there. They’ve caught on to that, because this 
government needs revenue. They need revenue, they say, but the 
public is . . . I predict that there may soon well be a tax revolt 
because of the way you people are overtaxing the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But here is a way you can gain some revenue, boys — I 
  



 
June 15, 1988 

 

2148 
 

think there are no women over there. Here’s some ways you can 
gain some revenue — $60 million. That would pay for the 
prescription drug plan for at least one year; $60 million would 
pay for the school-based dental program for about 60 years; $60 
million could create a number of new day-care spaces in this 
province. And I think the Minister of Social Services understands 
about the problems that he’s having there. We wouldn’t have an 
empty day-care centre that’s already been built and paid for at 
Woodlands in P.A. because the government has no money to 
open it up. 
 
That’s what we’re talking about, and you guys don’t understand 
it. It’s unbelievable. Even if you’re a Conservative, even if you’re 
a right-winger, even if you’re ideologically committed to 
privatization, surely you have to use your head and understand 
you’ve got to have some money to do some things, or you’ll be 
turfed out of office. 
 
Surely you want to be re-elected, or is the agenda . . . part of the 
agenda to absolutely destroy this province? Is that what the 
agenda is? Just flatten it — have the level playing field, have the 
level playing field that the member from Regina South talked 
about. Destroy it at all cost so that when we’re re-elected in 1990 
and 1991 it’ll be very difficult to recover. Well people are also 
on to that; people are on to that. 
 
Saskatchewan people understand, regardless of what your polls 
say, that you’ve got a privatization agenda, that you’ve got a 
privatization agenda; that you are prepared to sell everything, 
lock, stock and barrel; that you're prepared to do away with jobs, 
the revenue, and the ownership and control of the Saskatchewan 
economy; that you’re prepared to do that. 
 
But Saskatchewan people don’t want you to destroy the province 
of Saskatchewan, and they think that that’s what you’re doing. 
They think that you’re out to destroy Saskatchewan because you 
simply don’t care about this province, and you simply don’t care 
about the people of our province, and you simply don’t care. 
 
You’re a government that has lost your vision. You’re a 
government that has lost compassion, if you every had any. 
You’re a government with no heart, and all you’re interested in 
doing is socking it to the public and bellying up to the public 
trough. That’s all you’re interested in doing. 
 
And you can sit here one by one, every one of you, and you can 
sit in here until the next provincial election, but I predict that even 
though you think your privatization strategy may be your election 
victory come 1990, it simply won’t happen. It simply won’t 
happen because Saskatchewan people have caught on to you. 
 
Saskatchewan people want jobs and they want good jobs. They 
don’t want minimum wage jobs; they want good jobs. Good jobs 
mean that Main Street, Saskatchewan’s doing well. That’s what 
good jobs mean. Good jobs mean that people have the ability to 
buy a home, and in Saskatchewan that’s important to people. 
Good jobs mean that people have food for their family and 
clothing for their children. That’s what good jobs mean.

Good jobs mean that you might think about educating your 
children and sending them off to a Kelsey institute or Wascana 
or the University of Regina or the University of Saskatchewan. 
Good jobs mean that maybe you can think about, when you’re 
65, taking a trip to Europe because you never had the opportunity 
to do it when you were working. Good jobs mean that business 
in Saskatchewan’s doing well. Good jobs mean that you have 
hope for your family and you’re hoping for a better life for your 
family. 
 
This is not Alabama; this is not Georgia; this is Saskatchewan. 
That’s what this province is, Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — If you people think that you can privatize the 
parks and privatize this and privatize that, and put all of those 
folks who have had good jobs on to minimum wage or $5 an hour 
wages, men and women who spent 20 years working for 
Saskatchewan, if you think you can do that and get away with it, 
I don’t think you can. 
 
And you can try and appeal to rural Saskatchewan, but people in 
rural Saskatchewan have kids too. Not everybody can live on the 
farm and work on the farm. Not everybody can do that. I come 
from a family of five. There’s only one of us that’s on the family 
farm, only one. The rest of us are in the city, working in the city. 
And so, rural people want good jobs for their kids. They don’t 
want minimum wage jobs. They want their kids to have hope and 
have a future. 
 
And if you think privatization means that your rich friends and 
your buddies in the Conservative Party can make megabucks — 
and there aren’t that many that can make megabucks, when all 
the rest of us are sitting on minimum wage jobs — and not have 
some sort of political ramification, you’re sadly mistaken. 
You’re sadly mistaken. 
 
You people offer no hope for Saskatchewan people. You’ve tied 
your wagon to privatization. You think that privatization is your 
way out of this economic crisis that we’re facing. Do you think 
privatization will get you elected come 1990? And I want you to 
know it will not. It will not, because privatization means lost jobs, 
privatization means jobs that don’t have adequate wages and 
benefits. Privatization means that revenues are lost to the people 
of Saskatchewan; they go to people outside of Saskatchewan and 
even outside of Canada. That’s what it means. And privatization 
means that we lose, we lose the control of our own economy. 
Saskatchewan people want to have control over their own 
economy. 
 
(1700) 
 
Now, you from Regina . . . whatever it is, Wascana, you from 
Regina Wascana, you put up the Power Plus bond thing. I’d like 
to know how much money SaskPower is spending on this 
mega-advertising campaign, convincing us to invest our money 
in Saskatchewan. People don’t have problems with buying 
SaskPower bonds. People don’t have problems doing that. They 
want their money 
  



 
June 15, 1988 

 

2149 
 

to be in Saskatchewan. But that’s only if they have money. That’s 
only if they have money. If you have $4.25 an hour or $4.50 an 
hour jobs, you aren’t going to have any money to invest in 
SaskPower bonds. That is true; that is true. That is true. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move adjournment of this debate. I have 
many more things that I want to say about SMDC, and so I 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 o’clock p.m. 


	ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS
	ORAL QUESTIONS
	Rafferty Dam Project
	Cost of Power from New Plant
	Dental Services for Gravelbourg
	Shortage of Radio-Therapy Technicians
	Child Poverty in Saskatchewan
	Hold-back of Fee by SGI
	Answers from Ministers
	ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS
	ORDERS OF THE DAY

