


















































May 3, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 May 3 1988 
 

1033 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Martin:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you, and through you to the members of the House, 25 
students from W.F. Ready School, grades 3 and 4, and they’re 
in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And accompanying them are Marian Ready who, by the way, is 
the daughter of W.F. Ready. W.F. Ready is a lawyer in town 
and was a long-time member of the public school board. And in 
addition to that, we have Mrs. Heebner as well  I presume is 
the teacher. 
 
Welcome to the House. I’ll be meeting you for photographs and 
a little discussion after a while. I hope you enjoy the next little 
while in the House. And I ask all the members to please join me 
in welcoming our students from W.F. Ready School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of my 
colleague, the member from Melville, I would like to welcome 
to the Assembly 37 students, grade 8 students from Melville’s 
St. Henry School. 
 
And I will probably be meeting with them later at 2:30, and I’d 
like to have the Assembly join me in welcoming their teachers 
and their bus drivers to the Assembly today. Thank you very 
much for coming. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

National Report on Poverty 
 

Mr. Romanow:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question today is to the Hon. Premier. It deals with a national 
Council of Welfare report, 1988, entitled Poverty Profile 1988. 
Under the authority of the federal government, the report is 
published. 
 
This report, Mr. Premier, shows that Saskatchewan had the 
second highest poverty rate amongst families of all the 
provinces in Canada  the second highest poverty rate of all 
the provinces. Now, Mr. Premier, this is, I’m sure you’ll admit, 
shocking and embarrassing, to say the least, for the province of 
Saskatchewan and for the people of this province. 
 
My question to you, sir, is this: do you accept these figures? 
Are you aware of these figures, and if you do, what specific 
plans do you have to ease the tragedy, the crisis, on 
Saskatchewan families in this regard? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, I have not seen the 
research that the hon. member is talking about. I will 

suggest to the hon. member that we have the highest rates for 
families in Canada in terms of funds that we provide families. 
We have also brought in a program where we provide 
opportunities, and through welfare reform, for people to get off 
of welfare, particularly young employables, and we would be 
only too happy to review the figures, or I would, when I have an 
opportunity. 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I have a supplementary 
question to the Premier. This is a report published by the 
National Council of Welfare, as I’ve indicated, dated April 
1988. Actually it’s the Minister of Supply and Services Canada 
that authorizes the publication, and it’s a poverty profile just 
tabled a few days ago. And it says that there are 42,600 families 
living in poverty, 64,600 children living in poverty. Now that’s 
a tragedy. 
 
Mr. Premier, my question to you is this: why not admit that we 
have a crisis on our hands in Saskatchewan, that the poverty 
rate has grown dramatically since 1982 as this report shows? 
Why not admit it and establish today a priority within your 
cabinet to tackle this urgent problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, we have initiated the 
program of welfare reform to address many of the concerns 
associated with having people trapped in a welfare situation so 
that they can get into the labour force. 
 
I would not take the figures at face value. I would want to 
review the report and find out, Mr. Speaker, exactly what it 
says, and for what reasons and where, and look at the 
demographics and all the information in the background 
material before I would respond any further. 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 
Premier, if I might. And I would preface it, not to be overtly 
political on this very serious matter, I’m somewhat surprised 
that the Premier at least would not have been aware of this 
report which has received national attention and, as I say, is a 
blight on our reputation, let alone a tragedy for the people that 
are identified here  64,000 children 16 years of age and 
under, second highest poverty rate, in Saskatchewan. 
 
My question to you is this, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier: why 
not admit that the policies of your government ranging all the 
way from health care to taxation have contributed, and why not 
go ahead and convene a special conference of knowledgeable 
and dedicated individuals, under your guidance, under the 
authority of your office and under the authority of you as the 
Premier, to get down to the task of determining the immediate 
and long-term solutions to this pressing crisis? 
 
Why not admit the error of your ways and convene such a 
conference so that at least we can begin to tackle the problems, 
because, Mr. Premier, your welfare reform is not working? 
There’s been an increase in the number of people in poverty in 
Saskatchewan. Why not do something about it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
May 3, 1988 

 

1034 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, I said that I cannot accept 
his interpretation of the report at face value; I will look at it. 
 
I will say to the hon. member that we have the best employment 
record in western Canada, and he knows that, and we’ve had 
that for the last five years, and either second or third in all of 
Canada in the last four or five years. So in terms of creating 
new jobs and in terms of the employment levels, Mr. Speaker, it 
is the best in the West and one of the very best across the 
country. 
 
Now he’s coming back with some research, so he says, that says 
as we’re creating all these jobs  and one of the best in western 
Canada  we’ve got a particular problem with respect to 
welfare clients. I’ve said we’ve initiated welfare reform. We 
have the highest levels of payments to families on welfare, and 
we’ve provided more incentives for young people to get off that 
welfare trap. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will want to look at the background; I will 
want to look at the demographics; I will want to look at all the 
things that are in the report before I could comment in further 
detail with respect to the suggestions by the committee. 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, if I might, with your 
indulgence, one last question to the Premier in this regard. A 
new question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Premier, you are aware of the facts that in 1982 the 
unemployment rate here  there were 28,000 unemployed; 
today the figures show 45,000 unemployed in Saskatchewan. 
This report, sir, shows  the poverty profile shows  that in 
the six years of your administration there has been an increase, 
a dramatic increase, to the point where we’re the second 
highest. 
 
Now those are facts, not published by the NDP, they’re 
published by the National Council of welfare, and also by the 
federal government. Why not accept the suggestion that we 
make to you? Why not abandon the political rhetoric for a 
change? Why not show some concern for these children and 
these families? How about convening at least a conference? It 
may not solve the problem right away, but at least a conference 
and change your wrong-headed policies. Let’s get on with the 
business of feeding our poor people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, the Leader of the 
Opposition is against a health care task force. He wasn’t even 
aware of his own research on free trade, and he’s asking me to 
call now for a conference on something that has just been 
published. I mean, obviously he’s grandstanding, trying to say 
that he has got a hold of a piece of research that was just 
released in the last few days, and he’s standing up here saying, 
well, you’re going to have to deal with welfare reform. 
 
Welfare reform is real, and we are leading the nation in terms of 
brand-new things we’re doing in terms of welfare reform. It’s 
not rhetoric at all. It’s very popular and it’s getting young 
people that were trapped in welfare off into the employee 
service and back into the work force. And 

that’s precisely the kinds of things they’re asking for. 
 
Now I’d be glad to look at the research. I haven’t got it, but 
when I get it I certainly will be prepared to respond in detail. 
 

SGI Insurance Rate Increases 
 

Mr. Rolfes:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question was to be to the minister in charge of SGI, so I’ll direct 
it to the Premier. Mr. Premier, both you and the minister in 
charge of SGI have admitted that you are considering further 
increases in the SGI insurance rates. You are obviously going to 
wait after the by-elections tomorrow to make those 
announcements. 
 
But, Mr. Premier, you have already made huge increases in the 
auto insurance rates. A 1983 Oldsmobile Omega, a small sedan, 
registration fee and insurance premium together, increased $63 
or 19 per cent. A 1969 Pontiac Acadian, a four-door sedan 
that’s almost 20 years old, registration and insurance together 
increased $50 or 36 per cent; or a 1948 GMC farm truck . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order. The hon. member 
is introducing a great deal of information which will provoke a 
long answer. I would ask him to get to his question. 
 
Mr. Rolfes:  Mr. Premier, Mr. Speaker, the farm truck 
increased 47 per cent. 
 
Mr. Premier, my question to you is this: when are you going to 
stop these huge increases which you have already imposed, and 
when are you going to announce the increases that the people 
are anticipating, that you have admitted to, that will be coming 
in the future? When are you going to make those 
announcements? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, as I have responded last 
week, that our increases will be nowhere near the increases that 
the NDP brought in here or that the NDP brought in in 
Manitoba  in the neighbourhood of 28 per cent. So that you 
can count on that. 
 
With respect to specifics, I believe that the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana had asked about several others and they had 
specific vehicles and so forth, and they were wrong in every 
case. In terms of the . . . the member from Nutana said that a 
premium on a 1977 Plymouth Volare went from 250 to 300, or 
20 per cent. It only went up $35 at 15 per cent. And if you look 
from January ’79 to April 1982, the NDP increased the rate on a 
1977 Plymouth by 40 per cent  40 per cent. 
 
Then she went on to say that the rate for a ’79 Honda Prelude 
went up 15 per cent. Well the answer, from January 1979 to 
April ’82, the increase by the NDP on a 1979 Honda was 60.2 
per cent. 
 
Now I can say to the hon. member, we can go through a list of 
vehicles. We are not going to raise the rates anywhere close to 
where you raised them or where the NDP raised them in 
Manitoba. You can count on the fact 
  



 
May 3, 1988 

 

1035 
 

it’ll be much fairer under our administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes:  New question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Premier, I have the registration forms right here  I have them 
right here; 47 per cent  47 per cent increase for a GMC truck; 
36 per cent on that Acadian. You can’t deny those; they’re here. 
 
I’m asking you, Mr. Premier, because you . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Rolfes:  Mr. Premier, not everybody is as rich as a 
cabinet minister or their Premier and can afford an ’88 car. A 
lot of people in this province are as poor as the report has 
indicated. 
 
I’m asking you, Mr. Premier: because of the huge increases that 
you have already imposed upon people, why are you now 
considering another $25 surcharge on every vehicle in this 
province? In view of the fact that you’ve increased it by 47 per 
cent, why are you now considering another $25 increase for 
every vehicle in this province? That’s simply unacceptable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, I’ve already . . . this is the 
third time you’ve asked that question, and I’ve given the 
response and the answer is: we’re not going to have an increase 
anywhere near what you increased or anybody . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me just say 
that the auto insurance rate increases since 1982 have averaged 
less than 1 per cent per year, including the average 10 per cent 
increase in 1988. Members opposite raised the rates 20 per cent 
in 1980, 28 per cent in 1981, another 7 per cent in 1982  
that’s 55 per cent in three years. Manitoba raised their rates 24 
per cent last year alone. Well I’m saying to the hon. member, 
we’re not going to raise the rates anywhere near what you did. 
 
The suggestion that was brought forward to cabinet with respect 
to a $25 surcharge was just a suggestion. We sent it back and 
we said, bring us some others. We haven’t discussed it now for 
months. I just point out to the hon. member that it averages 1 
per cent a year under our administration, and it was well over 
20 per cent under yours; in fact, it was 55 per cent in three years 
under the NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes:  Supplementary. Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard today 
the Premier saying that they’re going to increase automobile 
insurance rates again  not nearly as much, he says, but they’re 
going to increase them. 
 
Mr. Premier, in view of the fact that a camper trailer has been 
increased by 81 per cent this year, and your park fees have 
increased, you are demanding of Saskatchewan 

people too much. I’m asking you again: when are you going to 
stop these huge increases? Forty-seven per cent on farm trucks, 
again a surcharge on every vehicle. When are you going to stop 
these outrageous increases on the ordinary person of this 
province? When are you going to stop those? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well, Mr. Speaker, if we go back . . . the 
NDP have no grounds to even raise the issue, Mr. Speaker. 
They don’t even like to listen to the response. 
 
They used to divert 6 to $8 million from the auto fund from 
other revenues. In other words, seniors and others who didn’t 
own or drive vehicles were paying taxes to subsidize those that 
did. You had the sliding 20 per cent ad valorem tax that you 
could pump into the auto fund, so you taxed people that didn’t 
even have vehicles to put into the auto fund, and you raised it 
55 per cent on top of that in the last three years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they don’t have a grounds to speak on either here 
or in Manitoba when it comes to SGI rates or auto fund. Mr. 
Speaker, they had the highest rates that you could find any 
place, and frankly, that’s why they were defeated in ’82, or ’86, 
’88. 
 
Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, on top of 
your planned rate increases for SGI, we have further evidence 
of your mismanagement. A 1988 Ford Crown Victoria is the 
twin to an ’88 Mercury Grand Marquis, yet you set the 
registration and insurance premium $60 higher for the Ford than 
for the comparable Mercury, the twin car. When are you going 
to, and will you change this obvious error and reimburse the 
owners of Ford Crown Victorias the $60? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well, Mr. Speaker, he didn’t describe 
which model, whether it was a Crown Victoria model or it was 
a particular model. I have to admit to the hon. member, I don’t 
have the information before me with respect to the two models 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. Order. The Premier is 
trying to answer the question, but I’m afraid he’s getting some 
interruption, as you all realize, and I ask for your co-operation 
in allowing him to answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, I just say to the hon. 
member that models can vary in terms of expense, and the 
Crown Victoria might be more expensive than the Marquis. I 
don’t have all the models before me. I would be glad to look at 
that and take notice with respect to model variations and rate 
variations. 
 
If the hon. member wants to provide me with the specifics, I’ll 
take notice and I will respond . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
And he said, well he just did. I don’t have the information 
before me to compare all the models and all their costs and then 
the corresponding rates. But if he’d like to provide me with that, 
I would provide an answer. 
 

Increase in Grain Freight Rates 
  



 
May 3, 1988 

 

1036 
 

Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Agriculture and it deals with the 
announced increase in grain freight rates. 
 
Mr. Minister, last week the Mulroney government increased the 
costs that farmers will have to pay to ship their grain from $6.32 
per tonne to $7.27 per tonne. For a farmer with 1,000 acres, 
average-size farmer, producing a tonne an acre, that’s an 
increase of $950 a year or about 15 per cent increase. 
 
Mr. Minister, farmers in Saskatchewan are facing a $6 billion 
debt crisis. The CPR is facing a 65 per cent increase in profits 
in 1987. How can you justify, Mr. Minister, more money from 
farmers and more money to the CPR? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m certainly 
glad that the single rural member from the NDP has chosen to 
raise the issue. And, Mr. Speaker . . . I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, 
two rural members. Mr. Speaker, I’m certainly dismayed . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order, order, order, order. We are receiving 
an inordinate amount of comments from both sides of the 
House now, and would you allow the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation to continue with his answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins:  I’m certainly dismayed, Mr. Speaker, 
that the member chose to wait to raise this issue. We sat in the 
legislature yesterday and the question period was dominated by 
who was going to print the telephone books. I was dismayed 
that the member waited to bring this issue up till after the 
telephone book issue was resolved. 
 
Onto the issue itself, Mr. Speaker, I have taken note of the 
increase in freight rates. And, Mr. Speaker, I think if you view 
it in the context of the cost of the freight rates as a percentage of 
the price of grain, I am advised that the percentage in the last 
crop year, ’87-88, was 6.4 per cent. This year, with the increase 
it will be 7.4 per cent. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not saying that the farmers can afford to 
pay hardly a cent more. But I am saying, Mr. Speaker, that 
without the intervention of the federal government the statutory 
increase would have been 32 per cent. 
 
I am saying, Mr. Speaker, that it is with pride that I look to the 
federal government, supported by this government, that we 
have seen the federal government step in, step in and be 
responsive to the farmers’ needs to the tune of $35 million of 
subsidization in this instance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, without the support of this province and this 
Premier and this government towards the federal government, 
the rate would have increased by 32 per cent. The federal 
government has been responsive to the tune of $35 million 
under the special federal grains assistance program. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall:  New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, it’s 
obvious that your policies are not . . . are bad news for farmers, 
but they’re good news for the CPR (Canadian Pacific Railway). 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall:  In the year just ended, Mr. Minister, the CP 
. . . Canadian Pacific had an increase of $900 million  an 
increase of $900 million. CP rail by itself, 65 per cent increase 
in profits. Nine hundred million dollars for Canadian Pacific  
incredible amounts. And again, your government  where 
were they? The so-called friends of the farmers were again not 
standing up for them. Mr. Minister, where was your 
government? Were you hiding again, or were you in the pocket 
of the CPR? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I do know that the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has made a statement with respect to 
this issue. The wheat pool has stated that most farmers knew 
that when prices would rise so would cost, and the wheat pool 
has said that the rise in freight rate costs would have been much 
higher had Ottawa not helped subsidize. 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins:  Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is 
that farmers indeed cannot afford, in these economic times, to 
pay any more on any part of their costs. But the real facts are 
also, Mr. Speaker, that it is the federal government who has 
stepped in with a special grain assistance program to the tune of 
$35 million. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that that is responsive to the needs, the 
same way the federal government has been responsive with 
deficiency payments to the extent of $2 billion or more, the 
same way this provincial government has been responsive with 
assistance in many, many forms. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
when the statutory grain freight rates were destroyed, your 
government did nothing. When Farm Credit Corporation 
moratorium was lifted, your government did nothing. When 
variable freight rates were pushed through, your government 
did nothing. And now an increase in freight rates when farmers 
can’t afford it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would ask you to table in this House today, the 
representation that you made to the federal government in 
support of Saskatchewan farmers on this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I feel that I have 
adequately addressed the question, but, Mr. Speaker, the people 
of Saskatchewan, both urban and rural, know that 
  



 
May 3, 1988 

 

1037 
 

it has been this government, supported in two elections strongly 
by the farmers of Saskatchewan. The people of Saskatchewan 
know that there are but two rural members in the NDP Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan know, they know full 
well, to be very, very wary of any NDP or Liberal or 
NDP-Liberal coalition who goes around . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order. 
 

Loan Policy for Small Business 
 
Mr. Goodale:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the acting minister responsible for small-business policy. Mr. 
Minister, in view of the fact that small business and agriculture 
go hand in hand, at least in most of Saskatchewan, and in view 
of the fact that small businesses account for the vast majority of 
good, long-term Saskatchewan jobs, and in view of the fact that 
many small businesses have chronic difficulty in having 
adequate access to both loan money and equity capital, I 
wonder if this government will implement a new initiative to 
provide home-grown Saskatchewan small businesses with 
access to loan policies and credit programs parallel to those 
which exist for agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I would find it 
somewhat strange for the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
to suggest, I think and what he is suggesting is that programs in 
place  and they are many  for the farmers in Saskatchewan 
should also apply to every small business. 
 
I think there has been traditionally in this province an 
understanding that the farm community, the agriculture sector, 
is a special sector. And that’s been recognized both provincially 
and it’s been recognized nationally, and I would suggest it’s 
been recognized, for the most part, world-wide, that they are a 
special group of people, and farmers should be looked at as a 
special group of people. 
 
Now with regard to the question of how we deal with small 
business. When we came to office in 1982, small business was a 
bad word in this province, particularly as it related to 
government, and we have brought in a multitude of programs 
with regard to small business. One of them that’s been very 
successful that we must look at is the ability to develop equity. I 
think a lot of small businesses are saying, we don’t want to get 
into some of the problems associated with the problems that the 
farmers find themselves in  that is too much debt. So you 
must encourage them to get into that  into more ability to 
raise more equity and perhaps a lot less debt. 
 
The other thing is in the area of taxation. In the most recent 
budget brought in by the Minister of Finance, for example, what 
the Federation of Independent Business said is their biggest 
priority that they saw for the Government of Saskatchewan to 
respond was twofold: one, to deal with the business tax the 
Minister of Finance brought in a measure of $10 million to 
small business in Saskatchewan to deal with their business tax; 
point 

number two that they suggested is that we would get ahead and 
go on with the free trade agreement that the members opposite 
opposed and that you oppose. Unfortunately, independent small 
business support that  12 to one support that. 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goodale:  Mr. Speaker, I take it from the minister’s 
answer that there will be no action with respect to the loan 
policies question. I would like to ask the minister then about 
equity, which is a crying need in the small-business sector in 
Saskatchewan, and I’d like to refer the minister to the 
Saskatchewan Stock Savings Plan. 
 
That plan, unlike the plan in most other provinces, does not 
have any special features in it that are particularly favourable to 
small business. And I wonder if the minister would undertake 
here to adjust the Saskatchewan Stock Savings Plan to provide 
the most favourable treatment for investments that are in fact in 
the small-business sector in Saskatchewan, and not a flat kind 
of benefit across the board which tends to provide the largest 
advantage to the larger investor. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane:  Mr. Speaker, as minister responsible for the 
stock savings plan I’ll respond to the hon. member. First of all, 
put in context, what the stock savings plan is designed to do is 
to allow smaller businesses to tap the equity markets and to 
raise equity from Saskatchewan people through a tax saving. 
We have indicated in the budget that there will be a further 
extension of initiatives to assist small businesses in terms of the 
research, the analysis necessary with the grant program to 
determine whether they are in fact suitable companies for the 
use of the stock savings plan. So we are taking the initiatives. 
 
I think it fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that you do have to have a 
degree of size if you are trying to make it worthwhile for small 
business to, say, have 10 or 15,000 shareholders. The cost of 
supplying information to that number certainly requires a 
degree of size in the corporation. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Tabling of Public Accounts 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane:  Mr. Speaker, I simply report to the 
legislature, Mr. Speaker, that an action was taken against the 
Government of Saskatchewan and certain members, with regard 
to the Public Accounts, and the tabling of the Public Accounts. I 
know that the Leader of the Opposition will wish to respond 
today that that action by the hon. member from Regina was 
dismissed  notably, Mr. Speaker, dismissed with costs, and 
for the first time, I believe, that that has happened against a 
member of the legislature. 
 
Secondly, the judge’s statement, that it was deplorable that 
someone would use the courts for such political purposes, Mr. 
Speaker. I believe that the decision of the judge, obviously, was 
a very firm statement to all members of this Assembly, and I 
know that the Leader of the Opposition, who I’m sure was 
somewhat involved 
  



 
May 3, 1988 

 

1038 
 

knowingly with his own member, will apologize to the people 
of this province. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Mr. Speaker, I certainly want to respond 
to the comments by the member opposite. He thinks it’s funny 
that the government would be so deplorable in its neglect of its 
responsibility to this legislature and to the public of 
Saskatchewan that it would cover up as important a document 
as the Public Accounts of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and I say to 
the member opposite, the Minister of Finance, that the public 
has a right to know. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  The public of Saskatchewan has a right 
to know how the government is spending their taxpayers’ 
money and shouldn’t have to wait over a year to get that 
information while the government sits on it, which the Minister 
of Finance has been doing for weeks now and refuses to table it 
in the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  And I want to say in no uncertain terms: 
we’re going to, on this side of the House, continue to fight for 
that right of the public to know, no matter what it takes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  And I find, Mr. Speaker, that it’s 
regrettable that the opposition had to go to court to try to make 
the point that this government is hiding and it is acting 
irresponsibly and immorally in withholding that information. 
 
There is one other judge, in my concluding comment, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  There is one other court that is going to 
make a judgement on the actions of that minister and that 
Premier, and that is the people of Elphinstone and Saskatoon 
Eastview tomorrow, and they will . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order. Order. I wonder if 
the hon. members are ready to go on to the next point in routine 
proceedings. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 6  Effects of Cut-backs in Educational 
Services 

 
Mr. Rolfes:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
motion that I have before me this afternoon is a very 

important motion for the children of this province, and I have 
considerable information that I want to convey to the public this 
afternoon. So it will take a fair amount of time to relay that to 
the public and to relay to the public exactly what has happened 
under this minister in the last two years, and what we can 
foresee and what we can await to happen in this province if this 
minister continues in that portfolio. 
 
At the end of my debate, Mr. Speaker, I want to move the 
following motion: 
 

That this Assembly call upon the Government of 
Saskatchewan to reverse its harmful and short-sighted 
cut-backs in the Saskatchewan educational system which 
will increase unemployment, particularly for the young 
people of our province, and seriously impair our ability to 
compete effectively in a world economy increasingly 
based on knowledge and information. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes:  Mr. Speaker, the track record of this 
government in education, as in health, is a sorry, sorry track 
record. 
 
We have, Mr. Speaker, in health, thousands and thousands of 
people waiting to get into our hospitals. We have, in education, 
a parallel track record of hundreds and literally thousands of 
young people and adults trying to get into our educational 
institutions and not able to do so  not able to do so, Mr. 
Speaker, because this government has not given education a 
priority. 
 
It had choices, Mr. Speaker. And when the Minister of 
Education says, but circumstances, economic circumstances, 
prevent us to do any more in education, I say, Mr. Speaker, that 
that is simply not true. That is a false statement, and I can easily 
prove that in the debate this afternoon. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, having said that, we’ve got to go back a few 
years, because this government’s economic mistake happened 
in 1982 immediately after they were elected. 
 
In July of 1982 this government made a decision, a policy 
decision, to reduce their revenues over the succeeding years by 
$1.7 billion because of the decrease in royalty rates to our oil 
companies. That $1.7 billion, if that had been invested, would 
have made huge amounts of money available not only to 
education but also to hospitalization, and so on. School boards 
could have received substantial increases in operating grants so 
that property taxes would not have to go up. That is one mistake 
they made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they made other decisions which adversely 
affected revenues for this province. There was no fairness  no 
fairness  in their policy decisions, no fairness to the ordinary 
individual. 
 
We just heard a statement in question period today by the 
national poverty council of Canada saying how this province 
has taken a backward step. We now have 
  



 
May 3, 1988 

 

1039 
 

64,000 children living in poverty. The welfare rates have almost 
doubled since 1982. Our unemployment has gone up. 
Thousands of our young people have left this province for 
opportunities in other provinces. It is a sorry, sorry track record 
of this government. 
 
I remember full well, Mr. Speaker, when the now Premier of 
this province in 1982 said, let’s bring our children back to 
Saskatchewan. Now thousands are leaving for other provinces. 
My own son just left a few days ago, Mr. Speaker, to seek 
employment in Ontario. No jobs here. Others are doing exactly 
the same thing. 
 
The future of this province is moving to other provinces, and 
they’re moving to other provinces because this government has 
not been responsive to the needs of our young people. We don’t 
have adequate educational facilities. We no longer have the best 
educational staff in this province. We no longer have adequate 
facilities and spaces for our young people, and I’ll show that a 
little bit later. 
 
Mr. Premier, Mr. Speaker, this province, in education, was built 
on the co-operative and collaborative approach; we’ve always 
worked together. We’ve always worked together to build the 
best educational system anywhere in Canada, and we’ve had 
some world-renowned graduates from our educational system. 
It was a system that we were all proud of. Trustees worked with 
teachers, parents worked with trustees and teachers, and all 
three worked together with the Department of Education. But 
that, Mr. Speaker, is no longer true. 
 
We now have a government, we now have a minister who 
believes that he knows best. He is not an educator as such. He 
has no experience with what has gone on in this province as far 
as the collaborative approach is concerned. What have we seen 
since he has taken over the department? We have seen the 
demise of the Department of Education. We have seen him 
taking unilateral steps in forging on the people of this province 
the kind of education that he wants, not necessarily what the 
people want, but what he wants. 
 
So we see, Mr. Speaker, wholesale changes without any 
consultation. No consultation with the STF (Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation), no consultation with LEADS (League of 
Educational Administrators, Directors and Superintendents), no 
consultation with the trustees association, no consultation with 
parents, simply unilateral decisions made by one individual  
one individual because he believes that he has the answers for 
the 21st century. 
 
I say to the minister opposite, the Minister of Education: you 
better stop and listen. You better stop and listen to the students 
and the teachers and the trustees of this province. We’ve 
always, as I said, we’ve worked together. But the minister will 
not listen. He says we have to prepare our kids for the 21st 
century, and no one denies that. But in saying that they have to 
meet the technological age, what does he do? He cuts back on 
grants to school boards so that computer programs have to be 
eliminated, so that in the arts we no longer have programs that 
we had before. And I can verify that, as I will later on. 

And the minister says, but we can’t do any more. It’s bad 
economic times. We don’t have the money. As I’ve indicated 
before, Mr. Speaker, they had choices; they made the wrong 
choices  the wrong choices. 
 
They have lots of money, Mr. Speaker, for certain people. As I 
indicated, royalties were reduced. Gasoline taxes were reduced 
for interprovincial companies that paid not 1 cent over the 
years. We lost $1.7 billion to the oil companies. We lost another 
$700 million to the gas tax reductions. We lost hundreds of 
thousands of dollars through venture capitals that didn’t work 
out  Joytec, just to name one  $1.5 million to Joytec of 
Saskatoon. And where are the jobs created? Not in this 
province. Created in Japan  money that could have been used 
for education. 
 
(1445) 
 
Hundreds of millions of dollars to Weyerhaeuser. 
Weyerhaeuser this year made a profit of $88 million. That 
money could have been taken into the Consolidated Fund. Yes, 
they gave us 30 million, but we lost, Mr. Speaker, 50-some 
million dollars of money that could have been used for 
education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we saw in the last budget, again, huge tax 
increases to the ordinary citizen of this province but a reduction 
to the big corporate people of this province. Those were 
revenue reductions, and that was a choice that these people 
made, many of them wrong choices, and we’re paying the price 
for those choices now. 
 
I say to the members opposite, you also made some choices as 
far as expenditures were concerned. You had lots of money for 
Pocklington and you have lots of money for patronage  as I 
will show very shortly  moneys that could have been used for 
education, moneys that could have been used to give to school 
boards so that property taxes would not have to increase. 
 
You could have made some changes to the production loan 
program, as we pointed out last night in agricultural estimates, 
so that our young students and the senior citizens, who are on a 
means test, would not have to subsidize the Premier and cabinet 
ministers and MLAs in this House. 
 
I will show later on again how the students in this province are 
subsidizing people who are making 70 and $80,000 a year 
because students and senior citizens are put on the means test. 
But on the production loan program, when it pertains to the 
Premier of this province who makes $73,000  and the 
Premier gets a production loan program, Mr. Speaker, with 
subsidized interest rates, and the students of this province are 
subsidizing him  moneys that could have been used for 
education, moneys that could have been used for a student loan 
program and moneys that could have saved the best bursary 
program that we had in Saskatchewan, the best bursary program 
in Canada before 1982. But oh no, those choices were made by 
the members opposite. 
 
I want to also refer to the livestock cash advances. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, free money. Free money with no interest. 
  



 
May 3, 1988 

 

1040 
 

But no money for students. But they don’t have money for 
students. But the livestock cash advances, $125 per head, and 
members opposite, I’m not sure, maybe members on this side 
who have cattle get $125 per cattle . . . per cow, and what do 
they do? No interest paid. You get $15,000 at 12 per cent; that’s 
$1,800 subsidy a year. But do we see that same subsidy to our 
students? No. 
 
What do they do? They cut out the bursary programs. They cut 
out the bursary programs to our students and say to our 
students: well, if you want an education, then build up an 
accumulated debt of 25 or 30,000. But we’ve got lots of money 
to subsidize our Premier, and we’ve got lots of money to 
subsidize cabinet ministers who are making 63,000 and lots of 
money to subsidize MLAs. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that’s unfair. If we are short of money 
then let all of us pay the price, and not at the expense of our 
students and not at the expense of our senior citizens. Our 
senior citizens, I want to point out to the member opposite, they 
are on a means test on the heritage program. And if they have a 
combined interest of 30,000, they get nothing. But if you’re the 
Premier of this province and make 73,000, we’ll subsidize. 
 
All I can say is, Mr. Speaker, that there is lots of money around 
for education, but let’s dish it out more fairly. And that is, Mr. 
Speaker, what I think is so unfair. When, Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Education says, well we all have to do is practise 
restraint, that is pure rhetoric. Their actions speak otherwise. 
Their policies speak otherwise. They are fairer to themselves 
and to their friends than they are to our senior citizens whose 
property taxes have just been increased and to our students who 
can’t get student loans, students who can’t go to technical 
school because there aren’t sufficient spaces. And I will show 
that a little bit later. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s simply unacceptable for governments 
to say that we have to practise restraint and then at the same 
time dish out the public money to those who already are making 
substantial salaries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to refer to last year’s budget. Before I do 
that, Mr. Speaker, let me continue in the vein as I have done so 
far, that there is sufficient money available but we’ve got to 
make the right choices. 
 
As I indicated, this government has not made the right choices 
for the ordinary person. Taxes have gone up hundreds of 
millions of dollars since this government took office in 1982. 
Those of us . . . well all of us who filled out our income tax 
forms just recently, just last week, know what it cost each and 
every one of us in the flat tax. Students know what it costs 
them, and I’ll give you an example. 
 
My son, who made $14,000 last year, over and above what they 
had already deducted from his income tax, he had to pay 
another $500 of income tax, basically due to the flat tax and 
other substantial increases both by the federal Tory government 
and this Tory government  $14,000, and they have to extract 
another $500 from a poor university student. 
 
But what do we do for the Premier of this province? We 

say, Mr. Premier, yes, you’re eligible for the production loan 
program  $25 an acre; we’ll subsidize you. You can’t live on 
73,000  of course not  so we’ll subsidize you. 
 
And we say to cabinet ministers and other MLAs who take 
advantage of it, we’ll subsidize you on the production loan 
program, but we don’t have money  we don’t have money, 
Mr. Speaker  for the ordinary citizen; we don’t have money 
for senior citizens whose property tax has just been increased. 
That is where the unfairness comes in with this government. 
There is money, but where does it go? In the pockets of the 
members opposite and their friends, that’s where it’s going. 
And that’s a shame, Mr. Speaker, that’s a shame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, this government has made the 
wrong choices, and I just want to look at some of the things that 
it has done. For example, legislative secretaries. It has taken 
money from the public purse, which could have gone for 
education, and have said, well let’s help our back-benchers out 
a little bit. What have they done? They’ve appointed 11 
legislative secretaries  and in fact, some ministers even have 
two. Now I could understand if they were to give to the 
Minister of Social Services and Labour a Legislative Secretary; 
he’s got a big portfolio  in fact, he’s got two. Certainly we all 
know he needs one. But the Minister of Rural Affairs, two 
secretaries, two legislative secretaries, one for crop insurance 
and one for Rural Development. 
 
Those people opposite say they don’t have any money for 
education. They say to the senior citizens of this province, but 
we’ll increase your property tax because we don’t have the 
money to give to school boards. But they’ve got money for their 
legislative secretaries, for their MLAs  two, in fact, for the 
Minister of Rural Development. Mr. Speaker, $7,000 each, plus 
expenses, Mr. Speaker, and this government says that they 
don’t have money for education. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, there is lots of money. They’ve made the 
wrong choices, the wrong priorities  the wrong priorities. 
Eleven such legislative secretaries, another basic salary, about 
$77,000, plus their expenses. Now wouldn’t the senior citizens 
love to have that kind of money? That kind of money, and I ask 
the members opposite to justify that. Justify that. 
 
But that’s neither here nor there. That’s $77,000 the members 
would say opposite. 
 
But there’s lots of other patronage appointments that have gone 
on. A former minister, Sid Dutchak, he received some money 
from the public purse, but oh no, there was no money for 
education. Paul Schoenhals reported getting well over $100,000 
a year, but no money for education, Mr. Speaker. No money for 
our students. 
 
George Hill reported to be getting 200,000 a year, and just 
recently, Mr. Speaker, just recently got a 10 per cent increase, 
because George Hill could not possibly live on $200,000 a year. 
No one would want him to make that kind of a sacrifice for 
Saskatchewan. But for our senior citizens whose property taxes 
have just gone up, and for our students who don’t have spaces 
in our technical 
  



 
May 3, 1988 

 

1041 
 

schools, and our students who can’t get loans to continue with 
their education, we don’t have the money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we could go on and on with these patronage 
appointments. Keith Parker, Sandberg from Saskatoon, the 
former minister from Humboldt, Domotor  all of these 
people, Mr. Speaker, received appointments from this 
government, moneys out of the public purse, moneys which 
should have and could have been directed to education, but they 
weren’t. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is what is so sad about this government. 
That is why, Mr. Speaker, it’s such an indictment on this 
government when we have from the national poverty council a 
report which says that 64,000 people live in poverty  64,000 
people live in poverty . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . There’s a 
member who’s also, or was a Legislative Secretary, the member 
from Wilkie . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, the member 
from Biggar. Well Biggar wished you were from Wilkie. 
 
The member from Biggar who kindly took his $7,000, Mr. 
Speaker, didn’t worry about the . . . the member from Biggar 
didn’t worry about . . . The member from Biggar over there also 
is a Legislative Secretary and he takes his $7,000 . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, it doesn’t make any difference. Doesn’t 
make any difference . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, okay 
. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Order, order. 
 
Mr. Rolfes:  I was correct in the first place, Mr. Speaker  
the member from Wilkie. The members opposite don’t even 
know where he’s from. In fact, if I were them I wouldn’t want 
to know either where he’s from. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all I’m saying is that there are a number of 
members over there hanging their heads in shame, and so they 
should  so they should. While 64,000 people are living in 
poverty, they are the ones that don’t mind. They don’t mind 
bringing in policies which benefit them personally  
production loan program for one. I wonder when they were 
sitting in caucus  I wonder when they were sitting in caucus 
and how many of them said: well gee, this is not a bad policy; 
this is not a bad policy because I can qualify for that; the 
livestock cash advance program, that’s not a bad policy, that’s 
not a bad policy, I can benefit from that. 
 
Oh, I see some members opposite are pretty sensitive about this. 
I hope your conscience twigs you a little bit as you take that 
money because there are 64,000 people living in poverty right 
now. They don’t have any money to live on. I say that money 
ought to be distributed more equitably in this province, more 
fairly. Maybe we wouldn’t have . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes:  . . . maybe we wouldn’t have some of the 
problems that we presently have in education. Maybe some of 
our people . . . maybe some of our young people would have 
spaces in technical schools to go to. Maybe some of the people 
at university or people who apply to get in to university would 
be able to get in. 

I’ll say to the members opposite, you have a responsibility to 
more equitably distribute the public funds and not channel them 
to the few and the wealthy and the privileged in this province. 
And I consider us  I consider all of us, Mr. Speaker, in this 
House to be privileged, because we’re not living in poverty. 
Many of us don’t know what it means to live in poverty. 
 
And I say to the members opposite that it’s about time that you 
changed some of those policies and made sure that those 
policies benefit the ordinary person in this province  the 
ordinary person. And if you did that you would see to it that 
more money was available in education, that more money is 
there so that our young people can get the quality education that 
they so rightly deserve, and that will prepare them for the future 
of this province. These are the people who are going to make 
this province and continue to build it, not those patronage 
appointments that you people have made, and not the kinds of 
policies that put more money in the pockets of the wealthy and 
taking from the poor. Four hundred million dollar increases in 
taxes last year and this year alone, taken out of the ordinary 
person’s pocket and put directly in the pockets of some of the 
members opposite and their friends. That’s where the money is 
going. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Rolfes:  It’s time, Mr. Speaker, that we get back to the 
co-operative approach in education; that we make decisions, 
Mr. Speaker, in education that benefit our young people. And I 
say to the Minister of Education, please start listening to the 
trustees, please start listening to the teachers of this province, 
and please do put in some policies which will benefit the 
children of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister said, ah, but there weren’t any cuts in 
education; that’s a fabrication of the members opposite. I have 
ample evidence here, Mr. Speaker, that trustees, school boards, 
university people, people out in the boondocks  everybody 
knows that there have been cuts in education. And education 
has simply . . . the spending in education has simply not kept 
pace with inflation, and consequently school boards had no 
other choice but to raise property taxes. And I say to the 
members opposite, don’t put your head in the sand and put your 
blinkers on. Listen to your constituents out there. Listen to 
them. 
 
Here is one: “Cut in school funding roundly criticized”  this 
was last year. Here’s another one: “$3.3 million or 1 per cent 
cut in the budget.” Funds to school libraries have been cut by 
12.7 per cent and the minister says, there have been no cuts; 
that’s a fabrication of the members opposite. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, you can’t on the one hand 
say that we are funding adequately and cut the budget at the 
same time. It simply will not work. School boards, Mr. Speaker, 
were hit by a $1.5 million increase by the 7 cents a litre 
gasoline that came into effect last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s just have a look, let’s have a look at 
  



 
May 3, 1988 

 

1042 
 

some of the comments that were made, and not by us, but by 
others who have written members opposite and citizens who 
have written us. Here is one that’s written to a member opposite 
and it says: 
 

We are very concerned about how cuts in education 
funding will adversely affect student opportunities in our 
school. We are losing four-sevenths of a teacher. 
Saskatchewan Studies has been dropped from grades 10, 
11, and 12. 

 
How, I ask the Minister of Education, is that going to enhance 
the education of our students in this province  by cutting 
Saskatchewan Studies? 
 

Some subjects have been combined by grades for the first 
time in recent memory. 

 
That was a comment of one individual, written to a member 
opposite. 
 
Here’s a letter written to the Minister of Education, and this was 
also written by a principal of a school, and he says: 
 

We will lose two teachers from our school. The overall 
staff reduction is from 17 to 15.5. (He says) Presently we 
have the grade 1 class split in two rooms. This class will 
be combined next year, with around 30 students. 

 
How does that provide for quality education? You’re simply not 
providing, not providing adequate funding for education. Now 
this person is quite understandable. He says: 
 

Our provincial government has stated that we will all have 
to tighten our belts because of our overspending. I fail to 
see how the children have overspent. 

 
Why are you taking it out on the children of this province 
because of ill-conceived and ill-directed policies that you 
people, you people, put into place? It wasn’t the children of this 
province that put you there; it wasn’t the children of this 
province that forced you to make those ill-conceived policies. It 
was you people opposite, and you will have to, Mr. Speaker, 
take the responsibility for. 
 
Here’s a statement from the Tisdale School Unit. It says: 
 

Some of the programs that have been jeopardized by the 
cuts include library upgrading at a number of schools; 
guidance counselling for high-school-aged students in 
kindergarten to grade 12 schools at Arborfield, Mistatim, 
Ridgedale, and Zenon Park; as well as cuts to come of the 
French language education programs. 

 
These, Mr. Speaker, were all cut due to last year’s budget. 
 
Just a few more from last year’s budget before I get into this 
year’s budget. When we sent out a questionnaire, Mr. Speaker, 
to the school systems last year, we asked them what impact 
some of the cuts would have. Here are some of them: increased 
mill rate; terminated gifted education 

program; reduced classroom teacher; anticipates serious 
financial difficulty in funding capital projects, and so on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the cut of 1 per cent last year meant that many 
school boards simply could not continue with programs that 
they had implemented or started. They had to cancel them and 
hope that the government would this year increase the funding. 
But, Mr. Speaker, the funding in this year’s budget and the 
operating grants to school boards was well below, well below 
the CPI (consumer price index), the inflation rate in this 
province. Two point two per cent operating grants for school 
boards when inflation is at 6 per cent  a cut of 3.8 per cent. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the operating grants, the 
increase in operating grants over the last five years  over the 
last five years inflation has eroded the operating grants by 
almost 11 per cent  almost 11 per cent. And the Minister of 
Education says, we want quality education. 
 
So how did we have to make up for that? Well of course there 
was, as the member from Quill Lakes pointed out yesterday in 
question period, the shift of tax was from the provincial 
government to the property taxpayer. That’s where the shift 
went. And we see huge increases of up to 11 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker, this year in the property tax rate increases  11 per 
cent. 
 
And the members opposite have the gall and the audacity to 
stand up and say that they support quality education  quality 
education, Mr. Speaker, when they take money and funnel it to 
the richest people in this province, the well-to-do  people like 
the Premier who is subsidized in his production loan program, 
like cabinet ministers, like other MLAs. 
 
We ask the students of this province and our senior citizens, we 
put them on a means test. I say to you . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Not the Premier. 
 
Mr. Rolfes:  No, we don’t put the Premier on a means test. 
Oh no, we’ll subsidize him, by the students of this province. We 
subsidize him by the senior citizens’ property tax increases  
the poor senior citizen, who might only be making 5 or 6 or 
$7,000 a year, has to subsidize the Premier who makes 73,000, 
because they implement policies which benefit themselves but 
will not benefit the senior citizens of this province. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is a heartless government; that is a 
government that doesn’t know what fairness is; that is a 
dishonest government. That, Mr. Speaker, is a government that 
should be kicked out of office at the earliest opportunity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes:  Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier, the operating 
grant increases simply have not been sufficient to keep pace 
with inflation. We have here, Mr. Speaker, a list. And I have 
requested a list of all the mill rate increases from the minister 
and have not received them yet, and I can understand that it 
might take some time to get those. 
 
But I think, Mr. Speaker, we will be surprised at the huge 
  



 
May 3, 1988 

 

1043 
 

increases that local boards had to make on property taxes. We 
have some examples here. Moose Jaw public board increased 5 
per cent; Weyburn, 4 per cent; Yorkton separate school, 4.7 per 
cent; North Battleford, over 7 per cent; Humboldt, over 11 per 
cent. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is a tax increase on the ordinary citizen, the 
senior citizen out there who simply can’t make ends meet. And 
what does the provincial government say? Well, but we’re 
going to keep on with our policies that benefit us, that benefit 
the rich. We’ll continue with our patronage appointments. We’ll 
continue to appoint the legislative secretaries for most of our 
MLAs, so they can have additional income, but we haven’t got 
money for our students. We haven’t got money for our senior 
citizens and the ordinary citizen out there. We’re going to let 
the school boards  force them  to increase the property tax. 
 
That is the unfairness of the members opposite. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is simply unacceptable, and it’s time that we get back 
to helping the ordinary citizen. It is time, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government recognizes that it is dishonest to take money from 
the public treasury and devise policies which will help the 
wealthy but will harm the poor. Mr. Speaker, that is what is so 
unfair. 
 
And when the Minister of Education gets up and says, oh, we 
have funded adequately, it is simply not true. As I indicated, 
operating grants have simply not kept pace with inflation. In 
fact they have  the real value of the operating grants have 
gone down by about 11 per cent. 
 
I won’t spend too much time on this, Mr. Speaker, but just some 
of the headlines: “School trustees blame province for higher tax 
rates  school boards across the province are raising their local 
tax rates because the province is not giving them enough money 
this year,” says the president of the association of school 
trustees. School boards, most of them, are looking at tax 
increases in the range of 2.5 mills, which could be from 4 to 10 
per cent, and I’ve already indicated one is as high as 11 per 
cent. 
 
Traditionally  and I want the members opposite to know this 
 traditionally the provincial government shared about 60 per 
cent of the cost of education in Saskatchewan; that number has 
now slipped below 50 per cent. And let me say to the members 
opposite that here in Regina it’s about 35 per cent, I believe, 
and in Saskatoon it’s less than 34 per cent  a tremendous shift 
of taxes from the provincial government to the local taxpayer. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, they have the audacity to say, well, if 
the local boards would only tighten their belts like we do, like 
we have to do. I’ve already shown, Mr. Speaker, they’re not 
tightening their belts. They devise policies which benefit 
themselves. The loan production program, the livestock cash 
advance program benefitted financially many of the members 
opposite. They took advantage of those program. The public 
subsidizing  subsidizing someone that has a hundred head of 
cattle, who gets a $12,500 loan, pays no interest. That member 
opposite, if he has taken advantage of that loan, gets a subsidy 
from the public purse of $1,250 a year  $1,250 

a year. 
 
And if he also took advantage of the loan production program, 
or the production loan program, he again, Mr. Speaker, is 
subsidized out of the public purse. You combine those two, Mr. 
Speaker, and a member opposite or a member on this side, if 
they took advantage of the full program, could be subsidized to 
the tune of $3,500 a year. Over three years, Mr. Speaker, that is 
over $10,000 subsidized out of the public purse. 
 
I say to the members opposite, where is that fair to the student 
of this province whose bursary you cut, whose bursary you cut, 
and you’re asking him or her to build up a debt of over 25 or 
$30,000 over a five-year period to get their education? Where is 
the fairness when you don’t provide spaces for our students at 
the university or technical schools because you devise programs 
which takes money out of the public purse so that you could 
take advantage of this program? 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that that is unfair. And I say to the senior 
citizens, when your property tax has gone up, you have a reason 
to be angry. You have a reason to be frustrated with this 
government, because wouldn’t it be nice if you could get a 
$10,000 subsidy over three years. But no, that’s not the 
compassion of this government; that’s not where the fairness 
comes in; that’s where the greed comes in, the greed of some of 
the members opposite. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the government opposite that 
school tax increases on property has gone too far  has gone 
too far  and it’s time that we shifted back the taxes on to the 
provincial government. 
 
And when the Minister of Finance, Mr. Speaker, stands in this 
House and says, oh, but I have reduced the deficit  he has 
done it, Mr. Speaker, on the backs of the poor of this province, 
he’s done it on the students of this province, he’s done it on the 
senior citizens. But not one member opposite has money taken 
out of his purse to help with the restraint that they say is 
necessary. Not one member opposite. That’s where the 
unfairness comes in, and that’s where, Mr. Speaker, the 
unfairness of this Premier comes in. 
 
I say to the members opposite, it’s time that you change your 
policies; it’s time that you look at the welfare of the ordinary 
citizen under the law. 
 
An Hon. Member:  The people will do that in Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. Rolfes:  And as one of my colleagues indicates, the 
people of Elphinstone and the people of Eastview will give you 
a loud message tomorrow, I’m certain of that  a loud 
message. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes:  Mr. Speaker, I want to spend just a few more 
minutes on post-secondary education. If we look, Mr. Speaker, 
at this government’s contribution to 
  



 
May 3, 1988 

 

1044 
 

post-secondary education, its track record is almost as bad in 
post-secondary education as it is from kindergarten to grade 12 
 almost as bad. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at the contributions, the operating 
grants made by this government to the University of 
Saskatchewan and to the University of Regina, we find, Mr. 
Speaker, that over the last number of years  1,2,3,4,5,6,7 
years  a 24 per cent increase in the operating grants. Yet, Mr. 
Speaker, during that period of time inflation accumulated at 35 
per cent; 11 per cent decrease in actual money, in real dollars. 
 
And what did the members opposite say? What did the Minister 
of Education say before this budget came through? Education 
will get the highest priority. We will see to it that the 
universities can offer quality education that each one of our 
students, each one of our young people have an opportunity to 
get quality education, and spaces will be provided. That was the 
message that was given. 
 
What did the budget do, Mr. Speaker? The budget gave a 
miserly 1.9 per cent. And then the Minister of Finance has the 
audacity to intervene in the collective bargaining process, and 
then the Minister of Education intervened and . . . directly 
intervened with negotiations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can we, can we tolerate, can we accept this 
standard of education, that lack of standard of education that we 
are now experiencing in this province? University education, 
Mr. Speaker, must be top-quality education. The library at the 
University of Saskatchewan ranks 104th out of 105 libraries in 
this country, as far as materials are concerned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time this government gets its priorities in 
order. Education and health, Mr. Speaker, must be at the top of 
that priority. 
 
I have worked in education for over 20 years, and I can tell the 
government opposite there has never been such frustration, such 
anger, in the teaching profession as we have today. And you 
people brought it on. The unilateral decisions that have been 
made by this minister and by this government have simply 
frustrated teachers  the intervention  the intervention, Mr. 
Speaker, in the collective bargaining by this minister and this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not . . . There are many people who disagree 
with the government’s priority. Here is a headline, Mr. Speaker, 
which says, “Business elite bash underfunding.” Mr. Speaker, 
these are not people that are friends of this side necessarily. I 
think they’re fairly objective. Here is the Canadian 
Manufacturing Association who are deeply concerned about 
provincial government’s underfunding of post-secondary 
education, and they are saying to the members opposite, we 
need educated young people who will take their place in our 
society, who will be able to flow along with the changes in 
society, who are knowledgeable, who are skilled in the 
knowledge and information that is necessary, not just, Mr. 
Speaker, in engineering, but also they say in the social sciences. 
Let me just read a part of what they say here. It says: 

Provincial governments must strengthen their weak 
commitment to universities and community colleges. Here 
it is recognized that the real culprits of underfunding are 
the provincial governments, and the idiocy of such a 
policy. It goes on to commend initiatives by the Alberta 
and Ontario governments to promote excellence in their 
institution, and . . . (listen, members opposite) . . . and 
blasts provincial governments, (Sask) to 100 per cent of 
the funding for institutions. The provinces must stop using 
for other purposes those federal funds earmarked for 
post-secondary education. 

 
And this government, Mr. Speaker, has channelled much, much 
of the moneys that the federal government has made available 
for education, much of that money has been funnelled to other 
policies and other programs. 
 
And probably, Mr. Speaker, the production loan program which 
the members opposite took advantage and the Premier tool 
advantage of  the livestock cash advance program  that’s 
where some of the money has gone to when the money should 
have gone to education. Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
simply are not making sufficient moneys available for 
post-secondary education. 
 
Recently, Mr. Speaker, I had a constituent of mine telephoning 
me and saying, my son applied for CAD/CAM (Computer 
Aided Drafting/Computer Aided Mapping). Now CAD/CAM is 
simply short for computer assisted design and manufacturing 
technology at Kelsey university. 
 
He, Mr. Speaker, has three years of university, he has one year 
in a related field, and he can’t get into the program. He can’t get 
into the program because 130 applications have been received 
and there are only spaces for 30 people. 
 
When I telephoned Kelsey, I asked them, now what’s the 
problem. Well he said, I’d rather not comment. And I said, well 
could you use some more spaces. Well, he said, we certainly 
could use another 30, but he says, don’t quote me on it. And I 
said, look I won’t quote you on it, but I will speak on it in the 
House. And I won’t divulge the name of that individual. 
 
But I want to say to the members opposite, that’s an excellent 
program. The job opportunities for those students who 
graduated out of CAD/CAM is about 95 per cent, and yet you 
will not make sufficient spaces available so our students can 
attend those programs. In fact, they’ve been cut. No money for 
education, Mr. Speaker, but lots of subsidized money for the 
Premier, cabinet ministers, and other people. Lots of subsidized 
money, but we don’t have any money, we don’t have any 
money, Mr. Speaker, for our students and for education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to just for a brief moment turn to the 
University of Saskatchewan again. And for the first time in the 
history of this university, Mr. Speaker, we had quotas put on 
last year in Arts and Science, and my understanding is that 
quotas will have to be put on in 
  



 
May 3, 1988 

 

1045 
 

other colleges as well, due to the fact that there simply isn’t 
sufficient funding. Classes have simply . . . the size of classes 
have simply soared. In many, many of the classes there are 2 - 
300 students in a class. There is no way that we can offer 
quality education at our universities when that kind of a process 
takes place. 
 
But the university really doesn’t have a choice, it must now put 
on quotas. And last year about 600 students could not get into 
the College of Arts and Science. And what did the former 
minister of Health have to say, the member from Swift Current? 
The member from Swift Current said the following. The 
headline says, “Rejected students unlikely to find jobs anyway,” 
the member from Swift Current said. I have her name, but I 
can’t in this House read her name. And she said the following: 
 

About 400 would-be students turned away from the Arts 
and Science college at the University of Saskatchewan 
wouldn’t likely have found work after graduation 
anyway, says former Education minister. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what a comment made by the former minister of 
Education. No, she doesn’t have concern for those students who 
would qualify for the Arts and Science college. But do they get 
any compassion or sympathy from her or some empathy or 
some understanding? No, they wouldn’t find any work anyway. 
Well, that’s true. I mean, their record of job creation is so poor 
that a student would have to go to another province to get a job; 
I agree with her on that. 
 
But you would have thought that a former minister of Education 
would have said, well, I really have some empathy for those 
students. You work hard in your high school years to qualify to 
get into university, but oh no, not that minister. No, she says, 
they wouldn’t have gotten jobs anyway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the lack of funding at our universities has reduced 
the funding from about $10,000 to a little less than 7,000. In 
1982 the universities received close to $10,000 per student  a 
little less than $10,000 per student from our government. 
Today, Mr. Speaker, they are receiving less than 7,000 per 
student from the government opposite. Is it any wonder, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have the problems on the University of 
Saskatchewan we presently have? 
 
The university administration would love to pay their staff 
better so that they could draw the best qualified professors right 
across this country, and right across North America, and even 
the world, but they can’t offer them decent salaries because this 
government refuses to make adequate funds available. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said before, it’s not because there isn’t 
money. 
 
An Hon. Member:  No, priorities. 
 
Mr. Rolfes:  Priorities. Lots of money for the Premier on 
subsidized loan programs. Lots of money for the member from 
Shellbrook, lots of money. But who is subsidizing him? The 
students are subsidizing him; the senior citizens 

are subsidizing him because their property tax has gone up. 
 
But I’ll tell the member from Shellbrook, a lot of my students 
don’t make 50 or $60,000 a year. A lot of my senior citizens 
don’t make that kind of money, and they don’t have someone to 
give them a loan with no interest. They don’t have someone that 
will give them a loan and subsidize it to the tune of $3,500 a 
year. Oh no, the reverse is true. Our poor students who, if 
they’re lucky and find a job, can maybe make 5, $6,000 a year, 
have to subsidize the members opposite because of their loan 
program. 
 
Our senior citizens who, many of them, make 7, 8, 9, 10,000; 
they have to subsidize members opposite and the Premier of 
this province. Mr. Speaker, those are the wrong priorities. That 
money should have been taken and put into education. That 
money should have been given to school boards so school 
boards could offer the quality education that we have come to 
accept in this province, so the school boards don’t have to 
increase the property taxes to the extent that they have over the 
last six or seven years. Four hundred million dollar increase in 
property taxes alone because of this government, and another 
$400 million increase in income tax and flat taxes and sales tax 
by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s where the unfairness comes in; that’s where 
the priorities are so mixed up by this government. And I say to 
the members opposite, if you have any compassion at all, any 
compassion at all, if you have any integrity, if you knew what 
fairness was, you’d change those policies. You’d change those 
policies and you’d say to the senior citizens, no, we’re not 
going to let you increase those property taxes because we know 
you can’t afford them. 
 
(1530) 
 
We’d say to the students of this province, we’ll give you back 
the bursary program that was in existence in 1982 so that you 
don’t have to build up a debt of 25 or 30,000 at the end of your 
university career. I say to the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Oh, the member from Wascana; let me say a word about the 
member from Wascana. He was the one, Mr. Speaker, he was 
the one, if I remember correctly, was the Legislative Secretary 
to the Minister of Education. He took $7,000; he took $7,000 
out of the treasury, put it into his pocket at the expense of the 
students of this province  at the expense of students of this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes:  Oh, he didn’t have any compunction, Mr. 
Speaker, to say to the school boards, we don’t have sufficient 
money for you and we’re going to have to increase your 
property taxes because I need the $7,000. I need the $7,000 as 
Legislative Secretary. 
 
Let me say to the members opposite: your policies are 
ill-directed; your policies are ill-conceived; your policies are 
unfair. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if those policies continue, Saskatchewan 
will end up with not the best quality 
  



 
May 3, 1988 

 

1046 
 

education that we have come accustomed to. We will end up the 
ninth or tenth in this country, and people will not want to come 
to this province to receive their education. 
 
The best, Mr. Speaker, will no longer stay here to teach at our 
universities and technical schools. We won’t have the most 
talented people attracted to education to teach from 
kindergarten to grade 12, because the salaries they can get in 
other provinces will be considerably higher, because this 
government refused, refuses to make adequate moneys available 
for education. And I say you stand condemned for that. 
 
And I’ll tell the members opposite that the people will speak 
loudly tomorrow. Tomorrow is the beginning. Tomorrow in 
Elphinstone and Eastview the people will tell you what they 
think of your education policies. And that is just the beginning. 
 
And I’ll tell you, in 1990 or 1991, whenever you dare to call the 
election, you people will be the ones that will be looking from 
the outside in, because people will only take unfairness for so 
long. They will only feed the wealthy for so long until they say, 
we’ve had enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the policies of this government, 
particularly in education, and therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will 
move, seconded by the member from Cumberland: 
 

That this Assembly call upon the Government of 
Saskatchewan to reverse its harmful and short-sighted 
cut-backs in the Saskatchewan educational system, which 
will increase unemployment, particularly for the young 
people of our province, and seriously impair our ability to 
compete effectively in the world economy, increasingly 
based on knowledge and information. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, I am indeed pleased to second the 
resolution by the member from Saskatoon South. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I will cover the aspect that the member from 
Saskatoon raised in regards to this important resolution. I think, 
in simple terms or in basic terms, a person . . . the member from 
Saskatoon raised the issue of how we are dealing with our 
education system and how it is that it’s moving to favour the 
wealthy in our system. 
 
Sometimes as I talk with teachers, and sometimes when I visit 
the schools  and I recall just this past week as I visited a 
school in regards to the opening of a gymnasium, I saw the 
important sparkle in the eyes of the students as they presented 
new cultural forms and activities in front of us in regards to the 
celebration of what was happening in their school. And as I 
looked at that celebration, I knew that this was one of the few 
special situations in Saskatchewan, that in general this was not 
the case. 
 
As I looked at it, some people asked me later on  they 

said, we celebrate these specific instances of success because 
they have come few and far between in these past few years. 
When we look at these, they said, sometimes we try for so 
many years of planning, and in this case it was over 10 years. 
They said that this success, it appears that there must be a plan 
to this. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is indeed a plan. 
 
Many people ask me: is this plan on education that the PC 
government is proposing, is this plan something that will be the 
benefit for the public or for ordinary people? I have to reply and 
say straightforward, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that isn’t the 
case, that the trends that I see with this PC government in 
regards to education policy and in regards to educational 
financing is something that is the same plan that I see in the 
United States and also in Thatcher’s England. 
 
And the plan is pretty straightforward. The plan is this: you 
create the crisis in education; you create a crisis in education by 
less funding; you create crises in the educational system by 
knocking off the processes of development that have taken 
place, and the example here in Saskatchewan was in curriculum 
building and curriculum implementation, that you create crises 
and create unnecessary criticisms about the system. You create 
the impression that our educational system no longer has the 
quality it used to have in the past. And that’s the strategy. It’s 
the precise and exact strategy that we see in general from this 
PC government. 
 
The underlying ideological strain behind this strategy is one that 
we have seen already in adult education, that we see in 
Thatcher’s England, and we see in the United States. And that’s 
the road towards privatization. We see it on a greater extent in 
regards to the area of adult education. But lo and behold, we 
also see it in reflections in the education system. 
 
And one of the key ways  and I will talk about that  is to 
create crisis by shifting the responsibility of education from the 
provincial realm to the municipal realm, and you create the 
crisis in terms of taxation structures. These crises  which we 
tend to call nowadays, you know, the business tax revolt; later 
on it will be the community tax revolt  are systems that are 
created by this government. 
 
So when I look and people ask me, is there an agenda, is there a 
plan? And I must say, yes, there is a plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
There is a plan wherein the load that is borne by ordinary 
citizens is increased, and less money is paid by larger-scale 
corporations. 
 
When I looked at it in more specific terms, I looked at the past 
year in regards to specific instances where the overall creation 
of the crisis came to be in education. I mentioned that the first 
thing that a new government does in creating a crisis is to knock 
off the continuum in education. 
 
One of the key mechanisms that teachers use on a daily basis to 
improve quality education in the classroom level is the 
development of curriculum, the development of curriculum 
materials that becomes the tools that teachers use to help 
students out on a co-operative basis in a classroom. 
  



 
May 3, 1988 

 

1047 
 

What we have seen in this case is that those people that knew 
exactly what teachers wanted in this system were the ones that 
were knocked off by this PC government. 
 
But the people and the boards and the institutions of the 
province of Saskatchewan knew that the people that were 
released by this Tory government were quality educators, 
because now you see just about every one of them have been 
hired by this system and by our boards and by our institutions. 
The people at the grass roots level, at the grass roots level 
institutions, know quality that this PC government has refused 
to recognize. 
 
That is what we have seen in terms of the strategy. You shoot 
down the key people who are important in developing a 
continuum from what was the consultative approach and 
co-operative approach in getting the ideas from educators and 
parents and to put them into an implementation phase. 
 
The key in any educational chain’s process, in any historical 
situation throughout the world, is to make sure that there is 
continuum from the initial stages of developing chains to the 
final stages of developing chains in the curriculum format. And 
what we have seen in terms of this government is to shoot down 
those people and to tear them down from that important 
continuum. 
 
And when I looked at what types of changes a new government 
would create, I say glossy print, very similar to the plastic 
approach in health, and I saw just a glassy rhetoric coming out 
about quality education with no meaningful, concrete, financial 
efforts put out by this government. 
 
And I looked at what other reports would they come out with, 
and the only thing that has been substantive in terms of 
educational research that has come from the province of 
Saskatchewan, from the government side, has been one of 
straightforward patronage to one of the former ministers, and 
that was the former minister Dirks. 
 
A lot of educators know the Dirks report. This is the only 
substantive piece of research by the government that has come 
out, that has created a lot of stir in the educational system, 
basically because the whole consultative approach in the past 
was one where we need improvements in the public system, not 
to try and bypass them on a more privatized strategy on a larger 
scale. 
 
(1545) 
 
So I see the new strategy of education, the underlying 
ideological roots, very similar to the ones that I see in Britain 
and the United States. I look at, for example, Time magazine in 
August of last year. Everybody looks at and reads about the 
new right-wing establishment and their approaches to 
education, whether it’s Bloom or whether it’s Hirsch, on 
Cultural Literacy or Bloom’s The Closing of the American 
Mind. 
 
I must say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that The Closing of the 
American Mind is something that I see really reflected in this 
government, because what we see in this government policy is 
the closing of the PC mind in regards to the importance of 
quality public education that we now have 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
When we look at the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . One of the 
members talks about the core curriculum approach. Let me give 
you an example about the core curriculum approach. The core 
curriculum approach was in regards to the question of Indian 
and Metis curriculum advisory committee were done in a joint 
fashion. 
 
What I have seen in the past while is one where the educational 
development fund, which was supposed to support this 
curriculum development, was cut in half. This member from 
across wants to brag about the core curriculum approach and yet 
it was slashed in half. That’s not development; that’s a 
reactionary approach to education. 
 
A lot of the people in regards to . . . and this is a situation where 
I see it from across, from one of the members from across, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. A person has to see that financing of 
curriculum and curriculum materials development at the school 
level is an integral part of core curriculum. It’s part of an 
implementation phase of any curriculum proposals that are 
developed by any government. And the member across seems 
to say that those are not one and the same thing. Of course 
they’re not one and the same thing, but they are part and parcel 
of the overall curriculum development approach that he does 
not seem to understand. 
 
So when I look at this government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know 
that, in any case when I see the privatization strategy of this 
government, they always create the idea of crisis so that they 
can make an excuse for privatization to take place. We have 
seen it in other areas. 
 
We looked at the area of forestry. Weyerhaeuser, a big 
American corporation, takes over the best land  12 million 
acres in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And when I look at that, I know that a tremendous amount of 
money and our resources would be invested in this private, new, 
American corporation. And we knew that prior to that, in 1980 
and ’81, we had made approximately $20 million per year on 
that forestry. When the PCs got it, crisis management. They 
created a situation where their marketing was knocked, in the 
same way that they did with potash. They knocked off and 
created a crisis marketing scheme. 
 
And when you look at the importance of education, the same 
thing occurs. There is a crisis in education. 
 
There is also the aspect of the privatization. They said there was 
a crisis in health so the dental programs were taken over. 
There’s a crisis here and there’s a . . . but these, usually in every 
case, the publicly controlled institutions by the people of 
Saskatchewan were always operating at a successful basis. 
That’s what we have seen. That’s what we already know. 
 
So when I look at the aspect of ideology, the PC government 
creates a crisis of ideology so that they can move in to privatize 
systems. And that is one of the things I would warn educators 
throughout, that that is the intent in terms of adult education and 
that’ll be the intent also in 
  



 
May 3, 1988 

 

1048 
 

elementary and high school education in the long run. 
 
I’d be asking the question as to whether or not the curriculum 
branch and stuff like that would be privatized in the long run. 
And these are not just questions that are being asked just to 
throw that question out, these are important questions that need 
to be examined very carefully by the PC policy of privatization. 
 
When I looked at the aspect of creating a crisis, crises are not 
created by just ideology. Crises are created by actual practice. 
And one of the aspects, the real nitty-gritty of how you create a 
crisis is to create a financial crisis. You shift the responsibility 
from the provincial government to the municipal government. 
You create a financial crisis so that people are put in a divide 
and rule situation. It’ll be taxpayers against the municipal 
councils; it’ll be business tax people against the municipal 
councils; it’ll be the taxpayers against the boards of education 
 you know, for the rise in the mill rates. 
 
I’ll give you an example in the rise of taxation at a specific 
level. But first, before getting into that specific level of taxation, 
let’s look at the taxation strategy by the PC governments in both 
the federal level and the provincial levels and relate it back to 
education. 
 
When we look at the ’60s, in the early ’60s, the ordinary 
person’s tax load was approximately 30 per cent. When we look 
at the 1980s in PC time, the tax load at the federal level is about 
50 per cent for the ordinary taxpayer. When we look at the 
corporate tax structure, we know that it was 20 per cent in the 
1960s, now it’s down to 10 per cent. It is completely unfair; the 
structure is unfair. The wealthy get richer while we have to pay 
more from our own pockets to pay for the education system. 
 
And when you see it in the area of the provincial tax base, we 
know that also. We know that the corporate taxation stays at 
about 7 per cent since 1982 and stays the same. 
 
And we look at the taxation to the ordinary citizen  it has 
jumped from 15 per cent to 23 per cent. That’s why when we 
relate this thing to education, we know that in terms of payment 
to educational, the tax burden, for every dollar that the ordinary 
tax citizen puts in, only 16 cents is paid by the corporations  
16 cents. I do not consider that fair, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
When we look at the taxation rates, when we look at the mill 
rates at the community levels and we look at how much the 
province put in, we know that in 1970s, in the mid-1970s, the 
province had put in 60 per cent of the funding. When there was 
an NDP government, there was 60 per cent of the funding in 
education. When we look at the Tory government in 1988, 35 
per cent to 36 per cent. It’s just about cut in half on what the 
province puts into education, as to what the NDP government 
used to put into education. 
 
We know that there is a greater tax burden by the ordinary 
citizens not only in regards to the provincial and federal 
taxation, but also at the municipal level. Because corporations 
in general, large-scale corporations are paying less and less and 
we’re paying more and more. All that burden then is presented 
to the local taxpayer. 

I’ll give you an example in regards to northern Saskatchewan. 
On April 27, 1988 there was an article in The Northerner on the 
northern school mill rate increase. And I look at the figures 
there. And the minister talks about this increase in educational 
funding. And he’ll go at great length of how this great 
educational funding is helping our schooling programs and our 
system and so on. 
 
But what is the fact when it comes down to northern 
Saskatchewan? What did the minister do in northern 
Saskatchewan? Well this is the fact. They’ve been steadily 
cutting back in northern Saskatchewan in the past six years. 
That’s clear. We also know even in one year there is a 
tremendous cut-back. 
 
I looked at the figures. The boards in northern Saskatchewan 
asked to increase their mill rate by over 17 per cent. The paper 
states that there was a $300,000 cut-back in education in 
northern Saskatchewan through Northern Lights School District 
 $300,000 for one school board. And it happens to be in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the municipalities have to pick up the cost, and it will cost 
them an extra 17 per cent. The mill rate used to be 34.5; now it 
will be 40.5. And what the people are saying in northern 
Saskatchewan is this: we are already paying too much. 
 
There was a time, they said, in the past, when we were 
considered, when the increased costs of transportation were 
considered, when the increased costs of everything were 
considered and looked upon by the NDP government of the past 
as important in regards to providing provincial dollars for 
education. 
 
But, they said, this is no longer the case. We have to pay now, 
they said. We had to pay an extra 17 per cent. And even when 
we pay this extra 17 per cent on the mill rates, it will mean that 
there will still be a shortfall of $400,000  close to half a 
million dollars shortfall in northern education. And the Tory 
government can come up here and say, yes, we have increased 
the funding on education. 
 
But they simply haven’t, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The facts show 
very clearly that there is little concern for northern education. 
When I looked at education in the North, and I looked at the 
short history in the past six years, not only is there a crisis 
situation for the taxpayer in northern Saskatchewan and the fact 
that there will be a lot of division and debate at the municipality 
level in the North, but there was also the crisis that the teachers 
had to face. 
 
It took a long time for the teachers to finally make a point of 
getting their negotiations finally settled. It took a strong stand 
by the teachers before this government would listen. It took a 
strong stand and a lot of messages by the people of this 
province that they needed something that would be settled. 
 
And when I look at the past, a lot of the teachers told me, they 
said, look, we are concerned about the quality of education. 
They said, why is it that our curriculum branch 
  



 
May 3, 1988 

 

1049 
 

in northern Saskatchewan was slashed? Why did we lose one of 
the top consultants that western Canada had seen, one who had 
looked at curriculum change for the past 25 years in education? 
And she was also paid her respects by the band school system 
and by the public school systems of the North. The teachers 
gave her a special presentation at both levels this year. But this 
is the type of person that this government chose to cut right out 
of the educational scene. We saw that in the North. We saw 
others in special education that were cut by this government. 
And the same policy continues. 
 
(1600) 
 
As I look on a more general level, when you look at the aspect 
of the raising of the crisis in ideology and the crisis in finance, 
you also know that the government in general  and I’ve 
listened to the government, and I’ve never ever known a 
government that preaches more intolerance and more division 
that I’ve seen than this government. I look at this in terms of not 
only the statements by the Premier but by former ministers in 
regards to housing, in regards to education, and so on. 
 
And we know that even more recently in regards to the French 
language situation. And we presented our multiculturalism view 
because we know, everybody knows that when it comes down 
to multiculturalism and multilingual education that a lot more 
rhetoric is said by this government, but a lot less money is given 
out in regards to the practice of the cultures and the 
multicultural history that we have in Saskatchewan. Very little 
dollars. 
 
It took The Education Act back in the early ’70s to recognize 
this importance. But no improvement has been made by this 
government. All we get now are Tory ads in the campaign that 
are trying to deal . . . we are trying to deal with health and 
education issues in these two campaigns that are taking place, 
these two by-elections, and all we hear is the division in regards 
even to the French language situation. And I say that’s 
intolerance and hatred. We can’t afford that. Educators in 
Saskatchewan recognize that you can’t do that. There’s got to 
be due respects. 
 
You can’t place and put politics on questions of that nature; that 
you have to come and work with the people of the different 
cultures of our province, and work with them hand in hand and 
not play mere politics in your advertising schemes. Because 
that’s what I heard in the radio this morning, and I was 
absolutely shocked. Here we had . . . the Premier had made all 
kinds of situations and said we were a mature society when we 
debated Meech Lake. We were mature. 
 
And when we reflect back into the education system, and we 
look back at the importance that have been gained by the 
universities in regards to working with Indian-Metis education 
and in regards to multicultural education in this province, and 
also the school systems and many teachers who have worked 
hard to get at this issue, and we see petty politics being played 
on the important issues of culture and language, it’s a sad case 
in our history. And when we look at that whole issue in regards 
to the education, more money has to be put into that, but I just 

do not see it. 
 
The same holds true for the issue of special education. And I 
relate it to the North because many of the people do not have 
the services that we do in the South. A lot of the schools for the 
deaf, a lot of the schools for people with special situations 
cannot be provided those services immediately at the 
community level. So a lot of the teachers require support 
systems to help them in much the same way that I’ve said about 
curriculum  curriculum aids. 
 
And they need this help at the community level, but there was a 
cut-back in that in northern schools. And there’s a lot of 
rhetoric about mainstreaming and so on, but really, when it 
comes down to it, the concrete skills and the materials required 
for the teacher to work at the class-room level is simply not 
there. And that is the fact that I raise. 
 
It’s not only in glossy print of mainstreaming that you can call 
progress in education, it’s the actual fact of putting the 
important tools and the important materials for teachers to use 
to be able to deal with the issue of special needs. 
 
I also looked at the aspect of Indian-Metis people and the 
curriculum. I looked at it because I was part of the curriculum 
process. I was part of the Indian-Metis curriculum advisory 
committee. I was part of that team, and I looked at the top-notch 
educators that were part of that group. 
 
Tremendous recommendations were made, not only in the area 
of Indian and Metis studies, but how to integrate that into the 
broader curriculums, because that was the essential point that 
we were making. And we looked at how you needed to get right 
into the regular curriculum scheme and work closely with 
regular curriculum developers, and what we have seen is that 
that has been more or less on hold. There was no progression. 
 
There has been coming complaints that I’ve seen on 
Indian-Metis educators that state very clearly that it’s not 
happening, that the limited funds and the changes that they’ve 
done in regards to knocking off some key people in there is just 
not a good way of approaching that whole issue. 
 
So what we’ve seen in general for the province, we’ve seen also 
in Indian-Metis education in the province  a lot of rhetoric, a 
lot of glossy print, but really no substantive amounts of money. 
 
When we look again, therefore, in general, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
I see a trend  a trend in England, a trend in the United States, 
and a trend in some parts in North America, more particularly 
in Saskatchewan, where the right-wing approach to education 
does not look at an overall view of a comprehensive approach 
to education; that instead, narrow approaches are brought in 
with little or no consultation, or consultation only after some 
new developments that some deputy has concocted in a short 
period of time; that indeed the consultation approach only 
occurs after a decision has been made. 
  



 
May 3, 1988 

 

1050 
 

And that’s what the educators, that’s what teachers tell me. 
That’s what educational administrators tell me as I go along to 
the different schools in my travels. So this right-wing approach 
to education will indeed create a crisis. 
 
I looked at the latest report, the brief by the Minister of 
Education, and in there I found that he talked about the 
upcoming problems of strengthening the links that he broke 
down, of strengthening the lack of co-operation that he was able 
to . . . that he himself had created this problem. And I saw that 
in his brief that there would be a strain in education, and I 
believe it. And I believe that strain, because that’s the strain that 
this government has created. 
 
It tries to create that crisis and negative image in education. It 
tries to get us to fight each other in education. It tries to get us 
to fight the teachers. It tries to get us to fight the boards when 
the mill rates have to be increased. It tries to make us fight, 
business taxpayers versus the municipalities. It tries to create 
the fight between educators in the department, so that indeed a 
crisis would be created. 
 
And the real underlying goal that we see in the American and 
English strategy is the long-term goal of the privatization of 
different aspects of education. And I think this is the underlying 
goal as we see the PC government strategy in education unfold. 
And I really feel that as I watched the children last week, and I 
watched their excitement for that short term, and I watched the 
teachers getting excited about getting a new building, I knew 
that this wasn’t going to be the case for many of the 
communities in the North. I knew that this excitement was not 
going to be there because the PC strategy only gives to the rich 
and big corporations, but not to those little people that I saw 
that were extremely excited. 
 
I see that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I travel around. I would like 
to see this excitement; I would like to see this optimism develop 
through this, and create the quality education that we once saw 
in this province, the consultation that we once saw in this 
province  the pride and joy that we had in this province in our 
educational institutions. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is what I see 
disappearing when I speak in front of this House, as being an 
educator also from this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet:  So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I proudly support and 
second the resolution by the member from Saskatoon South. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I take great 
pleasure in rising in my place this afternoon to address this 
motion that has been made by the member from Saskatoon 
South. I’m a little bit at a loss of words to begin with, after 
listening to the tirade delivered by that member and listening to 
his colleague who has just concluded. 
 
I cannot help but to remember a saying about politicians, 

and I would like to read into the record my opinion of what I 
have just heard and witnessed over the last hour and a half or 
so, where the definition of a politician is given as one who 
speaks on a subject about which he knows nothing and attempts 
to make you feel that it is your fault. And that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I suggest to you is what we have just been witnessing 
over the last hour and a half or so. 
 
It gives me great pleasure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to speak here in 
reply to that motion on behalf of my constituents. And I must 
say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that my constituents want to send a 
clear message to the member of the party across the way, and 
that message, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that enough is enough. 
 
We have been hearing accusations, we have been hearing all 
kinds of wild gyrations during question period, another example 
today on the SGI issue, about statements being made with 
nothing substantiated, incredible statements being made with no 
regard to the fundamentals. And I am very impressed, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, what one of my colleagues from Turtleford, 
actually the member from Turtleford, has said about the 
opposition who tend to be certainly unencumbered by 
knowledge and uninhibited by the truth. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
suggest that that is what we have been hearing substantial 
amounts of comments on today. 
 
Now further to some of the comments made by the member 
from Saskatoon South, where I suggest to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, a lot of apologies are in order because, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in some of his comments he was suggesting that the 
educational system that we have in the province today is turning 
out staff  staff that is not adequate, were his words  they 
are not adequate in this province any more. And I suggest to 
you, Mr. Speaker, that by so saying, he is slapping the 
educational instructors of this province, that they are no longer 
adequate or capable of doing the tremendous job that they have 
been doing in the past. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that he 
certainly owes the staff members of the teaching profession an 
apology. 
 
(1615) 
 
Furthermore, in addition to that, his comments were to the 
secondary education that we are no longer turning out 
graduates, graduates of renown, he said, intimating that those 
people who have worked 4, 5, 6 years and more in the 
university to acquire their education, to contribute to the society 
in terms of research and writings, and so on, that they are no 
longer capable of being renowned, that they are not adequate to 
do the job. I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that he owes the 
graduates of the universities of this province an apology. 
 
But looking, Mr. Speaker, at the member from Saskatoon South 
who himself is a graduate of the University of Saskatchewan, I 
am assuming  I don’t know that for a fact, but I am assuming 
that he is a graduate. I suggest to him that if he is telling us that 
the system is not perfect today, looking at him I would suggest 
to you, Mr. Speaker, that the system in those days was also not 
perfect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, furthermore, the member from Saskatoon 
  



 
May 3, 1988 

 

1051 
 

South brought up the opposition to the production loan. And he 
made a great ado about the production loan and who was taking 
advantage of the production loan and who was not taking 
advantage of the production loan. 
 
I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that there was one ulterior 
motive, and that motive, Mr. Speaker, was to drive a wedge, to 
drive a split between the urban and the rural citizens of this 
province. Because, Mr. Speaker, I am firmly convinced, firmly 
convinced, particularly after listening to the member from 
Humboldt, the so-called critic of Agriculture in this province, 
during estimates over the last three or four days, and witnessing 
what the NDP policy, or perhaps I should say lack of policy in 
agriculture is, I can see that they understand full well that they 
will never again in the foreseeable future take a seat in 
agricultural Saskatchewan. So they’re putting all their apples 
into one cart and going for the cities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suggest his comments relating to the production 
loan were intended to achieve that end, because what he was 
saying was that not every farmer in the province should have 
received the production loan. That’s what he said  not every 
farmer should receive the production loan. He pointed to the 
members on this side and suggested that all members on this 
side received the production loan. I, as a matter of record, Mr. 
Speaker, have not taken out the production loan  not one 
penny  and I am a farmer; I’m a bona fide farmer; I earn my 
living as a farmer. 
 
But that, Mr. Speaker, is not really the point. The point, Mr. 
Speaker, is that by taking out this kind of production loan, that 
member was saying that half the farmers, or was he saying 
three-quarters of the farmers . . . He didn’t say, but what he was 
intimating was that there should be a means test before the 
production loan should have been left out, or handed out. 
 
Now I ask the farmers of Saskatchewan: would you have 
received it? Ask yourself that question. If the NDP would have 
been in power, firstly, we know that they would not have come 
up with such a program. But had they, who would have 
received it, who would have received it  some buddies, a few 
friends? 
 
That is a question, I think, that we have to take a very, very 
close look at because, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that they are 
in contradiction to their own Marxist socialist philosophy of 
universality when they talk that way. What are they saying? 
That if they ever, Heaven forbid, should reassume power in 
Saskatchewan, are they saying then that there will be no such 
thing as universality? Are they saying that we will decide who 
gets and who doesn’t get? Is that what they’re saying? 
 
That’s a scary thought, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but let’s take it a 
step further then. Universality, not being part of their doctrine 
any more, does that mean that medicare then, does that mean 
that the richer folks in society are now going to have to . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. Order. It’s true the hon. member is 
certainly referring to comments made by the member from 
Saskatoon South, which I myself heard. However, I would ask 
him in his response to relate it to the motion. 

Mr. Neudorf:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
The production loan and the relationship is: the production loan 
is over $1 billion that this government put into the economy of 
Saskatchewan, which enriched the economy of Saskatchewan, 
and thus allowed us to maintain the excellent educational 
system that we have in the province today. And I think, 
therefore, it is very, very relevant to the point that is under 
discussion today. 
 
But this is what concerns me, the obvious, the attempt by the 
opposition members, the NDP, to widen the split and to create a 
rift and to pound in that wedge between rural and urban 
Saskatchewan. I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that is 
certainly deplorable. 
 
And I want to pursue one other point that the hon. member from 
Saskatoon South brought up, and I suggest to you that an 
apology is also in order to my friend and colleague from Regina 
Wascana. As a Legislative Secretary, he was accused of ripping 
off the public treasury to the degree of $7,000 per year in his 
role as Legislative Secretary. Now this member, Mr. Speaker, 
was Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Education, and he 
is one of the hardest-working individuals in this Assembly, 
working hard not only for his constituents but for indeed the 
entire province, and particularly the children in the educational 
system within this province. Then we have him saying, the hon. 
member from Saskatoon South, that this individual is ripping 
off the public treasury. 
 
I don’t follow that, Mr. Speaker. Because talking about ripping 
off, it has been brought to my attention, Mr. Speaker, that 
rip-offs . . . now I am the first one, and I want to put this on 
public record, that I’m very glad that I chose 1986, October 20, 
to be elected to this Assembly for the first time, because that 
gave me an opportunity to be . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf:  Well I appreciate that, Minister of Highways. 
I appreciate that comment. 
 
That gave me the opportunity to get to know an individual that I 
have never agreed with as far as philosophy is concerned, but 
an individual that I learned to respect very, very much in my 
short, close association with him, and that was the former hon. 
Allan Blakeney. Now Allan Blakeney was a man who said what 
he thought, and you knew that what he thought was . . . 
probably it was the truth. He was an honourable gentleman. 
 
But one particular item that I think that he had a moment of 
lapse, a moment of lapse when he appointed a certain member 
of the opposition who then became the minister of Health under 
the previous administration which, of course, was the man who 
has perpetrated the greatest rip-off of the public treasury that 
this Assembly has ever known. 
 
And I will give you an example why, Mr. Speaker. Because as 
minister of Health, this member from Saskatoon South, at that 
time and now the critic speaking to this motion on education . . . 
And we were going to take 
  



 
May 3, 1988 

 

1052 
 

a look at the funding; we’re going to take a look at the funding 
as he brought out the Legislative Secretary to Education  
$7,000, $7,000 the Legislative Secretary. 
 
Here we have the member in 1981-82  not that long ago, but 
the last year that you folks were in power  we have the 
member from Saskatoon South, $24,877 in salary he received 
that year. He received $7,509 in travel. Then he received 
$12.15, and he forgot to say why, but I guess he went to the 
public treasury for that. 
 
Then in addition to that, there was an annual indemnity of 
$11,224; annual expense allowance he received, $10,011; 
session indemnity, $10,975. This is all the same gentlemen, the 
member from Saskatoon South. The long-distance calls he 
made, $1,019; communications expenses, $8,443, for a total of 
$47,388, which, if you combine it with the $7,000 and the 
$47,000 that I claimed before, received and cost the taxpayer of 
this province . . . the cost the taxpayer of this province $79,787. 
And he is complaining about a $7,000 hard-earned money by 
the Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Education. 
 
Now let’s follow this logic to the next step. If I may be 
permitted, Mr. Speaker, to round off $79,787 (thousand) to 
$80,000, and I realize that is a slight exaggeration, but $80,000 
. . . Our cabinet, numbers in cabinet today under our Premier, 
numbers 16. If you go back  and this is kind of spur of the 
moment  the latest size of the cabinet of that NDP Party was 
in the neighbourhood of 22 to 24 members. 
 
Mr. Speaker:  The hon. member is certainly introducing 
information but, as I said before, he must relate it to the motion 
under discussion if he’s going to introduce information such as 
that. 
 
Mr. Neudorf:  Mr. Speaker, the point simply was, $80,000 
and eight members more in the cabinet than ever before, costing 
the taxpayers of this province over $600,000 extra  $600,000 
in the extra-sized cabinet of the Blakeney government when 
they were in power, that could not be used for education, that 
could not be used to educate our children. 
 
And what do they do? They complain about the $7,000 of 
hard-earned money by their member of Regina Wascana, and 
that member from Saskatoon South owes that member an 
apology. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf:  Mr. Speaker, it give me a great deal of honour 
here to address some of the points perhaps that have not been 
brought out by the previous two speakers thus far. 
 
We are going to now start taking a look at some of the facts, 
some of the truths, the way they really are. I do not think that 
my constituents, for example, want me to get mired in the same 
wallow as some of the members of the other things. 
 
So having said that, I will at this point try to be a little bit more 
conservative  

Mr. Speaker:  Order, please. Order, please. Allow the 
member to continue. 
 
Mr. Neudorf:  I realize  thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker  that whenever the solid truth is spoken in this 
House, it does get them a little bit upset and so on, because it is 
not in keeping with their philosophy of using scare tactics, of 
crying wolf; somewhat, let us say, as this old . . . what do you 
call these old stories that we used to have in the . . . these fables, 
about the fable of the young boy who was always spreading 
untruths. 
 
And then I would suggest to you that what you do is you take 
perhaps your leader and let him throw out a bag of feathers into 
the air. It is so easy to take these untruths and these 
exaggerations and spread them to the wind, and let them do and 
fall and cause whatever damage and havoc that is possible. But 
I suggest to you that it is very, very difficult to gather them 
together and to be responsible. I think that is a key here. We 
must be responsible for what we say and what we utter. 
 
So with that brief introduction, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to get into 
the . . . some of the thoughts that I have prepared. Mr. Speaker, 
I would suggest to you that my constituents want an opposition, 
and they understand the role of an opposition. The role of the 
opposition is to keep the government on its toes, and that’s fair 
ball. I mean, that’s what our parliamentary system is about and 
that is great. 
 
But I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that this opposition is 
unequivocally prepared to do an outstanding role in their job 
because it gets so natural to them. It seems to be something 
that’s inherent within the natures of the members opposite to 
criticize, to be negative, not to admit that something good 
perhaps is going on. 
 
(1630) 
 
Well I’m just going to demonstrate a little bit by asking . . . I’ll 
ask my friend, colleague here, from Regina Wascana how full 
. . . how much water is in this tumbler? 
 
An Hon. Member:  It’s half full. 
 
Mr. Neudorf:  Half full. I’d ask the member . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order, order. Order! The hon. member cannot 
use exhibits in the House. 
 
Mr. Neudorf:  I apologize, Mr. Speaker, for taking the glass 
of water as an exhibit. 
 
What would the member from Regina . . . Saskatoon South 
have said? I suspect that his answer would be  and perhaps I 
could get all the members there in unison to indicate that this 
glass, excuse me, that the glass is half empty. And I think, Mr. 
Speaker . . . I think, Mr. Speaker, by hearing half full and half 
empty illustrates the basic significant difference between us and 
them  the positive thinkers, the negative gloom and doomers. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, my constituents like to have an opposition that 
will deal with facts, an opposition that will work hard to present 
positive new ideas. I certainly 
  



 
May 3, 1988 

 

1053 
 

do not object to criticism as long as it is constructive criticism, 
as long as it is criticism with an alternative. It is so easy to 
criticize, use a lot of rhetoric in doing it, but have no 
constructive criticisms, no policies that could be implemented 
in lieu of. 
 
And so, having said all that, since this government was elected 
in 1982 it has, Mr. Speaker, made education a priority. We have 
been willing to adapt, we have been willing to make changes, 
we’ve been willing to address the issues that are of concern to 
the people of this province so that indeed we can make 
adjustments  make adjustments to our delivery system of 
education in this province to meet the needs of the future 
centuries. 
 
Members of this side of the House realize the need to prepare 
our youth for the future. We know that the success of this 
province rides on their shoulders, and we are committed to 
providing every opportunity available in order for our children 
to meet the challenges of a new era. 
 
And we have all . . . we all have children. We all have families, 
and we all care for them. I do. It’s the most precious thing in 
my life. And I know that the members opposite would stand up 
and say the same thing. 
 
It seems so strange to me that there are people who will get up 
and say that there is a party or that there’s a group of 
individuals who feel the same way that they do, and yet they are 
going to go out with the expressed intent  purpose  of 
destroying an education system. I can’t fathom that. I find that 
difficult to understand. 
 
We may not have the same ideas about philosophy. We may not 
have the same ideas about the implementation of policy, but our 
goal is the same. The means to the end may not be the same. 
And so, when you have that castigation coming from members 
opposite with no regard to the intent, and I believe the honest 
philosophy behind these kinds of steps, I find it very, very 
difficult to understand that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at some facts. Over the last 
six years, the progressive government . . . the Progressive 
Conservative government of Saskatchewan has increased 
education spending in Saskatchewan by $259 million, or an 
equivalent of a 48 per cent increase. And that, Mr. Speaker, I 
suggest to you and members of the House and indeed the public 
of Saskatchewan, is commitment  commitment to education. 
 
In the recent budget before this Assembly a further commitment 
of $39 million, which is a 5.2 per cent increase, has been 
provided for education in 1988-89. Those, Mr. Speaker, are 
facts. The total expenditures, $789 million. That’s up from the 
records year that the NDP had while they were in government, 
of $530 million. The PC government, Mr. Speaker, is 
committed to excellence. 
 
And I want to refer my colleagues and members of the public to 
more facts about our commitment to education. In 1988-89 we 
will provide a further fourteen and a half million dollars from 
the educational development fund to continue the upgrading of 
programs and tools available to our young people. 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, that fourteen and a half million dollars 
is there and it would not have been there had the members 
opposite been in power, because they may criticize the EDF or 
the educational development fund, they may criticize the fact 
that it’s been extended over 10 years instead of five, but it’s 
something that simply did not exist under their administration 
 it wasn’t there. 
 
So we have $14.5 million from the EDF, and we will provide a 
million dollars for in-service training to help teachers introduce 
the core curriculum. And as a past educator, having spent a 
greater portion of my adult life in education, I can fully 
appreciate the significance and importance of having that 
in-service training for teachers. It’s vitally important that they 
get that and this government recognizes it, and we have put that 
$1 million in the budget for that express purpose. 
 
Your PC government will increase operating grants to school 
divisions by $7 million, raising the total commitment to 
operating grants to 37 . . . pardon me, $337 million; $31 million 
will be provided in capital assistance for the renovation and 
construction of new schools; $25 million for university capital 
projects. 
 
Your PC government will also implement the new core 
curriculum, which I’ve just been talking about, into the 
elementary and the secondary schools beginning in the fall of 
1988, and we will increase funding for special education to 
ensure that benefits of the core curriculum are equally shared by 
all students. 
 
These, Mr. Speaker, are just some of the facts that prove your 
PC government’s commitment to education in Saskatchewan. 
Let me also point out that this PC government is very sensitive 
to the need to make post-secondary education accessible to the 
largest number of students possible. And to this end, Mr. 
Speaker, 12,300 students will receive over $24 million in 
subsidies, and we heard the member from Saskatoon South 
criticizing this kind of program  12,300 students, over $24 
million. 
 
The points I’ve been making so far, in spite of the objections of 
the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, are fact. They do not, as 
this motion suggests, support the member’s claim that we are 
harming or impairing students’ opportunities in the educational 
system. To make my point even further, let us look back over 
the past year to see what initiatives have been provided in 
education for the people in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education, my hon. 
colleague from Weyburn, can take a great deal of pride in the 
accomplishments of his department. They reorganized  and 
I’ll just list some of them here for the members of the opposite 
party here and the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Under his jurisdiction they reorganized rural community 
colleges into nine regional colleges to enhance the provision 
and delivery of skilled training and university extension 
programs to rural students. My constituency is very happy 
about that because they are certainly reaping the benefits of his 
vision. 
  



 
May 3, 1988 

 

1054 
 

They also amalgamated three community colleges to form the 
Northlands Career College to maximize the linkages between 
training and employment in the North. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Take it as read. 
 
Mr. Neudorf:  I’ll not take it as read. I’ve still got quite a 
few of these programs . . . It’s quite a lengthy process to try to 
straighten the record out, Mr. Speaker, and it gives me a great 
deal of pleasure to be able to do that. 
 
And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, your PC government took a 
national leadership role by establishing the $3.2 million 
education outreach fund to address the problem of adult 
illiteracy and to expand availability of university extension and 
institute courses to smaller centres. 
 
In addition, four technical institutes and four urban community 
colleges were amalgamated into the Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology to develop areas of excellence 
and to focus on the skills that are currently in demand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the facts that I have presented are clearly the 
evidence that prove your PC government’s commitment to 
education. Under this government, we have developed an 
educational system that focuses on quality, accountability, 
lifelong learning skills, financial accessibility and increased 
access  and I take pride in this  and increased access for 
rural students. 
 
Now during the first term of our PC government, from 1982 to 
’86, our members had the foresight  and I can’t claim credit 
for this, but my colleagues and former colleagues certainly can 
 our members had the foresight to priorize those areas which 
will prepare this province for the years ahead, and indeed for 
the century ahead. And among these areas that were in fact 
labelled as the corner-stone to our province’s future, education 
was one of them. And the reason for this, Mr. Speaker, the 
reason for this commitment is in fact quite simple. Through 
consultation with people throughout the province it was made 
quite clear that education was a priority. Thus, it becomes our 
government’s responsibility. Our government is well aware that 
in order to meet future challenges we must continue with a 
process of renewal and development within our primary and 
within our secondary schools and universities. And we will 
continue our commitment to initiate this process in partnership 
with all participants in the educational communities, be it 
parents, teachers, students, trustees and any others that you 
would like to indicate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier in my remarks I made passing reference to 
the core curriculum program. And I’d just like to spend a few 
moments to explain just what this program is all about, what 
has been accomplished to date, and what the reaction has been 
to that program. 
 
And the new core curriculum is intended to provide all 
Saskatchewan students with an education that will serve them 
well regardless of their choices after leaving school. In other 
words, we’re going to give them as many options as possible to 
come out of that institution with as well-rounded an education 
as is possible which will both reinforce the teaching of basic 
skills and introduce an 

expanded range of new skills to the curriculum. 
 
Developmental in nature, the program affects kindergarten to 
grade 12 and it has two major components: the required areas of 
study, and the common and central learnings. Now within that 
there are seven required areas of study that the students must 
have to participate in: health, phys. ed, social studies, arts, 
education  arts education, math, science, and then the 
language arts. 
 
And each course of study provides for the inclusion of the six 
 what is called the six common, essential learnings which are: 
communication, numeracy, creative and critical thinking, 
technological literacy, independent learning, and personal and 
social values and skills. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, let me tell you that the reaction to this 
program has been extremely positive. Teachers are anxious to 
pursue the new core curriculum thrusts and the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation is very anxious and interested to lend 
assistance, and people throughout the province are generally 
excited by this curriculum project. 
 
It’s a comprehensive program, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that our 
children are equipped to deal with the rapid technological 
changes that this world is facing now and that accelerated 
technological pace that is coming in the future. Mr. Speaker, it 
is one program and just one example of your PC government’s 
commitment to equip our young people for the future. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion before us attempts to twist the facts, 
the facts as I have stated, and because of that twisting I will not 
be able to support that motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk:  Mr. Speaker, I would start  and I don’t 
know just how many people are still with us  but at the 
beginning . . . and I wish to really congratulate him on his very 
eloquent speech, but the member from Saskatoon South went 
into quite a tirade of what he called facts. And as I said, I don’t 
know how many people recall that part of the speech. 
 
But I would like to remind the people of Saskatchewan and 
members of this House that this member who is so concerned 
about the students of Saskatchewan is the same gentleman who 
voted against a motion that would allow the students of our 
University of Saskatchewan to write their final exams. That is 
that member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk:  That member is also a member of a 
government, of a previous government, that had student loan 
rates at fifteen and three-quarters per cent. Is that fair? Does that 
compare to our rate today of 6 per cent? Hypocrisy, I call it. 
 
He also alluded in his remarks to how the mill rates, the local 
mill rates, were being increased, and what a 
  



 
May 3, 1988 

 

1055 
 

hardship it was going to be on all our local school division 
boards. I have a figure here, Mr. Speaker, that says that the 
average local mill rate increased from 1982 to 1987, was 15.1 
per cent. Mr. Speaker, do you know what it was under the 
previous government in the period 1976 to 1981? Sixty-nine 
point seven per cent. That’s what the increase in the mill rate 
was, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He also alluded in his remarks that this government had 
imposed a hardship in the form of a 7 cent a litre gas tax. He 
also said that it would total over $1.5 million. What he 
neglected to tell the people was that for the remainder of 1987, 
it was only going to be $665,000 and that the rural 
transportation grant was increased for 1987 by $898,000, Mr. 
Speaker  more than enough to cover that increase. 
 
He also in his remarks alluded to a . . . because of a lack of 
funding that our schools were not really in a position to take 
advantage of a lot of things like technology, and I believe he 
used computers as an example. And he said that the schools in 
Saskatchewan could not afford to put computers into their 
schools. Well let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, that in 1976 there 
were no computers in the Regina public school system. in 1980 
there were just a few available, a number of 10 to 20. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order. I believe the member from Canora has 
the floor. 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk:  I would like to bring to the attention of the 
House that from 1982  and these are not our figures, Mr. 
Speaker; these are figures that are published in a Regina public 
school publication; this is not any government propaganda  
that the number of computers in the Regina public school 
jumped from approximately 100 in 1982 to where there are over 
1,000 in 1988 - another example of the government funding the 
schools and technology in our province. 
 
So all I am saying, Mr. Speaker, is that I would like to stick to 
the facts. And I would start by telling you that in the current 
provincial budget for the fiscal year 1988-89, education 
spending will total $789 million. That is a 5.2 per cent increase 
in spending. 
 
I want to emphasize the fact that education spending in 
Saskatchewan has increased. The record will show that in the 
last six years there has been a 48 per cent increase in education 
spending by this government. Yet the NDP member for 
Saskatoon South has the outrageous audacity to introduce 
before this Assembly a motion that contradicts those facts. 
 
The NDP opposition would prefer to deal in statements that are 
not correct, to introduce motions that are wrong, all for the sake 
of trying to win a few cheap political points at the expense of 
our young people. It is a shameful conduct, and I say, shame 
that he would exploit our education system for political gain. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I submit to you that honourable people would 
recognize that education spending in this province has 
increased. Education is of vital importance to 

Saskatchewan’s Progressive Conservative government. 
Education is an excellent investment in the future of our 
province; education will provide the young people of our 
province with solid opportunities for the future. The motion 
before this Assembly does a sad disservice to our entire 
education system. It is a slur on our educators; it is an insult to 
education professionals and students alike. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the $789 million Education budget for this 
province contains provisions for a $7 million increase in school 
operating grants, a $2.8 million increase in university operating 
assistance, 4.5 million for the education development fund, 31 
million in capital assistance for the renovation and construction 
of new schools and $25 million for university capital projects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the increased spending by this government for 
education also includes $67 million for the Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology  new funding to 
develop programs for disabled students. There is 3.2 million for 
the education outreach fund to combat adult illiteracy and to 
expand the number of university and institute courses offered in 
smaller centres. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP opposition, the mover of this motion 
from Saskatoon South, persists in trying to scare the public by 
saying there is a decrease in education funding. The truth is, 
that education spending in this province has increased. 
 
The $789 million budget for Saskatchewan is one that we can 
be proud of. It shows leadership and vision in the field of 
education. The education system of this province is high on the 
agenda of this government. Since 1982 spending on education 
has increased by $259 million or a 48 per cent increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have dedicated substantial funding to 
education to help the young people of our province meet the 
changing needs of society. Our government, through the 
Minister of Education, has the foresight and leadership to do 
what is necessary to build a first-class education system in this 
province. Very important steps have been taken in our 
education system to guarantee excellence, to guarantee that 
Saskatchewan has an education system equal to or better than 
any jurisdiction in North America. 
 
All over North America, there is an increased public concern 
about education. Dr. Allan Bloom’s book, The Closing of the 
American Mind, which deals with education, well that book is 
on the best seller list, both in Canada and the United States. 
 
There is ever-increasing public interest in our education system. 
We have reached a point in our society where parents want a 
strong commitment from governments to quality education. 
This government has made that kind of a commitment to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people from all walks of life recognize the value 
of our public commitment to education. They see the $789 
million Education budget as an investment in the future of 
Saskatchewan. 
  



 
May 3, 1988 

 

1056 
 

In 1985 this government established the educational 
development fund to further enhance our province’s educational 
system. 
 
Over the past three years, I would like to point out, this 
government has provided over $50 million to school boards to 
improve library resources, to acquire computer technology and 
to introduce new programs for gifted and disadvantaged 
students. The 1988-89 Education budget has a further 4.5 
million to continue the upgrading programs and tools available 
to students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the record will show that since 1982 this 
government has increased funding to school divisions by over 
56 per cent. This year we will provide $337 million in operating 
grants to school divisions, which is an increase of over $7 
million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to commend our Progressive Conservative 
government and the Minister of Education for these positive 
initiatives in education. I wish to commend him for his 
leadership in promoting excellence in education. 
 
Take a look, for example, at the national leadership 
Saskatchewan has demonstrated by establishing a $3.2 million 
education outreach fund to address the problem of adult 
illiteracy. It is a sad and painful fact that in North America 
many persons are considered functionally illiterate. Even 
reading the newspaper is difficult for many adults. The centre 
for assessment of educational progress recently found that 32 
per cent of young adults could not write a simple phone 
message, 70 per cent could not find a listing in the yellow pages 
of a phone book. 
 
The Department of Education and Saskatchewan’s government 
has established the Saskatchewan outreach fund because we 
want to help those who have this problem. And I commend the 
government for establishing this fund to help adult illiteracy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, public education is being enhanced because of this 
government. We are building a tradition of quality education for 
Saskatchewan young people. Our commitment to education also 
includes a solid commitment to post-secondary education. Since 
1982, operating grants to our universities have increased by 
almost 45 per cent. Over that period, provincial spending on 
university capital projects totalled nearly $100 million. 
 
In 1988-89 our universities will receive an additional $2.8 
million in operating grants, for a total commitment of $146 
million; 12,300 students in post-secondary and adult education 
will receive over $24 million in subsidies to help them in their 
quest for further education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would strongly suggest to you that this 
government, Saskatchewan’s Progressive Conservative 
government, has a genuine record of promoting quality 
education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the most important functions of any 
provincial government is the education of our young people. 
The revenues and resources we put into education is most vital 
to our society. Schools play an 

important role in building communities. Primary and secondary 
schools provide many of these skills to our young people as 
they prepare for their future. 
 
Government has an obligation to guarantee that a quality 
education system is an ongoing part of our society. I believe 
that here in Saskatchewan, we, as a government, can proudly 
say we have upheld those qualities in education. Since 1982 we 
have restored public education to a point high on the list of 
public priorities. We, as a government, have established a 
record such that Saskatchewan’s education system is one that 
we can all take pride in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have much more to say, but I believe at this time 
I would move that debate be now adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 
 


