


















































April 20, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 20, 1988 
 

 
705 

 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to the members of 
this Assembly, a group of 22 students, grade 8 students from 
Glen Elm School. They are accompanied by their teacher, Larry 
Moleski, and their principal, L. Petschulat. 
 
I look forward to meeting with these students after the question 
period, and hopefully to answer any questions that they may 
have. And I would ask you and the members to join with me in 
welcoming this group here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you, a group of park workers 
seated in the west gallery who are in Regina today to present a 
petition to the Minister of Parks, Culture and Recreation with 
6,000 names of concerned citizens, concerned over the 
privatization of Saskatchewan provincial parks. 
 
They represent, Mr. Speaker, the Moose Mountain Provincial 
Park, the Lac La Ronge Provincial Park, The Battlefords 
Provincial Park, Blackstrap Provincial Park, Danielson and 
Douglas provincial parks, Cypress provincial park, Meadow 
Lake Provincial Park, Duck Mountain Provincial Park. 
 
I’d like to ask all members to welcome the park workers here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you, and through you to the Assembly, 23 students, grades 5, 
6, 7, and 8. They come from the Countryside School at 
Saltcoats, which is actually two miles south of the town of 
Saltcoats. 
 
They’re accompanied today by their teachers, Myron and Twila 
Wiebe and Tracey Bartel. Their drivers today are George and 
Mabel Penner, Ralph and Florence Warkentin, and Norman and 
Darleen Wohlgemuth. 
 
I had the pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to visit with this group this 
afternoon, and I took the liberty of briefing them on what they 
could witness in the Assembly today. I just would like to wish 
them a safe trip back home to your homes this evening and ask 
the Assembly to help me welcome them in the usual manner, to 
these fine people from Saltcoats. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

Summer Employment in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister in 
charge of the Employment Development Agency, and it has to 
do with the very serious unemployment in Saskatchewan, 
particularly in the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Saskatoon’s unemployment rate was a little over 12 per cent 
last month, giving it the fourth-highest unemployment rate of 
24 major cities across Canada, with the youth unemployment 
rate of some 16 per cent. This month thousands of students, as 
the minister will know, will be coming into the job market in 
search of summer employment, and yet in spite of these high 
unemployment totals your government has chose to cut the 
budgets for summer job creation in this particular year. 
 
Can the minister tell the young people of Saskatoon why he 
chose to cut the summer employment program this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Johnson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member 
opposite has a short and, I might say, inaccurate memory. 
Approximately one week ago that same question was asked, 
and I explained that Saskatoon is the fastest growing city in 
Canada and therefore people . . .  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Johnson: — . . . and therefore people are moving 
into Saskatoon because that’s where the jobs are being created, 
and therefore . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. We’re having difficulty 
hearing the minister, and I would ask for the co-operation of the 
House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Johnson: — Therefore, Mr. Speaker, people are 
moving into Saskatoon faster than the fastest-growing city in 
Canada can provide jobs for them because they heard it was 
good in Saskatoon. 
 
Now that I’ve reminded him of the question and the answer that 
I gave a week ago, I also point out to the member opposite that 
there has been no cut in the student job program; that the same 
amount of money has been budgeted as last year; that last year 
there was record student employment in Saskatchewan; that 
students are now completing their exams, and once they’ve 
completed their exams they will be out in the job market, and 
there will be at least as many jobs as last year. So the member 
opposite should take note that the question was asked and 
answered a week ago, and that his premise is false. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, the same minister. I imagine 
Saskatoon must be growing quite fast because of people being 
driven off their farms in the province because that’s the only 
place where the population 
  



 
April 20, 1988 

 

706 
 

 

increase would come from. 
 
And what the minister says is contrary to the facts. The 
Opportunities ’86 program contained in it $8.5 million; $2 
million was added because it was election year in the province 
of Saskatchewan, for a total of $10.5 million. The same 
program this year contains $4 million, and it doesn’t take a 
pocket calculator or computer to . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. I believe the hon. member is kind of 
getting into debate. I’m not sure whether it’s a new question or 
a supplementary. He hasn’t indicated that to me, and therefore I 
have to assume it’s a supplementary and ask him to put his 
question. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — It’s a new question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Supplementary. It’s a supplementary and I ask 
that you treat it as such. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, in the program this year there’s 
$6.5 million less than there was in 1986. Now since it’s election 
year again in the city of Saskatoon, I would ask the minister: 
will you bring in a supplementary budget for the Opportunities 
’88 program, and will you allow non-profits and municipal 
governments to qualify again under the program criteria so 
students in Saskatoon and other places in the province can find 
adequate summer employment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that was rather a 
broad question. First of all, the member opposite referred to 
people being forced off farms, and I have to answer that. That 
process started with land bank. That process continued in 1980 
when the interest rates went up to over 22 per cent. Farmers 
who were sitting on loans at eight and a half per cent — I know 
them personally — had their interest rates go up to over 22 per 
cent. And the Leader of the Opposition was then the deputy 
premier of Saskatchewan, and he said, well, we can’t do much 
— just shrugged his shoulders. Now they shrug their shoulders 
and ask, how did it happen? Well they were in government; 
they saw it happen; they let it happen. I had farmers in my 
constituency . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I believe the minister has 
more than made his point on that particular issue, and I would 
ask him to get to the latter part of the question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has 
twice said there’s been a cut from last year. There were $4 
million — one, two, three, four — last year. There are $4 
million — one, two, three, four. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, the four on my right hand 
equal the four on my left hand. That is the same as last year. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, two years ago there was 

one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, and I 
don’t know which finger to use for the other half. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — So to me that’s a reduction of $6.5 million in 
the summer employment program, Opportunities ’88. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Now do I have to count that out again for the 
minister? That’s a reduction, and you don’t need a pocket 
calculator. You can use your fingers again if you want, but 
you’ll come up with $6.5 million less, when we’ve got an 
unemployment rate that’s at least 3 per cent higher with young 
people. 
 
If the minister isn’t involved in the long waiting list on the 
hearing aid program, would you answer the question as to 
whether or not you’ll bring in a supplementary budget for 
Opportunities ’88; and will you reduce the criteria so that 
municipal governments and non-profits can apply and qualify 
for the program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the member 
opposite continues his exaggeration, he’ll have to remove his 
shoes to continue. 
 
Let us get down to the problem at hand here. Two years ago we 
had a different economic situation. There was more money in 
the program, yes, but the Saskatchewan home program has 
created jobs for students in other ways than directly buying 
these student . . . these jobs. 
 
In addition, our policies towards business and agriculture mean 
that those people are hiring students, and that’s where we are 
going to put the emphasis on student jobs, is business and 
agriculture, the job creation part of our economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — New question, Mr. Speaker. The members 
opposite can increase the salaries for their political staffs, they 
can rent $34,000 a day on empty office space across the 
province of Saskatchewan, but you can’t adequately fund the 
increase in at least 4,000 jobs lost to students in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
My question to the minister is whether or not you will bring in a 
supplementary budget so that students who are going into the 
work-force can be assured that they’ll have jobs for the summer 
and they won’t go back with empty pockets to university and 
back to school in the fall. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I was joking when I said 
the member opposite should remove his shoes, but I think he’s 
going to have to do it because here he comes up with $34,000 a 
day for empty space when that is seven times the actual figure. 
And I don’t know how he’s going to do multiplication and 
division on his hands, but he’s 
  



 
April 20, 1988 

 

707 
 

 

going to have to improve on it because that is a seven-fold 
exaggeration. 
 
The space he refers to, a large portion of that, a large portion of 
that is being held for a youth drug and alcohol. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I believe 
the minister has made his point regarding that remark, and it 
wasn’t the major aspect of the question. I would like to give 
him the opportunity to get to answer the major portion of the 
question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry. I’m having a 
hard time sorting the exaggeration from the question. If the 
members opposite could stick to a question without getting into 
exaggeration, we could try to answer it. 
 

Privatization of Provincial Parks 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the Minister of Parks. Mr. Minister, today workers from 
Saskatchewan’s provincial parks presented you with petitions 
signed by more than 6,000 people urging you to stop the 
privatization of our parks system. Privatization of the parks has 
meant jobs lost, poorer services, and huge increases in fees 
charged to park users. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is: can you tell the people why they 
should support privatization of our parks when it has resulted in 
an increase of 30 per cent in park entry fees, an increase in 80 
per cent in camping fees, and 30 per cent increase in swimming 
pool rates in the last year alone? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, private investment in the 
parks has meant $17.2 million of new money invested in the 
park system, and that compares to only 1.5 million that we had 
to put up as a government; that is, the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, these people sitting around here, put up 1.5 
million and the private sector put up 17.2 million. 
 
When he talks about increases in park fees and other things, 
yes, there were increases, and it was nothing to do with 
privatization, Mr. Speaker. We were spending in excess of $5 
million on park operations and taking in something under 2, and 
we’ve tried to close that gap. As it is we spent over all, some 
$12 million a year, and we recoup 9 from one source or another. 
And when we’re talking about privatization, do your homework 
and read what it is all about. It’s nothing to do with selling park 
land, Mr. Speaker, because under The Parks Act, land in a park 
cannot be sold. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, you know full well that you’re giving away to your 
Tory hack friends the lucrative portions of the park system, and 
that means that you’ve got to increase fees to the users of those 
parks. I ask you if you’re willing to sit back and have another 
look at your privatization scheme so that the people of this 
province can enjoy those parks at a reasonable rate. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, if it’s so lucrative, how 
come the system was losing money? And he’s talking about our 
friends . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, Order. Surely we can’t hear the 
minister attempting to answer the question, and I ask the 
members to allow him to answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — He talks about leasing to our friends; 
we’ll gladly lease to your friends if you can find any friends 
with enough business knowledge to get into the business in the 
parks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I direct my 
question . . . a new question to the Minister of Parks, Culture 
and Recreation. Mr. Minister, last year you turned over the 
operations of cabins and condominiums at Duck Mountain 
Provincial Park to a private company. The rental rate for a 
condominium immediately increased from $60 to $75 per day. 
 
When the Mount Blackstrap ski operation was leased, 
untendered, to a private operator, he doubled the price of a 
season ticket for a family of five from 200 to $400 — by way of 
information, Mr. Speaker. These are direct results of 
privatization in our public parks. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is: is it your strategy to turn 
Saskatchewan provincial parks into playgrounds for the rich, 
rather than keep them affordable to all Saskatchewan families? 
Is that where your privatization plans are leading this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, you talk about Blackstrap 
— there was an organization that was being run by the 
government that was losing over 100,000 . . . about 150 or 
$160,000 a year. 
 
We allowed someone to run it for us; we contracted him to run 
it for one year. He took his lumps, he took his losses, he worked 
it out, and he came back with proposal, an unsolicited proposal, 
and said, look, let me lease this, let me run it; I think I can turn 
it around. He did, and that’s the savings to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And it goes on with every park, Mr. Speaker. There are losing 
enterprises in every park. I don’t think it’s fair to expect the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan to subsidize absolutely every little 
thing that goes on in a park, including restaurants which are 
competing with the private sector who have to try and break 
even at least, or make money. Why should we, the taxpayers, be 
subsidizing hamburgers in a park? I don’t think that’s fair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — New question, Mr. Speaker. What an 
analogy — using hamburgers as an example. 
  



 
April 20, 1988 

 

708 
 

 

A new question to the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Recreation. Mr. Minister, what this privatization means as well 
is a loss of jobs and employment in income to the small 
communities surrounding many of our provincial parks, 
because the privatization of the parks means employees . . . that 
means lost jobs, and that means families moving away. 
 
Did the government study the long-term impact privatization of 
provincial parks will have on the communities before you 
decided that this change was cost-effective, or did you just jump 
into privatization of parks, as you have with everything else, 
with your eyes closed and your fingers crossed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Here we go again, Mr. Speaker, an 
example of the opposition uninhibited by fact, unencumbered 
by knowledge. The fact is, during the construction phase of 66 
projects that went on in the parks, 135 jobs were created. 
During the operating, 112 jobs were created. The jobs that were 
affected, 96. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, listen carefully and I ask all of the people of 
Saskatchewan to listen to this one. Because of privatization 
initiatives and efficiencies, which go hand in hand, 96 jobs were 
abolished. Now I’m saying abolished. The positions were 
abolished, but we took the people who were affected, Mr. 
Speaker, and they were offered alternatives. 
 
Sixty of them took alternative employment; eight of them are 
on a re-employment list and got transferred elsewhere; 19 
retired and eight . . . 19 resigned, eight retired. So there were no 
massive job losses at all connected with this. So it’s completely 
false and completely unfair for the NDP to run around 
spreading scare tactics about privatization of parks. 
 
What privatization does for us, Mr. Speaker, is it allows us to 
put capital into parks, put new facilities into parks at little or no 
cost whatsoever to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. And it 
allows us to operate them in a more efficient and effective 
manner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Inventory Appraisal of SIAST 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, can you explain why the 
Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology 
now has a team of 15 appraisers travelling across the province 
doing a complete inventory and asset evaluation on everything 
owned by Saskatchewan’s technical institutes and community 
colleges. And could you tell me what the cost of this massive 
appraisal is? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not familiar with the 
team as the hon. member has described it. I will take notice of 
his question and report back to the House. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m shocked that such a 
major expensive project, which had been 

launched by your department, would not be under your 
jurisdiction or under your authorization. 
 
So if you’re taking notice, Mr. Minister, I would ask that you 
answer these questions with respect to the project: What is the 
total cost? Was it tendered? And why is such an inventory and 
evaluation necessary to be done by an outside company, an 
Ontario company, when a new institute is simply an 
amalgamation of the old institutes? Surely they have this 
information on file, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As I said, Mr. Speaker, I’ll take 
notice. And the hon. member chastises me for not having — at 
least in his mind — a more detailed understanding of what the 
Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology is 
doing. 
 
I would just remind him that it’s about 8 or 10 or 11 months ago 
now that in this very House we passed a Bill giving autonomy 
to the newly formed Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology. They are not run by the Department of 
Education any more, and that was as they wished as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tabling of Public Accounts 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — My question is to the Acting Minister of 
Finance, and it deals with the 1986-87 Public Accounts. You 
will know, Mr. Speaker, that these Public Accounts show how 
the government spent the taxpayers’ money in that particular 
year. 
 
Mr. Minister, last week the Provincial Comptroller told the 
Public Accounts Committee of this legislature that your 
colleague, the Minister of Finance, received the final printed 
version of the Public Accounts the week of April 4. In other 
words, your government has had the Public Accounts in its 
possession for two weeks, yet you have been hiding these 
accounts from the public. My question is, Mr. Minister: why 
hasn’t your government tabled those Public Accounts, and what 
is it that you’re trying to hide? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I understand that, and I 
think the tradition of this House has been that the Public 
Accounts are tabled along with the Provincial Auditor’s report. 
The Provincial Auditor’s report then is referred to the Public 
Accounts Committee along with the Public Accounts, and the 
Public Accounts Committee study the Public Accounts and 
study the Provincial Auditor. Now that’s the tradition as I’ve 
always understood about the House. 
 
Now I would assume that the Provincial Auditor would have his 
report ready very soon to be presented and on it goes into the 
Public Accounts Committee. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
surprised that the minister, who’s been a member of this 
Assembly for some time, doesn’t know the facts better than 
that. And, Mr. Minister, I would strongly urge you to 
  



 
April 20, 1988 

 

709 
 

 

check the records in this matter before making any further 
statements in that vein before this Assembly because what you 
say is simply not true. 
 
And I ask you again: Why haven’t you tabled those Public 
Accounts? What is it that you are trying to hide? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there is nothing that 
we are trying to hide. I assume that the hon. member sits on the 
Public Accounts Committee. I also suspect that he’s probably 
anxious to get going with the Public Accounts Committee, and 
I’m sure that will happen in the very near future. 
 
And as soon as the Provincial Auditor, who traditionally puts 
forward his report — that’s not put forward by the government 
— the Provincial Auditor, as you know, Mr. Speaker, files his 
report with the Speaker; it’s tabled in this House, and this 
House then refers it to the Public Accounts Committee. That’s 
nothing to do with government; that’s the independent office of 
the Provincial Auditor, and he will tender it to your office. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The 
minister is throwing up a smoke-screen, Mr. Minister, you will 
know that your government has been underfunding the 
Provincial Auditor, and it is for that reason that he will not be 
able to bring in his report until sometime in June. 
 
The history of this Assembly suggests that you don’t have to 
wait for the Provincial Auditor to table his report before tabling 
the Public Accounts? What prevents you from doing that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would think that to 
somehow suggest that the Provincial Auditor doesn’t have 
enough money to prepare his report is somewhat a false and 
improper innuendo to be left by the hon. member. 
 
The Provincial Auditor has a proper amount of money; he will 
table his report. I’m surprised it’s not tabled now. He will table 
his report at his own will and not at the direction of 
government. That’s always the way it’s been. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 
minister. Mr. Minister, according to the recent budget 
documents, your government spent just over $4 billion in the 
year in question, 1986-87. You still haven’t given the taxpayers 
an accounting of how you spent their money, but you’re asking 
them to pay higher taxes in this current year’s budget without 
telling them that. 
 
How can you be so arrogant as to claim that the public doesn’t 
have a right to know how you spent their money before you 
sock it to them again? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, nobody is suggesting that 
the public does not have the right to know. I simply 

say this will be tabled in the normal course in the tradition of 
this particular House. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, let me just ask the minister 
this: what prevents you, what prevents you from tabling those 
public accounts here today? We won’t accept your excuses and 
your smoke screens, but what prevents you from tabling it here 
today? What prevents you? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve answered that 
question three times. 
 

Salary Increases to Ministerial Assistants 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I took notice of a question 
and the Deputy Premier took notice of it on Monday, April 19, 
with respect to eligible increments and salary increases for staff. 
I want to report that ministerial staff are eligible to receive 
increments based on their performance just as the public service 
employees are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask the members of the opposition to please 
listen. They asked the question. I would like to provide the 
public with the opportunity to know the answer. 
 
As the Deputy Premier said yesterday, this is no different from 
the process which is followed in the teaching profession, in the 
nursing profession, or other positions in the public sector. 
 
Increments are provided for under the ministerial assistant 
regulations just as they are provided for under the contracts in 
effect for teachers, nurses, and all government employees. 
 
It should be noted that other groups of employees have the 
ability to negotiate salary raises, cost of living increases, 
general economic adjustments and special benefits into their 
contracts, whereas ministerial assistants do not have that ability. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, if people are promoted, that is, they 
take on new and added responsibilities, and if they perform a 
higher level of duties, that they should be compensated for a 
higher rate. I am aware, for example, that as teachers, Mr. 
Speaker, are reclassified to principals, their salary increases can 
vary substantially depending on their level of responsibility, and 
I will give a couple of examples. When nurses become head 
nurses they get increases; when associate professors become 
full professors they get increases. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the former administration is a little 
sensitive to this because they got caught giving their staff 95 per 
cent increases, Mr. Speaker. People like Mr. Bill Knight, for 
example, received a 95 per cent increase, 46 per cent in one 
year. 
 
I will point out to the Hon. Members, if you move from MA 
(ministerial assistant) 3 to an MA 4, it’s a 27 per cent increase. 
If you move from an MA 3 to an MA 4, it can be a 22 per cent 
increase. If you look at a class IV teacher at the 
  



 
April 20, 1988 

 

710 
 

 

maximum salary range of $41,191 is promoted to principal, 
they will receive, in addition to the basic salary, an allowance of 
$1,190 . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Members don’t want to hear, they don’t 
want to hear this, but I ask for their co-operation, Mr. Speaker. I 
certainly want the public and the students here to look at the 
conduct of the members of the opposition when we’re trying to 
respond to a question. They speak from their seat. Mr. Speaker, 
I would just ask you to ask the Hon. Members to please listen to 
the answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. I would like the Hon. Members 
to please allow the Premier to answer, and I would like the 
Premier also, if he could, to get to the end of his question 
because it is getting to be a lengthy answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
wanted to point out that when you go from an associate 
professor . . . from an assistant professor to an associate 
professor, there is a 30.77 per cent increase; when you go from 
associate to full, it’s a 29 per cent increase; from assistant to full 
professor it’s a 69 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would be glad to respond to any additional questions the 
Hon. Members have with respect to salary increase for 
ministerial assistants or political staff under the previous 
administration — it’s as high as 95 per cent per year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

QUESTIONS PUT BY MEMBERS 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I would ask that all Questions Put By 
Members, 8 and 9, be moved to Motions for Returns 
(Debatable). 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Motions for Returns (Debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Rural Development 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 43 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my left 
here I have Bill Reader, deputy minister of Rural Development; 
over farther to my left here I have Denis Webster, executive 
director, development services; directly behind me on the left 
here I have Ernie Anderson, executive director of transportation 
services; behind me I have Larry Chaykowski, senior director 
of management services; sitting at the back I have Lloyd Talbot, 
director of community planning and development services; and 
also Walter Antonio, director of transportation and planning. 

Item 1 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
welcome the officials from the Department of Rural 
Development, and I look forward to at least this afternoon that 
we’ll spend with the minister and the officials, going over the 
estimates, the budget for the 1988-89 fiscal year. 
 
I’d like to ask the minister if he would have with him today the 
names and the salary of each ministerial assistant that you have 
working directly with you as of December 31, 1987. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I have it as of today. Would that be 
sufficient? Do you want me just to send it over to you, or do 
you want me to read it into the records? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I’d prefer you read it into the record. But 
what I’m asking for, Mr. Minister, there’s been some 
controversy, especially in question period over the past days in 
the Assembly, and what I want is I want the names and salary 
of each ministerial assistant as of December 31, 1987; and I 
would like the names and salaries for each of those as at March 
31, or as of today, I suppose, would be adequate. We would like 
to be able to do a comparison for the increases with your own 
ministerial staff. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well I have one new one added to 
December 31, so that may help you somewhat then. I’ll just 
read it in, if you want, if that will help you any. And I’d prefer 
not to read the amounts in, but I’ll read them if you’d like. I 
have . . .  
 
Mr. Anguish: — It’s not necessary that you read the amounts 
aloud. If you could provide me with the information I’m asking, 
we would do an analysis; but if you could provide the rest of the 
information to the record. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if you could tell me, in addition to 
the ministerial assistants that you have on staff, if in fact you 
have any people seconded from your department or other 
departments or agencies within government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — No, I don’t. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I imagine there are people within your 
department, Mr. Minister, that are in charge of personnel, and I 
would like also the name and the salary of each person currently 
working in your personnel branch. I notice in the expenditures 
put out in the estimates, there’s nothing specifically labelled as 
“personnel,” but I imagine it would apply to staffing services. I 
would like to know who those people are and what their salaries 
are as of March 31, 1988, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I was just checking. We don’t have any, 
I’d say, personnel department. We have three people partly 
responsible for the personnel . . . or the operation of the 
personnel within the department. We could get you their names. 
They work part time. They fill in on the job doing other jobs as 
well, if you’d like that. 
  



 
April 20, 1988 

 

711 
 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Yes, I’d appreciate it if you could provide 
those during the course of estimates. And I would like to know, 
of those three people, when they were hired, and whether or not 
there’s anyone left in personnel that was there prior to 1982. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — We’ll send it over to you. But just to 
answer your question, two of them were with Rural 
Development prior to ’82; the other one transferred from Urban 
Affairs, and he was with the government before ’82 as well. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — In terms of revenue-sharing grants to rural 
municipalities, that went down in the ’87-88 estimates by 
almost half a million dollars, and this year there was no increase 
even to cover inflation. So the picture, I guess, that we’re 
looking at, is in 1986-87 estimates it was $48,547,000 plus odd 
dollars; in 1987-88 the estimates reflected $48,062,000, and the 
estimates for ’88-89 reflect exactly the same amount as ’87-88, 
$48,062,000. 
 
In the 1985-86 rural revenue sharing it stayed the same as it had 
been in 1984-85, but otherwise the revenue sharing grants to 
R.M.’s were going up year after year. And why the drop two 
years ago, and why the freeze this year? It seems to me that 
there is an increased demand in terms of some emphasis on 
rural development in the province, and at the same time as there 
is an increased demand, as it would appear to us, you’re either 
freezing or reducing budgets, and we’d like to know the 
rationale, what the minister’s explanation of that is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as you all know, the 
economy stayed fairly flat over the last two or three years; in 
fact, in rural Saskatchewan farm prices have dropped 
dramatically. I would . . . the only answer I can give to the 
member is that we have held the line all the way through with 
revenue sharing grants because we know that certainly rural 
R.M.’s didn’t want, and couldn’t take a loss in the amount of 
revenue they would have. 
 
I think we’ve done a pretty fair job of working with SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) as well as 
all the R.M.’s around, in regards to keeping a level line and 
doing other things. We’ve taken the same amount of money and 
did other things, such as the re-gravel program, which allowed 
R.M.’s to maintain the roads as they were, and I think it’s a 
pretty responsible program. 
 
So we’ve taken a lot of the different . . . the same moneys and 
refocused it within the revenue sharing and on conditional 
grants . . . and the conditional grant sharing. I believe that it’s 
been well received by most R.M.’s, if not all R.M.'s out there, 
and we’ve worked all the time with SARM, that’s the executive 
of all rural municipalities, putting together this type of a 
hold-the-line budget. And I believe just to be fair to the R.M.’s, 
I think all but about 12 R.M.’s last year held the line on taxes, 
and them only . . . I believe one went up three mills was about 
the maximum. So I think that says it all in itself, that they’ve 
worked with us to hold the line in a fairly flat economy, and 
that even with farm prices down, we’ve managed to work with 
them. There has been no increases, but there’s certainly been no 
decreases, and I believe that’s the most important 

part. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well I would disagree with you, Minister, in 
terms of the actual numbers over the past few years. There have 
been decreases, although I acknowledge that between last year 
and this year you’re holding exactly the same. You can’t tell us 
today that there have been no decreases because in fact there 
have been decreases. 
 
But what I’m trying to get at is: what is the department’s 
rationale; what’s your priority in terms of rural Saskatchewan? 
Certainly many people would agree, and I think you would as 
well, someone who’s in touch with rural Saskatchewan, that the 
face of rural Saskatchewan is changing quite dramatically. And 
during these times of dramatic change and problems in terms of 
the agricultural economy, what’s the emphasis of your 
department? 
 
(1445) 
 
Do you have any futuristic thinking; do you have any kind of a 
vision or a dream of your own for rural Saskatchewan? And 
does that dream include some increase in financing for new 
directions, new programs, some revitalization of rural 
Saskatchewan? Or is it a policy of the department to allow a 
transition period and let rural Saskatchewan die and have 
people move into the urban centres across the province? 
 
I want to know what your priorities are and what we can look 
towards in future years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m sure he doesn’t 
want a real long answer, although I could certainly spend a lot 
of time in talking about where we would like to see rural 
Saskatchewan going and what we’ve done so far to at least 
facilitate the initial start-up of some of them. 
 
Without going into great details, I would just like to mention 
that a focus that I believe has to be on rural Saskatchewan is the 
development and especially the diversification from our 
shipping of raw products to manufacturing, to processing, and 
that maybe to the growing of different products and also to the 
manufacture processing of the articles that we use here in 
Saskatchewan. And if you put that in and work with it in the 
parameters that were set out there, I believe that you can not 
only maintain and stabilize the farm income, but you can also 
create jobs and opportunities for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
To give you an idea of one, just one that we’ve been working 
with, and we’ve been working with about 70 R.M.’s (rural 
municipalities) and about 120 urban municipalities . . . We have 
formed what we call the rural development corporation. You 
can form . . . It’s a group of municipalities, either urban or rural, 
getting together to look at their area and what they can do to 
develop, diversify, to bring in services to their area. 
 
A good example would be the Wood Mountain area south of 
here, and the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg was down 
at the official opening 
  



 
April 20, 1988 

 

712 
 

 

of it. Since then they have come a real long ways. They have in 
their area established a cement plant. When I say a cement 
plant, I mean where . . . the Redi-Mix cement. They have a 
gravel contractor. They have brought in, I believe, two or three 
businesses. They have now decided in their area how they 
should plan. 
 
They planned their area — where they’d like to see a nursing 
home, where they’d like to see their schools built, what they 
need for hospital care. They’ve also . . . At the same time there 
was a kaolin deposit there that’s been in the process of being 
developed. And if you listened on the news today, I believe that 
the group that’s looking at developing it have . . . are doing 
their final initial testing just out of here, outside of Regina. And 
it has real prospects. 
 
Those people have went out to put these kinds of things 
together. And what that does is not only give you the 
opportunity to diversify in your farming, to supply services to 
your people in the rural Saskatchewan, but to provide jobs for 
the young people, to keep them there. 
 
And I could go on. There’s one at Balcarres, there’s one at the 
radar base, there’s one up at Meath Park. We have four in 
operation, and I believe we’ve got six more just about ready to 
sign up. 
 
Those are the kind of things we can do together, and I say 
“together.” The people in that area working together to do some 
. . . to do diversification, especially development, and to look at 
our farming industry and say it’s more than the growing and 
shipping of raw products. Putting it all together and devising the 
services that are needed, I believe, is a real important step 
working towards maintaining rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, there’s a fund, the economic 
diversification investment fund, and I see on . . . I think it’s 
page 27 of the Estimates book, that there’s some $400,000 is 
coming from that source. Can you tell me what R.M.’s, what 
rural municipalities have taken advantage of that fund? And 
what can you really expect the several R.M.’s around the 
province to do with $400,000 in terms of economic 
diversification investment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Just to give you an idea of some of the 
ones that we’ve been working with, and I was just talking about 
that a moment, that’s what I was talking about — the RDC’s, 
(rural development corporation) the one at Wood Mountain. 
 
The other ones that we have in place and the R.M.’s and the 
villages, or towns that’s involved, that’s already been 
organized, and already been funded by the Government of 
Saskatchewan, NORDCO (New Opportunities Rural 
Development Corporation) is the name of the one, that’s the one 
up at Garden River, Meath Park. There is the R.M., Garden 
River; there’s the village of Albertville, Meath Park, and 
Weirdale involved in that one. The Poplar Hills one, the one I 
was mentioning to the south of us here, is the R.M. of Poplar 
Valley, the R.M. of Old Post, and the R.M. of Waverley. Also, 
the town of Rockglen, Wood Mountain and Glentworth are 
involved. That’s two of the ones. I could send you over a list if 
you’d like. 

There’s a good number of them. 
 
You might want to know how we fund them and why they 
would want . . . and what’s the role of it. How they’re funded is 
basically, there’s a $132,000 available over a five-year period. 
The first year, it’s based on a percentage, in other words, the 
communities put up 25 per cent on the first year, and we put up 
75 per cent to a maximum of $25,000. The second year, it’s 
based on the same criteria, and it’s at $40,000 . . . 50,000. I’m 
wrong, and the third year at $40,000. The idea of the money is 
so they can go out and bring in people who will help them, or 
use it themselves to look at what they can do for the area. In 
some cases, like the one I mentioned down at Wood Mountain, 
the one of RDC of Poplar Hills, they went out and worked with 
this kaolin to develop it and bring it in. 
 
The one at Meath Park has been looking at tourism up in the 
north end of Saskatchewan. They’re looking at tourism; how 
they can develop tourism in the area, which would create jobs 
for the young people. 
 
The one at Sage Hill out here where the Dana Radar Bas is, as 
you know they’ve got a training program; they’ve been trying 
to get on stream; they got an R.M. training program. They have 
also been looking at — just in that base area alone — they’ve 
been looking at certainly, I guess you’d call it a hog industry in 
that area. 
 
So they’ve all been very active, and the one out here at 
Balcarres has been interested in two major developments of 
which they’ve been working very intensively on. 
 
I believe that that’s the way that we will get diversification out 
there in rural Saskatchewan, but I’ll send you this list over just 
for your own reference. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, am I to understand then, the 
total funding for rural development corporations does not 
actually come from your department but comes from the 
economic diversification investment fund? Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — That’s how it’s funded, the way it’s 
funded through the budget. But we’re in charge of it; we 
allocate it out. And this year, I believe, out of the budget 
already we’ve sent out something like $150,000 has already 
been . . . or in the process of being allocated out. 
 
So I just wonder, if you would like, we have a couple of the 
annual reports done up, both by . . . one by Sage Hills and one 
by Poplar Hills, in regards to what they’re doing, their planning. 
And if you are interested, I’d send you a copy of each. They’re 
public documents; they’re done up. So if you’d like, I’d send a 
copy of each over to you. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, for clarification: your 
department does not then actually fund the rural development 
corporations, the ones that you sent over, the list; there’s one, 
two, three, four, five rural development corporations. You do 
not do the funding; it’s the economic diversification investment 
fund that funds those rural development corporations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, it comes indirectly from there, but 
we do the total administration of it through the Rural 
  



 
April 20, 1988 

 

713 
 

 

Development department. So yes, we’re in charge of it; we have 
total control of it, but it comes from a fund that’s set aside. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well I was . . . I would think that it should 
appear in your estimates. I don’t understand the rationale. I’m 
not going . . . I don’t want to get into that, but I don’t know why 
that wouldn’t appear in your estimates. 
 
I think that there is a special need in rural Saskatchewan, that 
the Department of Rural Development can play a very special 
role, and I would like to see your department enhance, not to be 
the administrators for, programs under other government 
departments and agencies. 
 
Am I to understand also, Mr. Minister, that the $132,000 you 
mentioned, that’s the cap, that’s the maximum amount that a 
rural development corporation can get in funding through the 
Department of Rural Development? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Just to answer your question, the 
$132,000 is for the administration, it’s the idea for that 
municipality or those RDC’s to go out and look at what they 
can do within their municipality. It costs money to do it. If you 
want to bring a consultant in, you have to bring in somebody, a 
resource counsellor such as they did down at Poplar Hills, or 
out here at Balcarres where they’re bringing in people to look at 
a hog industry . . . one of the industries they were looking at out 
there. It costs money to bring them in, to get that kind of 
consultation. 
 
It also helps them set up an administration, so they’re all 
working together, because it takes time to bring all those people 
together. Those people . . . the one thing I want to make note of 
is that . . . anybody that’s working for or elected to an RDC, 
that’s rural development corporation, the administrative part, 
other than the administrator nobody is paid. They donate their 
time and their effort to their community. So it’s sort of a . . . It’s 
a sharing. They donate their time. We help fund the actual 
costing because there’s telephones and there’s stamps and 
there’s consultants and the other stuff that really costs money. 
We help fund that with the moneys. And the moneys . . . as I 
was saying, there’s 132,000 total, most of it paid out in the first 
three years. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — $132,000 in total, per project? Or are you 
saying $132,000 for the five rural development corporations 
that started already? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Just to answer your question, it’s for each 
RDCs in the province. If there was 50 of them, each could get a 
maximum of 132,000 over a five-year period. Right now we 
have four; we have about six more in the process of being 
organized. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — The list you sent over, Mr. Minister, has five 
on it. There’s NORDCO, Poplar Hill, Sage Hill, Pheasant 
Creek, Missouri Coteau. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — But the fifth one is not officially 
incorporated, although they’re working together and they will 
be in about a few weeks, so it’s on your list. We’re sort of 
giving you a little bit in advance. 

Mr. Anguish: — So now if each of these are eligible, the first 
four on the list are eligible for $132,000 each for developmental 
money. That’s what you’re saying, and I see the minister 
nodding his head in the affirmative. Well if all of this money, 
Mr. Minister, comes from Vote 66, item 5 on page 27 of the 
Estimates, that comes to $400,000. And in the Estimates last 
year, in ’87-88, there was nothing — no amount, no balance put 
forward. How do you — how are you going to fund these rural 
development corporations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well just so you — if you look back and 
you’ll see there was $250,000 that we had in the budget for 
rural development corporations in ’87-88. We —just so you 
understand how it works, an RDC is formed with, as you know, 
with large numbers or any numbers of municipalities; at least 
there must be four. The first year they can receive 75 per cent of 
the funding up to the provincial share of $25,000. The second 
year they can receive 75 per cent of funding up to $50,000 — 
now they can spend more, but their maximum we’ll pay is 
$50,000. And then on the third year we’ll pay 50 per cent to a 
maximum of 33,500; and on the fourth year, 25 per cent to a 
maximum of 16,700; and on the last year, we paid only 10 per 
cent to a maximum of $7,000. 
 
So it’s a sort of phase-in, phase-out to get you working, to get 
you working together, to give you administration money. It’s 
not developmental money. It’s to look at what you can do 
within your area, so it’s administration money, costing money, 
to look at your whole area so you can do some development. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Once the administrative money is in place, 
feasibility studies, research work and everything, once that’s all 
done, where does the money come from for the rural 
development corporations then to do their development work, to 
bring these projects onto stream? I think you mentioned the first 
year, the cap, the maximum was $75,000 that a RDC was 
eligible for. Where does that money come from? I don’t see that 
reflected anywhere here in the budget. 
 
And you may say that the RDCs are doing a good job, and I 
don’t doubt that some of them are. And if they are doing a good 
job, many more municipalities throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan are going to want to form RDCs. And I just don’t 
see adequate funding in the budget to make provision for other 
municipal governments to form RDCs. Where is it reflected in 
the budget? Could you point it out to me very specifically, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well where it’s reflected in the budget 
would be such things as the venture capital program that you 
can access to do a development. Certainly that has some real 
possibilities out there in rural Saskatchewan because 49 per cent 
of the capital cost part of the project can be raised through 
venture capital. 
 
There’s two different types of venture capital projects. There’s 
the one where its 40 per or — 30? — 30 per cent is returnable, 
and the other one, certainly under the labour venture capital, 
both federally and provincially. And also there’s private sector 
money, there could be R.M.’s 
  



 
April 20, 1988 

 

714 
 

 

involved, there could be your towns or villages involved. Those 
are the areas that they would access money from. 
 
And there’s different examples that you can give, but I look at 
the one at Wood Mountain where they’re working with the 
private sector developer to develop, not only a Redi-Mix plant, 
a gravel source, also they brought in, I believe, three or four 
businesses into the area. Those are all private sector business, 
and now they’re working with, as you know, a major developer 
in the way of kaolin deposit. 
 
That is what we’ll help them do. We’ll help them source the 
funds. The government does not directly fund it, although 
through venture capital, as you know, 30 per cent would be 
provincial funds. 
 
So there’s many ways of doing it. But, I guess, what we’re 
saying is the money we put up is to look at what you can do in 
your area, and then we have folks that’ll help walk through to 
help source the money, or at least show you where . . . what 
provincial or federal programs are available to do that. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well either I’m not asking the right question, 
or you’re not interpreting it accurately. 
 
There’s currently four RDCs in the province. They’re each 
eligible for up to $132,000 for administrative funding. That 
comes to a total of $528,000. There’s another one coming on to 
stream, the one that you mentioned — it’s on the list, but is not 
yet there. I would assume they would also be eligible for 
$132,000. That totals $660,000. I’m asking you: where in the 
Estimates would I find at least $660,000 to cover the 
commitment that you’ve made for expenditures to rural 
development corporations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I thought I made it 
clear that this funding for RDCs is over a five-year period. I 
read it off one at a time, how much they can . . . are allocated to 
the first year, the second year, the third year and the fourth year, 
and so on. 
 
What that means is that if an RDC is formed this year, the 
maximum that we will pay to that RDC for 1988 would be 
$25,000. If they stay in the program, continue to work next 
year, they can apply to us for up to a $50,000 one. And the third 
year, they could be eligible for a $33,500 one. 
 
Now maybe by next year, 400,000 or even 5 or 600 . . . or 
maybe even it would take $1 million — I don’t know what it 
would take. I hope we’d be so fortunate that we’d have that 
many folks working in rural Saskatchewan, working together to 
look at development and diversification. I don’t know. 
 
We’ve been working — like I said, we’ve got about 70 R.M.’s 
right now and over 100 small urban communities that are 
working with us to look at this RDC program and how it could 
help them. 
 
But just so you have it clear: the first year, the first year that 
you’re in the program, the maximum the Government of 
Saskatchewan will supply is $25,000 for each RDC in this 
province. 

Mr. Anguish: — Well I was understanding you earlier, Mr. 
Minister — and I may have misunderstood because I am 
certainly not as knowledgeable about the program as you and 
your officials are — but what I was hearing you say to me was 
that the administrative funding to get going would be 132,000. 
But that’s not accurate. They’d be eligible for a maximum of 
$132,000 over the course of five years. And I see you’re 
nodding your head in the affirmative, so I’m glad we have that 
cleared up. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to say that the concept of rural 
development corporations is one of the most progressive things 
I’ve seen your government do since 1982, and I think it’s a very 
good program in concept. I like to see provincial governments 
give some sort of general direction as to what priorities are and 
what’s acceptable to them. And it’s important that local groups, 
whether they be entrepreneurs or rural municipal councils, 
identify specifics of what they can do and get guidance from 
your department, from the provincial government. And so I’m 
very supportive of rural development corporations. 
 
The one thing I would want to do, though, is encourage you to 
lobby support from your colleagues and go back to the Minister 
of Finance and get some adequate funding for rural 
development corporations. I just don’t think that, in the light of 
what’s happening in rural Saskatchewan today, that you have 
anywhere near enough funding to do the job that should be done 
to promote and develop and assist and direct, at the request of 
rural development corporations, to give them the resources that 
they need. I just don’t think it’s there. 
 
I congratulate the four that have already come into existence 
and the one that’s about to give birth to a rural development 
corporation. But I find it strange that sometimes an emphasis of 
a government, that you can have some people come in from 
outside the province where they can be given millions of dollars 
— it seems like it’s almost an endless pot; but yet when you and 
whoever came up with the rural development corporations — I 
think it’s excellent, whether it’s you, Mr. Minister, or someone 
in your department or a consensus of minds that came to this 
point. 
 
But I think that the funding is sadly lacking when you have 
local people — and local, I mean in terms of the province — 
doing progressive types of things to help assist in their rural 
communities, and they get little funding. Yet others can come in 
from outside the province and literally get millions of dollars, 
with very little, and in some cases no input from themselves. So 
I do encourage you to go back and argue with your cabinet 
colleagues and the Minister of Finance to get increased funding. 
 
I suppose my question to you at this point is: what is the 
projection that you have in your department that if all 
municipalities in the province participated — some larger, some 
smaller, in terms of the numbers of participating rural 
municipalities — what is the figure that would be required to 
have rural development corporations spread throughout the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
  



 
April 20, 1988 

 

715 
 

 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well it’s certainly a debatable area of how 
much you would need to fund RDCs if everybody in the 
province was to go under or become part of an RDC. It depends 
. . . as you notice, the sheet I sent over to you, one only has four 
. . . one R.M. and three urban municipalities on it. The other one 
has — that’s coming in in a short while here in a few weeks — 
has six urban and six rural municipalities. And it can be any 
number. The one up at Sage Hill, I believe, started out with 
something like about 17 that we were talking with, and some 
didn’t come in because of one reason or the other; now some 
are wanting to come in. 
 
 
I guess there’s some uncertainty there. That’s why there’s X 
number of dollars put into the budgets available. I feel very 
confident that if we needed more money, if more were coming 
in, I feel very confident that we could get whatever dollars was 
necessary to bring those extra ones in. If it’s more needed, I feel 
very certain that we could go back to the Department of 
Finance, and I think it’s a very, very valid case where extra 
money should be put in, or could be put in. 
 
But what we’d say is that we estimate to be somewhere between 
12 and 20 by the year end. Now we don’t know if it’s going to 
be 12 or it’s going to be 14, and those are estimates. We do 
know there will be certainly more than four, probably 10 by at 
least towards fall, so — 
 
How many more will get organized? It takes some time. We 
have about seven people out there working with R.M.s and you 
have to show them the benefits, what they could do with it. We 
have pretty near all our development and planning branch out 
there working. The folks were there before; they took on a new 
role; they’re just doing a great job of it. I think they’re excited 
about it as some of the R.M.’s have gotten. 
 
I guess it’ll take an education process, but as time goes on, as 
they see their neighbours doing something like that, it may 
become more and more required. And if it does, if it’s more 
needed, I certainly will be looking to try and get more into the 
budget for another year. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — At this point in time, Mr. Minister, I’m 
wondering: out of the four rural development corporations that 
are in existence today, what is the ratio of cost, government 
commitment of funds, to jobs? What’s the cost-job ratio? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Are you talking staff, or are you talking 
outside of the area of staff? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I’m talking more in terms, Mr. Minister, of 
job creation. Suppose that your department has spent, on rural 
development corporations through your own department 
allocations and through the development fund, the economic 
diversification investment fund — from those sources, 
government sources, in terms of dollars that have been spent to 
jobs that have actually been created by the rural development 
corporations, what is the ratio there, what is the cost per job? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — There is only one that we have some 
breakdown of the estimate of jobs that should be created 
because of the initial steps of the RDC. As you know, the 

one out here at Balcarres, Pheasant Creek, was just organized 
here a month or so ago — the one at Sage Hill last fall, and the 
one at Poplar Hill just a little before that, Meath Park later in 
the fall. 
 
Most of them are in the planning and development stages, and I 
guess that’s what it’s all about, to take a look at what they can 
do in the area. The dollar breakdown of a per job per cost, I’m 
not sure what the benefits would be, the job ratio to dollars. I 
guess it depends on the community — how aggressive they are, 
what they can bring into their community. Those kinds of things 
would relate more directly to the dollar and job ratios than 
anything I can think of, because no matter what they do or what 
they look at, if this kaolin mine comes on, it may be just a great 
ratio because it may create a couple of hundred jobs, maybe not 
all directly in regards to the RDCs, but certainly — and 
certainly a lot of credit to them. 
 
Some other areas, where they’ve planned for their hospitals or 
their recreation or their schools, the dollar savings — to maybe 
the people of Saskatchewan, because they have planned it. 
Instead of looking for maybe two schools in the area, or two 
nursing homes in the area, they decided that one in the right 
location would be ideal for their town and their communities, 
their area. It’s certainly dollar savings on a long run to the 
people of Saskatchewan, and yet planned by the local people. 
 
So I’m not quite sure how you put a dollar figure on it, but I 
imagine in a couple of years we could give you some job-dollar 
ratios, but it’s certainly now too much in the infant stage to do 
that. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Have any of the rural development 
corporations created jobs at this point in time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — One, the one at Sage Hill, the Dana radar 
base there. This is their plans for 1988 — and I quote, only their 
plans — is that they plan to have 11 jobs created, including a 
full-time administrator, by the end of the year. And they’re 
looking at a training program, and that’s including advertising; 
they’re going to hire some students in between. I’m not sure, 
but they’re looking at 11 full-time jobs to be created in 1988; 
that’s their goal for the Sage Hill RDC. And that’s still a goal. I 
wouldn’t want to say that’s what would really happen, but that’s 
what those folks are telling us that they’ll be able to do this 
year. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well how much does it cost the Government 
of Saskatchewan to get that in place? I’m sure that you feel their 
plan is fairly sound. You have people working with them from 
the department. How much money did you have to spend to get 
Sage Hill going and to keep it in operation over the years? And 
if you divide the 11 jobs into the amount of money you’ve 
spent, that’s the figure that I’m looking for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Like we gave them last fall, we gave them 
$25,000. They’ll be eligible for another $50,000 this year. How 
they spend that $50,000, or if it’s part of what this overall plan 
is, I don’t know. But they’ve got a much broader plan. So my 
best guess is that the $25,000 that we gave to them for their 
development process, or their administration process in 
developing this was 
  



 
April 20, 1988 

 

716 
 

 

probably where it went to. Now that’s a guess. 
 
Now if they spend all the other 50,000 by next year at this time 
and don’t create any additional jobs, plus this 11, that will be 
$75,000. But I don’t know what the job-per-dollar ratio would 
be, because I’m not sure what other they will create. Because 
they haven’t even only had . . . the $25,000 hasn’t even been a 
full year yet. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Anguish: — To me that sounds excellent. You know, 
you’ve got to base it on what you’ve got right now and try and 
do some projection into the future. I would sure hope that 
somebody in your department is doing projections so that 
you’ve got meat when you go to cabinet to argue for money for 
rural development corporations. 
 
Because if you’re creating 11 jobs, and all you’ve given them 
so far is $25,000 — and if you hadn’t given them any money 
and hadn’t started rural development corporations, those 11 jobs 
wouldn’t be there —it seems to me that the ratio would be 
somewhere around $2,500 per job. 
 
Now I don’t know of any other program that your government 
has touched, since coming into office in 1982, where you’re 
creating jobs at $2,500 a job for outlay of money from the 
government. I know of some incentives under the industrial 
incentive program — wasn’t it $7,500 a job you had to put out? 
And then there was additional funding beyond that. 
 
The Shand-Rafferty project, I think it’s in the . . . If you look at 
permanent jobs, Mr. Minister, created, you’re looking at 
millions of dollars per job created, not 2,500 or less per job 
created. So I think you’d be well-advised to have your officials 
do some projections on the cost per job created. 
 
And any time that you can swing a deal like that, and if this 
takes off and provides people with some respectable 
development in various areas across the province, I’d have to 
congratulate you again next year when we stand before 
estimates. 
 
But I certainly couldn’t congratulate many of the other 
programs that have been in development or creation of jobs in 
the province of Saskatchewan because they’ve been very, very 
costly to us. And that’s part of the reason we’re almost $4 
billion in debt after we’re done debating the Estimates and 
having our little dialogue back and forth here today . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Did the member from Swift Current 
want to participate? Did you have a question to ask the 
minister? 
 
An Hon. Member: — It would be a lot better than what you’re 
saying. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I beg your pardon? Yes, well the member 
from Swift Current knows that in Energy . . . what’s the target 
for yours? Is it in the billions per job? 
 
See, it’s really hard to compliment you, Mr. Minister, as a 
government on doing anything, because there’s always 

some member over there chirping negative stuff coming out. 
Never seen a more negative bunch in my whole life . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, there’s the member from 
Wascana, was it? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Regina Wascana. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Regina Wascana. The cost per job for you is 
far too much. The taxpayers pay far too much to the member 
from Regina Wascana. They’d better re-evaluate their position 
come next election up there. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. The item under discussion is 
Rural Development, so perhaps we could stick with that. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — If the Mr. Chairman, in all due respect, if 
you’d keep the members from entering into conversation with 
me, I’d be able to stay on the topic. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. I think the Chair is well 
capable of deciding whether or not members are out of order, 
and a little bit of talk back and forth is very, very common in 
this House. So I would just ask you to continue on with your 
discussion with the Minister of Rural Development, please. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Could you maybe turn on all the microphones 
so we can all participate in the debate here? 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to turn to ferry services in the province. It 
used to be there was a continual increase, to a certain point, of 
funding ferry services in the province, and I believe that at one 
point in time there was as many as 44 employees. And when the 
cuts started coming in ’84-85, the drop has been quite dramatic. 
 
This year in the Estimates you’re looking at a staffing 
component of twenty-six and a half person-years. That’s down 
from 44.3, a reduction since 1982-83, your first year of office, a 
reduction of some 17.8 person-years. And I’m wondering if you 
could tell me how this change came about? Have you closed a 
number of ferries in the province? You no longer need these 
employees, or are your employees working longer hours to 
provide the same services? 
 
How do you still provide the same level of service to people 
who rely on ferry crossings in the province by reducing, in your 
term of office as government, 17.8 person-years of employment 
in that particular branch of your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — In regards to the number of ferries, as the 
member is aware, last year there was one closed, the one at 
Birch Hills. That is the only ferry this year. The same number 
operating as there was last year. 
 
The number of positions. There was some folks on 
maintenance, and others . . . I don’t know about maintenance, 
but on general supervision, both within the department here and 
out in the field, who took early retirement. They weren’t 
replaced; we’re working or looking after it from . . . there’s still 
two people, I believe, left looking after ferry services. Is that 
correct, or one? No, I’m sorry; I take it back. There’s none in 
the field. They’re 
  



 
April 20, 1988 

 

717 
 

 

working directly out of the department here and responsible for 
ferry services. 
 
All the folks that’s been running the ferries are still operating 
them, that didn’t take early retirement, and I assume there’s 
probably been some part-time replacement or whatever, but . . . 
just the number of people that’s running it now. They’re still 
running the same hours that they’ve always run, but the one 
ferry . . . well there’s actually two ferries, one at Lloydminster 
where the bridge went in has been . . . it’s certainly not needed 
any more, and the one at Birch Hills. So it’s really been two 
ferries over the last three years that has been not in operation. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well how many jobs were attached to those 
two locations, Mr. Minister, the Birch Hills and Lloydminster? 
How many people would be displaced by the closure of those 
two crossings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — The one at Lloydminster, as you know, 
the bridge was put in there, and those people were allocated into 
other positions that were empty, and other ferry services 
around, so they continue to work unless they took an early 
retirement sum, or took a retirement package. 
 
I believe there was a total of about 4.5 positions — as you know 
that, 0.5 means there’s two or three spare people that work on 
there, part-time folks that work there — but those would be the 
number of positions that would have been not working because 
of the one at Birch Hills not operating and the ferry at 
Lloydminster being replaced by a bridge. So, you know, that 
would be the number of people we’d be dealing with. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — 4.5 in each of those locations, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — That 4.5 was between the two ferries. To 
make up the rest of it, there was a couple supervisors who took 
that early retirement package and they weren’t replaced. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — 4.5 between the two? With the two closures, 
that’s a total of 4.5 positions. Is that what you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Five person-years. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — So you have approximately, since 1982, 
’82-83 fiscal year where you had 44.3 person-years of 
employment in that particular branch, until these estimates 
we’re dealing with now in 1988-89, still to account for 13.3 
person-years. Now I don’t understand how the branch could 
operate as effectively when there’s still 13.3 person-years that 
haven’t been accounted for. You’ve accounted for 4.5 
person-years with the closure of the two crossings, but there’s 
still 13.3 person-years. And can you give me some kind of an 
accounting of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Just so the member understands where all 
the numbers come from, from 1982 till now, I think I told him 
4.5 person-years was the operation of the ferries. Two of those 
person-years was early retirement in 1986, I believe it was, and 
one was an early retirement 

just, I believe, in ’82 or ’83. It was a normal retirement for one 
of the supervisors in the department. There also was a 
maintenance crew. That’s now done through the local folks in 
the area, the private sector, so they have been doing the 
maintenance out there for the last few years. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — So then in terms of maintenance, the way I 
read it, there’s a 10.3 person-years lost to the branch between 
’82-83 and ’88-89, this current year, that were in maintenance 
previously. Is that correct? There’d be 10.3 person-years that 
have gone from the branch’s maintenance section over to 
private contractors in the local areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — We’re not sure. We’d have to go back and 
look in ’82 what was the number of folks on the maintenance 
crew, but they seem to think it was around about five people on 
there, person-years on there. You know, we could go back and 
check for it; we don’t have it with us. But the total amount — 
just so we know what we’re dealing with — the total amount, 
like I said, was three have taken early retirement, one in ’82, a 
couple in ’86. There has been 4.5 person-years in reduction 
because of the closure at Birch Hills and the closure in the 
bridge at Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — The numbers still don’t add up, but if you 
don’t have those figures with you, we won’t pursue that. I 
wonder if the minister can tell us the cost effectiveness of 
having done away with the maintenance within the branch to 
having it done by private contractors in the area where the ferry 
crossing are operating. What’s the difference in terms of what 
you’ve had to allocate? What’s the pay-out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — The difference is, the department staff tell 
me, the difference between what it was costing us before and 
what it cost through using the local people in the area to do the 
maintenance is about $90,000 a year. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — What does the $90,000 a year represent — the 
cost savings to the branch? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — A lot of that cost would be because there 
was a crew and they travelled around the province. There was 
the cost of not only moving the trailer, but the cost of travelling, 
the cost of rooms, the general costs of coming back to the city 
on the weekends, and those were all extra costs. 
 
When it’s done locally, it’s almost totally done within the area. 
There’s always somebody there that can fix it, and it’s just . . . 
the local people are getting the work instead of somebody 
coming and travelling around the province. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I understand and appreciate that, and I don’t 
disagree with the reasons that you’re giving, anyway. 
 
What I’m asking is: the $90,000, what is the $90,000 you 
mentioned to me? Is that the cost before when you had five 
people on maintenance travelling around doing the 
maintenance, or is 90,000 the savings, or is 90,000 what it costs 
you now? What I want to determine is: did it cost you more 
money before, or does it cost you more money now, or does it 
cost the same thing, between having 
  



 
April 20, 1988 

 

718 
 

 

permanent people who are qualified to do it or contracting it 
out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — It’s a saving of $90,000 per year by doing 
it the way we’re doing it now, letting the local people in the 
local area do the repair work on it. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Anguish: — What happened to the five or so people within 
the maintenance branch? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — A couple of them are working yet as 
operators on ferries within the province for the Government of 
Saskatchewan. I understand one or two went to Highways, and 
I’m not sure where the other person went, whether . . . in a 
department or not. They were all offered jobs within the 
department if they wanted, other departments if they wanted to 
take it, or on the ferries. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I’m assuming that a large part of your budget 
in that particular branch has to do with staffing. In light of the 
fact that you’ve almost cut the staffing in half, your budget is 
still two-thirds of what it was five years ago. What does this 
reflect? Is it higher wages that are being paid, or is it increased 
operating costs, or stabilized operating costs, and it’s a true 
reflection of the wages that were one-third of the overall 
budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — A lot of the costs would be fixed, like 
cables that have to be replaced on an almost biannual, or 
biannual basis. A lot of it would be the general operating costs, 
the upkeep of a ferry. It costs some anyway, regardless of how 
you look at it. 
 
The number of employees . . . There has been some wage 
increases, as you know, through SGEU (Saskatchewan 
Government Employees’ Union) — I believe it’s SGEU union 
that’s there. There has been some wage increases, and whatever 
they are they’re certainly public knowledge. 
 
Just the general . . . but mainly the general operating costs. 
Costs have went up somewhat, and no matter whether it’s a can 
of paint or what, it still costs a little bit more than it used to. 
And the general operating costs — cables, replacement of 
motors, whatever has to be done — they’re done regardless of 
how many folks are working there. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I imagine your major capital expenditure, if 
you were to make one, would be the purchase of a new ferry, or 
a fleet of ferries, if you want to call them that. 
 
In this period of time from 1982 till the present fiscal year, have 
you made any major capital expenditures? And if not, when do 
you plan in the future to replace some of the fleet that you have 
out there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — What we’ve been doing is . . . I 
understand a ferry is made basically of steel and if it’s looked 
after properly they do last a great length of time, except for such 
things as cables and motors. 

We have been sand-blasting the inside of them, repainting them, 
so that we don’t get no corrosion. Our belief is they will last a 
long time, as long as they’re looked after properly, and because 
of the nature of them. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I’d like to move now to your road services 
branch. 
 
The road services branch, I understand, provides engineering 
supervisory services to the district engineers and municipalities 
for all road programs. And the road services branch has been 
cut significantly in recent years. And again I would look at the 
staffing. The staffing has dropped from ’83-84 fiscal year till 
the current fiscal year by some 16 person-years of employment, 
and the budget has been reduced, the overall budget, by some 
$1.2 million since 1983. 
 
And the provincial highway system is clearly not a priority and 
now it appears to us that neither are the grid roads or the farm 
access roads in the province of Saskatchewan. And could you 
explain to us this dramatic decrease you mentioned a while ago 
about the regravelling program and things like that? But 
certainly the road services branch has had some pretty dramatic 
cuts that I can’t justify in my own mind as I could for the ferry 
services branch. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well I was just asking the department 
staff here. They — two things I guess that I should make note 
of. One is that last year there was . . . three of these positions 
you’re talking about were in head office over here, in the Walter 
Scott Building, and they weren’t replaced, they were just — 
people were just reallocated to look after that. 
 
Out in rural Saskatchewan, there were some retirements out 
there, as you’re well aware. What we did with the engineers that 
were still with — stayed with the department, they were 
reallocated around the province to give the supervision service 
that’s needed. 
 
And what an engineer does out there is that he — his job is to 
go out, as you know, and to make sure that the road is at least 
built to the standard. He doesn’t design that road. He doesn’t — 
he’s not there while it’s being built, he just checks it afterwards 
to be sure it’s built to the standards so when we pay the 
conditional funding it’s paid for — we get a dollar’s worth of 
work for a dollar, I guess. 
 
Most R.M.’s, and I think just about totally every R.M., are 
really responsible. If you are a councillor or reeve in your area 
and you have a road being built, I don’t care by what contractor 
in this province, and that’s your road by your place, I’ll tell you, 
that’s better supervised than we’ll ever, ever get it from 
anybody we sent out from Regina. 
 
It’s a double-check system, just to be sure that a low — because 
some of those councillors are not engineers and there may be 
something that’s not right up to standard, we draw it to their 
attention, make sure it is before they make the final payments. 
 
So it’s more or less a final supervision of the road. It always has 
been. And I think it’s working really well. I suppose it’s always 
room — you could say that we could 
  



 
April 20, 1988 

 

719 
 

 

use more often out there, but I think most R.M.’s were quite 
satisfied. 
 
The only area that there’s been any major changes is in the 
pavement supervision. The engineering work is now done by 
consulting engineers for anybody laying pavement within the 
R.M. There’s very little of that being done, I’ll tell you. 
 
And there’s a reason for it — two reasons: one is that they do 
have the qualifications to do it, maybe even better, or certainly 
do it right; and the second one is that it helps the small town 
where they need somebody to come in and be able to supervise 
paving in town. 
 
There was really none of that expertise in the province that will 
help develop that over the years so there’s . . . It can be a benefit 
to both urban and rural, especially small urban, maybe not large 
urban, but small urban communities. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Why is the member from Canora on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I would beg leave 
to introduce some visitors. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — Thank you very much., Mr. Deputy 
Chairman. It is my pleasure to introduce approximately 52 
students, exchange students, I might add, from the Preeceville 
High School from Preeceville, Saskatchewan, as well as from 
Berthierville, Quebec. 
 
If I remember correctly, I believe the Preeceville students have 
been to Quebec and now the Quebec students are repaying their 
visit to Preeceville. I think they arrived last week, and I know 
they were entertained at a banquet in Preeceville, Saturday. 
 
They are accompanied by Marcel Lapolice and Wilfrid Lanoix, 
as well as . . . and that’s from Berthierville; as well as Ivy 
Krauss and Sheila Ivanochko from Preeceville. And they are 
also accompanied by their bus drivers, Dale Goodsman and 
Neil Fenske. 
 
I understand that, as part of their tour of this legislature, half the 
students took their tour in French and the other half took it in 
English, and that is something different for a tour. 
 
I would wish them a safe journey home. I hope they’ve had a 
pleasant visit to Regina. Your visit to the legislature I hope has 
been educational to you, to all the students. I would tell you that 
I will be joining you in a few minutes for pictures and drinks, 
and at that time we will . . . I will I hope have a chance to 
personally meet each and every one of you. 
 
Would all the legislature please join with me in welcoming 
these students. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Monsieur le Président, permettez-moi à 
dire quelque môts à nos visiteur de la belle province, s’il vous 
plait? C’est un plaisir pour moi de vous accueillir ici 
aujourd’hui. An nom du gouvernement nous espèrons que vous 
allez enjouir de votre visite à Regina et à la législature. 
Bienvenue et bonne chance. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I, too, would like to welcome the students 
from Canora and from Quebec. Je ne parle pas francais, 
excuser. I’ll continue in English. 
 
What we’re doing in the legislature this afternoon is a process 
called estimates. We’re in Committee of Finance, and each year 
the government brings in a budget as to how they plan on 
spending taxpayers’ dollars over the coming fiscal year, in the 
1988-89 fiscal year. Today we’re examining the Department of 
Rural Development. I’m the critic in the opposition for the 
Department of Rural Development, and the member opposite is 
the minister in charge of Rural Development. He has some 
officials with him today that assist in answering technical 
questions about the budgetary process within the department. 
We hope you enjoy what happens here, but especially to the 
students from Quebec, your visit to Saskatchewan, and we wish 
you well here. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Rural Development 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 43 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, what I heard you saying was 
that basically the road services branch has a role of quality 
control. Is that the sole purpose of the road services branch? 
And in addition to whether or not the quality control is the sole 
role of the road services branch, I’d like to say that even though 
those people sitting in rural Saskatchewan watch that road being 
built past their property, have a great interest in making sure 
that it’s constructed properly because it’s their lifeline to the 
rest of the province. It’s also their tax dollars that are going into 
the construction of the road. They certainly don’t know, in fact 
in most cases, I don’t think would go out and do compaction 
tests or anything to the design of the road to have that expertise. 
And I think that even if it is the sole role to be quality control of 
the road services branch, we need that quality control 
throughout the province because the interest may be there by 
those that observe the roads being built past their property, but I 
don’t think in many cases would have the expertise to make 
sure the quality control was in place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — They do play a larger role than just going 
out and supervising to make sure the road is built to the 
standards required. They give technical advice, especially 
during the winter months, to R.M.’s in regard to how a road . . . 
or what’s required in an area, and how a road should be or how 
it could be designed or how it 
  



 
April 20, 1988 

 

720 
 

 

should be tendered. They also help them with the tendering 
process, and most of that’s done during the winter months when 
they can’t be out there, or very little they can do on the roads 
themselves. 
 
They also do road alignments; in other words, they’ll do the 
initial straight-lining or field-work or whatever you want to call 
it, in regards to the road-bed itself. 
 
And they also help them with initial planning. In other words, 
when you’re designing a road and where it’s going, they’ll sit 
down with the R.M.’s — mostly during the winter months when 
it’s fairly slack for them, they’ll go out there and they’ll talk to 
all the R.M.’s in the area, talking about what roads you’re going 
to build, where it’s going to, how it interconnects with other 
municipalities, the type of roads needed, and the tendering 
process you should go through, and what to expect in a tender 
and what kind of prices. They’ll even have a forecast of the, you 
know, the best guess of what price range should be in when 
you’re doing your planning, because you’ve got to plan . . . You 
usually plan your roads in the winter-time, and then you do 
your budget in the spring so you have your money for the 
summer. 
 
So those are the kind of things they do. So they do much more 
than just going out to check to see if the road is constructed. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Could the minister tell us at what locations 
within the province there would be employees of the road 
services branch that give technical advice and the other list of 
responsibilities that you’ve listed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — They would be in Weyburn — of course 
in Regina here —Swift Current, North Battleford, Saskatoon, 
Prince Albert, and Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, something that I’d like to turn 
to that doesn’t have, I suppose, a direct role of your department, 
but I’m sure you’re interested in, is the closure of customs 
offices. There have been a number of customs offices 
announced for closure, and I’m wondering what consultation, if 
any, the federal Department of Revenue has had with you or 
your officials in terms of wanting to close border crossings or 
customs offices on the 49th parallel? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — With the department, certainly, there 
hasn’t been any I’m told. Most of that would be done through 
intergovernmental affairs, and I haven’t been involved with 
discussions in regards to border closings. In fact, I haven’t even 
had a letter or a request or a concern addressed to me in regards 
to it. 
 
That don’t mean to say that maybe there shouldn’t be some 
more interest shown in it, but to be honest with you, I’ve had no 
consultation and no discussion in regards to border closing with 
either intergovernmental affairs, or with anybody from the area 
down there, or any resident of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Does your department have a role to play, if 
there was some consultations? You mentioned 

intergovernmental affairs would deal with that because of the 
relationship between the provincial government and the federal 
government, but I would hope that at least there would be an 
interest in your department, as the Minister of Rural 
Development, that things like that that happen that have impact 
on rural Saskatchewan, there be consultation with you. 
 
Certainly, if a border crossing closes, it’s going to have a great 
effect on traffic flow in those areas, and therefore an effect on 
the rural communities along that route, as tourists or business 
people or truckers, or whoever, are coming across the border. 
And if there has been no consultation going to you, I would ask 
that: would you or your officials check with intergovernmental 
affairs so that you apprise them that you are concerned and 
would like to have some consultation with intergovernmental 
affairs and the federal government when such a forum presents 
itself. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well certainly, if there’s a closure of a 
border, which certainly would affect the rural residents, and 
especially the people of Saskatchewan, the tourism end of it, the 
access to our trade in the United States is certainly very, very 
important. I’m sure intergovernmental affairs and myself, too, 
would be . . . I would hope to be involved in the consultation, 
and certainly in discussion in regards to maintaining of our 
border openings. 
 
I understand. I was asking one of my colleagues here and he 
said there has been some discussion about one of the borders, 
but I’m certainly not aware of it, but I will take a look into it to 
see what’s being discussed. But like I said, I’ve had no requests 
from anybody in Saskatchewan in regards to . . . or any 
concerns addressed to me in regards to that, but I certainly will 
take a look at it. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I appreciate that, Mr. Minister. I’d like to turn 
to the subject of post offices. There’s been great concern from 
the Canadian Postmasters and Assistants Association. There’s 
been great concern from people in rural areas who have either 
had their post offices closed or their mail delivery altered in 
some way. There’s been great concern from people who no 
longer receive the service that they had grown to expect from 
the post office. Many people, as I’m sure you’re aware, coming 
from rural Saskatchewan, that when your elevators start to go 
and your post office goes, it’s not very long before the 
community suffers drastic changes in the way of life that they 
have known over past years. 
 
Many provincial governments, Mr. Minister, have — I 
shouldn’t say many — I should say, actually, a few would be 
more accurate — have passed resolutions asking the federal 
government not to proceed with some of the rationalization over 
their five- or ten-year plan, there are very few post offices they 
don’t look at in terms of the possible closure of that particular 
postal outlet. In fact, if you looked at all of the south-east corner 
of Saskatchewan, there’d only likely be the communities of 
Moosomin and Estevan and Weyburn that aren’t up for some 
kind of review over the projected plan of Canada Post. 
  



 
April 20, 1988 

 

721 
 

 

In the resolution, Mr. Minister, that was passed by the Alberta 
legislature, in the province of Alberta, was — and I’ll read it to 
you: 
 

Be it resolved that the Legislative Assembly is of the 
opinion that post offices provide valuable services to rural 
Albertans, and is therefore concerned about the negative 
social and economic effects caused by the negative social 
and economic effects caused by the closing of post offices 
in many rural communities across Alberta. 

 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: would you join with all 
members of the House in putting forward a resolution such as 
this for transmittal to the federal government, and on to Canada 
Post, expressing our grave concern about the changes in postal 
delivery and postal services in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well if the member would send me over a 
copy or we could get a copy of that resolution, I’d certainly — I 
certainly entertain, you know, talking with you, about it and 
seeing what it says, and I’d have no trouble. If it says exactly 
what you read, I certainly don’t think there’d be any trouble 
with that. 
 
I just want to make mention that in December our department 
met with the regional . . . the director of regional . . . the 
director responsible for rural post offices from Ottawa — and 
we haven’t got his name with us — and also the regional 
director in Saskatchewan, and we were given the assurance at 
that time that there would be no closures, direct closures of post 
offices. 
 
There may be some changes . . . I shouldn’t say direct closures 
of post offices; there’d be no closures of post offices within a 
community, but there may be changes. So in other words, some 
may go to some retail outlet to handle the post office outlet. 
 
That was the . . . They’ve given us the assurance there will 
always be, at least, accessible post office services to the 
community, of all the communities that’s receiving it now. So 
they give us that assurance, and I would hope they would 
certainly live by it. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, I’m not sure that Canada Post 
. . . I believe you’re referring to the officials from Canada Post 
that you had met with in terms of closures. I have a list here 
done very recently. It’s effective April 12 of 1988 of the current 
year, and there’s a long list of post office closures. 
 
And I don’t want to consume the time of the House here today, 
but it looks to me that there’s one, two, three, three and a half 
pages of post offices that are either closed or have been 
announced that they’ll be closing in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I would assume that there must be about 25 
or so per page. So you’re looking at somewhere between 75 and 
100 post offices that have closed in the province of 
Saskatchewan as of . . . pardon me, closed or announced for 
closure as of April 12 of this year. 
 
And I’ve mentioned earlier in the estimates that the face of rural 
Saskatchewan is changing quite dramatically, and many people 
feel that those changes are not for the better, 

that they see the way of life that they have come to expect over 
a number of years, a number of generations in the province, 
changing to something that they are uncomfortable with that 
they don’t necessarily like. And I think we’re well-advised to 
preserve rural Saskatchewan; we’re well-advised to make sure 
that there is a repopulation, in fact, and not a depopulation of 
our rural base in this great province. 
 
So what the people from Canada Post are telling you are 
certainly contrary to the facts. And I don’t know whether you 
have a list of these post offices or not, but I would be more than 
happy to provide you with a list of the post offices that have 
closed or have been announced for closure, and I would also 
provide you with a copy of the resolution I have from the 
province of Alberta, their legislature, which gives some protest 
to the closure of rural post offices. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, when I put this information together with you, 
I would like you to give us your undertaking today that you in 
fact will support myself, or myself support you, in forwarding a 
resolution that would hopefully pass with unanimous consent of 
this legislature, protesting the closures in our fine province, and 
that that be transmitted to Canada Post and to your colleagues in 
the federal government. I ask you to please give us that 
undertaking here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well I would appreciate very much if you 
would send over that resolution, as well as that list. I don’t have 
that list, but when I was talking to my officials here — and I’m 
not sure if that’s closures or a change of method of delivery of 
postal services to the community. My understanding was there 
would be changes of method of delivery in the community, such 
things as a store maybe having the post office service or 
something, but they weren’t going to take any service away 
from rural Saskatchewan without certainly notifying us, and we 
haven’t had any notification at all of any being taken away. 
There may be a change in method of delivery, and that may be 
true, and it may well be part of what you’re talking about there, 
I’m not quite sure. 
 
I would appreciate very much if you could send that list over 
and I would certainly look at it. And as far as the resolution 
goes, I would like to read it. I’m certainly prepared to sit down 
and talk to my House Leader about a resolution — if that’s the 
same as the one we got there — and talk to yourself as well or 
your . . . the opposition, in regards to forming a resolution that 
would be adequate to send to the federal government in regards 
to maintaining a rural post office service out there. Because I, 
like you, believe that we do need a service out there. 
 
It has, over the years, as you know . . . when I grew up back on 
my little . . . on the farm way up in the bush up there, where we 
had a post office every three or four miles, and now in my area 
the only post office is Hudson Bay. You drive at least 25 miles 
or 30 miles any direction before you can find any post office. 
And I’m sure you’re familiar with it, coming from up in the 
North part there. 
 
It has changed dramatically, but there are some limitations as to 
how far it should go. And, I like you — I’d like to look at it, 
and I’m certainly prepared to talk with 
  



 
April 20, 1988 

 

722 
 

 

you and the opposition in regards to a resolution. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Just before we leave this topic, I would point 
out that in some cases I think Canada Post is misleading you in 
that they will close down the location, where they haven’t 
leased it out to private sector, that there’s no longer a 
postmaster or postmistress working in that particular 
community. But yet someone who writes a letter to someone in 
that community can send it to say, Aylesbury, use the 
Aylesbury postal code yet, but the mail never gets to Aylesbury. 
In this case, of that community, it would go to Chamberlain. So 
whoever is writing to you would feel that, well, there’s still a 
post office there — a post office presence of some kind. There 
must be some way there for them to get that, but it’s not true. 
 
What you get there is a community where the people that live 
there, there is no presence of a post office, and although it’s 
addressed to Aylesbury with that postal code —they would 
have to go into Chamberlain to pick up their mail. And there’s a 
list of those as well, and I will provide those to you. 
 
I want to turn over to my colleague from Regina Victoria for a 
few moments. He has a few questions to ask you. And I’d like 
to come back on; I have some other questions for you, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, for some months now your colleague, the Minister of 
Urban Affairs, has been making statements about doing away 
with the ward system in some of our cities. My question to you 
is: are you also planning to do away with the ward system in 
rural municipalities, or the division system, as he is now 
planning to do in our cities? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — The answer is no. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you might 
enunciate for the House, in your opinion, what you view to be 
some of the positive characteristics of the ward system and 
explain your answer a little bit more fully. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t have a ward 
system anyway. When I answered the member’s question a 
moment ago, I said no to the ward system. We have what we 
call a division system, which I’m sure there’s some similarity to 
it. 
 
In rural Saskatchewan, where the division system is in, or the 
councillor is in, the reeve is over the whole municipality. Some 
municipalities like the R.M. of Hudson Bay has 115 townships. 
They would travel in the neighbourhood of 50 or 60 miles if 
you didn’t have some area to look after. It would be a little 
different than . . . I’m sure if he’s referring to the ward system 
— the two major cities, and Prince Albert as well — you know 
the distance around the city is much different than the distance 
in rural Saskatchewan. One township in rural Saskatchewan — 
and there’s no municipalities, or very few, less than nine 
townships — is much larger than the city of Regina, so that 
distance is always a major factor out there. 
 
Certainly the rural councils like that, they have a total of 

some . . . most cases they have six councillors, and it can vary. I 
think the main reason they have it that way is for somebody . . . 
two reasons: one, there’s somebody in the area that would be 
familiar with the roads and the bridges, wash-outs in the spring, 
and those kinds of things that they have to deal with; second, 
great distances to travel from one end of the municipality to the 
other. Like in the R.M. of Hudson Bay, it would be at least 130 
miles from one end to the other — too far to ask somebody to 
be a supervisor or do any kind of work in that way. So that’s 
probably one of the large R.M.s, but no R.M.s are very . . . that 
I’m aware of, is much less than 18 miles in any one direction, 
so it could be a long travelling distance there and back. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I agree with you, Mr. Minister, that it’s 
not a ward system; it is a division system. Although where you 
say that there are some similarities, I would say that there are 
great similarities and that the division system in R.M.s is 
identical to the ward system that we have in our large cities and 
serve the same purpose. 
 
You talk about distances. Am I to assume from your remarks 
then that the ward system in rural municipalities is there 
because it’s of greater convenience to the voters, or is it there as 
a convenience to the councillors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well it’s a convenience to both, I’m sure. 
The division system in rural Saskatchewan is based on land 
mass. It’s the size that you have to deal with. Most councillors 
in an R.M. would have anywheres from 18 miles, 16 . . . no, I 
guess about 12, 16 miles one way or the other, to deal with, and 
it could vary. So they would have a mass to deal with, an area 
to deal with. I don’t know how that would compare to the urban 
centres because urbans are very concentrated and more by 
population than by acres or miles or whatever else. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I might have some disagreements with 
you on that point, Mr. Minister. I’ve lived in a city for many 
years and I know that, contrary to the opinion that you hold, it 
does take more than five minutes to get from point A to point B 
sometimes in the city. If you’re right next door, then it takes 
that amount of time. But you’re not travelling at 100 kilometres 
an hour; you’re travelling many times at much less speed than 
that, and it can take you some time to get around in a large 
urban area. 
 
So that what you’re suggesting in terms of cities, to say that if 
there’s an at-large system here that there’s no time involved for 
a member of a city council to get from one part of the city to 
another part of the city to check out a problem, yes, the problem 
may be somewhat more severe in rural municipalities, given the 
distance. But it is a consideration in a city as large as Regina 
and, I would submit, Saskatoon. 
 
You mentioned earlier that knowledge of local conditions was 
an important consideration in maintaining the division system 
in rural municipalities, and I wonder if you might expand on 
that point, just what you mean by knowledge of local conditions 
and why that’s an important ingredient in the division system. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, you know, it’s always hard 
to define the benefits of a division, but one of the 
  



 
April 20, 1988 

 

723 
 

 

areas that certainly a division councillor has to deal with — and 
I can speak more from the North where I come from where we 
have not limited . . . we have very unlimited access in a lot of 
cases. We have rivers, we have creeks, we have muskegs to deal 
with, we have . . . it isn’t accessible. Sometimes we may well 
drive 20 miles to get one mile because it’s just not accessible. 
 
The R.M. of Torch River is certainly a good example in the 
North there where the river runs through, and if you have to . . . 
you may drive 30 miles to get across on a bridge, or 20 miles. I 
mean those are the kinds of things that councillors have to deal 
with. It may be just across the river or across the creek or over 
the hill, but they’re not that accessible. Where you have an 
urban one — I’m trying to relate it to the urban one —where it 
is accessible, certainly, and like you say, it does take some time 
to go from one side of a town or a city to another. But in rural 
Saskatchewan all their work is related to the roads, basically to 
the roads, and to the bridges, and to the access for farmers to 
that. And that’s what they deal with. They actually do. 
 
A councillor actually does the observation, and in a lot of cases 
he’s actually the person out there putting up the signs. Yes, he 
does that. 
 
He also, when they’re building a road, he’s the one doing all the 
observation in regards to how it’s being built. Many roads 
aren’t built under capital funding and he’ll be out there actually 
doing . . . actually he’s the construction foreman; he’s right out 
there all the time. 
 
It’s different than in a city; it’s different than in a town. I think 
of a town where they . . . an alderman or a councillor in a 
smaller town does not do any of that kind of work. He’s more 
just . . . goes by to see how it’s going or what’s needed, and 
they have crews to do it. Most councillors are the crews in 
themselves. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — But again you say that knowledge of 
local conditions, that is to say, to know where the bridges are, to 
know the conditions of those bridges, to know where the roads 
are, to know the conditions of those roads are important. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister . . . I accept what you say that 
R.M. councillors may take on some immediate responsibilities 
if they see problems just give the nature of the resources that 
R.M.’s have. 
 
But I’m wondering like, if knowledge of local conditions is that 
important, why you would not think that it’s any less important 
for say, an alderman in a city — who may not have bridges to 
worry about, but may be concerned — receives calls to go 
check out complaints about sewers and sidewalks and roads and 
garbage pick-up. And also a knowledge of local conditions is 
very helpful in those cases because a city is not a homogeneous 
whole, and different conditions will prevail in different parts of 
a city so, therefore, a knowledge of local conditions is also 
important. 
 
I’m wondering why you would take the position that, although 
this is an important thing in rural municipalities, it’s not 
necessarily an important thing in some of our 

larger cities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I’ve taken the position that the division 
system within rural Saskatchewan has worked. It’s all over the 
province, the same all over the province, there’s no difference. 
 
It don’t matter if you go in the R.M. of Hudson Bay or the R.M. 
of Meota, or wherever you go it’s the same, it’s exactly the 
same system all across. It’s worked since it’s been brought into 
existence. 
 
I suppose the reasons that I gave you that it’s there is certainly 
based on land, the areas they have to travel. It is designed, and 
certainly where you have a farming industry, it’s as much . . . I 
suppose to be fair about it, it’s as much related to whether you 
have an urban or rural, the jobs are totally different, the 
responsibilities are probably totally different. The relationship 
to what an urban councillor or alderman would do compared to 
what a rural councillor would do, are not in any way 
comparable. They’re totally, totally different, and you’d have to 
be a reeve or a councillor out there to know what the 
responsibilities are. And I know you’ve been an alderman in the 
city and you know what that is, but if you haven’t been out in 
rural Saskatchewan, it’s a different— 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s a different world. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — It’s a different world altogether. That’s 
exactly what I was looking for. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I agree with you that it’s a different 
world, Mr. Minister, but I don’t think that there is any 
differences that, when it comes to a knowledge of local 
conditions that . . . again, cities are not a homogeneous mass, 
that there are local conditions within a city, and that to serve 
people a knowledge of those local conditions is many times 
very important if you want to serve the people and if you want 
to give the people good service. 
 
Can I just ask you, Mr. Minister, do you perceive there to be, or 
do you think there are any negative characteristics to the current 
division system in our rural municipalities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Certainly, there’s some down sides to the 
division system. I don’t think anybody would say there wasn’t 
any down sides to it. One that comes to mind, as a former reeve 
of an R.M., is that you always had one councillor who was 
maybe more vocal, more strong-willed than others, and they’ll 
have the tendency to probably get more into their little district 
than maybe the other councillor would get. And if the reeve or 
somebody at the top doesn’t say, hey wait a minute, that isn’t 
the way it works, you’ve got to look at all the R.M. and see 
what’s needed across the R.M. and work it out that way; you 
can find one division, and if you’ve been out in rural 
Saskatchewan you know that’s true — there’s some councils 
who over the years have had a very strong-willed councillor 
whose roads are just probably the best there is, and another 
councillor in another area doesn’t have quite as good a roads. 
 
So, I suppose there is some down sides. But, you now, the R.M. 
councils like it the way it is. There’s lots of up 
  



 
April 20, 1988 

 

724 
 

 

sides to it because of the mileage that you have to travel. So you 
take the good with the bad, I guess, and have a division system. 
But certainly one of the down sides to a division system is not 
representing the whole area, if you’re just representing your 
division. 
 
Now most councillors have broadened their thinking and are 
looking at the whole concept of what’s within an R.M., but 
there’s always a few that don’t. And that has been and will 
always be a bit of a problem out there. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well this little bit of a problem, or the 
few that in your opinion don’t have the broad interests of an 
R.M. at heart, those few to your mind is not sufficient reason 
then to change the system in our rural municipalities from a 
division system to an at-large system. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, first of all, I said there was, you 
know, it’s been, it’s an over-system . . . it’s a system all across 
the province, first of all, and it’s the same system for every 
R.M. in the province regardless of how it is. That system has 
worked and has been very successful over the years. 
 
In regards to whether there should be a change to a division 
system or not, I don’t believe there should be. I’ve said why — 
because of the miles that’s travelled, of the accessibility of the 
councillor, for flooding in the North, whether it’s bridges or 
whether it’s maintenance of roads so that you can get back and 
forth from one field to another — accessibility. So that he can 
. . . he does a lot of the work himself. I never saw an alderman 
yet, and I shouldn’t say there isn’t any, but I don’t know of any 
that actually go out and do any of the physical work in an R.M. 
 
Many councillors do a lot of work for free. They put up signs. 
They maintain their own signs; they maintain the standards out 
there. They maintain safety for the farmers out there. They will 
. . . in fact, I can think of cases in the area where there’s a 
narrow bridge where they maybe even go out and take the sides 
down so the guy can get through with his heavy equipment and 
put it back up. They don’t have a bunch of maintenance people 
around. 
 
(1615) 
 
They are not only the division councillor for the area, they’re 
sort of the maintenance man, the guiding counsellor for the 
area. He looks after almost totally and, if you might say, at most 
cases with no pay at all, or very, very little, except the odd 
meeting pay. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Is it your perception, Mr. Minister, that 
because you have a division system in rural municipalities, that 
rural municipalities would spend more than if they had an 
at-large system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well that’s a pretty . . . It’s a hypothetical 
question — certainly one I can’t answer. They’ve only had one 
system out there. It’s been successful. The R.M.’s like it. 
SARM thinks it’s what they’d like to see out there. I guess, to 
say the least, I couldn’t make that judgement. 
 
I don’t know if it would be better one way or the other as 

far as cost efficient go. I do know that there is some, certainly 
some up sides to the division, and I named them off to you. I 
named a couple of sides that . . . a couple of areas that are down 
sides to having it as a division system, but I couldn’t make a 
judgement call because there’s nothing to back it up. It would 
be just a best guess. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Have you done any research, Mr. 
Minister, at least in comparison with other jurisdictions where 
they may have rural municipalities, to see whether or not the 
R.M.’s in Saskatchewan may be spending money at a greater 
rate because of the ward . . . or the division system than is the 
case in rural municipalities or counties in other jurisdictions that 
do not have a division system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, you know, I suppose you could do 
research and all that, but to tell you the truth we’re not going to 
spend any money doing it because we haven’t had a request 
from SARM for any changes. We work very closely with 
SARM; we always have. I think it’s been a policy of all 
governments to work with the association, Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities; we have. So I’m not 
prepared to spend any money on it. 
 
I believe that the system has a lot of good things about it. It has 
some down sides to it. It is designed for rural Saskatchewan. It 
has worked in rural Saskatchewan. It is a farmers’ type of a 
system and it’s serving the farming people, and that’s where it 
will stay. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — What I want to just say, Mr. Minister: 
can I deduce then that when it comes to a question, on balance, 
of retaining the division system for rural municipalities, that 
money and that budgeting and the rates that rural municipalities 
may be spending money, that that is simply not a consideration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, you know, in regards to urban and 
rural, they are certainly different. It suits, like I said earlier, it 
suits rural Saskatchewan. As you know, I guess, the rural 
councillors out there certainly pay their own administrator, if 
that’s the case. Many places now they have one administrator 
for two or three R.M.’s. That can’t happen when you have a 
town or a city because, you know, they’re scattered many miles 
apart, where R.M.’s will sit, be in one town . . . I can think of 
the R.M. of Tisdale and Connaught who have their office in the 
town of Tisdale. There’s other ones. Down in the south-east 
over here there’s one that has three; one administrator looks 
after three R.M.’s, and so they have co-shared their costing. 
 
In regards to the division, the councillors, as you know, they’re 
not paid very much and I think the cost there is almost not 
noticeable in their overall features. And much of the work, as I 
said earlier, they do absolutely for free. I guess that’s the way 
rural Saskatchewan is. It isn’t always; I’ve got to be paid to do 
something, and those councillors exhibit exactly that type of a 
form. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, should you ever come to 
the conclusion that a division system was not feasible or 
desirable for rural municipalities, generally what would your 
policy be? Would it be to ask rural municipalities to hold a vote 
on the question to let the 
  



 
April 20, 1988 

 

725 
 

 

people decide; or is this something that you would say to them, 
this is the way it’s going to be? How would you handle it? What 
would your policy be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — When the time comes I guess I’ll deal 
with it, but I don’t believe the time will come. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, during the time that the member 
from Regina Victoria was asking questions about the ward 
system, the representation for R.M.’s, I had the chance to 
photocopy the resolution from the Alberta legislature, as well as 
some of the closures in post offices in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I’d like to send it over to you, and have 
you, or your officials, or both, examine it. 
 
In the case of the motion that was put through the Alberta 
legislature, it was introduced by the opposition. I’d be quite 
happy to do that after some consultation with you, or to support 
a resolution that you may bring forward in protecting rural post 
offices and the rural way of life in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And however we do it, I’d like it to be as 
non-partisan as possible and to have it as a unanimous voice of 
this legislature going to Canada Post and to the federal 
government expressing our concern. 
 
And I’d like to send this over to you, and I look forward to 
some dialogue, or some contact from you in the near future on 
the problem of the closure of rural postal services in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Minister, if I heard you correctly, when SARM met in 
Regina a few months ago, I thought I heard you say that there’d 
be some changes to The Rural Municipal Act in the province in 
this session of the legislature. I didn’t see anything in that 
regard in the throne speech, and I haven’t heard anything about 
proposed legislative changes in that Act since that time. I’m 
wondering if you could tell us this afternoon whether or not 
there are some amendments planned for The Rural Municipal 
Act, or any other Acts that affect the Department of Rural 
Development. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — As the member may well know, we had a 
rural law review committee travel around the province a couple 
of years ago, and they came back with a list of 
recommendations in regards to changes to the existing Rural 
Municipality Act. 
 
We have in fact then put together a proposed list — I guess 
you’d call the white paper — on what those proposals were, and 
how they could be or how they might be implemented. We sent 
that out to every R.M. council around the province; we did that 
about a year ago. 
 
Last year at the convention we discussed with, and brought up 
at the convention with all the R.M.’s — anybody that wanted to 
talk about any new or . . . concerns they had about the proposed 
Act. Since then, it’s now been brought back, and we’re in the 
start of the — we’ve started drafting and are putting together 
some draft features on drafting the new rural municipality Act, 
and I would think it should be ready to be introduced into this 
House this session. 
 
I’ll certainly, as soon as it’s ready, I’ll send you a copy 

over. It’s been no secret; it’s been around through every R.M. 
council. They’ve asked for their input; we’ve sent out, where 
there might be any controversy at all, we’ve sent out and asked 
them for their views on it. We have talked extensively with 
SARM executive. They’ve reviewed it; they think it’s right to 
do. They think everything in it is what they’d like to see. 
 
It’s not complicated. It’s just updating a lot of things that were 
brought in, in 1905, that sort of have been left behind, and 
bringing in some new features. One would be, like, if there’s a 
tie vote — instead of pulling straws or flipping a coin, you’d 
have another division election. And those things, The Line 
Fence Act, where there’s such things as a fence that’s between 
two parties, and one’s using it for cattle and one isn’t, and 
who’s responsible — things like that that should be addressed. 
They’ve been outdated; they were designed for 50 or 60 years 
ago. 
 
Other things that we would deal with would be such things as 
some of the small holdings that we’re looking at in regards to 
taxation base, how the assessment should be looked at. We’ve 
been looking at such things as trailers in the area. We looked at 
resort communities. There are some things there that we’ve 
tried to deal with. Fire, and there’s been a concern with some of 
the municipalities about how they should be able to collect fire 
— not a tax, but a surcharge. We’ve been trying to deal with 
them. Those are the only contentious ones that we’ve really had 
to deal with. 
 
The rest is all sort of basic, and I think most of it’s put together 
— SARM, I believe, is satisfied that it’s right. I think all the 
councils are satisfied that it’s right. And when it’s put together, 
as soon as it’s together, I’ll send you a copy and you can review 
it, give me your comments. If you have some comments that 
you feel it isn’t just right, I’d look at that again; I have no 
problems. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, the legislative changes that 
you’re planning, will they all be coming under one Act or are 
there other Acts that you are planning some legislative changes 
in during this session? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Just to clarify that, The Line Fence Act 
and there’s a Stray Animals Act that are . . . there are minor 
changes, and they’ll be different in separate Acts that’s brought 
in, because they’re already under a separate Act now within the 
statutes. So they’ll be brought in to make whatever change is 
necessary within that. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — The changes that you would be proposing in 
terms of assessments for trailers and acreages and whatever, 
would that come under The Rural Municipality Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I maybe misled you a little bit when I said 
“assessment.” It’s to do with the mill rate structure and how 
they can be taxed. So the assessment is under the assessment 
authority, which is a separate agency that does that, and it’s 
under the urban . . . I believe it comes under Urban Affairs, the 
assessment Act itself does. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Do you plan, the next time you release . . . 
you mentioned that you would give me a copy of the proposed 
changes as you would circulate, I would 
  



 
April 20, 1988 

 

726 
 

 

imagine, to other people. I welcome the opportunity to get that 
early so that it can be reviewed and we can provide some 
constructive criticism, if there is some to provide there. 
 
Will you be doing that in some kind of a discussion-paper form 
prior to the Act, or are you going to just do the changes without 
floating them by for broad-ranging discussions? Is it going to be 
quite specific, what you provide, or is it going to be a general 
paper for discussion purposes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well we’ve been out and we’ve had a lot 
of discussion papers out there with the folks in rural 
Saskatchewan, with all the R.M. councils, with SARM. It’s 
been out there for a year and a half now; we’ve had the rural 
law review committee before that. 
 
What I said to you was that when we have the Act drafted, I’ll 
send you a copy. If you have any problems with it, we’ll 
certainly . . . I’m prepared to deal with them. I believe it’s done 
the way that the rural folks would like to see it done. But if you 
have an area of concern, I’d be prepared to discuss it with you. 
It may even be that we just can work it out and take it through 
non-controversial Bills, if you want, but I have no problems 
with sending you a copy so you have lots of time to look at it. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — On another topic, one that concerns the 
drought situation in parts of Saskatchewan, I understand that the 
areas south of the Trans-Canada Highway and the areas on a 
line that would run from Regina to approximately the Rosetown 
area have a very serious problem in terms of water-supply 
drought. And as you’d be well aware, the water supply in those 
areas depends on spring run-off, in some cases heavy rains. 
 
At this point, the run-off for water supply has not been good 
because of the lack of snow in those areas over the course of the 
winter. And the hydrometric stations across the province . . . 
some of them established as long as, I believe, 50 years ago — 
there’s some 400 hydrometric stations across the province — 
that the water supply drought is the worst in recorded history in 
those areas that I mentioned, in many of the areas south of 
Trans-Canada and underneath the line running from Regina 
over to Rosetown. 
 
Places like Limerick, which has been in the news lately . . . in 
the community of Limerick I’m sure you’re aware that the 
dug-out that they had to supply the water to the community has 
gone dry. Last year they had a bad situation but they were able 
to pump water into their dug-out from another water source 
about six or so miles away. This year, because of the worsening 
drought situation for water supply, that water body is no longer 
available to them because it’s dried up as well. 
 
(1630) 
 
So just as an example, that’s one community that faces some 
very serious water-supply situations. There’s other communities 
in very similar situations, and I’m wondering what contingency 
plans your department has or what initiatives your department is 
willing to take to help provide a remedy to the water-supply 
drought in 

many communities in the area that I have described? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well I was talking with the department 
officials here, and we certainly realize that the drought out there 
in south and south-western Saskatchewan is very severe. 
Without an abundance of rainfall — and it’s certainly probably 
past the snowfall stage now — there could be especially a 
severe shortage of water for dug-outs and for some of our small 
towns and villages. 
 
I understand that the Saskatchewan Water Corporation have got 
all the seismic information from the oil companies with regard 
to water locations where they could drill. They’ve also 
identified all the water sources that are available out there in 
rural Saskatchewan where the drought is already been . . . is 
prevalent. 
 
There’s very little, other than that, that a person can do. We can 
. . . The Department of Agriculture’s been looking into it from 
the cattle side of it, looking to putting together a program if it 
doesn’t rain and there’s a need for such things as assistance or 
whatever. But unless it rains, there’s not much we can do in 
regards to water flow except to identify what’s available and, if 
it gets worse to worst, to see what we could do to assist them. 
The water corporation is looking into that and will be coming 
forward . . . I think the minister said the other day they have a 
contingency plan in place and are still working on all the 
relevants to it. 
 
So I guess it’s a matter of time and just too bad that the 
snowfall we get in the North and up where you are couldn’t 
transmit itself down to the South, because where I’m in we’re 
actually in flood conditions up there, have been for a week, and 
it just seems odd that in the South there’s no rain at all. But I 
guess that’s the way the nature is. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — You know, I can appreciate the distribution of 
snowfall in the province. I hope, as a government, you’re not 
promising to be able to control the weather as well. 
 
I am sure the minister understands there’s two types of drought 
in question here: there’s agricultural drought, which I think the 
jury is still out on that, because if there’s enough rain for the 
seed to germinate and have a good seeding in the province, that 
there may not be an agricultural drought, even though at this 
time there looks like there could be. So I’m talking specifically 
about the water-supply drought, and you’ve noted that you’re as 
well aware of it as I am. 
 
I think it’s good that there’s been some identification done of 
places where they can draw water from well supplies, but I 
think that many of the municipalities that are affected, that 
require a water source other than what they’ve traditionally 
used —which has been the run-off — don’t have the funding to 
be able to go into any kind of an extensive drilling program to 
get water for their communities or for their municipalities. 
 
I’m wondering if your department has a role to play, and if you 
do have a role to play, is there assistance that you’re 
  



 
April 20, 1988 

 

727 
 

 

going to provide to some of these communities and rural 
municipalities to do some well drilling over the course of this 
fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well we’re certainly concerned with it 
and we would work, through our department, any way we could 
with the rural municipalities in regard to help them access 
whatever programs there is available to either look for water or 
to access available water. And underground water is about the 
only source you have left when such things as a lake, like the 
Old Wives Lake, has been totally dried up for three or four 
months now. And when you lose large volumes of water like 
that out of an area, that creates a great problem. 
 
So when the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation, his estimates come up, maybe you should raise it 
with him. They have put together a contingency plan, and that 
we would certainly look at, working with any R.M.’s out there 
from the department in regards to helping them source or get 
the information they need to look for either drilling for wells or 
for sourcing funding, what is available, either federally or 
provincially. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — It’s my understanding, Mr. Minister, that the 
minister in charge of the water corporation has in fact looked at 
some of the things that we’ve talked about. The drilling of wells 
has been rejected because of the high cost factor. And certainly 
the municipalities do not have the funding. If the provincial 
government doesn’t have the funding to do that, I don’t know 
where the people in those drought-stricken areas are going to 
turn to. 
 
I suppose what I’m asking you, as Minister of Rural 
Development, is: do you not have some kind of a direct role in 
providing assistance in very serious times of the drought 
situation in those areas described? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well I’m aware that there is some 
funding, both at a provincial and a federal level, through PFRA 
(Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration) and through the 
water corporation, Saskatchewan Water Corporation, 
provincially, for deep-well drilling. 
 
I understand also the water corporation has identified areas 
through the oil companies, through seismographs, where there’s 
water located. If it gets to the point where R.M.’s are looking to 
supply or to get that supply of water, our department will 
certainly be willing to work with them to access both the 
provincial and federal funding and to identify areas where you 
could drill for the wells. 
 
So certainly our department will be available and certainly we’ll 
work with them, because we have as much concern about the 
lack of water out there for the cattle and for the farm families as 
any other department there is. Any way we can help them, we 
will. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, is your department involved at 
all in any discussions concerning water diversions in the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — No we’re not. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — It would seem to me that it would be 

important that the Department of Rural Development is 
consulted when major water diversions are explored because of 
the impact that that would have on, basically, the entire 
province of Saskatchewan. Where we have extensive bodies of 
water in northern Saskatchewan, extensive run-off as you’ve 
described, and I know as long as . . .  
 
About three years ago I recall reading a series of three articles 
in The Globe and Mail done by one Michael Keating. And he 
was able to provide information right down to the detail of 
which waters could be diverted to alleviate drought-stricken 
areas in other parts of the province, western Canada, central 
United States, where the dams would go. 
 
It looked to me, in the face of those articles, that there would be 
a very, very serious impact — I’m not saying positive or 
negative, but just a serious impact — on rural Saskatchewan. 
And if the Department of Rural Development does not have 
some role to play in that, I’m wondering who, in the provincial 
government? Is that removed to Executive Council or only to 
the exclusive right of the water corporation? Doesn’t your 
department have a role to play? 
 
If you don’t have role, whose role is it to play to make sure that 
if there are major water diversions that it’s in the best interests 
of everyone, and that the Department of Rural Development 
knows full well what’s going on and would have some 
expertise, I would hope, in terms of what the impacts would be 
of such water diversions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — In regards to who’s responsible for the 
looking into any diversions or the allocations towards 
diversions, the Saskatchewan Water Corporation would be the 
lead agency. If it was to . . . and that’s in regards to the water. 
 
If it was to cross through a farmer’s land, certainly the farmer 
would be at least partly involved in it. If it’s in a municipality, 
municipalities are always involved with anything happening in 
regards to drainage, water diversion of any kind. If it’s 
highways or anything, well then Highways are involved. And if 
there’s a local C&D, conservation and development authority 
there, they are always involved in it. 
 
So there’s a series of people that would be involved to the 
extent it’s taken. If it’s a local project, probably if there’s a local 
C&D, conservation and development authority there, they will 
probably be the lead agency along with the water corporation. If 
it’s a major one, if you’re talking about such things as the North 
Saskatchewan diversion or some of those projects that’s been 
proposed out there, you know, it would have to be a very, very 
major federal-provincial, whatever else is involved, so that 
would be PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration), 
water corporation, and others. But those are the way it would be 
handled. So locally, it would be C&D and farmer and 
municipality. If it’s beyond that, Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation would be the lead agency. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Would the Department of Rural Development 
at some point be involved if there were 
  



 
April 20, 1988 

 

728 
 

 

major water diversions planned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well we would be involved directly and 
indirectly. First of all, indirectly through the R.M.’s because 
certainly anything that’s approved from the R.M. goes through 
our development and planning branch. We’d also be involved 
where there would be a subdivision because that would be 
either splitting lands or something, so we’d have approval on 
that. 
 
We’re also directly involved if you were putting any kind of a 
major drainage where an EIA (environmental impact 
assessment) would be involved, we have direct input into that. 
And if there’s any interagency such as South Saskatchewan 
River Basin Authority or others, we would be involved in that 
committee. So directly and indirectly, we’d be involved if it’s 
any kind of a major type of a water diversion. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Have you been involved as minister or your 
officials, any of your officials been involved to date concerning 
any water diversions in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I just asked them that; they said no. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well to your knowledge then, as Minister of 
Rural Development, even informally, have you not had some 
consultation, some interaction with either cabinet colleagues or 
some of your department officials, with other departmental 
officials, concerning water diversion in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — We don’t have any directly going on now. 
We were involved with the Souris River Basin study and water 
diversion and also the Shand project, but those are pretty well at 
. . . from our point, they’ve been pretty well reviewed and at a 
completion point, so we have nothing new going right now. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — What is the expertise that you have in the 
Department of Rural Development in regard to those projects 
where there is the possibility at least of major water diversion 
— Shand, Rafferty, Alameda? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — We would be involved through, in that 
particular case, two or three different areas. One would be 
environmental management where we were involved in the 
environmental process; two, land management where R.M.’s 
would be involved, where roads would be involved, where there 
may have to be new roads built or whatever else; three, we’d be 
involved where the R.M.’s be involved with such things as 
losing a tax base or what effect it would have on them through 
our reassessment, or through assessment, so those areas we’d be 
involved as an adviser to them; and certainly, in regards to 
environmental management, we have engineering staff who are 
pretty qualified to make some pretty decent decisions in regards 
to the overall picture of roads and the effect it would have on 
the R.M.’s around. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — So it would be consequential effects of such a 
project coming into place, not the direct concerns about water 
flow or people who would be involved as 

hydrologists and that type of thing? You do not have those 
people? It’s the consequential effects that you actually look at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Primarily, yes it would be . . . there’d be 
some of the other, but primarily, yes, it’d be the consequential 
effects afterwards about how the R.M.’s would be affected. But 
how the . . . you know, like I said, the roads and the bridges, 
and whatever else would be required and how we’d . . . you 
know, everything would be put into place. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Turning to another topic, it has to do with the 
depopulation, I suppose you could call it, of rural 
Saskatchewan, in that many people are moving out of the rural 
areas. You find farms getting bigger and bigger, and farmers 
getting fewer and fewer; and as elevators go, and branch lines 
go, and post offices go, people find rural Saskatchewan a whole 
lot less appealing to them than they did over the past 
generations. And I’m wondering if your department has done 
any studies? If you have, within those studies, do you have any 
projections as to where we can expect the depopulation of rural 
Saskatchewan to level out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — The last one study that we had done was 
Jake Brown from the University of Saskatchewan. He headed 
up a task force on rural development, and that was in 1985. And 
that’s the last one that we’ve done. We haven’t done any since. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I’ve had an opportunity to look at that report 
by Mr. Brown, and there are some things in there that I find 
very appealing, and generally it was a good report. 
 
But what I’m asking is more: has the government, your 
department, taken any direction in terms of that task force 
report? You see, I don’t think that the department has any plans 
—or at least if you do, they’re not plans that I’m aware of — to 
put into place services and some things that are attractive to 
keep a base in rural Saskatchewan so that we don’t have an 
urban society in Saskatchewan, that we have a mixture of urban 
and rural. 
 
So I’d like the minister to tell me: what directions are you 
taking? What plans have you got for making sure that people 
who want to stay in rural Saskatchewan can stay there, that 
there’s some economic livelihood to them, either in agriculture 
or a spin-off from agriculture? And what services are you 
looking at that can be put in place to stop the changing face of 
rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I guess his report was called The Strategy 
for Development of Rural Saskatchewan. Just to give you an 
idea of some of the things that were recommended then that has 
been followed through with . . . And I believe there was 92 
recommendations, and many of them have already been . . . 
either in the process or already been implemented. 
 
To give you an idea —individual line service, telephone line 
service, natural gas, and one of the things he really highlighted 
on as well was the formation of rural development corporations, 
and that is the technical name we actually give to them. 
  



 
April 20, 1988 

 

729 
 

 

 
So we have come a long ways in using his . . . the task force 
report n regards to focusing on rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Going back to the initial question that I asked 
about the depopulation of rural Saskatchewan, is there a 
projection that your department has done in terms of, if things 
keep going as they are now, what the population of rural 
Saskatchewan will be five years from now, 10 years from now, 
and the split between what we would consider urban 
Saskatchewan and rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — We haven’t done it on a province-wide 
basis, but as we establish these RDCs, they are doing exactly 
that — looking at what their population is, how can they 
stabilize it, how can they make it grow. So we’re doing it more 
on an individual basis, but we haven’t done anything since the 
task force in 1985. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I have some other items I want to discuss with 
you tomorrow, if we can come back tomorrow. It will be very 
brief, I promise you that. 
 
I’m wondering though . . . if I’m accurate, I understand you 
have two legislative secretaries —you have the member from 
Morse and the member from Saltcoats. I can’t understand, for 
the life of me, why you need two legislative secretaries. You’re 
an important department, but you’re a small department. And in 
the past, governments in Saskatchewan have not had large 
numbers of legislative secretaries. In fact, I believe that I’m 
accurate in saying some governments in the past have had no 
more than two legislative secretaries in the whole of Executive 
Council, and you have within your department two legislative 
secretaries. Can you tell me just the rationalization of that 
before we close off here this afternoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — There’s a . . . I’d be pleased to. Two 
reasons, and that’s why there’s two legislative secretaries. 
 
One is called crop insurance. Crop insurance — the largest 
insurance company in Saskatchewan, and one of the larger ones 
in Western Canada, with an insurance coverage of $1.4 billion. 
They have something like 600 employees with 32 offices 
around the province. 
 
We have rural development which represents 299 R.M.’s, 
68,000 farmers out there plus many small holdings and hamlets. 
They are important to us as a government, and I believe it is 
important that we have that grass roots touch out there, that we 
can go out and talk to them and bring back into this legislature 
what the people are saying out there, and bring forth, I believe, 
reasonable and firm, not only legislation, but also such things as 
our funding for rural Saskatchewan, both crop insurance and 
rural. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I just 
have one question I’d like to address to the minister this 
afternoon — a short one that I think he would appreciate the 
opportunity to answer. 
 
It has to do with the progress being made on the development of 
a potential kaolin operation in the Wood Mountain area, and I 
know that through the local rural 

development corporation there is a great deal of interest in that 
particular project. 
 
I wonder if the minister could take the opportunity of the few 
moments that remain today to provide us with an update on 
where that situation stands with respect to the kaolin 
development at Wood Mountain, and what progress is being 
made by the government to draw together all of the support 
services that the area of Saskatchewan would require should 
this development go forward, as we all hope it will do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — as the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg knows, that it’s in a pilot project out 
here, just out of the city. I understand before the year end that 
they will have made their decision on whether it is a viable 
operation. We’re hoping and feel very confident it could well 
be. 
 
The RDCs down there have assured them that they will put into 
place the services or work to put the services in that is needed to 
establish the plant and the necessary people in the area. We’re 
going to continue to work with that RDC. It’s just an excellent 
one, as you said. They’ve showed more initiative than most 
folks, I believe, ever thought anybody could, and they should be 
congratulated — very much so. 
 
I’m sure that the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg knows 
them all personally, and they’re good folks; they’ve done an 
excellent job. And we’ll work with them to work it through, and 
if it becomes a viable project in the go-ahead, we’ll certainly be 
there to help them all we can. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 


