


















































June 9, 1988 Hansard Evening


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 9, 1988 
 

1985 
 

 
EVENING SITTING 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Health 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 
want to say a few words in response. I will say that they will be 
less numerous than some of the words that were addressed just 
prior to 5 o’clock from the hon. critic over there. I would say a 
couple of things, Mr. Speaker, in response, and I made a couple 
of notes on various things that were mentioned by the member 
from Lakeview. 
 
First of all I think it needs to be noted, and it should be very 
clear to everyone, that while the member was presenting a very 
long sort of litany about health care from a series of notes that, 
you know, would suggest, I think, to anything in the House and 
the viewer and so on that those were very thoughtful notes put 
together by the member in her critic position as to the 
Department of Health, I want to point out that much of what 
was said comes from this little booklet that I have in my hand, 
beginning on page 68. 
 
That booklet, Mr. Chairman, is called The Facts and is related 
to the . . . what I would call the scare mongering tactics of the 
Canadian Union of Public Employees as it relates to free trade. 
That’s what this booklet is all about, and it has a section on 
education, and we heard some of that from the Education critic 
the other day, and we heard some more of it today from the 
health critic across. And I, you know, I say that’s fine. Take 
your sources from wherever they are, but attribute your remarks 
to the sources and that’s . . . I guess that’s the only thing I 
would suggest, and I think all people in the House should 
recognize that this Canadian Union of Public Employees 
viewpoint is that that’s being suggested as being the viewpoint, 
part and parcel, of the NDP opposition opposite, Mr. Chairman. 
 
We went into several things, the member got into several 
things, one of which was the creation of the task force or the 
commission on health care which was just announced 
yesterday, and the concept for which was announced some time 
ago in the throne speech. At that time, the Leader of the 
Opposition said, if the members of the task force are credible 
people, and if there is a reasonable budget and a long enough 
time frame for that task force to be able to carry out its work, 
that he would support that task force. I heard that at that time, 
but the very day that the task force was announced, the critic in 
health care was up and attacking not only the concept of a task 
force and what it would not be able to do, frankly, on behalf of 
Saskatchewan — her words — she even went to the point of 
attacking one of the members of the task force, which I 
answered at that time and won’t get into in a major way here 
now, unless the member would like to carry that on. 

 
One of the things mentioned in this, the hon. member talked 
about the task force and some of the things that, according to 
the NDP, some of the four corner-stones of medicare and the 
way we understand medicare in this country — not just in this 
province but across this country — and talked about some 
corner-stones being universality, accessibility, comprehensive 
nature of medicare and of the health care system, and also the 
public administration aspect of health care, and talked about 
those being the corner-stones. I would just point out, Mr. 
Chairman, on page 68 of this document that I’ve been referring 
to, those points are very well laid out. And, literally, once I had 
this little document in my hand, I could follow the member’s 
speech, following it all the way through. All I’m saying is that 
there are more points of view across Saskatchewan related to a 
very, very important sector of our life here, which is the health 
care sector. And, frankly, if you want to get into the . . . Even as 
it relates to free trade and all of the sectors of our economy, 
there are many more points of view across Saskatchewan than 
those points of view put forward by the Canadian Union of 
Public Employees, Mr. Chairman — many more points of view. 
So I just would make that point. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, as it relates to the task force and just . . . I 
wanted to go into it in a very . . . to explain a little more about 
why. Let’s talk about the history of the development of our 
health care system a little bit in this province. And it has 
developed over a good long period of time. We are in, now in 
1988, the last . . . And this point was made by the chairman 
yesterday, the chairman of the commission, that point was made 
yesterday by Dr. Murray, that the last study, very 
comprehensive study of the health care system in this province 
was done 44 years ago. Forty-four years ago since there has 
been what we will say is a very hard look at the composite of all 
of the health care system in this province and the service that it 
must provide and the service that we must expect as citizens of 
the province, from this very, very large system. And I think it’s 
. . . And if you just go no further than that, and from that 
understanding of 44 years ago one was done, there have been 
references . . . The member made reference earlier to the Elmer 
Schwartz report that has had some discussion here in the House 
and elsewhere in recent weeks, and other reports that were 
commissioned both by this government since we’ve been in 
office, by the other government when they were in office just 
preceding us, and certainly by governments preceding them. 
 
There have been reports done, there have been snapshots taken 
of various aspects of the health care system, individual aspects 
of the system, whether it be the hospital system, perhaps maybe 
the regional system, perhaps the community health program — 
very, very many aspects of this very large system. But I would 
say, once again, Mr. Chairman, this task force, this commission 
is only the second time in the history of our province that the 
composite view of the wider system and how that wider system 
serves our people and can serve our people and will serve our 
people is being undertaken now. And it is, as some of the task 
force members have said to myself and to the Premier 
yesterday, it is a tremendous challenge for those individuals, 
there’s no  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

 

1986 
 

question. 
 
I believe, and I think . . . Well I was going to say all members 
of the House. I know that’s not the case. I know that all 
members on this side of the House believe, and I know the 
Premier believes strongly, and I believe a large segment of the 
thinking population in Saskatchewan who know many of these 
people, who know many of these task force and commissioners 
from their contributions that they have made in various walks of 
life and contributions they have made in various communities, I 
believe the public of Saskatchewan thinks that these people are 
up to the task. I know they find it a humbling sort of experience 
to take it on and the challenge. I believe strongly that they will 
be up to that task and that the recommendations that they will 
bring forward will indeed be a blueprint that can look into the 
future in terms of the service to our public in this province — 
all generations in all parts of the province, both urban and rural. 
 
Enough said on that, Mr. Speaker, unless, you know, we could 
get into some more detail of that a little later. But I think it’s 
important to make that point. It’s also important to make the 
point because the member did make reference to the fact that 
the task force is some kind of a . . . because they have a 
tendency over there to see everything in that partisan light. And 
I’m not against partisanship and so on. I come here with my 
eyes wide open in terms of partisanship, Mr. Speaker. And I do. 
I have won three elections in very partisan campaigns. I’ll tell 
you that, Mr. Speaker, and I will win some more elections in 
very partisan campaigns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I would tell you, Mr. Speaker, there are certain areas and 
there are certain times — even in this partisan forum in which 
I’m now speaking and in which the members are here — there 
are times when we must look beyond or at least reach out and 
try to look beyond some of that. And we did not see that in the 
opening remarks from the NDP critic on health care in those 
opening remarks because there was a very . . . It’s hard to 
describe without succumbing to some of the temptation that I 
might have to get into some of that, but I would say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that . . . And I will before we’re finished, I’m sure — I 
may succumb to some of that — but I won’t in this initial 
remarks, Mr. Chairman. 
 
I say to the member and I ask all members of the House . . . 
And I believe, as the editorial in the Leader-Post today 
suggested, that this issue, this issue and this challenge that this 
task force has taken on, is a challenge which is going to need 
the support of the public in this province, the wider public, the 
thinking people of our province. Certainly all the people of our 
province are going to need the support of people who are 
elected to responsible office, whether that be at the municipal 
level or at the provincial level as we are here. 
 
That task force, as the chairman said yesterday and made very 
clear, does not have, does not have, I repeat — and that’s to 
refute some of the comments that were made — does not have 
an agenda in its hand that was handed to them by us to say, this 
is what you shall come in with. 
 
And that’s the suggestion that the member was making —  

that we had an agenda; we said, here, come in with this report. 
Because when you say that, when any member stands and says 
that, what they are really doing is reflecting upon the integrity 
of the people who have said yes, I will serve my province. And 
that’s what they’ve said. They haven’t said yes, I will serve my 
Premier; yes, I will serve this Minister of Health or this 
administration or this party that happens to be government now. 
That’s not what they’ve said, Mr. Chairman. They’ve said yes, I 
feel humbled by this. I feel challenged by this and I will serve 
my province. 
 
That’s what they’ve said, and I’m very glad we have people of 
that quality who will say that and who have said that and who 
are going to serve it. And they are not well served, nor is the 
province well served by that kind of attack on the concept of a 
task force or on any member of the task force. So that’s all I 
will say about the task force just now, Mr. Chairman. 
 
There are other things that the member mentioned that I want to 
make some remarks about. One other thing that was mentioned, 
and I will say it clearly to the member here and to all of the 
House: we will continue to operate in the Department of Health, 
to operate the day-to-day and the year-to-year department which 
is a very large one, as I’ve said. We will continue to do that. We 
will not be looking to the task force as some kind of cover for 
how the department operates on a day-to-day basis. 
 
The task force is out there, as I’ve said, for a good futuristic 
look at where we are going and where we should go with all of 
the information possible — with all the information possible. 
But the day-to-day operations and the year-to-year operations of 
this Department of Health will continue; will continue and 
continue as it has. So that’s a very important thing, and the task 
force would not be expected to be commenting on what we are 
doing at the present time, what we have done in the last week or 
whatever, or what we should do in the next month or two prior 
to the recommendation time. They need that independence and 
they have that independence, Mr. Chairman, and everybody 
should know that. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I have said to the member, as she raised 
these issues: comprehensive nature, the accessibility, what she 
called the corner-stones of what we know as our medical care 
system in Canada — that medical care system that came out of 
this province; something that every citizen of our province 
should be extremely proud of — I have no problem at all with 
giving credit where credit’s due. 
 
There is significant credit to be given to those who had the 
foresight in 1944 to create the Sigerist commission. There’s no 
question about that, that the Sigerist commission, being the 
commission named after Dr. Sigerist of Johns Hopkins 
University in Baltimore, which was the very first of these 
comprehensive studies. So those people had foresight. 
 
The Premier of that day, Mr. Douglas, had foresight. The 
member mentioned that. The member mentions subsequent 
politicians who had foresight in implementing some of the 
recommendations of that report. Some of those 
recommendations took a good long  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

 

1987 
 

time to come into being. Others came into being early — 
medical college, some of our rural hospital systems, some of 
those things that would have served us well. And this medical 
care system has served us well. 
 
The concept, the concept of publicly funded medicare and so 
on, came from this province. But it didn’t just start in 1944 
either; in fairness there were other people. And you go out on 
the highway near Bulyea and you’ll see . . . Was it Matt 
Anderson, I believe, from the constituency of our Speaker, who 
had the first publicly funded system created in the municipality 
that he happened to be the reeve of at that time, back in as early 
as 1938, I believe it was. I mean, this concept and the concept 
of caring for ourselves, caring for our population, whether we 
be remote, rural, or urban people is something that has sprung 
from the soil of Saskatchewan and all of us in this province 
should be extremely proud of that fact. So I will give credit to 
all who are responsible for that sort of legacy. There’s no 
question about that. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Chairman, what we face, what we face now — and it’s not 
something that’s unique to this province — what this country 
faces in terms of every jurisdiction with the responsibility, a 
very great responsibility for administering the health care 
system, are some significant challenges. 
 
And you know, we’ve heard of them, we can talk about them, 
and we’ll talk about them in some detail if the member would 
like. But the challenges of technology that was unheard of just a 
few short years ago — technology; the challenges of medical 
science and developments in medical science for procedures 
that are now being done in our hospitals here, and hospitals 
across the country, frankly, that were unheard of just a very few 
short years ago. 
 
The challenge of the demographics that we have and the 
demographics that we all are very aware of in terms of what we 
call . . . Sometimes it rolls out of us just too easily when we talk 
about the ageing population. 
 
Mr. Chairman, that’s a very . . . Some will say that that’s a 
problem, the ageing population. Frankly, Mr. Chairman, the fact 
that we have more and more people living for longer and longer 
times is more than . . . It’s not a problem. It’s a challenge, 
certainly, and we talk about it in that context. It’s a triumph for 
medical science and for mankind, and so on, but that same 
triumph creates, on the other hand, a tremendous challenge for 
us in terms of being able to serve these people and being able to 
create the circumstances in which they can have accessibility to 
the kind of procedures that, like I said a few moments ago, were 
unheard of some time ago. I think of a couple of things which 
are quick examples to come to mind: one is the way in which 
we are now able to deal with cataract conditions, and the way 
ophthalmologists . . . and the technology in terms of restoring 
eyesight to many of our people, many of whom are well on into 
their eighties and so on, and beyond. And another one is the 
orthopedic side, the orthopedic specialists who are able to 
replace hip joints, replace knees, replace so many of the 
difficulties that people have had over many years, and  

those same difficulties were crippling in nature, and now if we 
can create the circumstances where their accessibility is . . . If 
we can meet that challenge so that that accessibility is there 
more quickly than it is now, those are the kind of challenges 
that we have. And those are the kind of challenges we should 
talk about here when we’re dealing with this very, very large 
Department of Health and the challenges that face all of us. I 
think I’ll leave it at that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member went on and on, I know, for some time — talked 
about how we’re withholding money from professions and 
we’re withholding money from . . . which is not the case, not 
the case in any case, and I challenge her to tell me where that’s 
the case; telling us that, yes, we have waiting lists in some of 
our large hospitals for some of the reasons that I’ve just 
outlined. 
 
And I will say to you though, Mr. Speaker, that the waiting list 
in Saskatoon, for example, which was and is and continues to 
be a problem in terms of the number of people who are able to 
get that accessibility that I refer to, those are challenges that I 
would like to have some quick answers for. There are no quick 
answers, Mr. Chairman. But the waiting lists are down 1,500 
since last September. While some will say, well it was 
unreasonably high before, I agree with that. It was unreasonably 
high. Frankly, Mr. Chairman, it’s unreasonably high now. 
 
But the key to remember as it relates to urban hospitals and 
waiting lists for some of these procedures, the key always is: 
how long does an individual . . . because when you’re dealing 
with health care of individuals, how long does the individual 
have to wait for the given procedure rather than . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . And the member says in her normal glib way, 
too long. But I’m just saying to you, I agree. If they wait too 
long, it is too long. The waits are now too long. Those are 
challenges. Those are the kinds of things we should discuss, and 
we will. But those lists are coming down, Mr. Chairman. I’m 
pleased about that. 
 
I’ll say as well that anybody who’s familiar with the Saskatoon 
circumstance knows that we have significant, significant 
commitments, and there’s more than just commitments. The 
actual hospital construction is going on now, the openings are 
there. If you go by St. Paul’s Hospital and see that major 
expansion of St. Paul’s Hospital . . . which was long overdue. 
 
I’m not here to say we are building that because we are more 
committed than they are, but the fact is, there was a time for 11 
years when that hospital at St. Paul’s should, Mr. Chairman, 
have been expended in some better days . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . that St. Paul’s should have been expanded. 
University Hospital should have been expanded and, Mr. 
Chairman, City Hospital got nothing from these other folks. 
City Hospital is getting a new hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
Those are the kinds of things where they are significant 
commitments by us — significant commitments. And, Mr. 
Chairman, the challenges that we have are to be sure that those 
hospitals are there, the best equipment possible is there, that 
technology I spoke of earlier, and to have them staffed with the 
best professionals possible that we  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

 

1988 
 

can train in our own province, to a large extent, and we do, but 
to have those professionals available in those hospitals to carry 
out the kind of challenges that I talked about earlier. 
 
And if we can get the discussion as it relates to this very 
important department into that sort of tender, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Chairman, I believe that we would serve the public very well. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Well, Mr. Minister, those are many challenges 
for the future, and I wonder whether you’re up to it. And let me 
just point this out: many of those challenges wouldn’t be 
challenges today but for your policies and your cut-backs and 
underfunding in health care. Many of those challenges are there 
because you’ve created the problems, Mr. Minister, you and 
your government. 
 
And I’m not surprised to think, to know that there are many 
other people out there who think like us, because we’ve been 
talking and listening to the people of Saskatchewan now for a 
long time, and they’re telling us many of the things I put before 
the legislature today. 
 
And with respect to source material, let me just tell you some of 
the other source material that we use. There was many different 
sources of material that we use, and this isn’t comprehensive 
either, but the Watson task force is one of the sources of the 
material we used. The Datawatch, Recent Trends in 
International Health Care Spending is another source that we 
use. The Canada Year Book is a source that we use; the 
Economic Council of Canada, The Canada-U.S. Free Trade 
Agreement; Possible Implications of Canada’s Health Care 
System, a paper prepared by the Economic Council of Canada, 
Mr. Minister. There are multi resources that we went to in order 
to compile our information to illustrate that your privatization 
policies with the health care are short-sighted and misplaced 
and right-wing in their approach. And I believe that we 
illustrated that this afternoon, and anybody that was watching in 
the public realizes that we illustrated that. And I notice that the 
minister has not been able to respond to many of our statistics. 
 
With respect to the task force, Mr. Minister, the task force 
agenda of the task force members themselves most certainly is a 
different agenda than yours, Mr. Minister. I know that they will 
review the health care system, and they’ll do their best to put 
forward a fair and honest report, but the fact of the matter is, 
Mr. Minister, there is a Tory agenda there. And the Tory agenda 
is nothing but a totally political agenda to justify their 
misleading and harsh policies and to direct medical care in the 
province of Saskatchewan towards privatization. Your agenda 
is to attempt to salvage some of your credibility, Mr. Minister, 
but it’s not going to work. 
 
And this minister talks about the caring tradition of the people 
of Saskatchewan. He talks about that as though he’s part of that 
tradition, but I tell you, Mr. Chairman, he will go down in 
history as being one of the least caring ministers of Health that 
this province has ever seen. Those comments on his part ring 
hollow, Mr. Chairman. 

Let’s just talk about the Julie Shepherd case, and the Shepherd 
family, who couldn’t get their prescription drugs, and tried and 
tried throughout the Department of Health to get some 
consideration, and only got some action — which I understand 
is incomplete, Mr. Minister, incomplete — only got some 
action after we were forced to bring the question up in the 
legislature. 
 
Let’s talk about all the seniors that are paying 100 per cent 
up-front costs for their drugs and 20 per cent in the end, after 
the rebate. And he calls that caring? People on fixed income 
receiving a substantial increase in the outlay of money that they 
have to produce — he calls that caring, Mr. Chairman? Well I 
tell you, his words ring hollow, and I know the people of 
Saskatchewan feel the same way. 
 
He challenges us to show where he’s withholding money, 
because I made a comment this afternoon about health care 
professionals being forced to go into private practice or leave 
the province. And he says, well where are we withholding 
money. Well, Mr. Chairman, the man obviously doesn’t 
understand the system — doesn’t understand the system. 
 
When he cuts back on funding to hospitals, he cuts back on — 
destroys — a dental program. Where are these health care 
professionals, these 400 dental therapists going to go? Some of 
them went into the private sector. Where are they going to go? 
Some of the mare leaving the province and getting wooed away 
by other provinces, and we’re losing not only people and the 
money that they spend here but we’re losing our Saskatchewan 
men and women that grew up in Saskatchewan, in many cases, 
because they’re being wooed out of this province because of his 
firing of over 400 dental workers. And he says, where were we 
withholding money. 
 
What about hospitals that can’t provide the sort of surgical 
needs that the public wants? Don’t you think these specialists in 
our hospitals and out there in private practice, or public 
practice, are getting frustrated by the fact that the system is 
constantly underfunded? Don’t you think that’s a reason, Mr. 
Minister, for the fact that specialists in this province are leaving 
at an unprecedented rate and that we have a terrible shortage of 
specialists, Mr. Minister? Where are we withholding money? 
That comment of yours just shows how little you understand the 
system, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now I asked you about a specific case this afternoon, before I 
closed my remarks, Mr. Minister, a specific case with respect to 
a Mr. Max Smith who has been waiting for surgery since 
December 9, who has been in communication with you and 
received a response that simply more or less said I’m sorry, but 
there are lists there, and attempted to suggest that this wasn’t a 
problem, that it was just something that happened recently with 
respect to lots of people needing this surgery. The problem isn’t 
that lots of people need the surgery, Mr. Minister. The problem 
is that there’s underfunding and there’s waiting lists with 
respect to this because of underfunding, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now I want to know tonight whether you will take another look 
at Mr. Smith’s case and see whether there’s something you can 
do with respect to the Plains Hospital  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

 

1989 
 

to ensure that he doesn’t have to wait another six months to 
obtain this surgery, because this man with blood clots in leg, his 
condition is deteriorating every day, and the ultimate result of 
not getting surgery, Mr. Minister, is that he could lose his legs if 
this was allowed to persist over a long period of time. Could 
you please tell us tonight what you can do for Mr. Smith? 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — A couple of things, Mr. Chairman, and 
I’ll get to the specific case in a minute. And I just want to make 
a comment as it relates to . . . and it goes back to that, some of 
the challenges that I spoke of earlier, and they are certainly 
challenges as it relates to some of the procedures that we now 
are able to do in the province and across the country, and also 
the demand that increases at a quicker rate than what we’re able 
to deal with. Like I say, that’s another thing that’s not unique 
here. 
 
But the number of procedures — and I’m not going to get into 
this in a major way; I’ll get back to your other case. The 
number of procedures is increasing at a tremendous rate every 
year. The number of procedures performed this year, for 
example, is far more than those performed last year. For 
example, total surgical procedures between ’85 and ’86 and 
’86-87 went up 36 per cent — 36 per cent more. So more than 
one-third more surgical procedures performed in our base 
hospitals across the two cities. The year before that it was a 
28.6 per cent increase; the year before that a 15 per cent 
increase; the year before that an 8 per cent increase — just to 
show the trend line in terms of the extent to which that sort of 
pressure and that is happening. And I know that the member is 
aware of that. So those are the kinds of pressures I spoke of 
earlier. 
 
Now another comment that the member made in the initial 
stages of the last remarks was that — and I just want to make 
this clear because I don’t purport to have all the answers in a lot 
of things — the member says, I wonder if . . . I don’t think 
you’re up to the challenge of this, so I wonder if you’re up to 
the challenge. And I’ll say to the member and to everybody in 
the House, including the member from Regina Centre, 
including that member who has always been up to every 
challenge that he’s undertaken, and everybody here will know 
that through history of . . . even in this legislature, we’ll all 
know that the member from Centre, if you would be well 
advised just to let us carry on with this more serious debate. 
Thank you. 
 
But I can say to you and to you, Mr. Chairman, that I 
sometimes wonder as well when you look at the major 
challenges that there are in this very large department which 
serves the total population and which has so much emotion 
surrounding it as relates to people’s health and their well-being, 
anybody would be less than honest to say, in a very flippant 
way, I know I’m up to the challenge, because I tell you that in 
any one of us should and does say, I wonder if I’m up to the 
challenge, and then you go out and try to do what you can, I’ll 
just say that to the member and that’s the way I’d like to 
approach this. 
 
As it relates to the specific case that the member raised earlier, 
just before supper, I believe you . . . I want to just  

preface my remarks here by saying that — and I’ve said to you 
before — you may portray this as a cop-out, but it isn’t. I’m 
reluctant to talk about the specific condition of the individual 
because it’s not something that I believe that the Minister of 
Health, at any time and whoever it is, should be talking about 
— any particular citizen’s specific condition. You chose to do 
that, and it may well have been with the permission of the 
individual and so on, but I still say to you, I still say to you even 
with his or her permission, I don’t believe that their physicians 
will be talking about it, nor will I. 
 
But I will say this. That individual has been on the elective 
waiting list. And I emphasize the word, “elective” here because 
they way you portrayed it a few moment ago, and you 
suggested that he’s on Dr. Busse’s list and Dr. Busse is a 
cardiac surgeon here in Regina, one who does a good number of 
emergencies and . . . His practice entails a good number of 
emergencies, which is difficult for those elective patients that 
are on his list, but all I can say to the member is that the 
individual you refer to has been on the elective list and remains 
on the elective list. 
 
Our people over supper did contact the Plains hospital and, you 
know, to the extent that we can have any influence . . . Nor do 
we want to have because it will certainly be left to and must be 
left to the medical professionals to determine whether this is 
elective or whether this is emergency. And the way that you 
portrayed this in terms of the person is in danger of losing his 
leg, I believe you said, I believe is inappropriate. And I know 
the emotion surrounding this and I know how the individual 
must feel, and I know how that it is very, very difficult for 
individuals and for families while they wait for these 
procedures, but I think it’s not an appropriate thing for us here 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Indeed it is. It’s what this debate’s all 
about. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No. It is not an appropriate thing for us 
here to debate the specific concern, the specific condition of the 
individual, number one; and number two, it’s not an appropriate 
thing for us to suggest what the consequence of a particular 
condition will be if the medical practitioner, the medical 
specialist in this case, has the person on an elective list that 
would suggest that what you’re saying is wrong. 
 
So I just want to say that. And I don’t have a particular date 
when he can go in, but I know he’s been on the elective list for 
some time and I agree with it. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, Mr. Smith is my constituent and 
it’s important for me to come before you and fight on his 
behalf, and that’s what I’m doing today, and you’re not going to 
tell me what’s appropriate or not. I’ll do whatever it takes to get 
him into the hospital. 
 
And I’m telling you, Mr. Minister, I spoke to Mr. Smith today 
and I asked him what the long-term consequences of this wait 
were. And he told me that his doctor said eventually it could 
mean the loss of his legs if he didn’t get it . . . if he didn’t get 
treatment. He didn’t say he was going to lose his legs 
tomorrow, he said eventually that could happen, and that’s what 
I said to this House. 
  



 
June 9, 1988 

 

1990 
 

And, Mr. Minister, Mr. Smith asked me, he agreed with me, 
discussing this in the House with you today and bringing this to 
your attention because he also believes, not just for himself but 
for the public of Saskatchewan and the men and women out 
there, these problems and these situations have to be brought to 
their attention so that everyone knows what’s going on in this 
province and how the sick and the elderly people are suffering 
as a result of your heartless and inhumane policies, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
So I think it is not appropriate for you, Mr. Minister, to tell me 
what’s appropriate in terms of fighting for my constituent and 
for the best services possible for my constituent, Mr. Minister. 
 
With respect to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well there’s 
nothing I can do about it, it’s up to the doctors. Of course it’s up 
to the doctors to make the decision. But you’ve put a restriction 
on them inasmuch as there’s not adequate hospital beds in order 
to accommodate a lot of this surgery. You’ve put a restriction 
on them. They’re forced into making these decisions. Sure they 
have to make the decisions. But if you were a little more 
forthcoming with funding to hospitals, this situation wouldn’t 
have occurred. 
 
Now I also asked you this afternoon with respect to Mrs. Smith 
and her Persantine, the drug that she’s obtaining. When the 12 
months was up on March 20 and she didn’t get her claim in till 
March 26, then you cut her off. What are you going to do for 
her, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, a couple of things, and I 
. . . another to this other individual case, but I’ll just give you as 
it relates to this drug Persantine which you raised. The policy 
governing coverage for Persantine is a policy recommended by 
two professional committees that which serve the Department 
of Health and, frankly, which serve the public; one, the drug 
quality assessment committee; and secondly, the Saskatchewan 
formulary committee. 
 
The drug quality assessment committee is . . . some of the 
members: a professor of pharmacology; a clinical 
pharmacologist; and a physician, a specialist in internal 
medicine — a couple of those; a physician, a specialist in 
clinical pharmacology. Those are the people who serve on this 
committee, in other words, medical professionals who are best 
qualified to make these kinds of judgements. 
 
The particular drug you refer to, in all of the best professional 
advice that we have in the drug plan and that this committee 
gives us and has gleaned from their various professions across 
the country, is that this drug is not effective after one year of 
use — is not effective. And I would say to the member that it is 
a drug which is, when it was covered for that first year after 
bypass surgery, it is a drug that is not on the formulary in a 
normal consequence. It’s a drug that is given exceptional drug 
status for the period of one year. And the reason it’s for a period 
of one year is, as I’ve said, because it is not effective beyond 
that year. And I must take their professional advice in that area. 

And just one other point, Mr. Chairman. Prior to this 
government coming to office in 1982, this drug Persantine was 
never approved for drug plan coverage at any time by the 
former drug plan. So, you know, I just say to you that’s for the 
case of bypass surgery. 
 
So you know, in terms of your portraying us as some kind of 
heartless group that won’t deal with those kinds of things — to 
use some of your terms — I just say to you that that’s the 
circumstances. That’s the committee that I must guide, and we 
must guide ourselves by, because those are the people best able 
to make those kinds of judgements, and that’s where it is. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, I’m aware that Persantine is not 
covered after the 12-month supply. The face of the matter is, is 
this was the 12th month that this woman purchased the stuff, 
the drug rather. The only problem is, is that she was, oh, into six 
days over when she filled her 12th prescription. That’s the 
problem, Mr. Minister. She was within the year, but she was six 
days over when she filled here 12th prescription, and your 
department refused to cover it. Will they please reconsider this 
because this was her 12th prescription? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, as I’ve said, the one-year 
coverage on this, following bypass surgery, is coverage which, 
you know, if the professional committee had said that this 
particular drug . . . and let me assure you . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You missed the point, George. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, I didn’t miss the point. If the 
professional committee had said that this particular drug was 
effective for a longer period of time, extra drug coverage would 
have been given for a longer period of time. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the drug that the member is talking about, and 
she uses so many days, or whatever, that the use of that drug . . . 
What we must do is deal with the length of time that the drug is 
deemed to be effective, and beyond that, there’s no coverage. 
And that’s exactly what’s been done here, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And so while some will say, well if it’s effective in the first 
year, why can’t I have another prescription to carry on into the 
second year and so on. And when the best medical advice said 
it’s not effective, it’s not being covered. 
 
Ms. Simard: — I think you’ve quite missed the point, Mr. 
Minister, but I take it that your response is no, that this woman, 
who is entitled to a 12-month supply, is being denied coverage 
for her 12th month. And that’s the minister’s answer. Is that the 
minister’s answer? 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — My information, as it relates to this 
specific case, is that the prescription, which is in dispute or 
which you refer to, would have taken this particular patient 
beyond the 12-month period of time when the drug has been 
deemed, by the professionals, to be not effective. And so there’s 
no reason to cover the drug. It’s  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

 

1991 
 

not a matter of any kind of intransigence. It’s a matter of the 
fact that it’s how the medical professionals have said this 
should be handled. That’s the reason we’re doing it this way, 
and that’s the only reason. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I wanted to 
make a few comments about this departmental estimate, and I 
also wanted to ask the minister some questions later on. And I 
want to start my remarks today on the same vein that the 
member for Lakeview began her remarks. 
 
Earlier today, after we had dealt with some Bills in the House, 
we went into Committee of Finance to deal with the Health 
estimates. As the minister walked in with his officials, we were 
having put on our desk reports relating to the Department of 
Health — every one of them. And, as a matter of fact, the 
chairman had started the committee before the final report 
dropped on the Table. 
 
These reports are the interim report of Saskatchewan health and 
vital statistics. That particular report is 14 pages long of 
statistics — dropped on the desks today. 
 
The other report was the Saskatchewan Health report . . . the 
Department of Health report. The Department of Health report 
is 74 pages long. The report on the Department of Health for the 
year ending March 31, 1987 — not ’88 — but 1987, dropped on 
the desk as the minister began his estimates today. 
 
The next report that was laid on our Table was the 
Saskatchewan Health prescription drug plan. This report, the 
health prescription drug plan is 28 pages long. This has the 
auditor’s statement in this report, and the date on the auditor’s 
statement was March 31, 19987. This report is for the period 
1986-87. The auditor’s stamp is March 31, 1987, put on our 
desks today, as the Minister of Health walked in the House to 
begin his estimates. 
 
The next report is the Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance 
Commission. This report for 1986-87 — 47 pages long. The 
auditor’s stamp in this book is August 18, 1987 — getting close 
to a year ago that the auditor had approved it. These four 
reports, dropped on our desk today as the ministers and his 
officials walked in and the chairman called the committee to 
order — total 163 pages. 
 
Now this kind of hiding information and holding information 
back would be bad enough, Mr. Chairman, if it was just 
confined to the Department of Health, but this is not confined to 
the Department of Health. The tabling of the Public Accounts of 
this province approach the scale of scandal this year, the latest 
the Public Accounts have ever been tabled, which is an 
accounting of the expenditures of millions, actually billions of 
dollars of taxpayers’ money that this government has collected 
and had failed to report on until the latest opportunity that they 
had to report on it. 
 
This hiding of information, this holding back of information, 
has become endemic with this government, and there’s other 
people commenting on it, not just me. There are other people 
commenting on it as well. The Provincial Auditor is another one 
who comments on it. 

And what, Mr. Chairman, is the background? What is the 
background in which the Minister of Health does this, puts 
before us 163 pages of reports, ending March 31, 1987, on our 
desk as he and his officials were walking in today? Well the 
background of this, is this: this government, and I recall it well, 
Mr. Chairman, was elected on the basis that they were going to 
be open government. They said it. They advertised it all over 
the province. They said, this is open government; we’re going 
to give the auditor more funds; we’re going to give the auditor 
more independence; we’re going to be open and frank with the 
public. And they even said, we’re going to bring in freedom of 
information legislation. 
 
Well, do you doubt my word? Here’s the member for Melville 
in his 1982 ad, part of which must have been responsible for 
getting him elected, said, “establish freedom of information” 
right in his election ad, Mr. Chairman. Now they have done 
none of these. You cannot believe their ads, Mr. Chairman. You 
cannot believe their ads, because they say other things in those 
ads — and we have sheaves of them from all over the province, 
stating how they were going to preserve medicare; how they 
were going to provide more information to this legislature and 
to the people of Saskatchewan; how they were going to be an 
open government. They’ve ignored all their advertising, and 
they’ve put off, in as many cases as possible, and in this case, 
which is a serious department, which has serious difficulties, 
they put off bringing in the reports until the very day the 
estimates start, the very day the estimates start. 
 
Why is this government doing that in the face of its solemn 
promise, its advertising to the people of Saskatchewan it was 
going to be open government? Well, I don’t know the real 
reason, but I know you can’t believe their advertising. 
 
The task force on health care has been mentioned here and 
before this time. I think it’s worthy of some comments, because 
the minister and his Premier and others have attempted to say 
that we are attacking the individuals on the health care task 
force. The problem with the health care task force is not the 
individuals on the health care task force, it’s the time interval 
before the task force and, something we have to look forward 
to, the time interval after the task force. And this is where this 
government has a great weakness. Everything this government 
has done, virtually everything this government has done in the 
health care field has been to run down the health care system. 
 
Someone mentioned that the number of Americans that are not 
covered by their health care systems . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Thirty-seven million. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — The figure is mentioned as 37 million. 
Well I have something to add to that which I’m sure the 
Minister of Health will be interested in. I read the figure as 35 
million. Now there’s a discrepancy between the figure that I 
have and the figure which the critic brought forward — a 
difference of 2 million people in the United States. But 
regardless of that discrepancy, it’s a  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

 

1992 
 

serious problem. It would be a more serious problem if that was 
a situation in Canada or Saskatchewan. My figure of 35 million 
comes from Au Courant, which is the journal of the Economic 
Council of Canada — quotes 35 million Americans are not 
covered by a health care system. 
 
And the interesting addition to this information which I have is 
that about nine years ago, nine to 10 years ago, I was invited by 
the New Jersey State Medical Society to be on a panel at their 
212th annual convention — now I’m not going to go into the 
detail about how I got the invitation to go to that particular 
convention. I took the invitation, Mr. Minister, and when I 
arrived at the convention, it was interesting to note the feelings 
of the doctors at the convention. I was the only Canadian on the 
panel — there were about four people on the panel dealing with 
health care — and when I arrived at the convention, there were 
some United States doctors who would not shake hands with 
me because I was from Canada. Now there were very few, there 
were just two — just two — and I regard them as the exception. 
Most of the others were very friendly and I was invited by the 
orthopedic section of that medical association to be at that 
convention. They must have thought that the information that I 
provided to them was of some value because they printed my 
remarks, verbatim, in the state medical journal a few months 
later. 
 
And in the research, Mr. Minister, in the research before I went 
down there, at that time, about 10 years ago, the research 
showed that there were 10 million Americans that were not 
covered by their health care system — 10 million. Last fall in 
Au Courant it was 35 million. 
 
Now what has been said here . . . Now I have no objections, I 
have no objections as to how the Americans conduct their 
health care system and I took no view in my presentation at the 
convention. But I think it was quite clear that the problems in 
the American systems, if they recognize them as problems, are 
getting more severe. Whereas it was 10 million about 10 years 
ago, it’s now 35 million. And everything that this minister has 
done and this government has done to our health care system 
tends to push it towards that system. If the people in the United 
States want that system, that’s fine with me, but I don’t want 
that system. I want the system we have in Canada because I 
think it’s a better system. 
 
Now the push in Canada by the federal Tories is towards a 
two-tiered system towards increasing the costs of the health 
care system. The drug legislation that the federal government 
passed tends towards that. The drug plan, which has been 
brought here in Saskatchewan, tends towards that. I call it the 
sick tax, it’s the Tory sick tax. And the reason you call it the 
Tory sick tax is quite simple, because the only people that pay it 
are those that are sick. You do not pay this prescription fee 
unless you’re sick. And you pay the fee of a deductible of $125, 
and you pay a deterrent fee of 20 per cent on your prescription 
costs from thereon. All of this tending towards the two-tier 
system. 
 
The hospital waiting lists, the same thing. The hospital waiting 
lists are so bad in Saskatoon that it approaches being 
unbelievable — unbelievable. 

(2000) 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I don’t want to take too much time in this 
estimate, but I wanted to register some serious considerations I 
have about information, about the timing of the presentation of 
the information, and about believing what this government says. 
You can’t believe what this government says. They give you 
ads, you know. They give you the ad from the member for 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden that says they’re going to remove the 
deterrent fees, any deterrent fees or charges on the prescription 
drug plan. You can’t believe their ads; not worth the paper 
they’re written on. You can’t believe what this government says 
about health care. 
 
This evening — this very evening — while I went out for 
supper, I was coming out of the restaurant, Mr. Minister, and a 
gentleman approached me. He says, just a minute, I want to talk 
to you. I did not know the man. He introduced himself, and he 
said that he knew who I was. And he said, I have a couple of 
things I want to tell you. One of them was about SaskTel, which 
is no relation to what’s happening this evening; the other one 
was about the prescription drug plan. And I’m going to pass on 
what that gentleman had to say this evening, just over the 
supper period, around 5:30 this evening, 6 o’clock. 
 
This gentleman back in July had incurred a $300 prescription 
drug bill. He sent his receipts in. He was waiting for his 
reimbursement. He waited months, and nothing happened. He 
finally phoned the department, and they said, we’ve received 
nothing. They said, go to your dentist, or go to your druggist, go 
to your druggist; you’ll have to get a new set of receipts. So he 
went to his druggists, and his druggist, as you can understand, 
would be disgruntled about having to dig up another set of 
receipts because this government has inflicted some more 
bureaucracy on the druggists of Saskatchewan. But as this was 
happening, he finally got a call from the prescription drug plan 
in November. This was in July when he sent the $300 bill in. In 
November he finally got a call from the department who said, 
oh, we found your receipts. 
 
Now I’m not faulting the bureaucracy, the people that work in 
the bureaucracy. I think what this minister has done, not only in 
this department but in the other departments, is loaded on 
inefficient bureaucracies and more and more red tape and 
procedures to go through, that the opportunity to lose 
prescriptions such as this has gone up and up. That’s one case I 
wanted to mention, Mr. Minister. 
 
I have another one that I wanted to mention. I had a call in May, 
and this is in my own constituency. This gentleman called me 
up. He was over 80 years old, lived in my constituency. His 
wife broke her hip on May 19. She is about 80 years old. He 
phoned me up; he was desperate. His doctor could not get the 
lady into the operating room at University Hospital. This 
happened on May 19. He called me on May 21. Finally, on the 
late afternoon of May 28 the lady had her operation. So this 
lady, who broke her hip — 80 years old — broke her hip on 
May 19; finally on May 22 she got in and had the operation that 
was required. 
  



 
June 9, 1988 

 

1993 
 

Now this smacks, Mr. Chairman, of inaccessibility, which is 
one of the corner-stones of health care in this province, at least 
in previous times — doesn’t seem to be the order of the day 
now — inaccessibility to the health care service, and that’s what 
this gentleman had a problem with. The other gentleman had a 
problem with the bureaucracy that this government has built up 
around a number of programs . . . You know, take the gasoline 
tax, drug plan, you take it; they’ve built up the bureaucracy. 
 
They have their various reasons for doing it, but I suggest to 
you, Mr. Minister, that that’s not good enough. That’s not good 
enough for the people of Saskatchewan. You’re going to have 
to do a lot better, and I am surprised at the minister. It appals 
me that this minister comes into this House on the day of his 
estimates — virtually at the time they’re going to start — and 
dumps four reports dealing with his department on the desks of 
the members, and then sits back and pretends that this is open 
government. That appals me, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I don’t know what the minister is formulating 
over there, but just in case he is just consulting with his officials 
for the sake of consulting, I will give him something to answer. 
I want to know why he dumped those four reports on our desks 
today, as his estimates are starting. And I also want to know 
why this gentleman, who had a $300 drug bill which you lost 
. . . Are you going to pay him interest on his money? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — A couple of things, before I get to the 
specific cases that the member raises. As it relates to your 
comments regarding the . . . You know, you’ve said several 
things here. One, that everything we have done just tears down 
the system, and it goes on into some of that sort of rhetoric that 
we’ve heard before — unbelievable lists — and he talks about 
some of those things. 
 
I would ask the member from Saskatoon Westmount if he’s 
really proud of his days in . . . You know, just driving in your 
own city and looking at St. Paul’s, what’s happening there. And 
do you ever wonder to yourself, why was there no expansion at 
St. Paul’s during those days? Why was there no commitment to 
City Hospital in those days? Those are legitimate questions, 
because as the member from Nutana keeps saying, well the 
waiting list wasn’t as high at that time, so we didn’t commit to 
the St. Paul’s or the City Hospital at that time. 
 
I say that this kind of enterprise and the kind of hospital needs 
that are there — in that city of Saskatoon and certainly here, 
and in other places — those needs are there and the planning 
that must go on for those needs has to be long in advance of 
when the circumstance arises that we have these kinds of lists. 
 
And it’s a matter of having the foresight to look forward and 
recognize the demographics and the number of seniors that we 
have, and the number of people with hip replacements required, 
and the number of people with knee joint replacements, the 
number of people with the requirements of ophthalmic surgery, 
and so on — all of those things. 

So I just say to the member: look, you know, while it’s very 
easy, and it’s fine, and we’ll get into this sort of thing. And I 
recognize that, and as I said, I came with my eyes open. But the 
important thing for you to think about, I think, is to say to 
yourself once in a while, are you really proud of that 11 years 
without expansion at University Hospital, no commitment to 
City Hospital, no expansion at St. Paul’s? What happened 
there? And I just ask you those questions. 
 
You say we’ve torn down. I mean what did you do as it relates 
to rehabilitative care, rehabilitative care in this city? Wascana 
hospital is now going up. That rehabilitative care is based on 
the needs of this province, not only presently, but on into the 
future — those needs which were identified and which were 
identified by everybody in the field long before, long before. 
And rehabilitative care is there; any rehabilitative care 
commitment is there, and what government is about is making 
some choices. 
 
We made choices and with the choices we made we said, 
rehabilitative care will be looked after. That means injured 
workers, inured and disabled children in this Wascana hospital 
over here for all of this province, and for the southern half of 
this province, certainly. We made choices as it relates to that 
hospital construction I talked about. 
 
We made choices as it relates to an area that you neglected in a 
very serious way and that’s the alcohol and drug abuse area. 
Those areas were neglected. We’ve made choices in there and 
given significant money, and committed significant money, not 
only in this year or in the last year, but significant money over a 
period of time. All of those things are important to do; we’ve 
made those choices and have said those commitments are there. 
 
We made choices as it relates to nursing homes, too. Nursing 
homes. We made choices in that area and you did as well. And I 
grant you that; you had the right to make those choices and you 
made them. And the member who’s just sat down was in 
cabinet, and was part of making the choice to say there will be 
no nursing home construction in this province — 1976 you 
made that choice. And you imposed a moratorium on nursing 
home construction across this province much to the dismay, 
serious dismay of rural communities all across the province. 
 
We’ve made the choice that we’re going to build those nursing 
home beds. We’ve also made the choice that we’re building 
nursing home beds as integrated facilities which ties in with, 
and speaks directly to, the viability of rural hospitals — some of 
the small ones. We’ve made that choice and we’ve said that’s it, 
and we’re going to do that. And we are doing it much to the 
pleasure of rural communities. And I will be the first to say 
there are other rural communities who have not received their 
project yet, but there are rural communities who are out there 
now raising their local portions and dealing with that in a 
positive way. And they will have that money raised, and we will 
have the commitment there, and those nursing home 
construction projects will carry on. 
 
So just to put all of that stuff into context, I would say . . .  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

 

1994 
 

Now we get to the specific case of the gentleman that you 
mentioned as it relates to the drug plan, and I can only say I 
don’t know . . . The circumstances as you’ve outlined it is, I 
understand, the circumstance. I don’t know the specific case or 
whatever, and as I understand it, he has received his money, but 
it was a long delay because of a mix-up in terms of having lost 
his receipts or whatever, I think, as you’ve outlined it. 
 
I know that there were something in the order to 235,000 claims 
last year. I don’t think that circumstance was around for very 
many. One is too many, I’ll admit that to you. And there may 
have been more, and I’m sure that there . . . I believe there 
probably were more in that circumstance with that inundation 
that we were subjected to. 
 
So all I can say to you . . . And you asked the specific question: 
will we be paying interest. The member knows that we won’t, 
and it’s just not the nature of anything within the government, 
that the government does it and can’t get into that whole 
process of paying interest on that money. And I understand the 
question that is raised in the public about that, and I’ve heard it 
many times, as you have, and you’ve been a member here for a 
lot longer than I have. And you have heard those kinds of 
questions in the past from various other times. 
 
So all I can say to you is that, you know, it’s an unfortunate 
circumstance that you outlined. I’m glad that he’s got his 
money now, and I understand his consternation, as well, for not 
having received it earlier. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, you forgot to answer my 
question about those four reports you laid on the Table today. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — As it relates to the reports, and I had it 
down here, I wanted to say that because the member from 
Lakeview raised it, right off the bat — and justifiably so — and 
you were justified very much in raising that, as well. 
 
(2015) 
 
The reports should have been tabled a matter of a month or two 
ago, and I’ll say that here. I should have had those on the Table 
a month or so ago, and it has nothing to do with the folks in the 
Department of Health, I’ll say that. These folks had them over 
from the building there into my own office, and they were in the 
vault of the office, and I’ll give you the whole circumstance of 
how this happened, which I’m not proud of, but which I’m 
being very forthright with you. 
 
I went in, in anticipating of these estimates coming today, and I 
asked one of the folks in my office for the annual report of the 
Department of Health to just give me the report because in 
anticipating a couple of questions, and they went for the reports, 
and they went into the vault and there the reports had not been 
tabled — my little package of reports that I should have had in 
here and into the House. 
 
So that’s a thing that I’ll take direct responsibility for. I’ll take 
responsibility obviously, as I must, for everything in  

the department, both here and in the department and out in the 
field. But in this specific case, and I say to the member from 
Westmount, I had every intention of mentioning that to the 
member from Lakeview earlier on today, so it’s not a . . . As I 
recall, she spoke right till 5 o’clock and I didn’t have any 
opportunity. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Minister, I will accept your apology 
to the House in so far as I can for myself. I realize that happens 
once in a while, but I would suggest that possibly next year 
we’ll be asking you very early for your report just to keep you 
on your toes. 
 
The prescription drug . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, they 
should be ready very soon, Mr. Minister. Probably you could 
send them out to us in August, September. Maybe we’ll be here 
and we can just pass them out during August while we’re here. 
 
Mr. Minister, like I said, everything that you’ve done in health 
care tends towards running down the health care system in 
Saskatchewan, and I don’t want that to happen. You get up here 
and you talk about our record. Our record is no problem to us 
out there, no problem at all. We don’t have a problem with it. 
As a matter of fact, the people are really not talking about our 
record, they’re talking about your record. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — And that’s what they were talking about 
in Eastview. You got the message, Mr. Minister, or maybe you 
didn’t hear about Eastview, but there was . . . It was circulating 
around there, and it would have done you wonders, Mr. 
Minister, to go out and walk around a little bit in Eastview 
constituency because it would have been a valuable lesson to 
you about health care in Saskatchewan. Because I was out there 
and took the opportunity to walk around and hear not only 
about health care but many other things. And they weren’t 
talking about us except to say, gee, it’s sure changed, and we 
don’t like it. And they talked about a whole bunch of your 
programs — how you slashed the dental nurses program, how 
you slashed the drug program, and how they can’t get 
information, and how they got this bureaucracy they’ve got to 
go through now. That’s what they’re saying in Eastview, and 
you missed that valuable opportunity to get out there and meet 
those people. 
 
Now I know you’re not going to take my word for it, Mr. 
Minister. You know you’re looking around for plastic solutions. 
You’re looking around for plastic solutions, anything that will 
put off the day of reckoning. And one of them is the creation of 
the task force at a bill of $1.5 million — and I suggest that’ll be 
the minimum. 
 
You’re suggesting plastic cards for another $2 million, Mr. 
Minister. You know, this whole thing is much more elementary 
than this — much more elementary that that. You know, if you 
just turn to your officials in your department and say, you 
know, give me the reports you’ve been afraid to give me up to 
this point because you knew I’d bite your head off, have them 
give you — have the people in your department tell you what’s 
wrong in health care. You don’t need a task force, Mr. Minister. 
You just need some resolve of your own, but I don’t think  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

 

1995 
 

you’ve got it. 
 
And I’m not the only one that says that. I have a letter here from 
someone I know you’ll be glad to hear from. This is May 17, 
’88 — very recent. And this person says — this was in the 
Leader-Post: 
 

I am appalled at the hardships forced upon people needing 
special medication for health problems. 

 
Oh, by the way, the sentence before that was: 
 

As the former Conservative candidate for the provincial 
legislature, I am appalled . . . 

 
Well you shed a candidate there and probably shed a supporter 
because he says . . . Essentially he says unless you get on the 
ball he’s not going to vote for you guys next time. And he was a 
candidate for you not too long ago, a Mr. Shepherd. 
 
And you know, even your own people — even your own people 
. . . Well I don’t whether those ones there could but some of 
those out there — because I had Tories in Eastview — Tories in 
Eastview were telling me what was wrong with the Tory party, 
what was wrong with their health care. 
 
The problem is a hearing problem you’ve got, Mr. Minister. 
You can’t hear. You’re insensitive. You’re not . . . you know to 
get up here and say that the four corners of the health care in 
Saskatchewan came out of the CUPE (Canadian Union of 
Public Employees) magazine, is just to try and derail the issue 
of facing up to health care. 
 
Those four corner posts of health care in Saskatchewan were 
around before CUPE was around, Mr. Minister. The pioneers of 
this province engineered those pillars and the manifestation of 
those ideas about health care — came out with hospitalization, 
pre-cancer treatment, a medical care plan, dental plan, 
prescription drug plan. That was the manifestation of the four 
corner posts of health care in Saskatchewan. And you attempt to 
divert that with the nonsense of saying that the critic got the 
idea out of the CUPE magazine, Mr. Minister. Just be honest 
with yourself, Mr. Minister. That’s all I’m asking. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well the only comment I’ll make, and I 
think if you go back to what I said about the CUPE magazine 
. . . I’ll just leave it quickly. But I was just going through and 
pointing out to the public and to all the members, frankly, that 
as I read through this, I was just reading and I could almost 
literally follow the member’s speech, going through this. So I’ll 
just tell you that that was one of the sources. 
 
But I would say to you, Mr. Chairman, that the things that the 
member tends to make like of, a couple of things that he makes 
light of . . . And, you know, I accept the source from which they 
come. He makes light of the fact that we are talking about the 
technology that will be afforded with the technology of the 
plastic card, and so on, as it relates to the payment for drugs and 
the potential applications of that kind of technology for several 
things in this sector. 
 
Those are forward-looking things and we don’t apologize  

for that. We don’t apologize for looking at what technology can 
bring to the administrative side of health care. If any one of us 
would think for a moment — and I invite you all to do that — 
technology has been very, very rapid. The advancement of 
technology has been very, very rapid in the medical science 
area, in the treatment area of the health care sector, and the use 
of technology in the administrative side of health care has not 
been very rapid at all. And one should ask the question: why is 
that? And it’s a very difficult question to answer because the 
administrative side of this very large enterprise we call the 
health care sector is a very large administrative . . . It is a very 
large bureaucracy and all the rest of it, and it goes around the 
piece. 
 
So there’s no reason in the world that we should not look for the 
best technology as it relates to the administrative side of health 
care and the delivery of that health care to our citizens. 
 
And the second one is the commission. The member, as well, 
talked a little bit about the commission. And I just say to him 
that those two things, the card and the commission, both of 
which you tend to just sort of dismiss and say it’s some kind of 
a plot, or whatever, that you like to do . . . And like I said to 
your colleague, I recognize what this forum is about and I 
recognize what it’s like to be in opposition and what it is to be 
government. And I know the member does, as well, having sat 
on both sides of the House, as I have. 
 
I’ll just say to you that both of those things, the card and the 
technology and what that might afford to us, and the 
commission, are both forward looking and they’re the kinds of 
things, the kind of initiatives that we need and that will be 
widely regarded by the public of this province when they come 
to understand how well they both will serve us. I just will say 
that and I will stand upon that and make no apology at all for 
attempting always to be forward looking in some of these areas. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, will you send me a copy of that 
CUPE pamphlet that you talk about because I don’t have it in 
my possession and I’ve never seen it. I would like a copy of it, 
please. Will you send it over. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I will say to the member: I won’t send 
this; I would never part with this. You know, this is my bedtime 
reading. This is funny. But I will tell you this. It’s called The 
Facts by the Canadian Union of Public Employees, submitted 
for publication to the CUPE PR department at 21 Florence 
Street, Ottawa, so I would suggest if you write to 21 Florence 
Street, Ottawa, Ontario, K2P 0W6 — or maybe you could 
phone them at area code (613) 237-1590 — I’m sure the 
Canadian Union of Public Employees would send you one of 
these copies. And that’s the best I can do for you. I’m sorry. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, you made an allegation that we 
quoted from that line and verse, now send us a copy if you’re 
going to make that allegation. 
 
Number one, will you send us a copy? Number two, why are 
saying this is bad literature? Simply because it’s written by 
CUPE? Is that why, Mr. Minister? 
 
  



 
June 9, 1988 

 

1996 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I said earlier I only have the one copy 
and I won’t send it to you. But I very much made it very clear 
to you, and you can have a look at it. But make a phone call. I 
gave you the number. Phone. They’ll probably send it to you. 
 
And all I say to you is . . . All I’m saying is that the particular 
article — and we can get off on this, I suppose — but the 
particular little booklet is one put together, not as it relates to 
health care necessarily — there’s a section on health care and a 
section on education — and it’s all based on the opposition of 
this particular organization to the whole concept of trade with 
the United States, and that’s what it’s all about. 
 
So all I’m just saying, and I pointed that out earlier, and just to 
make the point that if you haven’t used the copy, some of your 
researchers then have been using the copy to commit to the 
notes, or the ones that you were using. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Minister, do you mind if we borrow it and 
xerox it and we’ll return it to you? Do you mind that, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — See me when the House adjourns, I may 
well lend you my book. But I don’t really want to part with this 
book, Mr. Chairman; it’s really important that I hold onto this. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, you might find that report funny, but the people of 
Saskatchewan, sir, do not find you funny, nor I don’t think 
they’ll find you making light of the serious health care concerns 
funny. I think that they’re very serious about the way you’re 
undermining the health care system. 
 
In addition, Mr. Minister, I would like to add my comments 
about and concerns about releasing this information just prior to 
these estimates. You released your plastic card idea during the 
by-elections because you were trying to get yourself out of the 
political hole. That didn’t work. You released the information 
just before these estimates. You announced the task force 
yesterday just before these estimates to try and get yourself out 
of the political hole. That won’t work either. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have to join with my colleagues tonight and 
protest that you are, in fact, breaking your promise to preserve, 
to protect, and to build health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
Viewers, I’m sure, will not be very encouraged by what they 
hear you saying tonight. You don’t build, Mr. Minister, by 
dismantling; you build by strengthening a system. You build by 
reinforcing and you build by adapting to change. You talked 
tonight about health challenges, and I agree there are many 
health care challenged to be faced. Your challenge, Mr. 
Minister,, has been to see how quickly you can cut health care 
in Saskatchewan. If you’re serious about consultation and 
communication, read the executive summary of the SHA’s 
(Saskatchewan Health-Care Association) brief that was 
presented to you in March of ’88, where they talk about the 
need for better communication, co-operation and co-ordination 
in health care in this province. 

You’re not strengthening it, that is, health care, Mr. Minister. 
You’re dismantling it and you’re privatizing. It has been very 
clearly demonstrated tonight. You have abandoned the very 
important and fundamental principles upon which our health 
care system has been built — the principles of universality, of 
accessibility, of comprehensiveness, and of public 
administration. 
 
(2030) 
 
I haven’t seen that CUPE publication either, Mr. Minister, and 
if they say that then they must have read the Hall report, which 
I would suggest you do as well, sir. You may not believe the 
New Democrats, Mr. Minister, but surely you believe people 
when they tell you of the hardships created by your government 
in terms of the significant cuts to health care. 
 
Your candidate in Saskatoon Eastview, I would suggest that 
you give her a call — I certainly didn’t see you up there talking 
to people during the by-election — give her a call, because she 
has publicly acknowledged that your health care cuts are 
creating hardships for people of Saskatchewan and it was a 
major issue that made you lose your deposit in Eastview. 
 
I spoke two days ago on health care, on an important motion put 
forward by my colleague from Saskatoon Centre, asking your 
government to restore the prescription drug program in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Minister, residents of Saskatchewan feel betrayed. They 
feel betrayed, if I may use that word, because you do not listen, 
you do not acknowledge their pleas for financial relief in the 
prescription drug program. In fact, your members laugh — and 
I’ve seen them myself — at hearing about examples of hardship 
of the people of province. Your members laugh at hearing about 
starving children — I saw that last week again. They laugh 
when they hear about women being turned away from transition 
houses. They laugh about people driving for miles to get needed 
dental care as if that’s not the case. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Did you write this? 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Yes, I wrote this, sir. I hope you listen and take 
notes. 
 
Your people laugh about hearing of 10,000 people on the 
waiting list in Saskatoon as if it somehow is funny. Mr. 
Minister, you’re laughing now. It’s not funny. It’s not funny. 
You may be laughing at me, but those people don’t think this is 
funny. 
 
Mr. Minister, two days ago when I related some examples of 
drug hardship situations some of your members — I talked 
about seven examples, real, live people — some of your 
members were laughing. Why? I don’t know, sir. I saw nothing 
funny about this. My only guess is that it’s part of the arrogance 
and the insensitivity that I see on that side of the House. 
 
You know from the two recent by-elections that people in this 
province do not find your attitudes or your health care policies 
funny. In fact, yesterday you may have noted — I  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

 

1997 
 

know you people don’t like to read the Leader-Post — but you 
may have noted that Vander Zalm, who’s going in the same 
direction you are, lost an election by over 5,000 votes in a 
strong Social Credit seat. Both that government and your 
government are going in the wrong direction, Mr. Minister, and 
I suggest that you’re going to have a lot of difficulty holding 
onto your seat. 
 
Mr. Minister, your policies in health care have been very 
devastating to individuals and families in this province. When, 
Mr. Minister, are you going to start putting people first? 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to talk about another example, Mr. 
Minister, of a family that’s experiencing hardship thanks to 
your policies. This I received in my office just yesterday. It’s a 
situation of a constituent. They have 18 and 19-year-old young 
adults living at home. Both are attending school. There are 
additional family costs associated with these young people 
remaining with their family, even though one’s 18 and one’s 19. 
Neither of these young people are earning money. The parents 
suggested to me that it costs between 80 and $90 a month to 
feed these young people. They’re paying for it, of course, 
because they’re trying to help out. 
 
Since both of these young people are over 18, they’re not 
eligible to be included under the family deductible of $125. 
Their deductible as a family, family unit of four, is $375, Mr. 
Minister. This family is very upset. You look surprised. Now 
their deductible is $375; this is what they’re sharing with me. 
They have asked me to convey their disappointment in you 
because of this, and of course they would like this to be 
changed so that anyone living in the family unit would be under 
the $125 deductible. And that means they have to . . . Otherwise 
they have to pay almost $400 before they get any relief. Mr. 
Minister, you like to, and your Premier likes to, talk about 
families and family life and supporting families. The problem 
is, you and your government only talk about it; you don’t do 
anything about it. You are not supporting families, Mr. 
Minister. Tell this family, tell this family that you’re building 
health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
Plastic cards won’t help this family, who feel very financially 
strapped, Mr. Minister. This is an added cost. The prescription 
drug costs are an added cost to this family by your government 
that cannot be afforded by this family. And don’t forget, Mr. 
Minister, they are also experiencing the effects of your flat tax 
increase, your school and property increases, your tuition fee 
increases, your sales tax increase, your licence tax increase, 
your telephone tax increase, and on and on. I might add, Mr. 
Minister, they’re also helping to pay your debt off at a rate of 
$1 million per day interest. 
 
Mr. Minister, how much do you think, and your government 
think, that people can continue to pay? What is the limit that 
you can stretch people to, as you and your government continue 
to mismanage your economy and squander our finances? 
 
Individuals and families by the thousands have exceeded their 
limits, their ability to meet their financial obligations in this 
province. We’re the second highest percentage of  

people living in poverty of any province in the country. Those 
are federal statistics. They’re not New Democrat statistics, Mr. 
Minister. Surely, you must be embarrassed about that. When 
will you people get that message and do something about it? 
When will you start putting people first? 
 
Mr. Minister, in the Saskatoon Eastview by-election I can 
reaffirm what has been said just a few minutes ago by the 
member from Saskatoon Westmount. The message was clear: 
your managing the Saskatchewan health care system is 
considered to be so horrendous, your rhetoric is so misleading 
that you actually, go to Saskatoon, you actually contribute to 
people’s stress and strain and illness, when your job, sir, is to 
relieve it and to support relieving of it. 
 
I’m aware of a family in Riverhurst — you like to talk about 
rural Saskatchewan. This family had to drive 73 kilometres to 
Outlook and 80 miles to Moose Jaw for recent dental work for 
their children. Well, what does that mean to this family in rural 
Saskatchewan? Well, it meant that the parent had to take time 
off work. They had to take their children out of school for two 
or three days. 
 
This is not accessible health care, Mr. Minister, that you talk 
about. This is a hardship that this family cannot afford to 
experience. This creates additional stress and strain that’s 
clearly linked to your policy, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now I know that you view dental care as fringe health care 
because I heard you say that two or three months ago in 
Saskatoon at the Holy Cross High School. Well I can tell you, 
Mr. Minister, that this family from Riverhurst does not view 
dental care as fringe health care, nor do we on this side of the 
House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — I have another example, Mr. Minister, because 
I don’t want you to think that we’re just throwing out a bunch 
of rhetoric. I want you to get the message that we’re talking 
about real families and real people and their real experiences, 
and these people are calling us every day. 
 
One call I got yesterday — here’s a family on partial social 
assistance. They have a son who’s 12 who’s still under the 
dental program. He’s needs a procedure called grafting or 
graphing — and I’m not familiar with it — but this is what’s 
being shared with me. They cannot afford it, Mr. Minister. They 
have explored coverage. They’ve talked to officials in Social 
Services whom I know; they’ve talked to officials in Health, 
one of who is here tonight; and their information is that no one 
will cover it. Social Services will not cover it; Health will not 
cover it. The dentist is saying that this is essential dental work 
that’s required, and if it’s not, the outcome is that this youngster 
may lose his teeth. 
 
Now this family is obviously feeling very distressed about this. 
They’re wondering where to turn, where to go with this. And I 
can certainly provide your officials with the name of this family 
— and I see you’re expressing interest in hearing that and I 
appreciate that — but my point is there are many, many 
families like this whose  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

 

1998 
 

names you don’t know. And this isn’t a statistic. This is a 
family, a real live family. 
 
Another family I have, Mr. Minister, a prescription drug 
concern, a family in Saskatoon, one of my constituents. It’s a 
couple with a son aged 21; father had a brain tumour recently; 
he’s got some scar tissue that requires ongoing medications 
costing about $115 per month. The son is unemployed, thanks 
to, I would suggest, your policies on job creation — your failed 
policies on job creation. At any rate, this son has a severe case 
of asthma, drug costs anywhere from 80 to $100 a month. So 
this family is paying 200 to $215 per month, up-front money, 
Mr. Minister. The son is living at home — yet another example 
of not being covered under the family’s $125 deductible. 
 
And another concern they have — of course they’re concerned 
about the deductible — another concern they have is that they 
have seen drug costs increase over the last seven months, as 
was illustrated by the member from Regina Lakeview, that 
theirs has gone up an average of 25 per cent, Mr. Minister, and 
it’s becoming to be prohibitive to them to, in fact, get the 
needed drugs. 
 
They wanted you to know that they’re very upset about this. 
Again I can provide the name. I would be happy to do that. 
They are also concerned and they wanted me to advise you of 
this tonight, that they’re very concerned about your array of tax 
increases that I just talked about. 
 
And I was very pleased to hear my colleague from Saskatoon 
Westmount talk about the example of the gentleman who 
approached us on the street tonight when we were coming out 
of a restaurant having supper, recognized us, and stopped us on 
the street to talk about his problems with the prescription drug 
program. I mean, it’s come to that, Mr. Minister, and I wish you 
would get that message. 
 
As I said, these examples come to our attention every day, and 
they must come to the attention of your members, sir. Surely 
they come to the attention of your members. Aren’t they giving 
you this feedback? Either that or they’re not approachable, or 
you people simply don’t listen. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Minister, as has been brought out today — and I 
want to say more about this later on in these estimates — but 
your disgraceful handling of the hospital waiting list issue was a 
major issue, a major issue in the Saskatoon Eastview 
by-election, there is no question about that. It has been well 
documented, and I will provide examples again in the next day 
or two of those, the suffering and pain that people are going 
through as they await necessary surgery. 
 
(2045) 
 
And I can tell you, I can tell you that I talked to a prominent 
physician in Saskatoon, and he tells me that four or five of his 
colleagues are leaving. The fundamental reason is that we’ve 
lost the ability in Saskatchewan to provide basic health care 
services. He is going to some place where that can be done. 
 

An Hon. Member: — Ontario. 
 
Mr. Pringle: He’s going to Ontario, that’s correct. You’re 
hiding behind plastic cards, Mr. Minister, or task forces. It’s no 
help to the people in the examples I talked about tonight, these 
real people. And I would suggest, sir, that the task force is an 
18-month excuse and delay. 
 
In closing, on behalf of the family with the $375 deductible and 
hundreds and thousands of others like them, I appeal, Mr. 
Minister, to your sense of duty, if not your sense of compassion, 
to restore the drug plan as it was and then await your task 
force’s decision about what should be done with the 
recommendation . . . what should be done with it. But in the 
meantime, please restore the preventative cuts that you’ve 
made. Do the same with the dental program. Many dental 
technicians are still around. That plan could be re-established if 
there was just a commitment to it. 
 
You lose credibility when you talk about prevention and you 
talk about your commitment to health care and then you cut 
cost-efficient preventive programs, you simply lose your 
credibility, Mr. Minister. Then you try to recover politically 
with plastic cards or task forces. And I want to make it clear, 
I’m not being critical of the members on the task force; I am 
critical of some of your terms of reference, as our party was 
well articulated this afternoon by the critic on health care. But 
people see plastic cards for what they are. It’s just simply a 
chance to try and bring you out of your political hole. 
 
Please announce tonight, Mr. Minister, your decision to restore 
these important, preventive, cost-efficient programs that you 
have cut. Show some real leadership in health care. Show the 
people of Saskatchewan that you don’t agree with your Premier 
that Saskatchewan seniors are drug abusers. Seniors were very 
upset to hear that. Show your Premier you don’t agree with him 
and make some important decisions that put people first. Show 
the people of Saskatchewan that the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena was wrong the other night when he said 
that we just don’t have the money. 
 
I have here, Mr. Minister, a copy of an article from the Globe 
and Mail, June 2, 1988 — talks about Royal Bank’s first half 
profits jumped 30 per cent. And I’d just like to read a couple of 
paragraphs and make a comment about this. It says, and I quote: 
 

The Royal Bank of Canada showed a 30 per cent profit 
gain in the first half of its fiscal year despite large 
additions to its provision for possible losses on loans to 
less-developed countries. 
 
. . . the bank’s profit rose to $297-million from a restated 
$228-million a year earlier. 
 
. . . The bank said it intends to raise that percentage to 
about 45 per cent during the rest of the year . . . 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, your government cut the Royal Bank’s 
taxes by 2 per cent in the last budget, while yet all the same 
time, passing the tax burden and increasing taxes to 
Saskatchewan families — that you like to talk about supporting 
— another half per cent. And that was just in  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

 

1999 
 

the last budget; I’m not talking about the 1 per cent you added 
the year before. What hypocrisy, Mr. Minister, when you talk 
about a commitment to health care or you talk about supporting 
Saskatchewan families. When you cut tax to the Royal Bank, 
their profits jumped 30 per cent, and then you say you don’t 
have money for important health care services. Where are your 
priorities? 
 
Mr. Minister, it was no fluke that you lost your deposit in the 
Saskatoon Eastview and the Regina Elphinstone by-elections. 
 
I would like to just make a couple of comments. As the member 
from Saskatoon Westmount said, we have got 160 or 170 pages 
from you that should have been here months ago, so we haven’t 
had time to study those yet, but I would just like to make a few 
observations from one of the four booklets called Saskatchewan 
Health Prescription Drug Plan. And I’d like to take a look at 
the objectives of the prescription drug program, Mr. Minister. 
 
The first objective says to: “Reduce the direct cost of 
prescription drugs to Saskatchewan (families) residents.” Well, 
Mr. Minister, you’re not achieving that objective, you have 
increased cost to Saskatchewan families, residents. 
 
The third objective you say to: “Reduce the cost of drug 
materials by encouraging effective price competition and 
quantity discounts.” Well, Mr. Minister, that’s not happening 
either. We’ve just heard today, and we’ve heard from the 
experiences of people throughout the province, that drugs have 
gone up anywhere from 25 per cent to 300 per cent. So you’re 
not meeting that objective either, Mr. Minister. 
 
Therefore the only conclusion that one can reach is that you’re 
simply not meeting the objectives of the program. But are you 
going to do about it? That’s your challenge, Mr. Minister. 
 
What the report doesn’t say, Mr. Minister, what this report 
doesn’t say is just as important as what it says. It doesn’t say 
that in many cases the people of this province care putting up 
hundreds of dollars, up front, that they cannot afford, for 
necessary medications; it doesn’t say that they wait four to six 
weeks before they get their money back; and it doesn’t say that 
people cannot afford their medication so they send them back 
over the counter; or that they’re making decisions between 
whether to buy food or whether to buy medications. 
 
These are the real stories about the prescription drug program, 
Mr. Minister. Those are the real stories. And I suggest that you 
take a serious look in your planning for next year, you take a 
serious look at the objectives and measure the feedback you’re 
getting from the people of the province as to whether or not 
you’re achieving those objectives, and then have the courage to 
make the necessary adjustments, have the courage to admit that 
you made a mistake. People will accept that, and they’ll admire 
you for that. And put the money there to reinstate the program. 
 
Mr. Minister, in conclusion . . . If I could have your attention, 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to ask you a question on  

concluding. In conclusion, I would like to ask you if you would 
please, if you would please reinstate, make an announcement 
tonight, make an announcement tonight to reinstate the 
prescription drug program in its original form pending the 
recommendations of the task force, pending the 
recommendations of the task force. If the task force says to 
abandon the prescription drug program, then you can make the 
decision about it at that time. 
 
Please make a decision tonight to reinstate the prescription drug 
program, to reinstate the children’s dental program so people 
don’t have to drive 75 kilometres for basic dental services, and 
make a commitment tonight, Mr. Minister, to adequately fund 
for operational costs, not just shells — the University Hospital 
and the cancer clinic and St. Paul’s. Make a commitment to 
adequately fund, through operational grants, the hospitals. 
Announce those decisions tonight, and the people of the 
province will be very thankful to you, and I would be happy to 
stand up after you finish and commend you for that leadership. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, a couple of remarks just 
in response to the member from Eastview, and I appreciate 
some of the comments that he made. A couple of things though 
that I want to make a point of. One is, the member — and we’ll 
come back to the drug plan in a minute because there’s several 
things that I want to say about that — the member makes 
reference to the fact that, you know, we’re building shells in his 
home city of Saskatoon and that those shells are not funding 
and there is not operational funding and so on. And nothing 
could be further from the actual fact. And that’s . . . I just 
wanted to be sure that the member understands that. Those 
shells that you refer to are something that you should be proud 
of as a member, and as a person living in Saskatoon, that those 
facilities are going up. You should not be proud to be associated 
with a party who was a government, who did not build on to 
those three hospitals, and I’ve mentioned that before. 
 
You mentioned about specialists, and you mention a particular 
specialist and two or three, and I believe you’re referring to the 
orthopedic people from University Hospital. I can inform you 
that the people at the hospital, in the specialty area, are 
convinced that there will be no problem with — I shouldn’t say 
no problem — but they are convinced that there will be 
replacement orthopedic surgeons there at University Hospital 
and that they will be able to carry on. And it’s always . . . That’s 
an ongoing circumstance that we’ve had in this province 
always, frankly always, in terms of having the supply of certain 
specialities that we might like to have. 
 
We’ve got a maldistribution of specialists across the country, 
and certainly we have a maldistribution of physicians across the 
province here. But in the orthopedic area that you made a 
specific reference to, I would just give you the commitment that 
that is being looked after by the hospital people and there will 
be orthopedic people there. 
 
I give you another example, as it relates to specialists leaving 
the province from time to time, and specialists  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

 

2000 
 

coming into the province from time to time, ophthalmologists in 
this city of Regina, for example. We have seven now. There 
will be an eighth ophthalmologists in Regina by July. I dare say 
that there hasn’t been a time when we’ve had ophthalmologists 
in Regina. 
 
So that kind of recruitment, and the kind of thing that’s going 
on in many of these specialty areas — the same speciality areas 
that I refer to in my earliest remarks here — as it relates to those 
areas where there is increasing pressure. No one can deny that, 
and I certainly don’t attempt to, that there is increasing pressure 
as it relates to orthopedics, as it relates to ophthalmology. 
 
And those are the two areas, especially those two areas and on 
other, in general surgery, where we have some . . . the waiting 
list pressure in Saskatoon that you referred to earlier. But we’ve 
had a drop of something like 1,575 people from the waiting lists 
from September of ’87 till April of this year, and that trend line 
is continuing. That’s based on a couple of initiatives that we 
have brought forward, one being the day surgery unit at City 
Hospital, and the trend that’s changing so that there’s more and 
more of these surgical procedures that are done on a day 
surgery basis and that certainly brings down the waiting list. So 
I’d say that to the member and just . . . because I respect your 
concern as it relates to those things in the city that you live in 
and represent. There’s no question that we should all be 
concerned about those things, and we are. So you should know 
that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well, what are you doing about it? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — And I’ve outlined . . . The member from 
Nutana says what are you doing, and I’ve outlined some of the 
things that we’re doing. And I would say that you — none of 
you; none of you — should be very proud of your record, of 
your record of leaving that whole area and of not being forward 
looking, and of lacking the foresight to build for the future, 
which is now. 
 
We are now living in the future that you people neglected to 
look forward to, and that’s the problem that this government, 
whoever occupies this chair, would have to face now. Had it 
been one of you or me, it doesn’t matter. That person occupying 
the chair of the Minister of Health at this time in our history 
would be facing those problems that we’ve outlined because of 
the lack of foresight from some years ago. And I’ll say that very 
clearly and anyone who’s a thinking person in this province in 
any of our major cities or anywhere else in the province 
understands that clearly. 
 
Another point that I want to say to the member, and this is a 
point that, you know, I don’t want to dwell on too long, but I 
will say to you very clearly, and I think it’s important that you 
. . . You said in your earliest remarks that members on this side 
of the House and that I, you know particularly, was laughing at 
particular cases of hardship that you raised. Okay. Okay so now 
you . . .Okay and you indicate that I didn’t and I certainly will 
say to you and to the House in any open way, I did not, nor 
have I ever laughed at any particular case of hardship. 
 
And I want to say to the member as well, if you’re going to say 
that members on this side of the House — whether it  

be the other day during your comments in the House or today or 
any other time — were laughing at the circumstance that you 
were outlining, I want you to name the members now. Because 
what you’re saying is that these members are, well, just what I 
said. You said clearly that members on the government benches 
were laughing at particular cases of hardship that you outlined 
and I want you to say who they were so that they will have a 
chance to defend themselves and have a chance to put on the 
record that it is absolutely a falsehood what you have just 
outlined here. 
 
(2100) 
 
And it’s very important that we do that. And I don’t want to 
dwell on it in a big way and I know that you’re a new member 
in the House, but that’s no excuse for that kind of attack on a 
general sense, on all of these members because it did not 
happen the other day nor did it happen today, this evening. So 
all I’m saying is: stand in your place; name the members. Say 
which members laughed at hardship cases that were outlined by 
your or any of your colleagues, and those members will then 
have a chance to get up and clear the record and clear 
themselves and clear the case. So that’s all I will say about that, 
and I hope you’ll do the honourable thing and actually maintain 
that. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Well, Mr. Minister, a couple of comments. 
First of all, you didn’t answer my questions in response to the 
questions I raised so I’ll ask again. I would like to say that I am 
very, very proud of the record of the previous CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) and NDP 
governments in health care. You should be so lucky, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — How on earth do you think you inherited the 
best health care system in Canada? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — But what you have done, what you have done 
. . . Do you think we could not have responded to the times? Do 
you . . . I mean for Heaven’s sakes, when are you people going 
to start taking responsibility for the fact that you’ve been 
governing for almost seven years? Everything that comes up, 
you say, well if you wouldn’t have done this . . . Whether it’s 
potash lay-offs, or the health care system, or the educational 
system, or whatever, you blame us for 10 years ago. You have 
to start taking responsibility. You’re the government. You’ve 
been the government for well into your second term, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, in terms of me being from Saskatoon and 
recognizing building, health care buildings in the city, I have 
stated publicly during the by-election on at least two or three 
occasions that I, as a resident of the city, was thankful, and I 
complimented the government on those buildings. And so if I 
neglected to do that tonight, my apologies. I did it at that time. 
However, I was also concerned that empty shells without the 
committed funds to operate them don’t bring down the waiting 
lists for surgery. A building, you know, a building to provide 
cancer treatment with no equipment or commitments to  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

 

2001 
 

staff don’t deal with the cancer issue. Again, health care is a 
matter of balancing needed facilities with the ability to operate 
those facilities. And I’m not suggesting it’s easy, but you don’t 
address the problem unless you also give the hospitals money to 
operate. That was my point, Mr. Minister. 
 
So what I would like to ask you is: will you commit tonight, on 
behalf of people, the examples of families I talked about, will 
you make a commitment tonight pending the recommendations 
of the task force? I don’t think this an unreasonable request, 
because why on earth would you, if you were serious about the 
health care challenge and building health care for the future, 
why would you cut preventive cost-efficient programs and 
services when there’s still the capacity to get them in place at 
relatively little cost? Why don’t you reinstate those programs 
tonight, and then wait and see what the task force says about the 
prescription drug program and the children’s school-based 
dental program? That would give you the credibility that you’re 
missing if you would make that kind of commitment tonight, 
Mr. Minister. Will you please do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — A couple of things, and I will get to the 
drug plan before I sit down this time. I want to say to the 
member, it’s nice for you to be able to stand here and say, and 
as you have done here, you talk about the cancer clinic, and I 
think you made specific reference to a cancer clinic that’s just a 
shell and it has no commitment to staff, I think, if I use your 
terms. The facts are: there is commitment to staff; they’re there 
and they’re budgeted for. There is a new cancer clinic in that 
city of Saskatoon built by us, this government, but certainly 
built by the people of Saskatchewan, let’s face it. And they’re 
moving in, and I believe in this month of June as far as I know. 
But that’s ongoing and that’s done by the foundation people. 
And that commitment is there, the staff is in place. 
 
And you said something about the lack of the best of 
equipment. That’s not the case at all. In fact, nothing could be 
further from the real case. They have three linear accelerators in 
that new cancer clinic, the very best of equipment, and the staff 
to man it to the extent that that’s possible in this country. and 
there is a shortage of radiotherapists and you folks will know 
that. You folks know that very well. And there is a shortage of 
radiotherapists in the country and we have moved a significant 
way to deal with that in this latest agreement that’s just been . . . 
we hope is ratified very soon. You many know more about that 
thank I do, frankly. 
 
But I’ll just say to you that the cancer clinic, the staff and the 
equipment is all there — all of it is there. And yet the member 
will stand and say that’s not the case. Now it makes for a nice 
little story, I suppose, if you’re standing at the door in some 
campaign. But it is not an accurate story to say here and on the 
record, which you’ve just done. Now you can say it in your 
campaign, and you have done it, and you’ve said all these 
things, but they weren’t the fact. And it is not the fact as you 
outline it tonight. So that’s the case. 
 
And I just . . . And the other thing the member says he is very 
proud of, and that we should recognize that, when I speak of 
these hospitals that are being built now and that  

are soon to be moved into and so on. In the case of the 
University Hospital where there is a . . . the moving, the plan is 
. . . they are moving in, in fact, now. The St. Paul’s Hospital, all 
of these others that I’ve mentioned on several occasions tonight, 
the member needs to know — and I think all members over 
there need to know — to have the foresight to look down the 
road to the length of time that it takes to plan, to construct, and 
to move into one of these very large sophisticated hospitals that 
we’re talking about here, is a period of some seven to eight 
years. That’s how long it takes. 
 
So don’t say to me, you’ve been in government for six years 
and why haven’t you got all this done. Those things are being 
done and they’re very advanced — they’re all very advanced. 
And all I’m saying is that it’s fine to get into our political 
rhetoric, back and forth, and we will. And that’s the nature of 
this forum. But on the other hand, it’s important, as well, for 
you to recognize and for people that support your to recognize 
that that planning process is a very long one. It’s a very long 
process, but it’s an important process and it’s ongoing as a 
result of decisions taken by us to go ahead and build those 
hospitals. And the reason we took those decisions, because 
there was absolute neglect in taking those decisions prior. 
 
Now, the drug plan. The member mentions specific cases as it 
relates to the drug plan and I just want to reiterate to you and to 
your colleagues the circumstances surrounding the new drug 
plan and when we brought it in. We went to Manitoba and we 
asked them: what is your plan which works well? And we know 
that their plan worked well in Manitoba — they had a good 
plan. And their plan worked well and all of them, from the 
people administering it to the politicians in power at that time, 
the NDP government, all said it was a plan that works well. 
And we said, okay, if that plan works well and we believe that 
it’s important to have an understanding of what the costs of 
drugs are and so on, we will implement a similar plan — very 
similar plan, with some changes. One of the changes was that 
the deductible here is cheaper for seniors than it is there — $50 
for singles and so on. 
 
And all I’m saying is that that plan worked well. There were no 
stories of hardship cases in any communities across Manitoba. 
They just were not in existence, just were not in existence. And 
what I’m saying to you is that many of the problems that people 
have deal directly with a lack of acceptance of the fact that there 
is a change at all. There’s no question that that’s true. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, and to the hon. member, you raised 
specific cases and if you have . . . and as I’ve said to you before 
. . . You say, I think on the one case where there was a specific 
response required, that you would provide it to us and I urge 
you to do that . . . Two cases. Then please do that and we’ll get 
on to giving you an answer as soon as we can. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, I want to tell you for the 
record that statements that you’ve made about the cancer clinic 
are not completely true. They are not completely true and my 
colleague, the member from Regina Lakeview, will deal with 
this at another time. 
 
But what you have done is you’ve been very selective and  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

 

2002 
 

you’ve given some misleading statements. And for the record I 
want to tell you they’re not completely true. 
 
What I want to do now, Mr. Minister, is I want to deal with a 
specific case from my constituency — the case of Mr. Epp. And 
you might get your officials ready on that because I want to 
deal with that — the case of Mr. Epp. And I want to give a case 
of Mr. Epp as an example to show how you in this government 
are on the wrong track, Mr. Minister. You’re completely on the 
wrong track. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — You see what happened is, we in 
Saskatchewan had the best health care in the country, in North 
America, and probably in the world, probably in the world. And 
if you hadn’t gotten off the track, the track — and you’re 
relating the principles of medicare — then you wouldn’t be in 
the jam that you are. You wouldn’t be having to answer all 
these questions and all these specifications such as in the case 
of Mr. Epp. 
 
Now Mrs. Epp is watching on television tonight, and she’s been 
waiting, waiting to see . . . And she’s waiting to see what your 
answers are going to be with respect to her husband who had 
knee surgery started away back in 1984 and is still waiting — is 
on a waiting list and is still waiting — so that he can have his 
corrective knee surgery done. 
 
Now what’s happened is, instead of you adopting the principles 
of medicare — that is the principles of universality, of universal 
access, the principle of comprehensiveness, and of public 
administration — you’re going off on some scheme where 
you’re trying to use profit as the motive. We want service to be 
the motive for health care — service. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Now what’s happened is you’ve gotten 
yourself into some kind of a flat earth theory. If you’re wrong in 
principle, Mr. Minister, if you’re wrong in principle you will 
never ever be right in practice. And the principle of 
profit-operated medicine is the wrong way to go, and you 
should be endorsing the medicare scheme, and you should be 
endorsing the principles of medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Now let’s get on. And I want to ask for your 
commitment to be able to do something in the case of Mr. Epp. 
Now Mr. Epp had knee surgery back in ’84, and then what 
happened to him in ’84 is the knee surgery didn’t provide all the 
corrective . . . all the corrections that was done. So he went back 
to his doctor and the doctor advised that he go to a specialist. 
And he went to see a specialist. He went to see Dr. Begg, in 
Saskatoon I believe it is, and Dr. Begg said, he told him right 
there and then that he needed corrective knee surgery. So what 
has he done? Instead of being able to go in and get the 
corrective knee surgery, because he’s been having trouble with 
this knee since 1984, he was put on a waiting list, and he was 
told well maybe he can get in next year or the year after. It will 
take about a year. 
 

Now Mr. Epp has been in contact with you to no avail. They got 
in contact with my office and I wrote you a letter. And I want to 
know . . . And there was nothing happened as a result of the 
letter, Mr. Minister. There was nothing that happened as a result 
of the letter. 
 
And I want to know what you’re doing in the case of Mr. Epp. I 
want to know if Mr. Epp can be assured that there is some way 
that you’re going to be able to help him out. Because what’s 
happened here, Mr. Minister, what the system needs, is political 
surgery. There’s a political answer because it was a political 
problem. The waiting list is a political problem, and that’s why 
I’m coming to you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, first of all, Mr. Chairman, to the 
hon. member, my folks here, based on the information that 
you’ve just given us . . . Like we haven’t got this specific case, 
and you’ve said to me that you’ve written a letter to me and so 
on. I don’t have it right in front of me; we’ll certainly look for it 
right away here. 
 
And you can say well, the waiting list is a political problem. 
And I’ll say to you that the waiting list is a problem of demand 
and of resources and of a lack of building those hospitals in 
time. And it’s certainly not the case that we haven’t been going 
full speed ahead to try to have them in place in time and so on. 
And as I talked to you about earlier, the challenges are there for 
all of us not only in this province but elsewhere. 
 
But I’m going to need more information, and I would ask you to 
give it me, or send it over if you wouldn’t mind, just writing in 
on a paper when you wrote a letter to me, what it was, you 
know, exactly the case and so on. I know you’ve outlined that 
he was with Dr. Begg. I take from that that it was at St. Paul’s 
Hospital. Those are the kinds of things that I need to know, and 
our people I know are now, as a result of your question, looking 
for the specifics. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I’ll give you a few more particulars with 
respect to Mr. Epp, Mr. Minister, but I want to re-emphasize 
that I insist that this is a political problem. We never had 
waiting lists, and if you had . . . we never had waiting lists of 
this magnitude. The waiting lists now are 10 times what they 
were before — 10 times. 
 
It used to be, Mr. Minister, that you’d get sick, you’d go to the 
doctor, you’d get an appointment, get a referral, go to get your 
operation, go home, and get well. Now it’s get sick, go to your 
doctor, get your referral, then go home and wait. That’s what it 
is now: go home and wait. Go home and wait for a year. And 
that’s what we want an answer to, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, here’s the thing that really gets me, Mr. 
Minister. Here is the thing, and here’s the evidence for this 
being a political problem. After you were written, you replied to 
me, and I quote the letter that you replied to me on May 13. 
May 13 you said: 
 

Thank you for your letter of May 6 with respect to  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

 

2003 
 

Helen and Peter Epp of Prince Albert. This is to inform 
you that my office has already been in contact with Mrs. 
Epp and Dr. Begg regarding the waiting time for Mr. 
Epp’s surgery. I trust you will find this satisfactory. 

 
Signed, “Yours truly,” the minister who purports to be Minister 
of Health. You signed it yourself, and you tell me it’s not a 
political problem. I say it is a political problem. 
 
When I contacted Mrs. Epp again about this — which says, 
well, you’ve been in contact — she says, what do you mean? I 
haven’t heard anything from him. Those were her words; she 
says, I had not heard anything from him. And I phoned her 
again today. I say, have you had any reply; and she said, no. 
 
You owe Mrs. Epp an apology. You owe this House an 
apology. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, a couple of things. 
The member says well we never had waiting lists and so on. I 
mean, if you continue the debate at that level, in terms of 
waiting lists and the causes of them and so on, and say, well we 
never had waiting lists — I tell you, you had waiting lists, and 
the signals for those waiting lists were there for a good, long 
time. And those signals were things like I talked about earlier in 
terms of just the kind of thing you’re talking about now — 
orthopedic surgery and in ophthalmology, areas that for a very 
few years ago many of the procedures that are being done in 
those areas were unheard of. 
 
But the signals were there and the technology was advancing so 
that those procedures, not only were they heard of very quickly, 
but became commonplace across the country and certainly here 
in Saskatchewan. And that has caused a significant problem in 
terms of the numbers of people that can have hip replacements, 
knee joint replacements, things that were unheard of and a very 
short time ago. And I have had some personal experience in 
some of that area, and I know that the physician, the orthopedic 
surgeon that you refer to, Dr. Begg, very well as a matter of fact 
because of that. 
 
But I will say to you that the . . . So for you to take it to the 
level of, oh, we never had waiting lists — it’s not true; you had 
waiting lists. But what’s worse, what’s worse about that is you 
had those and those signals were there, and forward-looking 
people at that time, forward-looking people at that time, few of 
whom were in your own ranks, but forward-looking people 
knew that that was what was coming upon us. But did you 
respond in a forward-looking way? No, you did not. 
 
And so as I said a few minutes ago, whoever is in this 
responsibility now, whether it be this government, whether you 
are, here, or whether the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
was, over here, it would not matter. The circumstance, as it is in 
this jurisdiction and across the country, would be the same, and 
it is the same, and we are trying to accept these challenges as 
best we can. 
 
Now as it relates to the specific case that you mentioned, you 
say that I received a letter on the 6th; I acknowledged  

it on the 13th. I don’t have the other letter before me, but 
certainly there will be another letter going out to her. 
 
I would say to you that the circumstances surrounding this, I 
believe, would be that it’s based on . . . that it’s an elective case, 
and that this is a case that must be determined by, in this case 
Dr. Begg. And there’s little I can do about it. And I understand 
the pressures as well that Dr. Begg and others in his profession 
are under in terms of the kind of expectations people have, and 
also the emergency surgery that they are required to do in the 
orthopedic departments, and not only required to do but the 
emergency surgery that they have now the capability to do as a 
result of accidents and some of those things. 
 
So as I’ve said to you before, it’s a triumph, frankly, for 
medical science and for all of us that we have the capabilities of 
doing these things. It’s now . . . the challenge that we all face is 
to be able to respond to that as quickly as we can, and to 
respond to it so that there is accessibility and everybody can get 
in in a much quicker way than they are able to now in some of 
these circumstances that you outlined. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairperson. I 
have sat here for some several hours now listening to the 
Minister of Health reflect back on all of the ills of the health 
care system and refer to the problems that obviously, in his 
viewpoint, came about as a result of an NDP government from 
1971 to 1982. 
 
I think that the minister doesn’t realize, when he talks about 
signals, and from my point of view he’s got a few crossed 
signals, the minister doesn’t realize that his government has 
been the government of the day for the last six year. Mr. 
Minister, you can no longer talk about the problems of the 
health care system in the context of something that happened 20 
years ago, something that happened 15 years ago, something 
that happened seven years ago, or six years ago. You have had 
the opportunity for the last six years to take responsibility for 
the present state of our health care system. No one else is 
responsible Mr. Minister/ Your government is clearly 
responsible because of your underfunding and because of your 
lack of planning as it comes to our health care system here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now my colleagues in this legislature have spoken tonight 
about a number of specific cases that have come about as a 
result of your government’s health care cuts — some $18.6 
million last year. They’ve talked about some of the problems 
that have come about as a result of underfunding in our health 
care system, underfunding by your government. And I want to 
relay to you tonight an example of how your health care 
cut-backs, particularly your changes to the prescription drug 
plan, are hurting Saskatchewan families. 
 
Now we know that you are a government that purports to be 
pro-family; you purport to be pro-life. I have an example, Mr. 
Minister, that has been raised with you and your government 
officials, of a family in Saskatoon where the mother is six 
months pregnant; they are expecting their fourth child. This 
woman went into premature labour and was told by her doctor 
that she required a prescription drug that would cost the family 
$131. That  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

 

2004 
 

family didn’t have the money to come up with the up front costs 
for those drugs. That family didn’t have the money. 
 
This is what happens when you don’t have the money to buy 
prescription drugs, when you’re in a position where you’re in 
premature labour. You can go into labour, Mr. Minister; the 
baby can be delivered; and when you’re dealing with a 
six-month fetus or baby, you’re really dealing with an infant 
who is in a position where that infant has to go into a neonatal 
unit. And that infant goes into the neonatal unit for some 
months. And my understanding, Mr. Minister, that it costs the 
Government of Saskatchewan, approximately, between 31 and 
$40,000 to have a baby in a neonatal unit at University Hospital 
in the city of Saskatoon. 
 
For $131, Mr. Minister, this family didn’t have it. This family 
didn’t have $131 to purchase this drug that would prevent 
premature labour and would prevent the delivery of a premature 
infant. So what happens, Mr. Minister? This family had to go to 
other family members, go to neighbours — I don’t know who 
they had to go to — to come up with the money for this 
particular prescription drug. And my office, through myself, 
contacted your officials in your department, your political aides, 
to find out how we could resolve this problem for the following 
month, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now this was a drug that was not on the formulary, but your 
government officials deduced that it could be put on the 
formulary for the next couple of months while this woman 
continued her pregnancy. the only problem was, Mr. Minister, 
she still had to come up with the up front money for that 
particular prescription drug. That was the problem. And there 
have been other examples, Mr. Minister, that have been brought 
to my attention since this specific case, of women who are 
going into premature labour who require very expensive drugs 
in order to prevent the early delivery of a child. And I want to 
know, Mr. Minister, does this really make sense that these kinds 
of drugs are not available to the family if they don’t have the 
money in this province, they don’t have the money to pay the 
up front costs; why shouldn’t those drugs be available to the 
family when the Department of Health, the taxpayers of this 
province, are looking at horrendous, horrendous social and 
economic costs when premature babies are delivered between 
the six and seven or eight month period. Does that make any 
kind of social and economic sense for a government that says 
that it’s pro-family and it’s pro-life? How is that saving lives, 
Mr. Minister? How is that saving the family? And it certainly 
isn’t saving any money. 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I am aware of the case that 
the member raises. A couple of things, of points of clarification. 
The drug the member raises is . . . I think I wrote that to you on 
March 9, that that drug has been approved as a benefit drug in 
that case. But I know that’s not the gist of your question. The 
gist of your question is that she went forward for this drug, and 
I think if you go back and look at it, she was requesting a 
prescription for a full month’s supply at the time when she was 
unable to pay for the drug, and so on. I think there were some 
certain circumstances that could have been followed  

there, like a portion of it, or whatever. 
 
And I understand the cash flow problem can be a circumstance 
that somebody at the counter would not be able to deal with 
unless they can deal with a pharmacist on an ongoing basis and 
could deal with a credit from that pharmacist. Or there are 
programs available within the government, and I know the 
member is aware of it, as well, in terms of people with a 
circumstance like that who could apply for short-term benefits 
from the department of my colleague, the Minister of Social 
Services. And those kind of things are available to people, and I 
understand as well though, you know, the emotional 
circumstance of this case and, given the circumstance as you 
outline it here, it’s not the kind of thing where you’ve got other 
things on your mind, obviously, other than the financial 
circumstance, and I know that. 
 
But all I’m saying is that the drug plan per se, regardless, has no 
way to be able to deal with those dollars on the very, you know, 
at the moment of appearing at the drug store. But I believe as 
well that the pharmacist, given that circumstance, there would 
have been some short-term credit from the pharmacist, or 
whatever. I know that that’s the case. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I think you’ve missed the point 
of my remarks. This family, and there are thousands of families 
like them, are not eligible for social assistance benefits. They’re 
not eligible for a plan 1, a plan 2, or a plan 3 because of their 
income. 
 
Now there are families in this province that are low income 
families with children, or they may even be middle income 
families with children, but they do not have the money to pay 
for up front drugs, prescription drug costs. My point in all of 
this is this: that here is a family; they’re expecting their fourth 
child; this woman was in premature labour; she had to have the 
prescription drug like that; she had to have it to prevent a 
premature delivery. 
 
This woman had no option, Mr. Minister. She had no money, 
and her family had no money, and there are other women in her 
position. And her question to me was this: this is a government 
that purports to be pro-life, and this woman was pro-life; this is 
a government that purports to be pro-family, and this woman 
was pro-family; this woman was worried that if she went into 
labour her baby would be premature and end up in a neonatal 
unit or, Mr. Minister, her baby would die. That’s what she was 
worried about. 
 
And she needed the prescription drug. And I contacted your 
office immediately, and you, Mr. Minister, are not equipped to 
deal with those kinds of situations. You’re not . . . your office 
isn’t equipped to deal with those kinds of situations where you 
can make a decision that that prescription drug will be paid for 
like that by the provincial government, 100 per cent. And there 
are situations in this province where families don’t have the 
money, they need a prescription drug immediately, and your 
government does not have the flexibility to deal with those 
kinds of situations. And I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that this 
was a situation where your government needed to respond 
immediately, and it did not. 
  



 
June 9, 1988 

 

2005 
 

It did not respond, and this woman was forced to go and try and 
find some money to pay for the prescription drug. Now you say 
this woman could have gotten a weeks’ prescription or two 
weeks’ prescription or whatever, but, Mr. Minister, you know 
that pharmacists cannot change prescription drugs when a 
quantity is prescribed by a doctor. You know that; you know 
that. And this woman needed the drug now. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, since this case has come to my attention and 
it has been brought to your attention, I have received other calls 
from people in similar situations. And, Mr. Minister, I wrote 
you a letter outlining the circumstances of this case and what I 
was arguing: does it make sense from a social and economic 
point of view in this province for your government not to pay 
the 100 per cent prescription drug costs for this particular drug 
which would have prevented a premature delivery of a baby? 
 
So you’re not prepared to do that. So this woman goes into 
premature labour, which she was in, and it needed to be 
stopped. But say she hadn’t have gotten the money to buy that 
drug. She would have gone into premature labour and her baby 
would have been delivered, and one of two things would have 
happened: the baby could have been born early and not lived, or 
the baby could have been put in a neonatal unit at the 
University Hospital at a cost of somewhere between 30 and 
40,000 a month for a three or four or five month period. This 
baby may have been born brain-damaged and required the state 
to intervene for the rest of its life. 
 
My argument is this: that there are social costs associated and 
economic costs associated with your government’s decision to 
change the prescription drug plan. There are long-term social 
and economic costs associated with it, and your government 
doesn’t have the flexibility or the political will to deal with this 
situation or situations like this. 
 
And I’m asking you: if I ever phone you again, and a woman is 
in this particular situation and her family is in this situation and 
she doesn’t have the money for a prescription drug to prevent a 
premature delivery of a premature baby and she is in labour, 
will your government have the decency to make sure that that 
drug is made available to her when she doesn’t have the 
money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The member knows, and I hear you 
raising the case, and so on, and the member knows that the 
circumstance — and the way you’re outlining it is that the 
person was not able to get the drug. The person in fact did get 
the drug; the person got the money, and the person got the drug, 
and the person has coverage now and that’s a . . . you know, 
and that’s a good circumstance. I know that. 
 
All I’m saying, all I can say to the member is that the . . . you’re 
making a medical judgement that I don’t believe you or I, either 
of us, are qualified to make when you go so far . . . 
 

An Hon. Member: — You haven’t answered the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No . . . when you go so far as to say that 
this drug, and by the use of this drug you can carry on the 
pregnancy to the point of saving the neonatal unit costs and all 
of that. I think you’re making a medical judgement, as I believe 
the use of this drug probably is there to maintain the pregnancy 
to the point where the baby can be born and then probably, in 
fact, make use of the excellent neonatal unit that’s there at the 
University Hospital. 
 
So, you know, just to bring you up to date on that topic . . . And 
the other thing I would say is that, Mr. Chairman, these kinds of 
circumstances are difficult circumstances. Nobody will ever 
deny that; I certainly don’t deny that. It’s a difficult 
circumstance, and the member says, is there some flexibility to 
deal with it. I would suggest to you that there is, and had the 
member had a conversation with her pharmacist and whatever, 
if there was . . . been a straight call to the department, that could 
have been solved. And I believe it would have been, by the drug 
plan people. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, your response absolutely is 
remarkable. You do not have the sensitivity to deal with this 
issue. You do not have the knowledge or the capability to deal 
with this issue. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you whether or not your department, the 
prescription drug plan, the Department of Health — your 
government — was prepared to be flexible on questions such as 
these, on issues such as these. Now I recognize that you and I 
aren’t medical professionals, but most people, Mr. Minister — 
which should include yourself — realize that when women are 
in premature labour at the early stages or the middle stages of 
their pregnancy, that there are prescription drugs that will 
prevent them from going into labour, from delivering their 
baby. And this woman was in that situation where she required 
a prescription drug at a cost of $131 to stop her premature 
labour. 
 
That’s not a very difficult thing to understand, Mr. Minister. 
This woman was in the position where she did not have the 
money and she required the drug immediately. Since this 
woman’s situation has come to my attention, other situations 
have come to my attention that are similar. Drugs that prevent 
premature delivery of babies are expensive, and there are many 
families in this province that cannot afford the up front costs of 
those drugs, and they need the drugs immediately. They do not 
have time to go to the Department of Health and apply for the 
20 per cent waiver; they don’t have time to get the Priority Post 
envelopes; they have to have the drug now. 
 
And I’m asking you, Mr. Minister, will you make a 
commitment to families in this province, particularly families 
who are expecting children and who may be in the position of 
this family that I have referred to tonight, will you make the 
commitment that if they don’t have the up front costs for those 
prescription drugs that you will ensure that they have access to 
prescription drugs in order to prevent premature delivery of 
babies in order to prevent horrendous social and economic costs 
associated with young infants being in a neonatal unit  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

 

2006 
 

such as the one at University Hospital 
 
Mr. Minister, it makes no sense, to me anyway, for your 
government not to be prepared to spend $360 in this woman’s 
case for three months supply of this particular prescription drug. 
That makes no sense when you have the possibility of looking 
forward to a cost to the state, a cost to the taxpayers, of over 
$100,000 for that child to be homed in a neonatal unit for three 
or four or five months, and you have the outlook or the 
possibility of having to deal with children who require 
rehabilitative care and who have disabilities. 
 
For $390 dollars it does not make any sense to me. You say you 
are a pro-life and a pro-family government. I’m asking you: 
how can you possibly say that this particular policy decision of 
yours is enhancing family life in this province and is, in fact, a 
pro-life policy? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, as it relates to just so the 
. . . the member portrays this as a case . . . and suggests that 
there are several or many cases of similar things out there. And 
I would say to you that the officials in the drug plan tell me that, 
as far as he can recall, the executive director of the drug, this is 
the only case of this drug, okay. The only one. I just want to 
make sure that you know that. It’s an extremely important case, 
there’s no question about that. It’s important, but I don’t want 
you to be able to portray this as though there are all of these 
cases of this same thing, because it’s not the case. 
 
Now in this circumstance, and as you will know and as we have 
mentioned here, this case has been looked after, and the lady 
thankfully and happily is in good shape. And I understand that 
she got some money from her father, and whatever, and on she 
went. 
 
But I would say to you that there is . . . you say, will you be 
flexible? There is flexibility in the plan, and there is flexibility 
and there is a mechanism to get some special coverage when 
that’s there. It doesn’t happen by just being there, but I would 
suggest, if the pharmacist had called directly to the drug plan, 
that flexibility could have kicked in right there at that time. 
That’s number one. 
 
And number two, the safety net that we have in this society, the 
safety net that we have in this society for the Department of 
Social Services, for people who find themselves in that 
circumstance, is there. And that person could well have gone 
there and been looked after, and you know that that’s the case. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I just have one sentence to say 
to you: you say she got the money and on she went, and I say to 
you, how callous! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2145) 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Chairman, the minister made several 
statements tonight about the PC government’s record with 
respect to hospitals and what a great record it is. And what he 
neglected to tell us is the fact that somewhere, shortly after they 
were elected to government, one of the hospital boards — at 
least one that I know of in  

Saskatchewan — received some sort of communication from 
the government to the effect that the planned expansion of 
hospitals in Regina would be held back. He neglected to report 
that fact, Mr. Minister. 
 
I also want to refer to the fact that in my possession right here I 
have an ad in the . . . I assume it’s the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. 
It is July 21, 1987. And the ad is a picture of a doctor holding 
up his hands with surgical gloves on, and a mask, and a hat, 
dressed in his surgical equipment, saying: St. Paul needs your 
help. And it’s asking for funding from the public of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I have another article here in the Leader-Post, August 7, 
entitled: Hospitals Team Up to Solicit Money. And this is 
August 7, ’87. The first paragraph in this newspaper article, Mr. 
Chairman, reads: 
 

Regina’s four hospitals are banding together to raise $8 
million for equipment which the provincial government is 
no longer fully paying for. 
 

Banding together to raise $8 million. Well I would like to know 
from the minister, Mr. Chairman, if the PC’s have done such a 
great job with hospital funding, why are the hospitals in Regina 
and Saskatoon having lotteries and begging for money? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the member mentions 
Regina hospitals, and I’m pleased that she did. She said that 
somehow that there was a hold-back and that we have been 
holding back the construction of hospitals in Regina. And I just 
want to outline this. We’ve spent some considerable time 
tonight talking about Saskatoon hospitals and the construction 
of those hospitals — St. Paul’s, and the announced City 
Hospital, and the expansion at University Hospital. 
 
In Regina we have a construction upgrading program going on 
within the Plains Hospital; we have a new pediatrics ward going 
into the Pasqua Hospital this year; we have a brand-new 
Wascana Hospital related to rehab centre that you never did 
build and that we are now under way, and that is very much 
under way, and in fact is . . . and at the General Hospital, this 
budget provides for phase 1 of the fourth package of the 
regeneration of the General Hospital. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, by anyone’s standards, anyone’s 
standards, even the standards of those folks over there who are 
so cynical and sceptical about everything, they must at least 
acknowledge, on behalf of the citizens of this city and of 
southern Saskatchewan, that those are going ahead, and that 
those are going ahead because of decisions of this government. 
 
Now the member mentions fund raising activities that are going 
on in the city of Regina as it relates to southern Saskatchewan’s 
base hospitals. Now, Mr. Chairman, the cost of those hospitals, 
100 per cent, 100 per cent of the cost of the construction of 
those hospitals is borne by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan — 
the people of Saskatchewan — 100 per cent. And, Mr. 
Chairman, the cost to the local fund raising and the local 
hospital boards and the local municipalities, and so on, is 15 per 
cent.  
  



 
June 9, 1988 

 

2007 
 

And that’s the case all across the province. 
 
Now the reason that the government is paying 100 per cent of 
the construction costs, and 15 per cent is being raised or 
equipment costs are being raised, equipment and furnishings by 
the hospitals in Regina, was at the request of the hospitals in 
Regina because they said the following. They said: you, 
government, taxpayer, build the hospitals, give us a period of 
time during that construction to come up with the money, and 
we will raise it on the local level. We’ll raise the money for 
furnishings and for equipment. And that was an agreement that 
was reached between us and the hospitals. It’s a very excellent 
agreement. The hospital boards are doing well. 
 
I should say that a similar circumstance is going on in 
Saskatoon. City Hospital is away out in front of their 
projections in terms of the kind of money they are able to raise. 
 
There are some very excellent people in both of these cities and 
across the province, frankly, who are raising money for these 
facilities that are much needed, and, as I’ve outlined, that were 
neglected for some period of time and that are now being built. 
So we make no apologies for that, and the co-operation between 
the government, this Department of Health, and the health 
boards — the health boards — but in this case, more 
specifically, the hospital board of both Regina and Saskatoon 
— is excellent, Mr. Chairman. And I believe that’s the case, and 
that’s been the case for a number of years now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, earlier today Bill No. 82, 
An Act to amend The Litter Control Act was introduced, and, 
Mr. Speaker, with the indulgence of the House, I beg to inform 
the Assembly that His Honour the Lieutenant Governor, having 
been informed of the subject matter of the Bill, recommends it 
to the consideration of the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move that this House . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Even the Lieutenant Governor supports 
that legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the Lieutenant Governor 
recommends it. And, Mr. Speaker, I move that this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:53 p.m. 
 
 


