


















































May 12, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 May 12, 1988 
 

1263 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure this 
afternoon to introduce to you and to members of the Assembly, 
22 grade 4 students from the W.H. Ford School, located in the 
east gallery. They’re located . . . or they’re accompanied, I 
should say, Mr. Speaker, by two teachers, Mrs. Aitkin and Ms. 
Luharsky, I believe is the name, as well as two chaperons, Mrs. 
Duggleby and Janice Brown. 
 
I’m pleased to have you visit the Assembly this afternoon, and I 
look forward to meeting with you after question period for 
pictures and questions and some answers perhaps to some 
questions. I ask all members to join with me in welcoming the 
W.H. Ford grade 4 students this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sauder: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me pleasure to introduce to you, and to the other members of 
the Assembly this afternoon on behalf of my colleague from 
Kelsey-Tisdale, 11 grade 9 students from Bjorkdale School in 
Bjorkdale in the Kelsey-Tisdale constituency. They’re 
accompanied this afternoon by their teacher, Jeff Sukut, 
chaperons, Janice Ruether and Richard Ashdown. 
 
I look forward to meeting them afterwards and having a 
discussion about the proceedings in the Assembly and for 
pictures and refreshments. And I’d just ask all members to help 
me welcome them here on behalf of our colleague. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Contract to California Company 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — My question is to the minister responsible for 
SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), and it involves 
computer estimating of vehicle replacement costs. Will you 
confirm that your government, after a six-month trial, awarded 
a contract to Autotrak, a California-based firm, to do such 
estimations? And will you confirm that the price of this contract 
is between 500 and $750,000, and that the contract was not 
tendered? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I do believe that there has 
been a contract with the company that the member indicates. 
The specifics of it I do not have at my disposal in the House 
today, but I would report back to the House on that. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Supplementary. Mr. Minister, will you also 
confirm that while some jurisdictions have chosen to use figures 
generated by Autotrak as a negotiation point in determining 
valuation of cars which are written off, your  

government has decided that the figure will be a non-negotiable 
offer to the client? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I indicate I will bring back 
the information is this regard. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — New question. Mr. Minister, I am somewhat 
surprised that as the minister responsible for SGI that you don’t 
have this information. But I have new question. Mr. Minister, is 
it true that you’ve decided to go only with the Autotrak figures 
when determining write-off offers; and is that the reason that 
more Saskatchewan people have had to see expensive 
arbitration process on write-offs offers from SHI than in other 
jurisdictions; and isn’t that why we in Saskatchewan are now 
seven times as many arbitrations as in other jurisdictions such 
as Manitoba? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said previously 
on this question of the Auto-Paks and so on, this Autotrak 
company, I will investigate it further and be more than pleased 
to supply the information to the members of this House. 
 

Western Diversification Fund 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ll see if we can 
do a little better with a different minister. 
 
My question is to the Minister of Trade and Investment and it 
concerns the federal Western Diversification Fund. You’ll be 
aware, Mr. Minister, that Mr. Jack Scowen, who is the 
Conservative member of parliament for Mackenzie, has said 
that the way this fund is being handled will cost him his seat in 
the next general election. It’s his contention that rural areas are 
being discriminated against in favour of the two main cities. 
 
Mr. Minister, have you looked into Mr. Scowen’s charges? Do 
you share his point of view, and what do you propose to do 
about it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I read the article 
attributed to MP (member of parliament) Jack Scowen, with 
regard to the federal program. I suppose what I would say is the 
same thing I indicated to the hon. member when we were 
dealing with estimates, is that we had the view, I think, in the 
province that the Western Diversification Fund tends to be 
somewhat bureaucratic in the way it is being run. I think if 
that’s the gist of what he was saying . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Political. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — No, I didn’t say political, I said 
bureaucratic. It’s not being political at all. It’s being very, very 
bureaucratic and rather slow in being able to cut through some 
of the red tape to get some of these projects under way. 
 
One would hope that this can be rectified, because  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1264 
 

clearly the western diversification is something that we all look 
forward to, to see more and more industries being locate din our 
province. To date it has been somewhat slow in getting the 
mechanism in place and somewhat bureaucratic, and I would 
hope to see that change in the very near future. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — New question to the same minister, Mr. 
Speaker, John Bulloch, who is the president of the Canadian 
Federation of Independent Business, has stated, and I quote: 
 

The Western Diversification Fund is close to becoming 
nothing more than a political slush fund to feather the 
nests of provincial governments. 

 
So it’s not a judgement that we’re making, but one that Mr. 
Bulloch makes. And In Saskatchewan there has only, as of 
mid-April, there have been only 31 projects approved out of a 
total of 471 applicants, such as the Huff and Puff Stitchery in 
Moose Jaw which got $10,000 and created two jobs. 
 
Now, Minister, we’ve discussed these questions before. But my 
question is: have you met with Mr. McKnight and told him that 
the people of Saskatchewan expect more, a lot more from the 
Western Diversification Fund? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I and other members of 
our government have met with Mr. McKnight with regard to the 
Western Diversification Fund. I think it would improper for the 
member opposite to somehow suggest that no projects have 
been approved. For the hon. member, clearly the new project in 
Swift Current, of Spar industries. I would hope that the 
members do not laugh at that. That is an excellent further 
development in the area of Swift Current. I know nothing about 
the one that the hon. member refers to in Moose Jaw. 
 
There is various projects, certainly that the province of 
Saskatchewan has put forward for consideration by the Western 
Diversification Fund. Clearly some of them have not been 
accepted. One would hope that in the future more and more 
would be accepted. 
 
I think the hon. member though should not make light of 
assistance to diversify in this region of the country. 
 
And I think if you were to pursue what John Bulloch was 
saying — if you are now a voice of John Bulloch — now he 
was suggesting somehow that there should be no incentives 
whatsoever, no incentives whatsoever to small business. While 
I agree with many things that John Bulloch says, on this one I 
think John Bulloch perhaps is a little too right wing. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Last question, Mr. Minister. The problem has 
a further dimension, and that is the share of regional 
development money that’s coming to western Canada. Are you 
aware that under the present system of funding regional 
development, western Canada, which has 29 per cent of the 
Canadian population, will get only 15.4 per cent of federal 
funds dedicated to regional development, and at the same time 
Ontario and Quebec, 

with 62 per cent of the population, gets 66.8 per cent of the 
money? Have you drawn this to Mr. McKnight’s attention, and 
have you made it clear to him that his Western Diversification 
Fund is inadequate and unfair to western Canada? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I was asked the same 
question in estimates and I will respond the same way. For a 
long time we in this province have believe that many of the 
federal initiatives are for the betterment of the province of 
Ontario, to the detriment of other provinces across this country. 
They rank first, usually Quebec, ranks second, and we come a 
distant, distant fourth or fifth or tenth. 
 
Now we have seen at least some improvement in the current 
government in Ottawa from the previous government in Ottawa, 
but that improvements is far from being satisfactory. We 
believe there should be more dollars coming into western 
Canada, more dollars coming into the prairie region. We have 
been advocating that. That change seems to e coming slowly, 
and it’s slower than we would like to see, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — A new question to the same minister on a 
directly related subject, and this involves federal funds also 
coming to the province of Saskatchewan. Were you aware, Mr. 
Minister, that Saskatchewan, with 4 per cent of the national 
population, gets only 1 per cent of federal government 
business? If we got just our fair share of federal contracts, it 
would bring in an extra $381 million to the Saskatchewan 
economy and provide something like 7,600 new jobs. 
 
Now you’re the Minister of Trade and Investment, and your 
government says it has the ear of the federal government. My 
question is: what are you doing to correct the situation, and 
what are you doing to ensure that Saskatchewan receives its fair 
share of federal government business? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Let me make two responses to that. First 
of all, the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Management Corporation simply attended a meeting very 
recently in Saskatoon dealing with that exact question. And the 
point raised by the hon. member that in fact virtually all the 
supplying to the federal government tends to come out of 
central Canada . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. The minister is 
attempting to answer the question but is having some 
competition, and I’d like to ask you to give him opportunity to 
finish. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Clearly, we have made the point over 
and over to the federal government that it’s not fair that Ontario 
be the prime source of supplier base to the federal government, 
Ontario — and Quebec to a lesser degree than Ontario, quite 
frankly. 
 
What we have suggested to them is that they should look at 
some of the models that have been employed in the  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1265 
 

province of Saskatchewan, the Buy Saskatchewan policy. For 
example, Saskatchewan Power Corporation; when we came to 
office something like 85 to 90 per cent of all their supplies were 
being purchased outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation has turned that around, 
turned that around significantly, so the reverse is now the case 
where virtually 80 per cent of what they buy, they buy from 
local people, local businesses, local suppliers in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We would suggest to the federal government 
that they should take that, look at that, copy that, and use that 
for the betterment of all Canada, not just the province of 
Ontario. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Drought Assistance for Southern Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
the Environment responsible for the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation and it has to do with the minister’s announcement 
earlier this week of a drought program. The minister will know 
that that announcement was quite late in coming and that some 
very urgent work had already been started by many of those in 
south-western Saskatchewan that were in desperate need of 
water. And I wonder if the minister can give us the specific 
rules which he will be applying under his program for the 
retroactivity of that program, to ensure development prior to the 
announcement of the program will be fully covered under the 
program, going back to the beginning of 1988? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, at the time of the 
announcement, I advised the public and that that particular 
program, for the most effect, will start on April 1, but for 
certain cases, if it can be justified, we would back it back into 
March. Now there isn’t very much water exploration work done 
in January and February in Saskatchewan. I believe that the 
people will be basically satisfied with the decisions of the 
corporation in that regard. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. Of course 
some engineering and other technical work might have well 
have been done during the winter, which I hope the minister in 
his flexibility will cover under his program. 
 
Mr. Minister, a supplementary, having to do with the 
government’s commitment to cover 50 per cent of the cost of 
some of these water development projects. I wonder if the 
minister can tell us if the government’s 50 per cent will be paid 
directly by the government to whatever contractor might be 
doing the work to find and develop water supplies, or will 
municipalities and towns and farmers and others have to pay the 
full cost of any development project up front and then have to 
wait for the government’s share to be reimbursed to them? 
Which method will the government be pursuing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, for the most part, the 
payments by the Saskatchewan Water Corporation will not be 
made until the project is completed. But I believe with 
arrangements made by most farms or towns and  

villages, there’s no problem usually in having the cheque go to 
the town and just go on through to the contractor. Most 
contractors are very willing to wait for that service to occur. 
 

Cost of Power from New Plants 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question today is to the Deputy Premier, the minister 
responsible for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. It’s 
regards to statements the minister’s made concerning rate 
increases for SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation). Mr. 
Speaker, the minister has gone about the province telling people 
that the rate of increase for utility rates will not exceed the rate 
of inflation, and how he knows what the rate of inflation will be 
10 years hence, I don’t know. 
 
But be that as it may, his own documentation through the 
environmental impact statement for the Shand power plant 
project projects a 10.5 cents per kilowatt-hour operating costs, 
almost twice that of what the minister has been telling people in 
this province. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, what kind of twisted mathematics has 
left you to tell the people of the province that the cost is half 
that of the real cost of power production? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll be happy to, in some 
detail, respond to the question after I’ve checked with the 
officials, but my guess is — I don’t know precisely what figure 
he’s talking about — buy my guess is that that figure’s dealing 
with project dollars for when the project comes on stream in 
1992, as opposed to current dollars. And there would be a 
significant difference. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. Mr. 
Minister, will you not admit that you went before the television 
cameras, tried to say that it was going to be 6 cents per 
kilowatt-hour, and when you were shown your own document 
of 10.5 cents per kilowatt-hours, levelized cost, that starts from 
the moment that Shand goes on stream, that you don’t known 
what the cost of power is and that your twisted mathematics, no 
matter which way you try to twist it, is going to end up in a 
substantial rate increase for power users in this province? Won’t 
you admit that today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, in an effort to untwist the 
mind of the member opposite, I’d be quite prepared to come 
back with the numbers, comparing apples to apples and oranges 
to oranges, in project dollars, current dollars, kilowatt-hours, 
numbers comparing 1988 to 1988, numbers comparing 1992 to 
1992. And I’d be quite prepared to do that, Mr. Speaker, to sort 
out the hon. member’s twisted mind. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — New question to the minister, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, you don’t have to concern yourself with apples or 
oranges or anything else. I suggest you concern yourself with 
the power rates and the cost for each hour for the people of this 
province. 
 



 
May 12, 1988 

1266 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — My question, Mr. Minister, is this: when are you 
going to get a grip on the Saskatchewan Power Corporation’s 
and the kinds of inefficiencies and mismanagement which will 
result in massive rate increases to the people of this province? 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve gone on record as opposing 
cross-subsidization. You’ve gone on record as supporting 
reorganization after reorganization after reorganization. You’ve 
gone on record as supporting a project, the Shand power plant 
project, which will double the cost of power production in this 
province. When are you going to get a grip? When are you 
going to fire the Porky Pig of perks, Mr. George Hill, and when 
are you going to start producing and doing something for the 
people of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Not even most members in the caucus 
opposite can get themselves to the depth of that particular hon. 
member, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will say this. If projected out over the next 10 
years, rate increased on the electrical side will be at, or less, the 
rate of inflation. And when we’re talking about 
cross-subsidization, I want to talk about subsidization that has 
been going on. From 19600 to 1987, SaskPower has bought 40 
billion cubic feet of gas, natural gas from Alberta because of 
contracts that that government locked us into because they 
didn’t believe there was any gas in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the cost of that gas, Mr. Speaker, was significant. Now let 
me tell you what it did for Saskatchewan. Not much. But for 
Alberta, we put $2 billion into their economy, three-quarters of 
a billion dollars into their treasury, through royalties, Mr. 
Speaker, at a time when they had, Mr. Speaker, a moratorium 
on nursing homes, a moratorium on nursing homes — $2 billion 
in our economy . . . $2.5 billion into the Alberta economy. Had 
that been in ours, we could have had nursing homes, hospitals, 
jobs, Mr. Speaker, and a developed resource that we could be 
totally self-sufficient today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, don’t 
you dare lecture anybody on this side of the House about 
inefficiency. I have here an order in council, an order in council 
which . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order. Order. The hon. member has a right to 
ask a question. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, I have here an order in council signed by the Premier 
of this province which commits SaskPower to purchase from 
Basin Electric power 50 megawatts of power, irrespective, 
irrespective of whether or note that power is need in the 
province. 
 
Your government has gone forward, hooked us into a deal 
whether or not we need the power. Is that efficiency? Is  

that the kind of efficiency you’re talking about? And if it is, 
don’t you think that the suggestion to fire Mr. Hill and perhaps 
for yourself to vacate that position as minister responsible for 
SPC is a reasonable position, is a reasonable suggestion in this 
case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, on the first point, I didn’t 
mean to lecture; I thought I was just pointing out the obvious. 
 
Second, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the 50 megawatts from 
Basic Electric, we have a similar deal with Manitoba. We have 
a similar deal with Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, where we put Many 
Islands . . . not Many Islands, Island Falls hydro-electricity into 
the north of Manitoba and we take it out in the south on an 
exchange; and that’s the way the grid works, you see. 
 
In the case of the most recent Basic Electric deal, Mr. Speaker, 
we bought that 50 megawatts for the purposes of baseload 
supplementation because our baseload requirements are 
increasing on a daily basis. Shand is not going to be on in time 
to pick up those baseload increases, and water-flows right 
across the province, Mr. Speaker, are cutting the capacity of . . . 
of the hydro capacity of the province. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, we have a 100 megawatt deal with 
Basin Electric that I think was signed in 1983 or ’84 — I’m not 
quite sure of the date. And this deal, Mr. Speaker, is an 
exchange agreement that we have when our peak is down in the 
summer-time. We tend to use less energy for heat in the 
summer-time because it’s warmer in the summer-time. But in 
the United States they have peak demands in the summer for air 
conditioners, so we swap 100 megawatts in the summer-time 
and take it back into our baseload in the winter-time. 
 
And it’s been an excellent arrangement, Mr. Speaker. We are 
currently building a tie-in to Alberta, where we’re going to do 
another exchange, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Confidentiality Clause in Contract with NGOs 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Social Services, and it deals with the secretive and tyrannical 
nature of the government in office today. 
 
Mr. Minister, many non-government organizations which are 
now signing agreements with your department are being 
required by you to agree to a new clause in their funding 
contract which says, and I quote: 
 

The non-government organization further agrees to treat as 
confidential any policy information of the Department of 
Social Services. 

 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is: why have you tied a gag 
order to the non-government organizations in this province that 
you’re entering into contractual agreements with, and why are 
you preventing them, Mr. Minister, by way of this clause, 
preventing them from criticizing the  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1267 
 

policies of your government and making unfair policies of your 
department public? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite says 
one thing, reads something, and then tells us that we’re doing 
something entirely different from what is in the contract. 
 
I don’t know if he can read or not, or if he can remember what 
he read. It says that the department has certain responsibilities 
to be confidential, and we can’t give that confidential legality 
away when we’re contracting with somebody to do work for us. 
So our contractors, NGOs (non-governmental organizations) 
have to honour the confidentiality that we have to honour in the 
department, and that seems self-explanatory. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, 
we on this side of the House have no problem with the principle 
of client confidentiality, but that’s not what this new clause 
says. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, this new clause says that all 
policy information of the Department of Social Services is to be 
confidential. And would you not agree, Mr. Minister, that this 
will means that non-government organizations are unable to do 
advocacy work to change unfair policies in your department; 
that they will be unable to tell a welfare recipient what his 
rights to an appeal are under the policies of your department 
which has to be kept confidential. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you now do the reasonable thing and 
withdraw this provision — withdraw this clause — and tell 
every non-government organization in the province that this 
new clause will not be part of their contract. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
don’t respect confidentiality; they bandy about people’s private 
medical records; they phone departments and try to get 
information on people’s private affairs — on their private 
medical records. 
 
With respect to these contracts, if I cold believe what the 
member opposite is saying about these contracts, I would 
certainly review them, but I do not believe that my department 
has a mandate to contract with advocacy groups to find people 
to do political work. We don’t have that kind of contract. These 
are service contracts — contracts for them to serve the people 
of Saskatchewan, not to get involved in politics. 
 
If his friends are not happy because the taxpayers are not 
funding them to be involved in politics, then he should go to his 
friends at the CLC (Canadian Labour Congress) and get them to 
fund him the way they always do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I have recently  

received a group of students that are in the gallery — a notice 
about it — and I would ask leave if we could go back and to do 
the introduction of them. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 
pleasure to announce to you, and to the members of the 
Assembly, that there are a group of 42 students, grade 4 and 5, 
from King George School in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. 
 
These students are not from my constituency but the 
constituency of the Leader of the Opposition, who is not able to 
be here today. And the Leader of the Opposition has asked me 
to pass on his welcome and the welcome of other members of 
the Assembly to these students from King George School. I 
intend to meet with them after 2:30 and have pictures and 
perhaps some discussion about the Assembly today. 
 
These students are accompanied by Jacob Froese, Linda 
Kindrachuk, who are teachers; chaperons, Victor Thunderchild, 
Marie Ahenakeu, Dawn Morgan, Pauline Favel, and their bus 
driver is Mr. Walsh. I hope all members will join with me in 
welcoming the students from Saskatoon Riversdale, King 
George School, in the usual fashion. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Human Resources, Labour and Employment 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 20 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to ask the 
minister in respect to the employment development agency: 
could just give us a brief description as to what the mandate is 
of the employment development agency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the term employment 
development agency is a historical term. For all intents and 
purposes, that agency does not exist, but its function has been 
rolled into the department as it now exists. 
 
And that is, the aim to maximize participation of all 
Saskatchewan citizens in economic development and 
diversification while ensuring protection of citizens in the work 
place through appropriate legislative mechanism and for seniors 
through income supplements. Now that refers to the seniors’ 
portion of the department. 
 
That basically gives you an overview of where the employment 
aspects fit into the department. It is responsible . . . that branch 
is responsible for the  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1268 
 

Opportunities ’88 program for youth employment. It tries to 
equalize employment with respect to equal opportunity for 
disabled, for handicapped, for women in general, and for people 
in minority groups. And that is the general duties of that branch 
of the department. 
 
And the employment development agency was formerly a fund 
that was used for employment development projects. That role 
has now been taken over by the economic departments of the 
government. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Could you tell us then, Mr. Minister, 
specifically what there is for funding in the narrow scope of the 
definition of the employment mandate that you have? We knew 
that there’s the Opportunities ’88 program. Could you list for us 
the other programs and the dollar amount that’s been allocated 
for these programs for the current fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The department’s primary role is a 
co-ordinating function. The actual delivery of programs is 
through other departments, the economic development 
departments. 
 
You will be familiar with some of the things that the 
employment development agency did in the past. You will be 
familiar also that the Saskatchewan employment development 
program, part of welfare reform, is delivered by Social Services. 
You will be familiar, as you’ve indicated, with Opportunities 
’88 for summer student employment. You are also familiar with 
the economic developments that have taken place in your 
constituency, in The Battlefords. 
 
So formerly the employment development agency would assist 
in the funding of these economic development projects. 
Currently those are delivered by the departments, as I’ve given 
you examples — also the economic development departments. 
 
Things like the upgrader project and those things have been 
rolled into other department are no longer part of the 
employment development agency, which does not exist other 
than there is a branch of employment in my department. 
 
So that gives you a general overview of it. But you would have 
to look at the government as a whole, where the line 
departments are delivering. We’re the co-ordinating function. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Under a branch of Employment, Mr. Minister 
— to be more specific, I see in your Estimates for the 
Saskatchewan Opportunities ’88 summer employment program, 
you have an estimate of $4 million. 
 
Outside of your co-ordinating role and outside of this particular 
program, are there any other programs whereby you have direct 
funding for employment development? And I’m not interested, 
Mr. Minister in what’s been transferred to other departments 
from what was previously the employment development 
agency’s responsibility. I’d like to know now, today, what the 
other programs are where you provide direct funding for 
employment development within the province of  

Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the answer to the 
question is no, there are no others. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Minister, could you then tell me in 
regard to the only program that you fund jobs, the 
Saskatchewan Opportunities ’88, the summer employment 
program, what the allocations have been for that program or the 
comparable program in the years 1982 until the current fiscal 
year? And of course I have the current fiscal year estimate of 4 
million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the funding history of 
summer student employment is as follows: ’78-79, $1 million; 
’79-80, $1 million and that’s . . . it’s 1.015 million and it’s 
1.012 million — I’ll round it off close to the nearest million — 
1980-81, $1.038 million, so it’s quite constant there at $1 
million; 1981-82, and that, I might point out, was the last year 
that the members opposite were government, it was $1 million; 
1982-83, the first year of our administration, it was $1.130 
million; in 1983-84 it was nearly tripled to $2.8 million; in 
1984-85 it was $3.3 million; in 1985-86 it was $9.1 million; 
1986-87 it was $9 million; 1987-88 it was budgeted at $4 
million, and this year it’s budgeted at $4 million again. 
 
Under the NDP, I might point out, it was $1 million, that we 
tripled it to $3 million, and then the criteria were a little loose 
and it ballooned to $9 million in 1985-86 and ’86-87 which was 
ninefold what the NDP had been doing in student employment. 
And so we felt the criteria had to be tightened up a bit to direct 
the money where it was needed most — in health care, 
education — and still provide some summer jobs. 
 
(1445) 
 
So last year we budgeted $4 million, and as I indicated earlier, 
we had a record year for student employment in Saskatchewan. 
We have budgeted again $4 million this year because the 
program was successful last year. We found that the tighter 
controls — on not being able to hire grade 9s, 10s and 11s 
under this program, but people who are directly going on with 
continuing education — have worked successfully last year, and 
we’ve left the program the same as last year in this year’s 
budget. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, can you also tell me which of 
those years — going back, I guess you’ve reviewed about 10 
years there of the summer employment program. How many of 
those years and what were the amount of supplementary 
budgets brought in for student summer employment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well the two years that we put nine 
million into this . . . I don’t have the exact figures because 
we’re going into the history here. But I recall that they were 
budgeted at lesser sums and the controls weren’t as tight. It was 
kind of an open-ended program and it mushroomed up to $9 
million. And now you’re being critical that we’ve got it back 
under control. You can’t have it both ways. You can’t complain 
that it’s not enough, and at the same time complain that it was 
too much. You’ll have to make your choice. 
 
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1269 
 

But I want you to consider that whatever your choice is, I would 
like you to explain how the NDP’s $1 million was better. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I have to assume that you did not hear me, 
Mr. Minister. I wasn’t being critical of anything up until this 
point in time. I don’t know what you interpreted as being 
critical. All I’ve done in the few minutes — maybe 10 minutes 
we’ve been here — is to ask you some straightforward 
questions. I have not reacted positively nor negatively to them. 
 
The estimates process is one of seeking information from the 
government, and I’m asking you to provide me with the years, 
going back to the years that you so generously pointed out even 
under the New Democrat’s administration in the province; tell 
me which of these years there was a supplementary budget 
brought in for summer youth employment and what the dollar 
amount of the supplementary budget was. You have your 
employees and your department people with you today, and I 
respectfully ask you to provide that information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, if I heard the member 
right he wasn’t listening to my last answer. I would ask him to 
listen to this one. 
 
The situation is thus: I don’t have two years ago’s information 
on whether a supplementary budget was brought in or not. 
However, we can find it for the member opposite. If his 
researchers or he can’t go to the library and look it up, we can 
undertake to find it for him. So we will send him the 
information that is down the hall at the library, that is part of the 
history of Saskatchewan. We will find it for him and send it 
over to him because he doesn’t seem t be able to find it for 
himself. So we’ll do that. 
 
In addition, I should point out, Mr. Chairman, that in addition to 
the $4 million we have budgeted in our department, there is 
another budget item of $4.3 million in the Public Service 
Commission for government hiring of summer students. So the 
total amount of money would be $8.4 million spent on student 
hiring, and 4 of that is budgeted in my department for the farm 
and business sector and 4.3 for student hiring and the Public 
Service Commission. And I don’t know if we’ve dealt with 
those estimates or not, but I thought that might have been 
available in those estimates. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — What years has there been a supplementary 
budget for summer youth employment and what was the dollar 
amount of that supplementary budget for summer employment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — I will send the information over as soon 
as my staff has got it available. It may be today; it may be a day 
or two. But, you know, I could probably ask somebody to go to 
the library and look it up, or maybe you could ask one of your 
colleagues here to go and look it up for you. We’ll get it to you 
one way or another. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Would you acknowledge that in 1986 you 
brought in a supplementary budget for $2 million on the 
summer youth employment program, Mr. Minister? Would you 
acknowledge that? 
 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, no. The member 
opposite has the answer. I don’t now why he’s asking the 
question. I will not acknowledge it until we’ve looked it up. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I can’t believe, I can’t believe that you can’t 
provide that information. The arrogance of people like you 
sitting in that government opposite is the reason you lost 
by-elections in Elphinstone and Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
I came here with no thought of being critical of you. I came 
here with the thought of spending maybe about an hour this 
afternoon talking about employment development in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And you, in your arrogance, sit there 
and deal flippantly with what should be a very serious matter 
for the legislature in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I ask you questions about supplementary budgets. You flip it 
back in saying we should go and research it, that you might 
send somebody — it could be a day; it could be two days; it 
could be some time in the future. And if it holds true to what 
your government does, you likely will never provide it — just 
like the Public Accounts in the province of Saskatchewan that 
you should be tabling in this legislature so people can hold you 
accountable for particularly your election year spending, which 
you haven’t done. 
 
Now are you aware or not aware, Mr. Minister . . . can we get 
back to just answering and asking questions in which this forum 
is supposed to be about, the Committee of Finance? Can you 
acknowledge that your government brought in a supplementary 
budget in the 1986 summer employment program of $2 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I have to give the same 
answer to the same question. I can acknowledge . . . I recall that 
there was a supplementary budget. I do not know the specific 
amount. 
 
I repeat that this is the 1986 budget the member opposite is 
asking the question on. He seems to have the answer, or he 
would be misleading us. And I can’t understand why a member 
of this legislature would as a question to which has had the 
answer, and expect public servants to spend the taxpayers’ 
money looking up the answer to a question when he purports to 
have the answer in front of him. 
 
If he says it’s that sum, then I’ll accept it. If he doesn’t believe 
his own answer, then I will try to get him the information. But, I 
mean, if he wants to talk a lot of arrogance, he can. He can talk 
about arrogance or anything else he wishes, but the members 
opposite are only displaying their lack of capability of ever 
being able to govern this province. They’re displaying their lack 
of knowledge which makes them unfit to govern at any time. 
And I hope that the members carry on in the manner possible 
because they’re proving to the people of Saskatchewan who 
should be the government of this province. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Minister, the reason we’re asking 
for confirmation of that $2 million supplementary  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1270 
 

budget . . . excuse me, the $2 million supplementary budget, is 
because your government hasn’t tabled yet the Public Accounts 
for that particular fiscal year. So who knows for sure what you 
spent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — You’re about a year behind. 
 
I ask the minister: who over there amongst your employees in 
the department is responsible for the summer employment 
program this year? Who there is responsible for that program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I know the 
member opposite’s only been a member of this Assembly for a 
year and a half and is not maybe familiar with the ways of this 
Assembly. And I know that he has been a member of the House 
of Commons and should have some knowledge of the 
parliamentary procedure. He should know that the Public 
Accounts have nothing to do with the supplementary budgets 
which are passed by this Assembly. 
 
The budget that he is asking the questions on is passed by this 
Assembly. I’ve asked one of my staff to go to the library where 
it is a public record and carry it back here, and then I will open 
it up and see what it says, and then I can confirm or deny the 
information that he has before him. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I asked you: who there amongst your 
employees — you have 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 — 8 employees that I 
can see sitting here this afternoon. Which one of those 
employees is responsible for the summer employment program 
in this current fiscal year? Which one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the person in charge is 
Anne McFarlane, seated directly . . . not directly behind me, but 
one row behind me and one row back. And she is the person in 
charge of this particular program. And that’s a simple question. 
No problem. There she is, right there. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, I’m very . . . nice to know that Anne 
McFarlane is sitting there right behind you. Would you just turn 
around and ask her whether or not your government has brought 
in a supplementary budget, since you’ve been government, for 
the summer employment program, just turn around and ask her. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the answer is yes. And 
she was not in charge of the program in 1986, so you couldn’t 
expect her to remember that — I don’t recall you being in 
charge of it in 1986 — she confirms she was not in charge of 
the program in 1986, Mr. Chairman. And I confirm that there 
was a supplementary budget. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who is in charge? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — If the member opposite will have a little 
patience, or the library finds it, we will bring it. Maybe even the 
pages could go get it from the Clerk’s office. I’m sure they have 
it there. But if you will be a little patient we will get it for you, 
and I encourage you to ask  

other questions to get on with something relevant until they 
deliver it for us here. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — It would seem to me, I would imagine even 
you, when you came into as minister of your different 
portfolios, would check as to what had happened in the past and 
would have some knowledge as to what had happened in the 
past in your particular cabinet responsibilities. And I’m sure 
that as a lawyer — I was going to say learned friend, but I don’t 
want to go that far — that as a lawyer when you work on a case 
you check the past precedents. You go back into this history . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not him, he never won a case in his life. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well only taking away farm land from people 
is the only case he’s ever won. So it is important. 
 
And going back to the item of Public Accounts not yet being 
tabled, don’t mislead this legislature and the people who may be 
watching today by saying that the public accounts are 
irrelevant. We don’t know how much has actually been spent 
until those Public Accounts are tabled. 
 
Now you might have brought in a supplementary estimate, but 
in terms of knowing how much money was actually spent, we 
don’t know that until the Public Accounts are tabled. We can 
only speculate from the amount that was appropriated as to 
whether or not that total amount was spent, or maybe it was 
overspent and there was other provisions put forward. 
 
So I would ask the minister, then since you’ve acknowledged 
— and if you’d listen to this please — if you acknowledge, and 
you haven’t acknowledged if there was a supplementary budget 
brought in, could you tell us the rationale, the reason, as to why 
there was a supplementary budget brought in, in the summer 
employment program for 1986, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve already explained 
that the total expenditure in ’86-87 was $9.004 million. The 
reason it was expended at that sum was that the criteria were 
different and were a lot more loose; they were open-ended, and 
therefore the expenditure went up over the budgeted amount. 
I’ve already indicated that there was a supplementary budget 
item. 
 
I’ve indicated that we are trying to get the sum of the original 
budget item. It’s all we have to do, is as soon as we can get it 
from the library — and they’re trying to look it up now — is 
look at the original amount budgeted, subtract that from $9.004 
million, and the member opposite will have his answer. 
 
In addition, Mr. Chairman, the sum, I’ve already explained, was 
over the budgeted amount and therefore it was responsible to 
start coming in within budget in future years, and that’s what 
we have been doing. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, Mr. Minister, what do you do now? 
Last year then, were the amounts that you had received 
applications for in excess of the amount that you had estimated? 
 
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1271 
 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the 
library for giving us the budget for 1985-86 and 1986-87. I can 
point out that for 1986-87 the blue book original budget figure 
was $8.5 million, and the actual expenditure was 9.004 million, 
for an over-expenditure of $504,000. That was a supplementary 
budget figure; that’s the actual expenditure. Cabinet gave 
authority for an extra 2 point — what was it? — an extra 2 
million, but the uptake was not there. 
 
(1500) 
 
Applications came in to cover that amount, but afterwards 
people didn’t claim all of it in rebates or refunds, so that the 
actual expenditure was not as high as anticipated, based on the 
applications that came in. 
 
So now, if the member opposite can process that, the original 
sum was 8.5 million in 1985-86; 9.004 million was spent. The 
total sum budgeted was 8.5 million plus 2 million 
supplementary for a total of 10.5 million. The uptake was 9.004 
million. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — And you’re saying to this Assembly, Mr. 
Minister, that the only reason that there was the order in council 
to increase that amount was because of the fact that the criteria 
in the program was loose and there were more applications and 
you wanted to fund all the applications coming in without 
rejecting anyone. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the applications that 
came in went over the budgeted amount, and so therefore 
cabinet increased the allocation to match the amount of the 
applications. When the final year was completed, it turns out 
that some people either didn’t follow up with the program and 
didn’t hire, or some didn’t make the claim, or some may have 
hired people that didn’t qualify. As a result, when it was all 
calculated, finalized, $9.004 million was the actual expenditure 
and so therefore the sum that cabinet had set aside was not 
necessary — 10.5 million was not necessary. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Could the minister now tell me what other 
years are you aware of — you were certainly aware of what the 
amount was, total amount, in the program going back into the 
1970s, so could you at least tell me, if you can’t got back to the 
1970s, could you at least tell me, since 1982, how many other 
years did cabinet approval additional funding for summer 
employment programs in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I won’t do that because 
I’ve gone back and looked up documents from two years ago to 
satisfy the member’s curiosity. But we’re not going to go back 
through all of . . . that information is readily available. 
 
He has the Public Accounts for those years that he is insisting 
he doesn’t have now. He has the Public Accounts; he has the 
budgets. Those are public documents. If he wants to look that 
up, he can look that up. But I do not see the relevancy of . . . 
The budgeted amounts are a public record; the actual 
expenditures are public record. I’ve read the actual 
expenditures. 
 

He doesn’t want to hear the $1 million actual expenditure of the 
NDP. He has not yet told us whether the expenditure of $3.3 
million in ’84-85, a tripling by this government, was adequate 
or not. He has not decided, in relevance to what the NDP did, 
whether that was important or not. He has not now told us 
whether the $9 million, ninefold what the NDP spent, whether 
that was too much or not enough. 
 
What I am simply saying is this year we have budgeted the 
same as last year — $4 million — because we found that was 
adequate to cover the uptake, and that we had a record amount 
of student employment last year. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, do you think . . . it worked 
previously when I was asking you questions. Do you think you 
could turn around around and ask Anne McFarlane again if 
there’ been a supplementary budget in any other year from 1982 
till present. 
 
And I know that it can go and be looked up in the library, but 
I’d like to hear it out of your mouth so people that are watching 
today, and people in this Assembly, can follow some logical 
flow. And you’re certainly not providing logic. It’s not a court 
room. You’re supposed to be a cabinet minister answering to 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So would you please tell me, between 1982 and present, was 
that that the only year — the ’86-87 fiscal year — that there 
was a supplementary budget brought in for summer 
employment in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, there might have been. I 
wasn’t the minister at the time. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I asked if you’d turn around and ask Ms. 
McFarlane, behind you, that very question. She’s an expert in 
your department, and you’d think you would utilize her, not . . . 
I see her providing the information and you shaking your head. 
 
What are you trying to hide from the people in the province? 
Did you ask her? Did you ask her what other years there was a 
supplementary budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — What I am trying to show is, I’m trying 
to show the people of Saskatchewan that the members opposite 
are either not bright enough or too lazy to go and look it up 
themselves. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — What other years was there a supplementary 
budget brought in, other than the ’86-87 fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, my staff is trying to look 
this up, but I mean, this is history that they’re looking up. 
They’re doing . . . researching history for the whims of the 
member opposite there, when that history is available, publicly 
available. 
 
They advise that as far as they can gather the information, as 
fast as they are looking at this historical data, that in ’84-85 they 
believe there was a $1.1 million  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1272 
 

supplementary, but I cannot vouch for the absolute accuracy of 
that. 
 
They are trying to compare these figures going back to a time 
when I was not the minister. I’m not expected to recall what 
was done three or four years ago, when the members opposite 
can look it up in the book if — and I assume they are capable of 
looking it up and doing the calculation if they really want to 
know. 
 
We are discussing here this year’s budget. I’m prepared to talk 
about last year’s budget. I’m prepared to talk about the year 
before’s budget. I’m prepared to point out to them that they 
only spend a million dollars. But for them to have a whim that 
they want to know what the supplementary budget was three 
years ago or four years ago, now this historical data that is not 
relevant to today’s budget. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I did not yet ask the minister what the amount 
was. I asked the minister: in what years, other than the ’86-87 
fiscal year, was there a supplementary budget brought in for the 
summer youth employment program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I do not have that 
information available at this time. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Is the minister refusing to answer that 
particular question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, yes. 
 
Mr. Anguish: —Well I don’t know how we can proceed with 
the process in this Assembly in the Committee of Finance. 
You’re asked a very basic, straightforward question; you’ve got 
your officials here; you’ve noted the official that’s responsible 
for that. I maintain you have the information and you’re 
keeping it from people in the province. And it is relevant that 
comes from other years, because people need to know the 
pattern that’s there. And if it’s a good pattern, then you should 
be proud of it. So what are you trying to hide? 
 
We want to know from you what years, between 1982 and the 
current fiscal year, was there a supplementary budget brought in 
for the summer youth employment program. Very simple. Your 
official should know that. She’s in charge of the program. You 
acknowledge that. Surely to goodness someone who’s in charge 
of a program that in some years has been as high as over $10 
million would know the history of how supplementary budgets 
were brought in, and for what reasons those supplementary 
budgets were brought in. 
 
Will the minister now please tell us, because I know you have 
the information: which years, other than 1986-87, was there a 
supplementary budget brought in for the summer youth 
employment program in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I have actual 
expenditures and I won’t repeat them again. They are 
consistently at $1 million a year for the NDP. They peaked, 
from ’79 to 1982 they peaked at $1,038,000. Our government 
raised the actual expenditure to $2.8 million in ’83-84 and 3.3 
in ’84-85. And in ’84-85 I know  

that there was a supplementary budget. In ’85-86 there was, and 
in ’86-87 there was. There was not in ’87-88. We are now 
considering the year ’88-89. I can’t imagine what else the 
member opposite would want to know, and I can’t image why 
he can’t go look up his own history if he wishes to know what it 
is. 
 
The year in question, Mr. Chairman, is this year’s budget. 
That’s what we’re examining. I’ve gone back three years and 
given him the information he’s wanted for three years. I will not 
go back any further than three years. I will not go back into the 
history of Saskatchewan. If he wants to know the history of 
Saskatchewan, he should learn it for himself. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — You can’t come in here and selectively pick 
and choose. You’re the one who’s accountable to the 
Legislative Assembly for taxpayers’ dollars that are spent. 
 
You conveniently have some figures going back to 1978. The 
question — I don’t know how much simpler to put it to you. I 
can’t believe someone who was the top of their law class, what 
I was told, would not know or come prepared with this 
information or to be able to understand the question. The 
question is: in what years was there s supplementary budge 
brought in for the summer employment program in the province 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all I’d like 
to point out to the member that he is in error and he may be led 
by the media to be in error. I did not at any time finish at the top 
of my law class. I read such a statement in the Star-Phoenix. 
Not everything you read in the paper is true. 
 
The fact is that I finished first in the bar admission course in my 
class, but I did not finish at the top of the law class, and I can’t 
remember who did. But I believe that it was either the member 
for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg or one Constance Hunt. And I 
know that they finished first and second, and I don’t recall who 
finished first or second. And if it was the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, I would not want to take that honour 
away from him. 
 
The truth of the matter is, the absolute truth is, to the best of my 
knowledge I finished first in the bar admission course. I 
apologize for the Star-Phoenix misleading the member 
opposite. I know it bothers him a lot that I might have finished 
first in anything, but I apologize on behalf of the Star-Phoenix 
for them having mislead the member, and I also want to set that 
straight for my colleagues who know the truth. 
 
The truth is, I finished about in the top third. The truth is that 
with that education, Mr. Chairman, I have the ability to go and 
add and subtract, look at the Public Accounts, obtain that 
information in the library, the same as the member opposite 
should have. And if he was not too lazy to look it up himself, he 
would have the information. He probably has it in front of him. 
 
In some cases he has asked the question and then says he has 
the answer and want to know if that’s correct. If he wants me to 
check his addition or subtraction, I will not do that. He should 
be able to add and subtract for himself.  



 
May 12, 1988 

1273 
 

He should be able to read. He should be to find out what the 
history of this province was four years ago or 40 years ago. 
 
I’ll go back a little bit to assist him. I’ve gone back to telling 
him how the NDP spent $1 million. That has hurt him dearly. It 
has broken his political momentum here today to find out that 
the NDP spent $1 million and we raised it to three and then to 
nine. And we’ve said, no, just a minute, if 1 million was good 
enough when the NDP were government, then probably four 
should be reasonable now. It worked well last year; we’ve put it 
at four again. If the member opposite continues this way, we 
may never pass the four because he is not on anything relevant. 
 
So I would ask the member opposite, if he has any relevant 
questions, to ask them, and if he wants to know the history of 
Saskatchewan, he should go and study it for himself. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well I guess a couple of points before I put 
the question to you again. One is that I certainly wouldn’t want 
to go to you to have my mathematics checked, because I’ve 
seen you counting your fingers in the House before, and you’re 
wrong. 
 
The second thing is that in term of your standing as an 
academic, I think that you’re absolute living proof that just 
because you have high academic skills doesn’t necessarily 
mean that you would have any social skills whatsoever. There’s 
certainly a separation there, and you’re living proof of that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Get off that garbage, for crying out loud. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — The garbage call over there has asked me to 
get back to the question. The question is: in what years between 
1982 and 1988-89 fiscal year was there a supplementary budget 
brought in by your government other than the year you’ve 
already given me, in 1986-87? And the only reason you 
admitted that is because I knew it. So what other years was 
there a supplementary budget brought in by your government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the level of the member 
opposite’s questions have hit the gutter; they have got so low 
they have hit the gutter. I refuse to answer any questions that 
are that low. I told him he could look it up for himself, He 
already has in some cases. If he’s too lazy to do it, that’s his 
own problem. If he isn’t knowledgeable enough to do it, that’s 
his own problem. But when the questions get to the gutter level 
that they have gotten to now, I will not answer them. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Anguish: — It seems that you’re the one who seems to 
drag it down to that level. The basic question is: what years did 
you have a supplementary budget for the summer youth 
employment program other than the fiscal year ’86-87? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite is 
repeating himself; I will not. 
 

Mr. Anguish: — Do you refuse to give that information that’s 
relevant to this estimates process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t have it. It’s not 
relevant. That’s not this year’s budget or last year’s budget of 
the year before’s budget. I refuse to look up that information 
because the member opposite is too lazy to look it up himself. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — You said, Mr. Minister, that you spent $9 
million in 1985-86 on the summer employment program. Is that 
correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — This sum in 1986-87 was $9.004 
million. That is correct. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — How much did you estimate in that year, Mr. 
Minister, that would be spent in the summer employment 
program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I’m going to give him 
his answer for the last time. It was $8.4 million; the supplement 
was $2 million, for a total of 10.5 For the last time, 8.5 plus 2 
— 10.5 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Minister, I’d try and ask this for last time 
if you give the answer, I’ve got that year. Eighty-five, 
eighty-six fiscal year. You’re talking about one year into the 
future, Mr. Minister, one year beyond what I was asking about. 
Eighty-five, eighty-six — did you spend $9 million in the 
summer employment program in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the expenditure for 
’85-86 was $9.1 million. The records of this Assembly show 
that 8.4 million was originally budgeted. I do not know how 
much was allocated in supplementary. I can only tell you that, 
in addition to the 8.4, a total of 9.1 was spent, so that should be 
1.5 — and I haven’t calculated that quickly; I’m just looking at 
it — should be an additional 1.5 was spent over the original 
budget amount in 1985-86. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — So then in the 1985-86 . . . It seems like we’re 
really getting somewhere actually, Mr. Minister. And in ’85-86 
there was a supplementary budget brought in. Is that correct, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, yes. I answered that 
question about 10 minutes ago. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well why do we have to ask it one year at a 
time? Why can’t you just tell me the fiscal years that there was 
a supplementary budget brought in for the summer employment 
program? 
 
We’ve now got, after taking about half an hour of asking you 
the same question, we’ve finally got the information I requested 
for the ’86-87 fiscal year. We’ve got the information I requested 
for the ’85-86 fiscal year. Now could you give us the rest of the 
years in one sweeping movement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I answered that question 
about 15 minutes ago. The member opposite  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1274 
 

simply can’t remember the answer. He should look it up in 
Hansard tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well I maintain to you and to people who are 
watching, while they’re unemployed out there in the province 
of Saskatchewan today, that the only reason you brought in 
supplementary budgets in those years is to buy more votes at 
election time, no other reason other than that — absolutely no 
other reason. 
 
You bring in a $2 supplementary budget. You bring in a $1.1 
million supplementary budget. One was for the year where you 
should have called the election but were scared to, and the next 
one was for the year where you decided the only way you could 
get re-elected was to buy the election. And so you put that 
money into the budgets in order to entice people to vote for you. 
No question about that — buying votes with the summer 
employment program. 
 
It would seem that the criteria should be, for you to put money 
into the program, should be the unemployment levels in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And it seems strange that you would 
allow $10.5 million to be in the program in an election year, 
and when it’s 1988 and unemployment rates are higher than 
they were during election year, you’ve cut the program back by 
$6.5 million. 
 
My question is to you, Mr. Minister: will you make a 
commitment here today to have a supplementary budget 
brought in for the summer employment program to allow those 
thousands of students out there, that aren’t able to find jobs, to 
get those summer jobs they require; and secondly, to relax your 
requirements, or to relax the criteria for the program and stop 
the exclusion of non-profit corporations and municipal levels of 
government so they’re able to qualify for this particular 
program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t believe 
anybody’s watching this this afternoon. I can’t imagine who 
would watch this. You know, sometimes my mother watches, 
and if she’s watching now I don’t believe she would be any 
more. She’s probably turned it off because this kind of a debate 
makes her ill. And I’m serious, and probably does that to other 
people as well. 
 
It’s hard to believe, also, that the party opposite who would buy 
memberships in a nomination in Regina Elphinstone would then 
stand up, holier that thou, and accuse someone of buying votes. 
How can you buy a vote? You don’t know if these people that 
you think you are helping . . . you have no proof in a secret 
ballot that you have bought that vote? But you have in a 
nomination. You have their card; you write it out; they put their 
name on it; you know they’re a member of the NDP. 
 
So they are experts in buying memberships, but in a democracy 
it is not possible to buy votes because we still have a secret 
ballot, Mr. Chairman. So the members opposite who have 
bought votes and have receipts to show for it — a red receipt or 
a pink receipt to show that they’ve bought that vote from that 
person in Elphinstone — cannot say that it’s possible for a 
government to buy votes when there is no proof of it. They have 
proof — they  

have pink and red receipts that they bought votes in Elphinstone 
for the nomination. But in a democracy, in a secret ballot, there 
is no buying of votes. There’s the provision of services, and 
that’s what governments do. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Would the minister consider bringing in a 
supplementary budget to increase the $4 million amount in the 
Estimates, and will you look at changing the criteria to allow 
municipalities and non-profit corporations to qualify for the 
summer employment program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, if necessary we’ll bring 
in a supplementary budget, but we’ll have to see what the 
uptake is on the program this year. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — What would the basis be on bringing in a 
supplementary budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if the number of 
applications far exceed the budgetary sum, then cabinet would 
have to consider whether additional sums can be found this year 
to honour all of those applications. But last year we were within 
budget and we will see how things go this year. The economy is 
somewhat better, the price of grain has gone up a little bit. The 
manufacturing plants in Battlefords are rolling better than ever, 
and so I know that in Battlefords there should be a lot of jobs 
despite all the action or inaction of the member opposite in 
trying to stop bacon plants and trailer manufacturing plans. 
 
But we expect that in most places, including Battlefords, that 
employment will be better than ever this year and that it should 
not be necessary to bring in a supplementary budget, but if 
necessary we will do that. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Do I gather of all that the minister has 
basically said that the only way you’ll bring in a supplementary 
budget is if under the current criteria there are more applications 
that what there are funds that have been estimated for the 
program? Is that correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, that’s more or less what 
I said. I said if there are many applications, then we would have 
to consider whether the budget should be raised. But you can’t 
simply raise the budget. I can’t pluck money from the air. That 
would have to come from somewhere. It’d have to either come 
from deficit financing, or it would have to come from a tax 
increase, or it would have to come from another department. 
And you know, if the member opposite would want us to take it 
from important programs in other departments, I don’t think 
that’s wise. 
 
So we will examine the situation and see what happens during 
the course of this spring and summer, and if necessary, we will 
increase the budget. But that has to be balanced with having to 
obtain the funds from somewhere. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — How many people between the age of 15 and 
25 are unemployed in the province today, Mr. Minister? 
 
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1275 
 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, April 1988, the labour 
force in that age group is 100,000 of which 85,000 are 
employed, and approximately 15,000 are listed as unemployed. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Out of the $4 million that you’re putting into 
the program — or asking the approval to go into the program 
this year — out of that $4 million, how many jobs do you 
expect to create as a direct result of the Opportunities ’88 
program in the province, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the government’s 
portion of job creation this summer, from the provincial point of 
view would, if the budgetary sum is spent, would create about 
4,000 jobs this summer, plus the summer jobs that the 
government hires directly. And since those wages are 
considerably higher in the government positions, I would expect 
that that might run in a range of 2,000, but I’d have to check 
that. So that would be about 6,000. 
 
Then the federal government has a program that will create 
several thousand more jobs. Plus business and industry, which 
does the bulk of the hiring in summer, is also benefitting from 
some improvement in the economy, and we saw that last year 
when there were a record number of students hired last year. 
 
All the students in north-eastern Saskatchewan that were 
registered at Manpower had . . . I checked with them and they 
said that all of those that had registered for the summer had jobs 
now. There may have been some that registered late, or there 
might be one or two that didn’t get jobs that they wanted, but 
the . . . when I checked last year in that area, north-east 
Saskatchewan, which is one of the lowest income areas of 
Saskatchewan, all the students had jobs as far as Canada 
Manpower was concerned. 
 
So we had record employment last year, and we anticipate that 
this year should be as good or better. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I think your statistics are questionable in 
terms of your record employment. I do not believe that you had 
record employment created in the province of Saskatchewan. In 
fact, some would say that you have one of the worst job 
creation records across the country. 
 
Now the minister has just gone through a list of Opportunities 
’88 jobs — the jobs that come as a result of the Public Service 
Commission funding allocation, jobs under the federal program. 
In fact, if you could add all together what you were just saying, 
is that we’d have to import people in that age group of 15 to 25 
into the province to fill all these jobs you created, which is 
totally false. 
 
So how many jobs, Mr. Minister, are you saying will be created 
for young people in the province of Saskatchewan this year? 
Because if I took for fact as to what you had just said, they 
would exceed the 15,000 that you acknowledge by your own 
statistics are unemployed in the province of Saskatchewan. So 
how many jobs are there going to be created this year and what 
do you expect the summer population of student unemployment 
to be? 
 

(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t think that we’ll 
be importing students into Saskatchewan this year. However, I 
note that in the province of Manitoba in the past few years they 
have been importing Mexican labourers to pick vegetables in 
Manitoba and that they get a special permit. At least one plane 
load of Mexican workers comes into Manitoba to pick 
vegetables in that province for the last few years. Hopefully 
they won’t be needed this year. 
 
Now that is the kind of mentality you have under an NDP 
government where Manitoba’s unemployment rate is as high as 
Saskatchewan. Under the NDP government in Manitoba they 
would bring in Mexican labourers to do the work, and the 
government would pay the people in Manitoba to do nothing. 
So that’s the mentality of the NDP. So I don’t think we’ll be 
bringing in any out-of-province workers this summer. 
 
But I wanted to give you an example of the NDP thinking that 
in Canada, when we had the last NDP province, we were 
importing workers from Mexico to pick our food because in 
Manitoba they couldn’t get their own citizens to pick their own 
food. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well I’m glad you told us about the peon 
policy in other places in the country. I though we were in 
particular talking about this . . . I don’t appreciate your flippant 
answers, and I don’t think the people who follow this process 
appreciate it either. If you’ve got respect for anything, you 
would think that you would have respect for this institution 
here. But I don’t even think you have respect for that. 
 
What do you think the unemployment figure will be for 
students this summer in the province of Saskatchewan? That’s 
the question. Could you answer that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, that’s a guess. We’re 
projecting that it should be about the same as last year. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — What do you feel the unemployment 
percentage will be for young people in the province of 
Saskatchewan this year? If you can’t project that — you say it’s 
about the same as last year — what was last year’s? Could you 
tell us, Mr. Minister? Ask one of your officials instead of 
getting up and being flippant and arrogant about your answers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, as far as I know, 
StatsCanada doesn’t differentiate between students and youth 
out in the market. You’re either out in the market or you’re not 
out in the market in that age category. 
 
The figures I have for the last few years, on a yearly basis, for 
youth unemployment is: 1984, 15 per cent; 1985, 13.9 per cent; 
1986, 13.2 per cent; 1987, 12.9 per cent. You can see that the 
trend shows that youth unemployment is coming down, that if 
you will go back to the days of the oil and potash boom in 
Saskatchewan in the mid-’70s, late ’70s, that even when 
unemployment was at 4 per cent, youth unemployment was 
always double. So it’s traditional, and I’m not saying that it is  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1276 
 

desirable, that youth unemployment runs at about double of the 
regular unemployment rate. 
 
There may be many explanations why that is the situation. I 
would expect over the years, as our society ages and there is a 
greater demand of young workers as more and more people 
retire, that the youth unemployment rate should come down 
over the next 10 years or so. Last year it was 12.7 per cent. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well it also comes down to that group 
because we have an ageing population, Mr. Minister. 
Regardless from that, in the age group between 15 and 24, the 
unemployment rate in 1987 was 13.4 per cent. February of ’88, 
this is increased to 15.2 per cent, so I’m not sure where you get 
these figures from. 
 
Could the Minister tell me: the figures that you just read off, are 
they a yearly average or are they for a particular month that you 
had laid out? You started with 15 per cent, 13.9, 13.2, 12.9 
What years were those for, and what months were they? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll give you an annual 
average just so people get a picture of the trend and how youth 
unemployment tracks the regular unemployment rate: 1977, 
unemployment 4.5 per cent, youth 8.8; 1978 it’s 4.9 for youth, 
9.2 general — or 9.2 youth, 4.9 general; 1979, general rate 4.2 
per cent, the youth 7.8; 1980, youth 4.4, regular 8.5; 1981, 
youth 4.7, general rate, 8.9; 1982, youth 6.2, general rate 11.4; 
1983, youth 7.4, general 14.1 — or, sorry, general 7.4, youth 
14.1; 1984 the youth rate was 15 per cent, and the general rate 
was 8 per cent; 1985 the youth rate was 13.9, the general rate 
was 8.1; 1986 the rate for youth was 13.2 per cent, and the 
general rate was 7.7 per cent; 1987 the youth rate was 12.9, and 
the general rate was 7.3. 
 
You can see that in the boom times of high oil prices, high 
uranium and potash prices, that the youth unemployment rate 
was always approximately double of the regular unemployment 
rate. You can see that recently in the last two years the youth 
employment rate has been coming down, and it is no longer 
double the general unemployment rate in the province. 
 
So proportionately, youth unemployment is doing much better 
in the last few years than it did under the boom times of high 
energy prices and high uranium and potash prices, and grain 
price were pretty good in those years as well. So this would 
give you a clear picture that overall youth unemployment is 
coming down. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — This is one of the most exasperating 
experiences I ever had. My colleagues are laughing about it. I 
have a hard time keeping a train of thought with you, Mr. 
Minister, because you don’t answer any of the questions. 
 
Mr. Minister, the provincial government really has a lack of 
commitment to job creation in this province. And you’re 
absolutely accurate in one of the statements you made that the 
youth unemployment does not necessarily mean that they’re 
students. But you put on a program in the summer to employ 
students, but you do absolutely nothing for the youth 
unemployed, the unemployed  

people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Access youth employment program, cut, at a cost of 1,145 
jobs. The summer employment program for the student, you cut 
that between ’86 and currently by some 62 per cent — a loss of 
6,400 student jobs in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
There’s been no winter works program for the last two years. 
Saskatchewan skills development program received zero per 
cent increased in the last two years. Saskatchewan employment 
development program has been cuts by $4.1 million in the last 
two years at a cost of some 660 jobs. And you have the audacity 
to stand up here in this legislature and say you’re doing a good 
job in creating employment for people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s absolutely not at your initiative; that if there is anything 
positive to say about the employment picture the stimulus for 
that certainly does not come from you or the employment 
development agency in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
You say in your government that one of the greatest emphasis 
that we have to place on would be the tourism in the province of 
Saskatchewan. You know very well that chambers of commerce 
throughout the province of Saskatchewan rely on the 
employment program in the summer to staff the tourist booths. 
The city of North Battleford, I know, has two tourist booths; 
they can only get one person this year. And that’s not from your 
program, that’s from another source. You won’t allow the 
non-profits and the municipal levels of government to qualify 
for many of your programs. 
 
I’m asking the minister again, if you will change the criteria just 
as an initial step to show something positive towards 
employment development in this province, if you will change 
the criteria for the Opportunities ’88 program so that you will 
allow non-profit organizations in municipal governments to 
qualify for a meaningful summer employment program, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, with respect to 
youth unemployment, first of all, the province of Saskatchewan 
does not stand alone on the area of employment. 
Unemployment insurance is paid out by the federal government. 
Federal employment and manpower department has training 
programs throughout Saskatchewan and Canada that assist 
youth in locating employment. 
 
We have in our department welfare reform, something the NDP 
are opposed to. And now they stand up in the House and say, 
you didn’t put more money into welfare reform; you didn’t put 
more money into the Saskatchewan skills development 
program. They’re saying, you reduced the money on welfare 
reform; you reduced the money in the Saskatchewan 
employment development program. 
 
The members opposite are opposed to welfare reform and then 
come here and accuse us of not putting enough money into 
welfare reform. These are welfare reform programs primarily 
for unemployed youth. That’s  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1277 
 

primarily who benefits from these programs. 
 
There are 2,300 people now getting an education and further 
training under welfare reform. Annually we try to have about 
two and a half thousand people getting experience and working. 
These are primarily youth, primarily people under the age of 30. 
 
The NDP believe that we should have job creation but they are 
opposed to the Saskatchewan home improvement program. 
They believe we should have job creation but they are opposed 
to the upgrader in Regina and the Husky upgrader. They are 
opposed to bacon plants in The Battlefords. They are opposed 
to Weyerhaeuser projects for a paper mill. 
 
They are against everything that creates any jobs except giving 
away money. They are in favour of giving away money. Take 
the taxpayers’ money. Here, pay that salary. There is a job for 
somebody. 
 
Where’s this money supposed to come from, Mr. Chairman? 
That money has to come from taxpayers. But the NDP are 
opposed to increasing taxes. They’re opposed to economic 
development. They are only for spending money, but have no 
explanation where the money should come from, except get it 
from the oil companies. Our royalties are higher than Alberta — 
quite a lot higher than Alberta. 
 
The NDP had a policy of leaving the oil in the ground, and 
that’s where it was, producing nothing. You can’t tax nothing. 
We are pumping it out and we are taxing it. 
 
In natural gas, Mr. Chairman, the NDP had production royalties 
of $1 million a year. That’s what they taxed the oil companies 
on natural gas production. We had revenues of $16 million per 
year, sixteenfold. They say, go get it from the resource 
companies. 
 
We have got gas revenues sixteenfold of what the NDP had for 
several reasons, the first reason being the NDP wouldn’t allow 
any gas development. The NDP believe in spending money. 
They talk about not raising taxes, but in Manitoba they showed 
exactly the opposite. They talk abut not having a deficit. In 
Manitoba they have a gigantic deficit. They say they never had 
a deficit, and yet they took dividends out of the Sask Power 
Corporation rather than paying off its debt, so that the people of 
Saskatchewan would think they bought and paid for a power 
corporation; had all of that corporation’s money sent over to the 
NDP government to have it spent. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we have almost wasted an entire afternoon 
trying to educate the members opposite to at least ask an 
intelligent question. And they believe that they could govern 
this province? Mr. Chairman, I say to you and to the people of 
Saskatchewan, what you have seen from the NDP this afternoon 
scares people. I don’t have to scare them the way the NDP go 
around the scaring them about what we would do. The very fact 
that the NDP are what they are, scares people, and they have 
shown us a prime example this afternoon. 
 
I hope they get up and ask another nonsensical question. I hope 
they get up and show people how they are in the  

gutter, Mr. Chairman, I await the NDP to get up and show 
another example of their incompetence and whey they should 
never be the government of this province. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to conclude by making 
a few observations which we’re allowed to do in estimates in 
the Committee of Finance, going through this budgetary 
process. 
 
And I must say that in my political career this has been the most 
exasperating experience I’ve ever had, is being in estimates 
with this minister this afternoon. Even defeat, electoral defeat at 
the hands of a Conservative member in a federal election, did 
not exasperate me to the degree that I am this afternoon by the 
minister opposite. 
 
He doesn’t answer questions. He’s not prepared for estimates. 
He refuses to ask his employees. When he does ask the 
employees of the department, he doesn’t give the answers that 
they tell him. What have you go to hide, Mr. Minister? 
 
You say you don’t scare people, you don’t have to scare people 
around the province. All kinds of people are scared by that 
individual minister opposite — people who have to work in 
service industries, women. Anyone in the province that hasn’t 
been touched by you is because you haven’t talked to them. 
 
And they’re scared of the reaction that comes from the minister 
opposite. It’s just uncaring, unwarranted attacks on individual 
groups, right from churches to employees. I notice in this 
article, it says: 
 

We’re trying to encourage women not only to be 
managers, but owners of a business. Bosses, not mere 
employees. 

 
Well not everybody can be a boss. There always has to be 
workers. And workers are irrelevant and unmeaningful to you. 
You don’t care about working people, a mere employee. 
 
I would think that you would recognize, as some government 
that says that business is so important, that you can’t have 
business without employees. Because the employees run the 
business for you, and it’s also those employees that spend 
money to make the business operate. 
 
We don’t export everything from the province. There has to be 
consumer dollars within the province. And you’re not putting 
that money into the hands of consumers. All you’re doing is 
driving wedges in, trying to separate people all over the 
province. You’re eliminating the middle class by such things as 
your flat tax. So you have two groups in the province — you’ll 
have those that have and those that don’t; you’ll have the 
wealthy and the poor. 
 
And that’s increasing every day, every month, every year that 
passes under your administration. You’re making that 
separation between people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
You drive wedges between the rural  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1278 
 

communities and the urban communities. You try and be 
divisive — divide and conquer. Very good line for your 
government, and you’ve done nothing to dispel that here this 
afternoon. 
 
In the hypocrisy of the statements that you make in this 
legislature, you care not for this institution, you care not for 
government, you care note for the people of Saskatchewan. You 
put out information that’s contrary to the facts. You talk about 
bacon plants in North Battleford. And yes, they’re great, they 
employ people. Peter Pocklington’s great because he brought in 
new industry. 
 
What’s bad is your economic management of the province and 
the policies that you lack. You talk about not having money to 
do the programs. Where would the money come from? You’ve 
got decent revenues. During most years of your administration 
since 1982, oil prices were higher than they’d every been in the 
history of the country. Grain prices might not have been any 
better, but they certainly weren’t any worse. And yet every 
single year you spend far more money that what you bring into 
the provincial coffers. 
 
You spend money on your political friends, you spend money 
on patronage, and you drive the province so far into the hole 
that generations into the future will have to pay for the debts 
that you’ve created in this province. Even when you project a 
deficit budget, which you’ve done every single year since you 
came into office, you don’t meet the projections. The debt has 
always, in every single year, been worse than what you’ve 
projected. 
 
And that’s why you don’t want to bring in the Public Accounts 
for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1986. That’s why you don’t 
want to provide information to people in the province. But it’s 
backfiring on you. You saw that in the by-elections and you 
listened not to what people were saying to you. 
 
I’m anxious to go into a general election with this government 
pulling the reins and dragging down the province of 
Saskatchewan. It will be the same as it was in 1934 where your 
government was decimated then, and it will be again. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m absolutely shocked at your conduct here this 
afternoon and the administration of your government. 
 
I’d like to thank your employees for coming out. For the life of 
me, I don’t know why you came. How many are there here 
today? There’s 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 employees of your 
department here today, and you haven’t provided hardly any 
concrete answers to anything that’s been asked of you. We had 
to drag the information out. For about half an hour I had to 
place the same question to you to get the answer for two 
particular years in which I was interested to try and show 
people the continued incompetence that the policies of your 
government have created. 
 
So I do thank the employees for coming out this afternoon and 
the time that you spent here, even though you’ve wasted your 
time, because you have a minister that doesn’t care what you 
do. You’ve got a minister that you  

should likely be afraid of. He doesn’t care about your jobs; he 
doesn’t care about the program that you administer for the 
taxpayers in the province of Saskatchewan, but I thank you for 
coming anyway. I’d like to thank the minister for his time, but it 
was so unproductive that I hope never to have to appear in 
estimates again before the minister opposite. Thank you, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 10 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, when we were discussing 
information related to item 10 a couple of days ago, you were 
less than co-operative in providing information to explain the 
rationale for the increase. 
 
Item 10 indicates that the payments to the property management 
corporation for your department increased from a budget last 
year of $1,292,300 to $1,477,500 this year, an increase of 
$185,200, and 14.3 per cent in percentage terms. I ask you, Mr. 
Minister, to please justify to the Assembly and to the people of 
Saskatchewan why it is that you’re paying 14.3 per cent more to 
the property management corporation this year than last? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I answered that question 
a prior day, but primarily there’s extra services, including 
postage on the Saskatchewan income plan, renovations and 
printing services. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Minister, then will you please specify 
what the changes in postage have been, first of all? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — No, I will not. 
 
The total of those expenditures is $185,000. The Saskatchewan 
income plan had an increase in postage costs spending out 
information to senior citizens. The money goes to the property 
management corporation, as I explained a day or two ago. That 
money then is used by them to provide the services and, once 
the services have been provided, if they have any profit left over 
they return it to the consolidated fund. 
 
So what they charge us is not relevant to the taxpayers’ cost. 
They try to charge us market value in order that we budget 
carefully and accordingly. But what they charge us is charged 
back to the taxpayer, and we get out budget from the taxpayer, 
so there’s no net cost to the taxpayer. 
 
If they raised our rent and fees by 14.3 per cent, which they did, 
that is not necessarily a cost to the taxpayer, but will reflect in 
the estimates on the property management corporation, and you 
can ask them those questions. 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, that’s one of the most ridiculous 
statements I’ve ever heard. The costs have gone up 14.3 per 
cent — $185,000 — and that’s not an increased cost to the 
taxpayer? And you refuse to substantiate the rationale for that in 
this House. 
 
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1279 
 

Now let me repeat the question again: would you please advise 
the Assembly of the rationale, by category, of those increases in 
costs to the property management corporation. This whole 
creation has been a frustrating bit of financial subterfuge on the 
part of you and other ministers of the Crown. It’s impossible to 
get information about the cost of operations related to what’s 
currently being delivered now by the property management 
corporation. 
 
Let me ask you one more time: would you please provide some 
very simple information to explain the cost of services, and the 
difference between last year and this year, that are assigned to 
you by the property management corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the property 
management corporation has got a policy of charging us market 
prices for the rent, and market prices for their services, and 
that’s what they did last year. That caused an increase because 
we were paying the market prices. And the members opposite 
might have a hard time understanding the concept of market 
prices. I know they don’t believe in markets. But that’s the 
reason that our costs were increased by the property 
management corporation — we were paying fair market value 
for the services received. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister. And I 
wonder, Mr. Minister, if you can break the $185,200 down into 
the different components, the different main components, of 
expenditure that you’ve estimated here, and send it over later; 
it’s not necessary to have it right at this moment. 
 
And while you’re at it, could the minister break the $429,000 
that’s shown in the Supplementary Estimates ending March 31, 
1988, for Human Resources, Labour, Employment, under item 
20 — $429,000. If the minister could provide a breakdown on 
that figure as well, according to main components. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I won’t be giving a 
further breakdown on the question asked by the member for 
Moose Jaw North, repeated by the member for, I believe, 
Saskatoon Westmount. But I would like a further clarification 
of the $400,000 figure that he was referring to. Could he refer 
again to which vote he was referring to, so we can look it up 
and try to get him the answer? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes, I will refer to the Supplementary 
Estimates ending March 31, 1988, page 13, vote 20, item 20. 
Payments to the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation is the heading, and it’s $429,000. And I would like 
that broken down as to main components of the figure. 
 
With regard to the minister’s first comment, Mr. Chairman, 
could the minister specify why he will not break the 185,200 
increase to the property management corporation down into the 
main components? I’d like to know the reason why he says he 
won’t do that. 
 
(1600) 
 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, that question would 
more appropriately be asked of the property management 
corporation. The provision for payments to the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation is for accommodation, mail, 
photographic services, records management services. These are 
all contracted together. The subvote includes a cost of 
departmental mail service, postage, use of the corporation’s 
photographic services agency, management of records, storage 
and retrieval service, and all accommodation costs for facilities 
under the property management corporation’s mandate. The 
accommodation services provided include such items as rent, 
operating and maintenance charges, office furniture rentals, 
space improvements, telephone co-ordination, and management 
program equipment, and any taxes allocated to the properties 
that the corporation may have paid taxes on. 
 
So it’s a rather complicated calculation. You could ask those 
questions to the property management corporation. I can’t break 
it down any further than that. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I want to, Mr. Chairman, ask the minister 
a question with regard to the manner in which he is billed for 
these services by the property management corporation. It’s 
under his department name, and he . . . it’s listed as an 
expenditure of $429,900. 
 
Does he get a bill from the property management corporation 
which says, you owe us $429,000, pay it? Or is there something 
else on the bill that says what it’s for? Or does the property 
management corporation just list all the things the minister said 
and say, that’s what it’s for? And if so, how does the minister 
determine whether he is being charged an economic, a 
competitive price for the service he’s buying from the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation? How does 
he satisfy himself? How do his officials, his administrative 
officials, satisfy themselves that they’re getting the best 
possible price on the service that they’re purchasing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, they invoice us monthly 
for the standard charges. These are negotiated between Finance, 
my department, and the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation. 
 
If I had my choice, I may not deal with the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation, but I know the members 
opposite are opposed to privatization and contracting out of 
services, so I do deal with them. And I have to accept that they 
are running that part of government, that Crown corporation, 
efficiently and are charging me reasonable prices. But I would 
be perfectly prepared to tender and contract out to the business 
community in general. If the members opposite could advocate 
that policy, I certainly would look at it carefully. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, I accept with a certain 
hesitation the minister’s blind faith in the property management 
corporation. It’s his corporation. He set it up; he established it. 
He has now lost control of what it costs him to run that segment 
of his operations. He has a blind faith in the minister in charge 
of the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. 
 
I don’t understand how a minister can operate his  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1280 
 

department and negotiate with the property management 
corporation. He said he’s one of the partners in the negotiations; 
he, Finance and the minister in charge of the property 
management corporation. So their officials must get together 
and determine what these costs are. 
 
All I want is a simple explanation of how the minister 
determines that he’s getting value for his dollar that he’s 
spending — not his dollar, our dollar that he’ spending. And 
that seems to me relatively simple that the minister should be 
able to produce that. Because I’ve read in the property 
management . . . Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation report that this is going to be a very new and 
efficient operation. And I want to know what the efficiencies 
are that the minister is a witness to and how determines that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — It’s virtually impossible for any minister 
to come in and to answer details on a subvote related to the car 
or the government services argument. Ever since I’ve been 
around politics, government services have been renting space 
and buying the buildings for departments. 
 
If the member opposite thinks that the rent is too much, or 
somehow is building too many buildings, or there are not 
enough buildings, you ask government services. You don’t ask 
the minister. That has been a long-standing policy in this 
Assembly. And I quote from the Leader of the Opposition in 
Hansard, March 21, 1979, page 904 to 907. 
 
So that was a policy of the Leader of the Opposition when he 
was in estimates, and I think it’s only fair that if he was 
accurate at that time, I will accept that same policy. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister 
neglects to say one thing. The rather obvious conclusion here is 
that when the department of government services was doing 
these functions for the government departments, they didn’t 
charge them for it. And if they did charge them, they knew what 
the bill was. 
 
But the government department . . . property management 
corporation is charging this department. That was the whole 
theory behind the creation of the property management 
corporation, that there would be an accounting, and departments 
would be charged what they expended for rent, for postage, for 
whatever. And the minister has failed to show us that. So 
therefore, the objective of the property management corporation 
is not being met by the relationship to this particular 
department. And the minister is not able to say what each of 
these items cost his department. 
 
Responsible efficiency, that’s what the minister of the property 
management corporation said when the property management 
corporation was set up. And I intend to talk to him about that 
later, and I’m not lecturing the minister about that. I’m just 
saying that as a minister who is subject to that kind of a 
mandate from the minister in charge of the property 
management corporation, he should know; he should know. 
 
This has got nothing to do with privatization. They set up the 
property management corporation as an alternative to  

the system that was there. And the minister should be able to 
assure this House, with figures, that the objectives are being 
met by that agency for his department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, if the Leader of the 
Opposition was correct in what he said in 1979, then I’m 
correct in what I’m doing today. And if the Leader of the 
Opposition was wrong in what he said in 1979, then I am wrong 
today. If the member opposite is saying that his leader is wrong 
and didn’t know what he was doing in 1979, then I am wrong. 
If he’s saying his leader was correct in 1979, then I am correct 
in what I am doing today. I leave it up to him to decide, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Item 10 agreed to. 
 
Items 11 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 14 — Statutory. 
 
Item 15 — Statutory 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chairman, item no. 15, Members of 
Executive Council, shows that the department charged an 
expenditure of $28,300 per year. I ask, Mr. Minister, if that full 
amount is moneys that are received by you as minister 
responsible for this department. I note as well, Mr. Minister, 
that there is no equivalent expenditure for the Department of 
Social Services for which you are also the minister responsible. 
 
Would you please explain, Mr. Minister, first of all, if you 
personally receive the full amount of $28,300 for minister 
responsible for this department, and why you don’t receive 
anything for minister responsible for the Department of Social 
Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that’s probably the 
best question I’ve heard today. I believe I get $28,300 for 
holding two portfolios. And if $28,300 shows up in the Social 
Services Estimates, then I believe that I am owed another 
$28,300. And I can assure you that I received only one $28,300. 
And it really makes me think, is why do I do this for $28,300? 
It really makes you wonder, and it’s because I remember what it 
was like living under an NDP government, and I fear what it 
would be like living under a future NDP government. And so, 
that’s why I do that. I certainly don’t do it for the money. 
 
But if you want to give me another $28,300 for each portfolio 
— right now you’re getting a bargain; you’re getting a minister 
for $14,150 in each department, and I think the taxpayers are 
getting their money at $14,300 for a minister of a department. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Minister, if you want to remove the beans 
from your ears, I pointed out that there is no equivalent line in 
the Department of Social Services. And I simply ask, Mr. 
Minister: are you of the view that by the taxpayers paying you 
$28,300, in addition to your other MLA benefits, to be minister 
responsible for Human Resources, Labour and Employment, 
that they’re getting full value for their dollar? And are you also 
of the view that when you receive absolutely nothing for 
Minister of  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1281 
 

Social Services, that once again you’re getting what you’re 
worth in that department as well? 
 
Item 16 agreed to. 
 
Vote 20 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister and his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, at this stage I would like 
to thank the management people in my department who have 
been here with me today, who have not only been extremely 
helpful today, but have done a very efficient and competent job 
in managing this department with me in the past year. And I 
also want to thank my colleagues who have given me a lot of 
support in the past year in the efficient management of this 
department. 
 
I want the members opposite and the public to note that this 
department practises what it preaches, and that around me there 
are managers, both male and female, and I’m pleased to say that 
within reach here I have more female managers than I have 
male managers. This is a government that practises equal 
opportunity at the management level. 
 
And I would say that these people are not here because they are 
male or female; they are here because they are competent, and I 
appreciate very much the competence they have shown. They 
have been a credit to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan for the past 
year, and I thank them very much, very sincerely, for what they 
have done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I note 
that maybe you don’t practise entirely what you preach, because 
as I survey the officials here, that not all minorities are 
represented, and you may want to work on that in the years to 
come. 
 
I want to, on behalf of the opposition, thank the officials who 
have attended through this review of the expenditures of the 
Department of Human Resources, Labour and Employment. 
 
The task that you have in serving the people of Saskatchewan is 
a very important one and a very challenging one, particularly in 
these times. And I want to thank the officials for the work that 
they put in in preparing for these estimates and for doing their 
best to provide the minister with information to respond to the 
questions of the opposition on behalf of the interests of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditures 
Social Services 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 36 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister please introduce his 
officials. 
 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, I want to start by 
introducing the officials in my department. There are several of 
them present. I’ll just introduce the ones that are near me that 
might be on camera at this time. I have with me on my left, and 
your right, Stan Sojonky, the deputy minister of Social 
Services. I have on my right, your left, Henry Kutarna, the 
assistant deputy minister of Social Services; and directly behind 
me, Dr. Allan Hansen, assistant deputy minister of Social 
Services. 
 
I know that it is traditional for ministers, on occasion, to give a 
review of the department’s activities in the past year and the 
successes in the department. And I will do that, but very, very 
briefly, Mr. Chairman, because most of what my department 
has done is already public knowledge and has been scrutinized 
by the opposition and their friends and their coalitions for the 
last year or two. And so everybody knows exactly what’s been 
going on in my department. We have no secrets. My department 
has people that tell everybody everything, so that everything is 
usually public in my department. 
 
I want to say, though, that we have continued on the process of 
welfare reform in the last year, and that has been quite 
successful. There are at present, Mr. Deputy Chairman, 5 per 
cent fewer people on welfare than there were a year ago, and 
they are receiving, on average . . . the average sum paid out at a 
record amount per case this year as compared to other years. So 
we have fewer people on welfare receiving more money per 
person than they ever have in the history of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
So we believe that while welfare reform has been fair, it has 
also put more money in the hands of the people that are truly 
needy. And we’re rather proud of the progress that’s been made 
in welfare reform. 
 
On the family services side of the department, we are pleased 
with the progress that has been made with respect to the 
mentally retarded and community living in that division. We 
have made considerable improvements in foster care. Overall, 
the department is providing more and better services to people 
on the family services side of the department. 
 
We will continue to make improvements in that area and we 
will continue with welfare reform, but so far I’m very pleased, 
and I might say that the public as a whole that I meet is very 
pleased, with the improvements at the Department of Social 
Services. 
 
We will try our best to continue to make improvements and 
provide the best service available to the people of Saskatchewan 
through this department. And with that, I’m ready to answer 
any questions that may be relevant. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr. 
Minister. Mr. Minister, I want to welcome your officials here to 
the legislature today. We look forward, on this side of the 
House, to debating Social Services policy with you. 
 
We have some fundamental disagreements with you, and we 
don’t share your view, Mr. Minister, that the people of 
Saskatchewan support the initiatives that you’ve taken,  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1282 
 

either in the family services area or the work-for-welfare area. 
And we may as well get right to the central issues, Mr. Minister. 
 
We on this side of the Assembly are shocked, Mr. Minister. 
First of all, we do not share the view, that you have espoused, 
that your policies have supported families and enhanced the life 
of families in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
On the contrary, Mr. Minister, we are of the view — and we 
will demonstrate that during these estimates — that your 
policies have increased the stress on families in this province; 
that you have systematically eroded the support services that are 
available to families in the province in Saskatchewan; that the 
result of that, Mr. Minister, has been that we now have the 
second highest poverty rate among families in Canada, in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Now only the province of 
Newfoundland has a higher rate of poverty among its families 
than the province of Saskatchewan, and that’s a record that no 
government can be proud of. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’ve seen under . . . as a result of the policies of 
the Department of Social Services, the cuts in social assistance, 
the freeze in the minimum wage — with the exception of one 
25 cent increase in the past six years — we’ve seen, as a result 
of that, record number of persons at food banks in the province 
of Saskatchewan. And in effect, Mr. Minister, we are 
witnessing in this province, the crumbling of the social safety 
net that residents of Saskatchewan had long come to appreciate. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, my first specific question to you relates to 
the issue of incentives, or disincentives, for people who are on 
social assistance to work in the province of Saskatchewan. And 
you have tried — we would argue, falsely — to suggest that 
you are creating incentives and assistance for people who are on 
social welfare to get jobs. And we fundamentally disagree that 
your policies have proved to be any sort of an incentive or any 
sort of help for people on social welfare to get jobs. On the 
contrary, Mr. Minister, we argue on this side of the House that 
your policies have, in effect, created obstacles to people 
obtaining employment in this province. 
 
And I want to just briefly give you three examples. First of all, 
Mr. Minister, you cut the travel allowance for social assistance 
recipients in the province of Saskatchewan. You, in effect, 
eliminated it for most people right now who live on social 
welfare in this province. So, Mr. Minister, someone who is 
attempting to seek work in this province and who is on social 
welfare, now has no money for travelling about to do a job 
search or to go to job interviews. 
 
In the same way, Mr. Minister, if someone on social assistance 
now, as a result of your new regulations, obtains part-time 
employment effective at the beginning of the year, you have 
changed the policies of the department so that people are able to 
save less of their part-time earnings than they previously were. 
 
I just give the example of a single mother who’s working, 
who’s on social assistance and who get a part-time job in which 
she earns $500 a month. If that single mother has  

two children, before the changes that you made to your recent 
regulations, Mr. Minister, she was able to earn $223.50 a month 
and keep that, of the $500 of original earnings. She was able to 
add $223.50 a month to her monthly earnings. Now that single 
mother and two children can only keep $160. 
 
And the third example, Mr. Minister, that I want to give you is 
that people who are working now and who get part-time or 
full-time jobs in an attempt to get off social welfare are able to 
save less as a result of having to pay more for day care. 
 
Mr. Minister, as a result of your policies — again, and I’ll stay 
with the single mother with two children — that single mother 
with two children, Mr. Minister, five or six years ago would 
have had a day-care bill, per child, of about $30 a month. 
 
For the last six years, Mr. Minister, you’ve frozen day-care 
subsidies and they’ve remained at a maximum of $235 a month 
while the average cost of day care in the province of 
Saskatchewan has risen from about $250 to $260 a month, per 
child, to about $340 to $350 a month per child. The subsidy of 
$235 a month has remained unchanged. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, that single mother with two children now, 
instead of paying $25 to $30 a child for day care, is paying over 
$100 a month per child for day care. If she’s on minimum 
wage, Mr. Minister, instead of paying $60 a month for day care 
for her two children, she’s now paying $200. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, those are three examples of the kinds of 
disincentives for people to get off social assistance and to go 
out into the work place that you have very consciously created 
as a result of your government policies. 
 
And my first question to you is simply this: will you remove 
those three disincentives to work that I have just mentioned — 
will you restore travel allowances for social assistance 
recipients; will you allow social assistance recipients to keep 
more of their part-time earnings when they do get work so that 
they can get financially ahead; and will you raise day-car 
subsidies so that a working mother can . . . doesn’t have to 
offset day-care fees when she’s only making 8 to $900 a month 
on minimum wage? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all, with 
reference to poverty, the opposition quotes statistics. I mean, 
people know when they are poor or they are not poor, and they 
judge that in Canada not be a question of whether they are in 
need of food or whether they are in need of shelter or whether 
they are in need of clothing, but they compare themselves to 
their neighbours to say, I am poorer than my neighbour, or I’m 
lucky I’m richer than my neighbour. That’s how they compare 
things. 
 
These things are relevant to each other and how other people in 
the country are living. And when you calculate the poverty line 
as calculated by the members opposite as  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1283 
 

they would like to accept it, you are looking not at what a 
person needs to live on, but the average of what everyone has to 
live on. And then you say those people that under this average 
are poor, and those people that are over that average are not 
poor. 
 
And so they get calculations like a family of four living under 
19,900-and-some dollars per year is in poverty. Yes, I will 
agree that that family is poor compared to people making 
40,000 or 50,000 per family, and I would agree that it’s difficult 
to live on $20,000 with a family of four, but I will not accept 
that that family is living in absolute poverty. 
 
I mean, they are in a different situation that a family that’s 
living on $12,000 per year. There’s quite a difference between 
living on 12,000 and living on 20,000, yet their figure goes up 
to just about that $20,000 level. 
 
And they like to throw around statistics, you know, statistics on 
how many people are poor. There has to be a different way of 
calculating it. There has to be a calculation based on your basic 
needs. And I can get statistics that will show that 20 years ago if 
you take statistics as a percentage of family income spent on 
food, that now families are spending half as much on food as 
they were 20 years ago. 
 
And so you start comparing those kind of statistics and where 
do you draw the line? What is poverty? I agree that it varies 
from different region of the country to different region. But you 
can go into parts of Canada and people making $20,000 a year 
with a family of four do not consider themselves poor. And you 
can go into parts of my constituency, most of the rural part of 
my constituency, and you will find farm families that have less 
cash to live on farming than they would receive if they were on 
welfare. And yet, they know they are poor, but they don’t 
consider themselves to be living in poverty. 
 
So we want to raise the income of everyone as much as 
possible, but I don’t think the members opposite should throw 
around statistics simply for political purposes, trying to 
categorize people as poor or not poor. 
 
Now that is the kind of thing that the NDP try to do. And if you 
allowed the NDP to make their judgements on what is poor, 
everybody who made less that $95,000 a year would be poor, 
and compare it to people that make more than $95,000 per year. 
 
And then, you know, you have to compare it to family incomes. 
There are members of the opposition over there have family 
incomes in excess of $100,000 a year and yet they rail on about 
the poor. Do they know what poverty is? They would consider 
themselves poor with incomes in excess of $100,000 a year 
because the president of CPR might make $240,000 a year. 
Therefore their $109,000 per family income, as the member for 
Lakeview would have, she would consider herself poor. 
 
Now I do not consider myself poor. I was once poor; I’m no 
longer poor. I would hope that we could get many more people 
with higher incomes. But what is really disappointing is that 
even when people get their incomes up to $40,000 a year, the 
NDP still try to convince them  

that they are poor. And even when they get their incomes up to 
$60,000 a year, the NDP still try to convince them that they are 
poor. 
 
So what the NDP have here is such a negative attitude that 
fosters poverty. And people have to have a positive attitude and 
then they can escape the cycle of poverty. And what the NDP 
have is a poverty mentality. They have a negative mentality. 
You have to have a positive mentality. You have to believe that 
you can better yourself, and you will be able to. 
 
Now we will help in every way possible. For example, we have 
welfare reform — which the NDP are opposed to — and under 
welfare reform since 1984, 8,500 people have been able to get 
training and education through the skills development program 
of welfare reform. The members opposite are opposed to 
welfare reform, but they don’t acknowledge that 8,500 people 
have been able to get jobs. And I get letters every day from 
people who have taken these programs, and write and thank me. 
And it’s grateful to see that these people now have a positive 
attitude. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Can you table the letters? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Now if the NDP had their way . . . They 
say, can I table the letters? Yes, with the names taken off of 
them, I could table the letters. I’ll gather them up for you, and 
one of these days I’ll table them all for you en masse so that 
you can see these letters of thank-you from people who are 
grateful because they do not have negative attitudes like the 
NDP — people who once had negative attitudes and have now 
taken the programs are thankful, thankful that they have been 
able to participate in welfare reform and are now independent. 
 
But the NDP’s policy is: no, keep these people dependent. If 
they’re dependent on government, then they are dependent on 
us, and we will have them dependent and they will have to vote 
for us. Because they can’t possibly get out from under the 
socialist theory of being independent, because independence is 
inconsistent with socialism. That’s the problem that the NDP 
have. 
 
So we have really a disagreement in principle and we will 
continue to have a disagreement in principle, because we 
believe in independence and they believe in dependence. That’s 
the difference between socialism and free enterprise. 
 
We also believe that you should help the needy in a system that 
is based on a competitive system. Not everyone will be able to 
compete fully, and so therefore you have to help those people 
who cannot compete in such a competitive system. But 
certainly you don’t discourage those people who can compete 
from competing. 
 
And so we believe that everyone should be given an 
opportunity with welfare reform. We’ve given 8,500 people an 
opportunity to become independent. In addition, the Canadian 
Jobs Strategy in two years has added another 1,900 people to 
that independence category. In addition, the New Careers 
Corporation has  
 
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1284 
 

provided job training, on-the-job training, building in parks, 
building roads, operating heavy equipment, building marinas, 
improving the environment of Saskatoon along the river. 
 
And the members opposite called me a slaver for having people 
going out and cleaning up the parks in Saskatoon. Somehow 
there is something wrong when a Conservation puts people to 
work improving the environment. He is called a slaver. If an 
NDP improves the environment, that is a surprise, because how 
would they do it if they don’t have anybody working at the 
project? So those are the kinds of inconsistencies we have. 
 
In addition, we have complaining that there’s no incentive for 
people to work under our welfare reform, and the NDP asked 
for travel money. They want an incentive for people to travel, 
not an incentive for people to work. We still do have travel for 
those people who are in the greatest need of travel, for those 
people who actually need it. We have travel for medical 
reasons. We have travel to school. We have travel for the 
handicapped. We have travel for special needs. If you need 
travel money to go to a job interview, and it’s a legitimate job 
interview and it’s out of the city, we consider that a special 
need. 
 
Now we don’t give it in all cases, because in some cases people 
simply want to travel to another city, but if there is a job there 
for them to get an interview at, we’ve paid it. I know personally 
of instances in my constituency where it’s been paid to people 
to travel as far as Edmonton for a job interview and back, I 
might say. So we have those kind of travel allowances. 
 
In addition, when we made out latest welfare reform we raised 
the fee to people who were taking training by $30 to assist with 
their travel. We raised it to $30 per month. They make a big 
noise about a bus pass at $29. We have a travel allowance of 
$30 in addition to the regular welfare. We’re paying people to 
go to school. We’re paying people to go to training. We’re 
paying them travel to get there. In addition, we raised the rates 
for families — $13 for individuals, $13 for children, per child, 
$17 per adult. 
 
That was an increase in rates. Saskatchewan now has the 
highest welfare rate for children of any province in Canada. The 
NDP tried to come up and say: oh, they are starving children. 
Yes, there may be hungry children in Saskatchewan, but when 
we have the highest welfare rates for children, I defy the NDP 
to explain how the highest rates for children on welfare cause 
hunger for children. 
 
We have to co-operate, the NDP and I have to co-operate, in 
finding a way to have that money turned into food that ends up 
in the stomachs of those hungry children. And the NDP would 
propose a school lunch program to feed all children. Well it’s 
not the responsibility of my department to feed children twice. 
We pay the highest rates in Canada for food for children. I do 
not see why we should then in addition have another program. 
 
Yes, I have compassion and we would like to work out 
programs to make sure that all children in Saskatchewan  

are getting proper food. But simply paying more money to all 
parents does not guarantee that all children will get proper food. 
And some of that is not related to income, but related to 
parental responsibilities. 
 
Now the members opposite are the party of rights. They always 
talk about rights, but they never talk about responsibilities. 
Somebody has to have the responsibility of making sure that 
that money becomes food that ends up in the tummies of little 
children. I also am concerned that in some cases that is not 
happening, and I’m looking at ways to make sure that that 
money goes to the children. 
 
I have met with the Regina school boards. We are working on 
pilot projects in order to come up with systems in the school so 
that not only will these children receive food, but we can be 
certain that they are safe at home, that they are not dangerously 
out on the street at all hours, so that we can be certain that there 
is no abuse. Because it seems to me someone who would not 
feed their children is neglecting their children, and I have to 
make sure that children are not neglected. It goes beyond the 
actual feeding of children. 
 
I can close my eyes. We can afford to go out, set up a truck in 
any location in Saskatchewan and have guaranteed food for all 
children that come along, but that does not guarantee that they 
are not being neglected after they are fed. It does not guarantee 
that they are receiving the kind of guidance they need to 
encourage them to have a positive outlook so that they can 
escape the poverty cycle and become full participating members 
of our society. 
 
And we are looking at new ways of doing that. We are 
constantly thinking of ways of assisting people to escape the 
welfare cycle, escape the poverty cycle, because we believe that 
those children who are born equal should try to have an equal 
break in trying to become self-sufficient in the future. 
 
But it’s quite a problem, Mr. Speaker. It’s quite a problem 
because not all of these children have had the guidance that 
some of us have been fortunate enough to have had. I 
personally had the assistance of grandparents and parents, and 
learned a value system that served me very well. And I’m not 
trying to impose my value system on all of the people of all of 
the parents of Saskatchewan, of all of the children. However, 
everyone has to learn some value system. And at the very 
minimum it has to be a system of values that says I will be 
self-sufficient if possible. And you have to be educated that 
way; you have to be raised that way. 
 
We have to try to help parents do better with their children to 
break this cycle that is becoming a blight on our society — that 
our crime rates are going up, that we have all kinds of social 
problems. And the social problems cannot purely be cured by 
money alone. My department realizes that and has take 
measures to try to assist. 
 
With respect to day care, Mr. Chairman. Since our government 
came to office, we have increased the expenditure on day care 
by 113 per cent. We have not changed the qualification rates, so 
that they have  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1285 
 

remained the same as under the NDP. We still have a system 
where it’s possible to make over $30,000 per year and still 
receive day care subsidy. What we’re trying to do is gear the 
day care subsidies to the neediest people, and we’ve been doing 
that quite a lot in the last while. 
 
(1645) 
 
We are now at the stage where 80 per cent of the subsidies are 
paid to single-parent families. We feel that single-income 
family, that single-parent family is the family that needs the 
help the most. In the other 20 per cent of cases, we are talking 
about families that in most cases are single-income families, but 
two-parent families. 
 
We are trying to target that assistance to where it’s needed the 
most. And in addition, while we are reviewing the day care 
system totally in conjunction with the agreements that have 
been signed with the federal government — and they’re being 
finalized right now — we will try to develop a system that 
provides accessibility for all people. 
 
Right now the NDP have given us in this province a system that 
provides for accessibility only for those people who have low 
incomes. If you have higher incomes, you can’t get accessibility 
to day care centres, because the NDP had a system of keeping 
the costs of day care down by restricting the licences they 
would issue. So every space they would allow and allocate was 
subject to subsidy. And so in order to keep the subsidy costs 
down, the NDP wouldn’t license more spaces. 
 
So even if you could pay the full cost of day care, you couldn’t 
get into a licensed space because the NDP had a policy — 
which I am now going to re-examine — of allowing those 
people who can afford day care, allowing them to get into 
licensed spaces and pay for heir day care, and assisting those 
people who can’t afford day care with subsidies so that they can 
have day care as well. Now that was the NDP’s tricky little 
scheme, that they would pay subsidies but they wouldn’t allow 
accessibility to those people who could afford it. 
 
Now, with a federal Conservative government, we are allowing 
people choices and we are allowing them accessibility, and I 
have to adjust our day care laws to suit that purpose. And what 
we will be doing is taking into account, taking into recognition, 
the fact that the federal government has raised the amount that 
you can deduct per child off of income tax for child care from 
$2,000 to $4,000, I believe, to a maximum of 8. Is that right? 
Maximum of 8. Is that correct? Yes. Four per child, a maximum 
of 8 per family, is it? If I’m not correct, I will correct myself. 
But my recollection is that it’s a maximum of 8,000 per family 
or 4,000 per child. 
 
So that has to be taken into account, because the average day 
care rates in Saskatchewan are now $300 per month, which is 
$3,600 per year. if you are a family that can afford to pay your 
day care fees fully without subsidy, you can deduct them 
entirely from your income tax. If you bring someone into your 
home to provide this service, you can deduct that from your 
income tax up to $4,000 per child. If you send your child out to 
a neighbour, you can deduct that, up to $4,000, per child. That 
is giving accessibility to those people who can afford to pay 
their  

own way. 
 
In addition, we will look at more spaces so that not only will 
people be able to have access to day care, they will be able to 
have access to day care closer to their own homes so that they 
don’t drive all over cities looking for a day care space that’s 
licensed. So you will see many changes, Mr. Deputy Chairman, 
in day care in the near future. I would say they will be 
improvements, and they will be popular because they will give 
to the people what they haven’t had before — accessibility to 
day care. And that is part of the policy of this government. 
 
So over all, Mr. Chairman, I advise the members opposite that 
they will see many continuous improvements in day care; they 
will see continuous welfare reform; they will see continuous 
emphasis on job training, or re-education because we believe 
people have to be given an opportunity to become 
self-sufficient where possible. 
 
And they will also see, Mr. Chairman, improvement sin the care 
for those people who can’t help themselves. The members 
opposite will also see initiatives and employment for the 
handicapped, real employment. To use the socialist buss-word, 
meaningful employment — they will see that in the very near 
future. 
 
So I believe, Mr. Chairman, that the future for people who need 
assistance will be very good, and the future for those people 
who want to become self-sufficient will also be very good. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in that long diatribe from 
the Minister of Social Services, I note, Mr. Chairman, that first 
of all the minister did nothing to rebut the argument that the 
loss in the travel allowance is making it very difficult for people 
to travel about to do a job search in a urban centre — very, very 
difficult. How are people supposed to look for work, Mr. 
Chairman, when they can’t even get a bus pass through social 
assistance any more to go out to job interviews or to do a 
regular job search within the city? 
 
And what sort of financial opportunity is left for people, Mr. 
Chairman, who are on social assistance, to go out and get 
part-time work when three-quarters of what they earn on a 
part-time basis is deducted from their social assistance cheque 
before — you know, from their monthly income, so that really 
all they have is enough money to cover baby-sitting costs and 
additional travel costs, Mr. Chairman. 
 
What kind of help is there for working mothers who try to get 
either part-time or full-time work, or for working families 
when, if they’re making 8 or $900 a month, as a result of the 
freeze in day care subsidies for the last six year, Mr. Chairman, 
they’re losing more than $200 a month that they’re having to 
pay out in child care, when six years ago they wouldn’t have 
been paying out more than 50 to $60 a month if you had a 
single mother and two children in the home. 
 
And I note that the minister very intentionally ignored each of 
those points. The point that I want to make, Mr. Chairman, is 
that this government, contrary to what it claims, is trying to 
victimize the poor; is trying to, instead  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1286 
 

of assisting people in becoming independent, which we strongly 
support, is doing everything possible to create obstacles to 
people who want to get off welfare and who want to be in the 
work place and who can’t because of the policies of this 
government. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I also want to comment briefly on the 
point that the minister made with respect to the question of 
poverty. Obviously this minister rejects the poverty line as 
established by his own Conservative counterparts in Ottawa and 
as established by organizations such as Statistics Canada or the 
Canadian Council on Social Development. 
 
The minister’s claim that somehow poverty is relative, Mr. 
Speaker, is a ludicrous claim. The reality, Mr. Minister, is that 
people are poor in this province in large part because the 
minimum wage has not been increased, because social 
assistance rates have been frozen by your government, contrary 
to your claim. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’re not talking about people being poor 
because they make 25 to $30,000 a year as you tried to claim. 
We talking about people, Mr. Chairman, who — single 
employables on social assistance — are making, at a maximum, 
$372 a month. Many of them, Mr. Chairman, are only making 
150 to $200 a month under the policies of this government. And 
we’re talking about people, Mr. Minister, who when they work 
full time on minimum wage are not making more than 8 to 
$9,000 a year, and in many cases supporting one, two, or three 
dependants on that. That’s the kind of poverty, Mr. Minister, 
that we’re talking about, and there’s nothing relative about that. 
That just leaves people with not enough to live on. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to get into asking some very specific 
questions of you, and the first one relates to your 
work-for-welfare program. And specifically, Mr. Minister, I 
want to say that I, as Social Services critic, do not have a 
problem with the Saskatchewan skills development program, 
which I think has some merit to it. 
 
My problem, Mr. Minister, is with your work-for-welfare 
program, and my first question to you is this. I want to ask you, 
sir, how many people who are on your work-for-welfare 
program now are single employables who, under your 
work-for-welfare program, are working for two weeks and then 
have two weeks off, with the result that their salary in the 
course of a month is only $360? 
 
Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, how many single employables 
are now engaged in work-for-welfare programs, either through 
the New Careers Corporation or through the Saskatchewan 
Employment Development Agency, and are being limited to 
two weeks on, two weeks off — $360 a month? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Chairman, the bulk of the jobs in 
welfare reform are full-time jobs rather than part-time. On the 
Meewasin project and the Par Industries, we’ve had about 350 
people on those projects, plus there are a few smaller ones. We 
don’t have the details on the smaller ones. I know that the 
Meadow Lake workshop for the mentally retarded — and they 
don’t like to use the  

word mentally handicapped, but they use the terminology, the 
association for the mentally retarded. That workshop has got 
people assisting there on a two weeks on, two weeks off, and I 
toured it recently and they were very happy with the program 
and asked us to continue it. 
 
And so it would be probably 350 to a maximum of about 400, 
but I’d only be guessing at the figures on how many the total 
would be when you added up the small ones, but we don’t have 
the small ones — the two larger ones at 350. You do, on those 
projects, earn more working those two weeks than you would 
be paid if you were strictly on welfare, and you still have two 
weeks to yourself which you can spend looking for other 
employment. 
 
So I don’t think that is very harsh to ask somebody to put in two 
weeks of community service, and my colleagues point out that 
people like it. Yes, one of the complaints we have is that people 
would like to work full time, that they were a little bored in 
those other two weeks. But we feel that they should be out 
looking for other employment during those two weeks and still 
doing community service work during the two weeks that they 
are on the part-time job. 
 
With respect to some of the other issues that you raise — single 
employables. I’ll give you an example in your city of Saskatoon 
that we have to also track down the statistics, as you would call 
them, that the numbers that we are paying out there, we have to 
track them down from time to time and encourage them to look 
for work and assist them as well in looking for work. 
 
And what we’ve got now is a job-search training program. And 
in the first pilot project that we started in Saskatoon — this is 
very new, but it’s been in the paper and you’ve criticized it in 
the past — but I want you to know that in the first pilot project 
we telephone 50 people, because we had a class of 20 starting. 
 
And when we telephoned 50 people, we were able to locate 34 
of those people. the other 16 we could not find. So what would 
you expect us to do with 16 people we cannot find at all? And 
so we held their cheques until they came for them, and we’re 
doing a calculation on which of those came for the cheques. We 
can certainly not send the cheque out of the person does not live 
at the address. 
 
So then we had 34 people that we found. And out of the 34, 20 
were interested in learning how to get a job, and the other 14 
had various reasons why they were not interested or could not 
take a job training course. So out of 50 we had 20 people who 
said they would come on Monday morning to start the 
job-search training course which starts at 8 a.m. in the morning, 
includes a lunch for you at the expense of the department, and 
concludes at 5 p.m. in a normal working day for three weeks, 
for a total of 15 days. 
 
So in the city of Saskatoon 20 people agreed they would show 
up on Monday morning; however, only 13 arrived. And so we 
started with 13 and we filled in; we phoned some more people 
and finally got the course going. 
 
And they have stringent rules just like you’d have to learn  
  



 
May 12, 1988 

1287 
 

on any job. If you miss more than twice without excuse, you are 
terminated from the course. And we find that the course has 
been very positive. And now we’ve had another pilot project in 
Regina, and out of the first 89 people, when I last checked, 39 
had already received full-time jobs under this program. 
 
So people who are taking it are benefitting. And we had one girl 
who hasn’t found a job yet but would like to take the course 
again, because for the first time in her life she has had some 
purpose and she has had some direction. She asked if she could 
take it again. And I won’t discourage my people from letting 
her take it again because, you know, some of these people now 
feel that they have a purpose; they’re useful; they feel good 
about themselves; they know how to do resumes. 
 
(1700) 
 
There was one gentleman who graduated after three days 
because on the second day he cut his hair and washed his 
clothes and found a job as a welder at a very good wage that he 
could live on. And so we’ve had some very good success 
stories. We’ve had people that have gone over to Ipsco and are 
making . . . two of them are now making, I believe, in the range 
of $13 per hour. And so we’ve had some very good success 
stories out of these kind of welfare reform programs. 
 
And I just want to point that out to the members opposite that 
you have to make an effort as a government to give people 
these kind of opportunities to show them there is a different 
way. 
 
And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I await the next question. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


