


















































April 28, 1988 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 April 28, 1988 
 

891 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Private Members’ Bills 

 
Deputy Clerk:  Mr. Britton, from the Standing Committee 
on Private Members’ Bills, presents the third report of the said 
committee, which is as follows: 
 

Your committee has duly examined the undermentioned 
petitions for private Bills and finds that the provisions of 
rules 56, 57 and 60 have been fully complies with: 

 
petition of the Stephen and Michelene Worobetz 
Foundation, of the city of Saskatoon; 

 
petition of the Full Gospel Bible Institute, of the town of 
Eston; 

 
petition of Pastor Walter Boldt, Art Ratzlaff and Barry 
Hertz, of the city of Saskatoon. 

 
Mr. Britton:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member 
from Saskatoon South: 

 
That the third report of the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you, and through you to members of the House, a 
group of 18 grade 6 students from St. Michael’s School in Duck 
Lake. They are accompanied by teachers, Lorna Cameron, 
Jackie Gamble, Delores Smallchild; a chaperon, Doug Gamble, 
and bus driver, Dave O’Neill. They are in the east gallery, and I 
will hope their visit with us today will be informative and 
interesting, and I’ll be meeting them for refreshments and 
pictures later this afternoon. 

 
I ask all members to give them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the member from Cumberland, who is up North today, I want to 
introduce a group of students who are here from Stanley 
Mission School. There’s 15 of them. They are in grade 8. They 
are accompanied by their teachers, Felix Merasty and Maggie 
Kingston, as well as their bus driver, Tommy Ballantyne. 
 
I would like to ask the members to join me in welcoming them 
and indicate also that I will be meeting with them for pictures 
and for some refreshments after the question period. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you, and through you to the members of this Assembly, a 
group of 51 students from Roland Michener School in 
Saskatoon. They are seated in your Speaker’s gallery this 
afternoon, and with them are their teachers, Jim Taylor and 
Maurice Postnikoff, and also chaperons, Scott Thompson, 
Peggy Craig, and Mr. and Mrs. Rhodes. I’ll be visiting with 
them afterward with refreshments. It’s indeed a pleasure to have 
them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me pleasure 
today to introduce to you and to other members of the 
Assembly, the Cathedral Area Community Association 
co-ordinator, in the form of Lesley Griffin, seated in the east 
gallery. Please join me in welcoming Lesley to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Surcharge on Vehicle Registration 
 

Mr. Romanow:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to the Premier, and it pertains to cabinet’s 
consideration of a $25 per vehicle  every vehicle  
surcharge in Saskatchewan, and my letter to the Premier 
yesterday seeking clarification of government policy in this 
area. 
 
Mr. Premier, my question to you is this: will you advise the 
House today as to whether or not your government intends to 
impose the $25 surcharge, and if so, when? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, the minister responsible for 
the auto fund answered that same question on April 13 when it 
was put forward by the opposition SGI critic. The $25 
surcharge was only one of several suggestions put forward by 
SGI officials. A number of alternatives are now being 
considered. I can assure the hon. member, the Leader of the 
Opposition, that we will not be raising the rates 24 per cent as 
the NDP did in Manitoba, nor will we be raising them 28 per 
cent as the NDP did here the last time they were in power. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 
Premier if I might, Mr. Speaker. The Premier will be well aware 
of the memorandum to cabinet by the former minister in charge 
of SGI, dated December 30, 1987, which sets out, among other 
options, the option that there be an increase of 21 per cent in 
January of 1989. That is to say, if there is no $25 per vehicle 
surcharge right across the board, that there would be an increase 
of 21 per cent in January of 1989. 
 
Will the Premier advise this Assembly  since apparently  
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

892 
 

all options are being considered, including this one  will you 
tell the House whether or not that alternative is under active 
consideration as well? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, I said to the hon. member 
that we would not be raising rates 24 per cent as did the NDP in 
Manitoba, nor will we be raising them 28 per cent as the NDP 
did here in Saskatchewan. 
 
We were presented with alternatives and we sent them back to 
officials to say, bring forward something else so that we can 
look at it. We’re examining several alternatives, but you will 
not see rate increases like either the NDP did in Saskatchewan 
or they did in Manitoba. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A new question to 
the Premier. The Premier will admit, I would hope, that this 
matter has been before the cabinet at least since early of this 
year, 1988, with a variety of the options identified and 
discussed for cabinet’s consideration. Surely it’s not 
unreasonable for the people of Saskatchewan to expect that by 
now the government’s policy directions and decisions in this 
regard will have been decided upon. 
 
And if that’s the case, why aren’t those announcements made 
now, Mr. Premier? And do it now so that the voters in 
Elphinstone, in Eastview  but even forgetting about the voters 
there  the people of Saskatchewan can be informed. Why not 
tell us what your plans are? Why is it taking so long to 
deliberate on this issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, it hasn’t been to cabinet for 
months, and it hasn’t been discussed in cabinet for months. So 
we have many things that we discuss and are reviewing, but this 
wasn’t one of them. And as I said to the hon. member, the NDP 
raised the rates 28 per cent in that last session that they were in, 
and 24 per cent in Manitoba. We’re not going to do that. 
 
And so the public can rest assured, either in Eastview or in 
Elphinstone, that that’s not going to be the case here in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and I’ll just reiterate it for the hon. 
member. 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Premier, I have one last new 
question, if I might, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier. It’s clear that 
 at least it seem clear to me  we’re not going to get an 
answer from the Premier before May 4, and I think that’s 
unfortunate in terms of the people of Saskatoon and Regina and 
Saskatchewan. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Premier, is this; the motorists of 
Saskatchewan have been hit pretty hard with increases in 
October of 1987, January of 1988, and now this cabinet 
consideration of $25 surcharge across the board for every 
vehicle in Saskatchewan. In the list of these increases, Mr. 
Speaker, some of which are up to 94 per cent in the case of 
certain class and model, 38 per cent in the case of a half-ton 
farm truck, for example, on what basis can it  

possibly be that the government is considering yet an additional 
substantial hike of $25 per vehicle? On what justification, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, it clearly is an issue that is 
of concern to the NDP, because both in Manitoba and in 
Saskatchewan when the NDP were in power they lost 
government over rate increases. So they are quite paranoid 
about it. I will say our rate increases are not going to be 
anywhere near what they were under the NDP. And if you look 
at the rate increases under our jurisdiction compared to theirs, 
they raised them 55 per cent over the last three years of their 
administration; ours were nowhere close to that. We’ve had 
them very low, and our accident rate was much improved 
because of Lights On For Life and many other things. 
 
So we are, Mr. Speaker, listening to the public, responding in a 
very reasonable way. I can say to the hon. member, and 
anybody watching from Elphinstone and Eastview, you’re not 
going to see rate increases that match the NDP’S, either when 
they were in power here or like they were in Manitoba. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I must, with your indulgence, 
sir ask a very brief supplementary question. My question to the 
Premier is this: will you not tell the people, or tell the people of 
Saskatchewan now, if it’s not going to be $25 per car, what will 
be the increase? Why don’t you tell them before May 4 as to 
what that increase is going to be so that the people of 
Saskatchewan will know? We are well familiar with you pattern 
of saying something before an election and acting after an 
election differently. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, I said to the hon. member 
that the issue has not been to cabinet for months. So we sent 
them back and said, bring forward some new alternatives. We 
haven’t received the new alternatives yet, and when we do we 
will make the appropriate decision. I just let the member know, 
and all the public know, that he can rest assured that they won’t 
be as high as the rates that he imposed on people, or as high as 
the rates in Manitoba, because obviously the people rejected 
that. And clearly, Mr. Speaker, we are going to try to be a little 
bit more sensitive to the public’s concerns than the NDP either 
here or in Manitoba. 
 

Funding and Staffing at Saskatoon Cancer Clinic 
 

Mr. Rolfes:  Mr. Speaker, we have heard from the Premier 
admitting that the rates will go up. We just don’t know how 
much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Acting Minister of Health. 
Mr. Minister, my question deals with the Saskatoon Cancer 
Clinic and the underfunding and understaffing of the clinic by 
your government. Mr. Minister, you will be aware, I’m sure, of 
the underfunding and understaffing and the shortages that we 
have of staff  
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

893 
 

at the Saskatoon Cancer Clinic. 
 
I’m sure that you will also admit that there is now a formal 
waiting list of those patients waiting to get treatment in 
radio-therapy. Mr. Minister, I hope that you would also admit 
that it’s your government’s understaffing and underfunding 
that’s causing these problems. 
 
My question to you, sir, is this: when can the cancer patients 
and their families expect some action in this matter, and when 
are you going to resolve the problem of the underfunding and 
understaffing at the Saskatoon Cancer Clinic? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t accept the 
fact of any understaffing and underfunding at the Saskatoon 
Cancer Clinic. I do accept the fact that it was this government 
that built the brand-new cancer clinic in Saskatoon, state of the 
art, one of the best in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  And families in Saskatchewan are getting 
that type of treatment. Certainly there will be some line-ups; 
there always has been. There were when those people were in 
government, but they didn’t have the type of facility to be 
treated that they have today in Saskatchewan, due to this 
government. 
 
Mr. Rolfes:  New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
facts simply are not true. There never was a waiting list when 
we were the government. That is readily admitted by the 
professionals at the cancer clinic. 
 
Mr. Minister, I hear the rhetoric that you’re saying. Mr. 
Minister, I hear the rhetoric, but the cancer patients and their 
families can’t wait any longer  they need some action now. 
 
Dr McGowan, head of radio-therapy, has said that when the 
move is made to the new clinic, present staff shortages will 
have to be made up and additional staff hired. Dr. White, the 
clinic director, has acknowledged there is now a waiting list for 
radio-therapy. 
 
Mr. Minister, without trying to put too much rhetoric into this 
situation, when can the cancer patients, and when can their 
families expect some action so they can receive their treatment 
now and not a month or two months later? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Mr. Speaker, I find this very interesting 
from the opposition member who at one time occupied the chair 
of the ministry of Health in the Blakeney government, and he 
was on record as saying that he thought waiting lists were just 
quite part of the efficient operation of hospitals. You could 
check in Hansard; you’ll see that that was a quote, exactly from 
that minister. It seems it’s a big issue now. When he was the 
minister, a waiting list was normal and it was just good and 
efficient operation; that was his quote. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, getting to the cancer clinic . . . and  

I’d like the people of Saskatchewan to remember that because 
he would love to see that saying of his go away, but it won’t. 
But getting to the cancer clinic, certainly we have one of the 
best cancer clinics in Saskatchewan. We’re opening it and 
developing it  and the same as the University Hospital. I 
mean, as you open the facilities, you put in the beds, you put in 
the furnishing, you hire the staff, you bring it up and running, 
and I can assure the people of Saskatchewan that will happen in 
both cases in not the too distant future. 
 
Mr. Rolfes:  Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this issue is much, much too important for personal 
attacks, and I will refrain from that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes:  The cancer patients and their families, Mr. 
Speaker, don’t need the personal attacks. What the cancer 
patients and their families need, Mr. Minister, is more funding, 
more staff. This is what the professionals are telling you. 
 
I’m asking you again, Mr. Minister, please cut out the rhetoric. 
Please cut out the rhetoric and let’s have some action. When are 
you going to provide more funding so that staff can be hired 
and the patients can receive treatment? When are you going to 
do that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Well I know, Mr. Speaker, that the 
member opposite doesn’t like to be reminded of his quote about 
the waiting list, but I though it was apropos to put it out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, simply put, we have built in Saskatchewan one of 
the best cancer treatment facilities in the Dominion of Canada, 
and we’re very proud of that  one of the best in this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  And, Mr. Speaker, we have more money 
in the Health budget this year than last year  more money per 
capita than anywhere else in Canada  and the staff will be in 
place and the treatment of the people of Saskatchewan will be 
here, and they will be receiving the best treatment of anywhere 
in this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes:  Final supplementary. Mr. Speaker, one last 
time. Mr. Minister, we know the building is there, and the 
people of Saskatchewan appreciate that, but, Mr. Minister, that 
isn’t going to resolve the problem. We have a waiting list. What 
we need now is money at the cancer clinic so that staff can be 
hired. I toured that clinic the other day. It is completed, but the 
doctors were concerned about the lack of staff. They said to me, 
now if we can only get the staff, we can put this thing into 
operation. 
 
I’m asking you once again, will you make a commitment today, 
will you give the assurance to the cancer patients that funds, 
adequate funds and staff will be made  
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

894 
 

available so they can receive treatment now, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor:  Well, Mr. Speaker, in answer to that 
question, I’d like to go back to 1982 when that minister was not 
the minister of Health any more and I became the minister of 
Health in this province, and I can tell you that cancer facilities 
had been neglected to the point  and you can check this and 
the people of Saskatchewan can, with the people at the cancer 
clinic  that some of the best professionals were going to be 
leaving our province because of inadequate facilities. 
 
We saw that need, we have built the best facilities, and yes, Mr. 
Speaker, they will be funded and they will be staffed, and the 
people of Saskatchewan will get that type of care, the best in the 
country, here in Saskatchewan in the cancer clinic. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 

Task Force on Health Care 
 

Mr. Goodale:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By the end of this 
week, it will be six weeks, I believe, since the government 
announced its task force on health care, and I have a question to 
the Premier in the absence of the Minister of Health. 
 
In that six-week period, Mr. Premier, I wonder if you can tell us 
what progress has been made, if any, in the structuring of this 
task force, and when would you expect the Minister of Health 
to be able to give some detail on a proposal that was the single 
specific in a very vague throne speech? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well, I would be glad to say to the hon. 
member, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Health and the 
Premier’s office has been working ever since the Speech from 
the Throne in putting together the details and the frame of 
reference for the task force or the commission, talked to 
members of the public who would be prepared to serve on that 
commission. 
 
And in the very near future the Minister of Health will be 
announcing the members of the task force and its terms of 
reference, and the public will obviously have a chance to look at 
it. And then they’ll begin their hearings and talking to the 
people across the province. 
 
Mr. Goodale:  Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the Premier. 
Can he give us the assurance that all interested parties in our 
health care system, in terms of the various professional 
organizations around Saskatchewan, have indeed been 
consulted in the preparations for the task force, and have they 
all been invited to participate in the work of that task force, or 
are you in any way ruling out any specific groups? Because 
some of them have indicated that they have not been invited or 
consulted in this process. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well I can say, Mr. Speaker, that nobody 
is ruled out. But I’m sure that the hon. member will join with 
me in giving praise to the individuals that  

are selected on this task force. They will be high quality men 
and women, very professional, and they will be well received 
across the piece in Saskatchewan. And, indeed, we believe this 
commission and task force will have credibility across Canada. 
They will be looking for the kind of guidance that 
Saskatchewan can provide for the 21st century with respect to 
health care. 
 
So as soon as the minister can announce that, he will. He hasn’t 
ruled out anybody. There’s consultations and conversation 
going on with people from across the province. 
 

Request for Return of Information 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
question to the House Leader on the government side. Mr. 
Minister, it was on September 8 of last year that this Assembly 
ordered your government to provide certain information to the 
House. I refer you, and I have here the Votes and Proceedings 
of the Assembly of September 8 of 1977, and in those . . . in 
’87, and in those Votes and Proceedings . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  It seem like ’77. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  That’s right; it seems like 1977. In those 
Votes and Proceedings you were ordered to provide such 
information as out-of-province trips made by every government 
minister and agency, all public opinion polls commissioned by 
every government department and Crown corporation. 
 
Now I ask you, Mr. Minister, it’s now been seven months, 
which is a considerably long period of time. Why have you 
failed to provide this information to the House up until this 
time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson:  I’ll check into it and provide the 
answer for the member, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the 
minister. I’m wondering whether the minister is considering 
that to provide the information at the same time as the SGI 
increase in going to come. 
 
Mr. Minister . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  1994. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  That may be. 
 
On September 15, Mr. Minister, in view of the fact that on 
September 15 you were asked information about money  
public money  that was paid by every government department 
to Dome Advertising and Dome Media Buying Services, and 
this Assembly ordered you to provide that information some 
seven months ago, I ask you: what is there about the payments 
made to Dome Advertising and Dome Media Services that has 
prevented you from providing that information to the House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

895 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson:  Mr. Speaker, I think that there’s 
nothing particularly sinister that would cause, or prevent me 
from providing this information to the House. Now . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson:  As I said earlier, we could use up a lot 
of question periods if they want to go through each return one 
by one and ask me what’s preventing the information from 
being tabled. And I suppose that would make a far more 
interesting question period than the other kinds of questions 
they’ve been asking, Mr. Speaker. But suffice it to say, as I did 
to the first question asked by the hon. member, that I will check 
to find out where those returns are, and I will inform the hon. 
member as to where they are in the system. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Mr. Speaker, to help the minister in 
providing the answer and in his checking  new question  
Mr. Minister, I have here two documents: one, which is a Public 
Accounts Committee document ordered on February 3, and 
provided by your Supply and Services department on February 
26 asking for that same information, which you have been 
unable to provide for seven months  that was less than a 
month. 
 
I have another one here provided by the Department of 
Economic Development and Trade, ordered on February 4 and 
provided in less than two weeks time. In view of the fact that 
your departments are able to provide that information in that 
period of time, and in view of the fact that you, therefore, and 
your ministers have this information in your offices, what is it 
that you’re trying to hide from the voters, who are going to take 
part in the by-elections on May 4, that you have refused to table 
this information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson:  Mr. Speaker, I think we should 
commend those offices on their efficiency in getting that 
information out so quickly. This will be the third time now. I 
will find out where in the system those orders are, and I will 
inform the hon. member as to the situation with those orders. 
And I know that the member is waiting in eager anticipation of 
getting all of that information so that it can go on a shelf some 
place and never be looked at again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 

Proposed Grassland National Park 
 

Mr. Thompson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I direct my 
question to the Acting Minister of Parks. And my question is to 
the minister responsible, the acting minister, and it deals with 
the proposed grasslands national park in south-western 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, last fall, more than six months ago, your 
government stated that only one issue is holding up the 
establishment of the national park and that was the water rights. 
And it appears to have been resolved. 
 
Now, however, your government appears to have thrown up yet 
another obstacle  oil and gas rights in the area. 
 
Mr. Minister, when will you commit yourself to the  

establishment of this national park and when will you be 
making an announcement of this establishment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan:  Well, Mr. Speaker, the question was 
addressed to the Acting Minister of Parks, and I’m not that. But 
I am the minister that’s responsible for Sask Water, and we 
have dealt with a number of issues that dealt with grasslands 
and its finalization of the contract for the grasslands. 
 
I’m very pleased to advise the Assembly today that throughout 
the months of January and February my department staff 
worked very closed with Ottawa. They spent a considerable 
amount of time in Ottawa and have successfully negotiated a 
conclusion to the water issue that has been in the grasslands 
parks problem area for nearly five years. So I believe that was a 
great accomplishment. And they are now, through the Parks 
department, working very closely with Ottawa to finalize the 
last phases of that agreement. I would expect an announcement 
would be made in the very near future. 
 

Intentions to Join the Tripartite Plan 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a question for the Minister of Agriculture and it deals with his 
intentions to join the tripartite plan and scrap the beef 
stabilization plan. 
 
Mr. Minister, you state that if you were satisfied with the 
agreement through all the provinces of Canada you would go to 
that plan. Could I ask you now: have you been satisfied that the 
agreement reached with these provinces is sufficient to help 
Saskatchewan livestock producers, and will you be going 
forward and joining the national tripartite plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, the provinces are still 
negotiating and they haven’t come to a consensus with respect 
to the operation of the plan that would be satisfactory to most 
provinces. 
 
Most everybody would like to see a national plan and to join the 
national one so that we could have a comprehensive strategy 
and policy that would not be subject to countervail from the 
united States or any other thing under terms of reference with 
respect to GATT, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. 
 
We’re a little concerned that provinces in central Canada might 
subsidize to a larger extent than we can afford, in other words, 
top-load programs that are in place. So, we’ve seen much of 
that in the hog industry; the hog industry for many years moved 
from the West to the province of Quebec and in some cases into 
Ontario because of top loading in subsidy. We don’t want that 
to happen in the beef business and so we’re still in the process 
of going through the negotiations. I’d like to join it. The quicker 
we could join it the better. But we have to make sure that it is 
fair to us here in Saskatchewan as well as western Canada. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Premier, will you go ahead with this plan, 
or will you insist that there be two main aspects of  
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

896 
 

the Saskatchewan plan to be implemented: one is single-debt 
selling, and the other is a cost of production formula rather than 
an averaging over 10 years? Will you insist on those two 
provisions? 
 
And one more question: if not, why would you go to a plan that 
gives Saskatchewan producers less money than the plan they 
have now? Why would you not give them the same support as 
they have now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  I’m sure that we can get into this in my 
estimates that are coming up this afternoon. But as I mentioned 
to the hon. member, if you go on a cost of production basis, just 
simply make the point that they can have very high costs in 
Quebec, particularly real estate costs around the city of 
Montreal and other places, and they’ll inflate the cost; therefore 
they get a bigger subsidy than you would in the West. That’s 
how they stole the hog industry. 
 
They kept building the costs up and up, and they said it’s on the 
basis of cost; therefore they get a bigger subsidy, and the 
province paid the subsidy and we lost. Now, I think we have 
some natural advantages, particularly as you know . . . and 
there’s a large number of hogs grown here with barley, and with 
the cost of production in dry land, I believe we can compete. 
But I don’t want to see the government of Quebec unload its 
treasury on some silly formula that we may put together that 
says they can use the cost of production in Quebec compared to 
the cost of production here. Because you know what will 
happen  they’ll pay more subsidies in Quebec, and we’ll be 
against the wall in a non-competitive situation, and I don’t want 
to see that happen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  With leave of the Assembly, I would just 
like to introduce some students. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine:  It’s my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to 
introduce 25 student from the Lampman High School. They’re 
grade 11 students. They’re in the west gallery. They were 
brought here by their teacher, Mr. Boyd Sephton, and chaperons 
include Robins Lischka, and I would like the Assembly to 
extend a warm welcome to them. 
 
And they will be having refreshments and pictures at 3:15. And 
if I’m in my estimates, my seat mate behind me here, Mr. 
Johnny Gerich, MLA for Redberry, will be glad to entertain you 
and put on a show and have his picture taken with you. 
 
Welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Provincial Day of Mourning 
 

Mr. Hagel:  Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I request 
leave of the Assembly to make a very brief statement on a 
matter of interest to all members. 
 
Mr. Speaker:  I believe before the members can grant you 
leave, that you have to indicate what it is, so they can make a 
proper judgement. If you could do that very briefly. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  That has been indicated, Mr. Speaker, regarding 
the proclamation of today as a day of mourning for workers 
killed or injured on the job. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hagel:  Mr. Speaker, I simply wish to bring to the 
attention of the Assembly, and all members, that today in 
Saskatchewan is officially a day to recognize and to mourn 
Saskatchewan workers killed and injured on the job in this 
province. 
 
I would like, as well, Mr. Speaker, to express my appreciation 
to the Premier who has officially proclaimed this as a day of 
mourning, and accordingly, for the fact that the flags on this 
Legislative Building are being flown at half-mast. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, I would just like to add to 
the hon. member some noteworthy achievements by the people 
of Saskatchewan in reducing the number of fatal accidents and 
injuries in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We are looking now at Saskatchewan facilities that have 
dropped from as high as say 76 per year in the very early 1980s 
to down to 27 in 1987. And we note that we compare quite 
favourably with other jurisdictions, and we’re glad that we can 
provide education and information that would allow, 
particularly young people, to be more careful, both at work and 
in automobiles and generally throughout the public. 
 
So I’m happy to have declared this a day of note, so to make 
sure that our young people across the province of 
Saskatchewan, and people of all ages, can do the best in terms 
of reducing fatal accidents. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Agriculture 

Ordinary Expenditure  Vote 1 
 

Mr. Chairman:  Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With me is Mr. 
Jack Drew, deputy minister of Saskatchewan  
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

897 
 

Agriculture; Mr. Stuart Kramer, assistant deputy minister; and 
Mr. Wes Mazer, director, administrative services branch, 
Saskatchewan Agriculture. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to the 
minister and his assistants. 
 
I have a number of straightforward questions that I’d like to ask 
right at the beginning, and I’d ask the minister if he could send 
over the details of these questions as soon as he has them 
available to himself. 
 
I would like to have the names and salaries of each ministerial 
assistant at December 31, 1988. And also I would like the 
name, title, and salary of each one of the minister’s personal 
staff, and has any of them had a pay change in the past 12 
months, and if so, what was it? Do any of the persons have a 
government car or car allowance? I presume you’re taking note 
of these. If I’m going too fast, just indicate. I would like to 
know the out-of-province travel in ’86-87 by the minister and 
his staff, as to the date, destination, number of trips, purpose of 
the trips, and the total cost. I would also like to know the total 
in-province ministerial air travel in 1986-87 with the same 
details as the last one date, destination, number of trips, 
purpose, and total cost. 
 
Also I would like to know what costs the department incurred 
for polling, for advertising, aircraft charter or lease; and in each 
case the date, the firm, the purpose, and the cost. And did the 
agency do any business in ’86-87 or ’87-88 with Band City 
Aviation? I would like to know that. I would like to know the 
date, the purpose, and the cost. 
 
And with respect to the government-wide efficiency 
productivity study being done by Coopers & Lybrand, did this 
agency incur any costs related to their study in ’86-87 and thus 
far in ’87-88, and are there are costs anticipated for ’87-88? 
 
Also I would like to know the names, positions of any staff 
members terminated since October 20, 1986, the total severance 
payments paid out in ’86-87 and in ’87-88. 
 
Also I would like to know . . . I have an itemized list of the 
facilities like the offices, compounds, parking lost, etc., 
provided to your department by Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation. I would like to know the number of 
square feet or, in the case of parking lost, the number of staffs 
in each of the facilities. In those instances where the facility is 
not leased, would you indicate the amount which the 
department is paying property management for its use today, 
and how much was paid in the fiscal year ’87-88. And in each 
case would you outline . . . would you indicate the use or what 
the facility is presently being used for. 
 
And also, finally, would you provide an itemized list of services 
being provided by property management and the amount being 
charged to the department for those services today, as well as 
how much was paid in ’87-88, for example: mail service, 
government automobiles, the  

amount of money, furnishings, etc? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, the hon. member has 
asked for a long list of costs and statistics and information. I 
will endeavour to have . . . well I will ask my staff to get it 
together and provide him as much of the detailed information as 
quickly as we can assemble it. I don’t have it all at my 
fingertips, but they will work at it and provide it as much  as 
quickly as possible. 
 
I will make a point with respect to government space because it 
has been a little controversial recently and not well understood. 
I’ll just make one point  and we’ll provide the information 
with respect to agriculture. Approximately half of the unused 
space that government has is in the form of the new 
Whitespruce facility at Yorkton. And as the hon. member 
knows, that’s a rehabilitation centre for young people with 
respect to drug rehab. And we purchased that from the federal 
government for a small amount of money, and it provinces 
about half the extra space that we have totally in government, 
let alone just in Agriculture, for a very good reason. 
 
(1445) 
 
So the cost is nominal, and I just make that point that there is no 
extra space. In fact, when we get the Mackenzie Art Gallery in 
the right place and comply with the regulations with respect to 
the new drug facility, health facility at Whitespruce, it will be 
less than 1 per cent. So overall, it’s very low, and certainly 
you’ll find it’s very low in Agriculture. 
 
With respect to 1987 and 1988 meetings and travel, I will get 
you the travel. I’ll just point out, and I’ll send over a list of 
meetings and people that I have met with as Minister of 
Agriculture  not as Premier, but as Minister of Agriculture  
going back to January 12 in ’87, and it’ll go right through until 
December of ’87, and then January ’88 right through to date in 
1988. And I have  2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14  16 to 18 meetings 
per page, and I’ve got  1, 2, 3, 4, 5  approximately 6 
completed pages of meetings  that would be obviously in 
excess of 100 meetings that I have had with people on 
agriculture, both in the province of Saskatchewan and other 
provinces, and some outside. 
 
And it includes everybody from the university, to the board of 
directors of the pork board, to the agricultural credit 
corporation, to the North Dakota tillage association, to the 
sheep  wool commission; venture capital and agriculture; 
directing the livestock association, to the sheep  wool 
commission; venture capital and agriculture; directing the 
livestock association’s annual convention; meetings with the 
president of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool; the milk producers 
association; young farmers association; vocational agriculture 
policy classes at the university; poultry and animal science; the 
pulse crop people; conferences in Ottawa on several occasions; 
packing plant people; the stockgrowers; NASDA, which is the 
North American . . . National Association of State Directors of 
Agriculture in the United States  and I’m meeting again in 
Quebec City in early next month with respect to that; various 
meetings with respect to land owners; a number with respect to 
credit and agricultural producers themselves; certainly many 
with respect to  
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

898 
 

those that are trying to improve diversification, processing, and 
manufacturing in agriculture. 
 
So I will be prepared to forward this list to the hon. member, 
that has a large number of meetings that I have attended, both 
inside Saskatchewan and across Canada. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Minister, I’d like to start these estimates 
in Agriculture by asking you if you would just take a few 
minutes of our time to lay out before us what you feel is going 
to be happening in Saskatchewan over the next five or 10 years 
 your perspective of farms and size of operation, the 
infrastructure that is out there now. Just sort of give us your 
vision for what Saskatchewan will be like over the next number 
of years and what you think it would be like, and also how you 
would like to see it, if that may differ. So just take a few 
minutes now to explain to us what your vision is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well I would be more than glad to do that 
for the hon. member. I will say, on two or three fronts it is very 
important that the government of Saskatchewan provides all the 
infrastructure that’s possible for diversification and processing 
and agriculture here in the province. 
 
As you know, and I won’t dwell on it, we have, in the 
neighbourhood of spending, $350 million for natural gas for 
farms, towns and villages in rural Saskatchewan, the same with 
respect to individual line service so people can have access to 
telephones and bearing power lines. Those three general public 
utility measures will cost the taxpayer about $1.5 billion over a 
period of years to provide that basic infrastructure for 
agriculture. 
 
Secondly, I will point out that it is important to have a balance 
 an economic and, frankly, a political balance  in the grain 
business and in the livestock business. Much of what we’ve 
tried to do in the last few years is to have a better balance, a 
fairer balance. That’s why we’ve provided, for example, the 
cash advances at zero per cent interest rate for the livestock 
industry so that they could have the same advantages of people 
in the grain business that go to the elevators or the Wheat Board 
and get a cash advance and it doesn’t cost them any interest. 
 
That combination now is perceived to be, and I’m sure you’d 
agree, much fairer in Saskatchewan as they deal with the 
various cycles that they’re hit with. 
 
Secondly, it’s extremely important to go into the market and 
protect them against disasters that they can’t otherwise deal 
with as an individual, and I refer to high interest rates, when 
they’re 20 per cent or when they’re very high, we should be 
there helping them because government can play a role. And we 
have, and we’ve been very proud of that. 
 
And the same thing applies too, if they’re taking on other 
treasuries like United States treasury or the European treasuries 
that have huge subsidies going to farmers in our competing 
countries; and if those subsidies cause surpluses in grain, for 
example, we can end up with $2 wheat, and that means the 
individual farmer single-handedly is taking on the European or 
the American treasury. That’s unfair, so I believe it’s  

important that we not only protect them in terms of high interest 
rates but we provide protection against those subsidies and 
protectionism internationally. 
 
So we have argued for, and have been successful in providing, 
deficiency payments for farmers so that in fact they can take on 
that international instability and that unfairness, whether it’s in 
the banking system or international monetary system, high 
interest rates, or whether it’s because of unfair government 
subsidies. The two of those are extremely important. 
 
The third thing that I would just mention with respect to the 
long run health of agriculture is yes, it will be much better if we 
can get other countries to back off the subsidies and the price of 
grain could come up to 5 or $6. That’s true, but it’s going to 
take us getting outside Regina and battling internationally, and 
it would be much better if we can keep interest rates down 
around the 8 or 9 per cent as opposed to up around the 20 per 
cent. It’s impossible, but we’ll be there to help them. 
 
But also it’s to our advantage if we can get into processing and 
manufacturing of our raw materials; that is, in agriculture, 
particularly in the livestock sector, and in speciality crops, and 
in grain. The more value added and the diversification we can 
get into, the more money that’s in it for farmers and people who 
live in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So we will be encouraging that, and that’s why we’ve 
encouraged processing and manufacturing of meat  that 
packaging and that processing of the final consumer product 
that we can export to the United States or the Europe or to 
Japan or other places. That’s very important to us, so we will 
continue to provide diversification efforts so people can 
respond in that fashion. 
 
In that light, I suggest to the hon. member, is that he know, is 
that . . . and he knows the research is valid. I would have to say 
that I agree with the earlier research done by the NDP that 
lower tariffs into the United States market, into other markets, 
really helps agriculture because as you reduce the tariffs into the 
United States market, into other markets, really helps 
agriculture because as you reduce the tariffs, you reduce it on 
the processed package product, which is like the packaged 
bacon and other things. So in the research done by the NDP in 
1974, and I agree with you, and I just quote from page 18 of 
your document that said: 
 

. . . our philosophy (and we’re not talking even just in 
numbers, but our philosophy) is that free trade is superior 
. . . and that the province favors reduced trade barriers 
both in exports and imports. 

 
And it goes on to say on page 20 that in the agriculture sector, 
in the consumer sector, and in industrial manufacturing sectors, 
that we should reduce the temptation for protectionism, reduce 
the subsidies and go on to make sure that we trade, because we 
have some natural advantages here, particularly in adding value 
to products, like bacon instead of live hogs, or paper instead 
fence posts, and so forth. 
 
So my vision, if you will, of the province with respect to the 
overall viability is a combination of dealing with the 
international problems, helping the infrastructure here;  
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

899 
 

that is, water, schools, roads, hospitals, natural gas, individual 
line service, electricity  all those things that we can provide 
to give our people a competitive edge. Fight as hard as we can 
to reduce the protectionism and subsidies internationally to get 
the prices up, because that’s when you really make a living, and 
make sure that we go to defend the farmer and communities 
here, rural and urban, because Saskatoon and Regina obviously 
benefit when the farmer has money at the national level. 
 
So if we can get money  I think there’s now over $2 billion 
that’s come out to western Canada in straight deficiency 
payments, and they’ve also written off other debts  that 
money turns up in the cities and the towns and the villages. It’s 
$2 billion we didn’t have before that we have now. 
 
So the vision is to go out there and provide the infrastructure to 
work with communities, to work with young farmers, to provide 
education  and I could just touch on that so that you know 
that it’s part of it a  a new college of agriculture to make sure 
that we have a new biotech centre, make sure that we have the 
educational facilities that can go along with advanced 
management, because agriculture and rural people will survive 
only with good education and good management. 
 
And if we can provide the technology, provide the 
infrastructure, provide the water, provide the various kinds of 
services, along with the international political support to reduce 
the subsidies and get access to markets, as well as information 
and money at the national level when it’s needed, then I believe, 
clearly, Saskatchewan farmers are among the most competitive 
any place in the world. 
 
We will continue to be the wheat basket of Canada. We have 
43, 44 per cent of all the farm land in the country. We are very 
competitive with respect to dry land farming, and the rest of the 
world knows that. They come here to learn about the 
technology. And as you know, being from the Humboldt area, if 
we can put money into and research into . . . dollars into 
research like into PAMI (Prairie Agricultural Machinery 
Institute) so that we can have the best dry land farming 
equipment. And that is part of that infrastructure that is very 
important so that farmers here can survive and do well, as well 
as export their technology and their goods and their services all 
across the world as they have been in the past, and in fact 
increase their wealth and their prosperity as a result of those 
kinds of programs. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Well, Mr. Minister, I would just like to narrow 
down a little bit now. That’s a little overview you gave of the 
infrastructure and what you think that you’ve been doing for 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Part of my question, Mr. Minister, was, in Saskatchewan we 
have 60,000 farmers, give or take. Down the road do you see 
any change in that? Down the road do you think we should be 
moving away from that direction, or should we be continuing in 
that direction of trying to maintain at least that many farmers in 
Saskatchewan? And do you think that we can accomplish that 
under circumstances that we’re living in right now? And if not, 
why not; and if we can, why do you think we can? So just fairly  

specifically, on the farm population in rural Saskatchewan, 
what you believe will be happening in the next few years, and 
what you would like to see happen, specifically, with 
population in rural areas. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well, Mr. Speaker, the population in rural 
Saskatchewan will be a combination of people in towns and 
villages and farms. And we find that as you have more 
diversification in agriculture and diversification in the rural 
communities, that in fact you can have an increase in the 
population in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And you will find them, both farm and non-farm, living and 
working together side by side. And the schoolteachers will be 
living there and the credit union managers and the people who 
work in the service stations and the fertilizer plants and in the 
processing, like for example in meat processing or in seed 
cleaning or in combinations of pelleting plants and dry land 
farming, machinery manufacturing, all kinds of things that can 
go on at the local levels. 
 
Now my vision is that as you provide this lower cost energy 
through natural gas, as you provide that energy in electricity 
and the water and the facilities and the education, the 
communication distance education facilities, you can see a 
growth in rural Saskatchewan that will lead other jurisdictions, 
because you’re providing that overall farm and non-farm 
structure. So it is my estimate that it can be a healthy 
combination of things that you can do to help rural 
Saskatchewan grow, both towns and villages as well as farmer. 
 
What you face today is the consequences of $2 wheat and high 
interest rates, and that is really added to the debt burden that 
you feel on the farms today, on your farm or mine or others. 
And the $2 wheat is a result of unfairness in the international 
markets  no other reason. United States and Europeans spend 
billions of dollars wrecking our life, and we have to compete 
against that. 
 
So when you have $2 wheat, you’ve go to find some help for 
people. We don’t have enough money to compete with the 
United States or Europe on that basis. The federal government 
can help. That’s the first thing you have to address, and you’ve 
got to get outside the province to go fight that war 
internationally. 
 
The second thing is, just don’t let them hit you with 18 or 20 
per cent interest rates again. And clearly you know the problem 
with that, and it’s been the basis of . . . I suppose you could say 
two elections in this province  ’82 and ’86. We will just never 
let high interest rates walk in and take people’s farms and 
homes, because it’s just totally unfair. It’s an international 
phenomenon and you have no defence. 
 
So I think those two things  fighting internationally to get 
fairness in the market and access to those and making sure that 
interest rates are down. To stand in defence of farmers and 
home owners is critical for us to handle the debt that you see 
out there to date because of those two international forms of 
cheating, if you will, that have really hurt Saskatchewan people, 
particularly in the rural. 
 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

900 
 

(1500) 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Minister, I think you failed to address the 
main point of my question, and that was, and I’ll be very 
specific  two questions. Do you think the farm population of 
Saskatchewan in five years time will be greater or fewer than it 
is today? And secondly, very specifically, do you think 
personally that we should have more farmers or fewer farmers 
in Saskatchewan? Very specific, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Very specifically, I would hope to see 
more farmers and more diversified operations that are into 
many kinds of agriculture. And I believe that that’s possible. 
 
Secondly, the number will depend on a combination of things: 
the international subsidies and the amount, the degree of 
interest rate fluctuation and how high it is, and obviously our 
ability to protect farmers under various kinds of conditions. 
 
I can say to the hon. member, when interest rates were 20 per 
cent, it hurt, and that added to the burden. And so you’ve got to 
go back and look at why they’re in some trouble today. And 
you obviously know that I extend some blame, if you will, to 
the NDP administration, because when they were 20 per cent 
there wasn’t a dime. And I hold you at least partly responsible 
for the burden today because you weren’t there. 
 
And secondly, I know that it’s going to take some really tough 
bargaining at the international level to get the United States and 
Europeans to change their mind. That’s why I endorse the trade 
agreement we put together, because it deals with net subsidies. 
They have to bring their subsidies down to our level before they 
can get into our markets. That’s a very good lever to take 
around the world. 
 
And I would only hope you and your party members and people 
across the province that support your party would join with me 
and others to get that kind of a rule out there in the international 
market, because the subsidies have really hurt us here. I mean, 
that’s what we face. 
 
And yet I don’t hear any endorsement of any plan today. I see it 
in your research. Okay. If I could show you. This is your 
research that says if you had free trade it would be better for us 
in agriculture. And I recommend that you read this research 
because that’s the key  access to the markets, processing and 
manufacturing, and get those other governments out of 
subsidies and we can compete and do well at 6 or $7 durum and 
$10 canola and others. 
 
But you can’t do it if you’re going to take on the U.S. treasury. 
And the only way we’re going to get them to back off I sign an 
agreement  as you recommended in here, in 1974  to get to 
the table, reduce the subsidies, move towards more liberalized 
trade, and both of us will be better off. So I just share with you 
. . . I think there could be many more farmers and much more 
diversification if we get access to markets and get other 
governments to back off their unfairness. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Well, Mr. Premier, I don’t think you’re  

quite accurate with your last statement. In the document that 
you’re referring to, it’s talking about a global trading 
arrangement, not tying yourself into one country with the 
ramifications that are so great that will impact upon Canada and 
be very detrimental, in my estimation, with many aspects. And 
we’ll get into that issue later. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, you talk about your commitment, and I’ve 
given you, you know, 15-20 minutes just to so you could 
explain to me what you’re talking about, what your theories are, 
about farmers and the support programs that are going on. But 
last year, Mr. Minister, in agriculture in Saskatchewan you cut 
out $1 of every four spent by your Department of Agriculture. 
This year, times have . . . grain prices were down again and you 
have cut eight . . . another 8 per cent, I believe it is, off the 
budget. And yet at the same time you’re talking about all the 
programs that you’re going to maintain to support agriculture. 
 
We have a 6 billion debt in this province - $6 billion in 
agriculture, and I was hoping that in your explanation, Mr. 
Minister, that you would give us some indication of how you’re 
going to handle that debt, and I’ve asked this question before. 
And you have not given me that answer before, nor do I hear it 
today. You put out a little booklet saying Saskatchewan 
Agriculture Assistance Programs, and when you thumb through 
the programs, you got special Canadian grains program, 
Saskatchewan agricultural assistance program. First item, 
special Canadian grains program  something doesn’t relate to 
me there because I believe that’s a federal policy, program. So 
albeit, but you’re taking credit for it. 
 
The second thing on your little list is the production loan 
program, and I will get into these in detail later. But assistance 
to programs  production loan program that you upped the 
interest rate, took more security on, changed the rules in the 
middle of the game; farmers’ oil royalty refund, cut; farm 
purchase program, eliminated. And we can keep going through 
this. Livestock cash advances, cut 30 per cent. 
 
And yet you’re still telling me that you’re going to do all these 
great and wonderful things because you’re committed to 
agriculture. Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, when I hear what 
you’re saying and when I look at what you’re doing, they don’t 
mesh. And I’ll say they don’t mesh because, Mr. Minister, I 
don’t believe you have a commitment to agriculture. I think 
your rhetoric is showing clear right now. And I’ll say to you, 
Mr. Minister, those are just a few indications, a few indications 
of why your rhetoric is not matching with your actions. 
 
In Canada right now we have, according to a survey of farm 
debt capital and income review, it shows that government 
payment are now almost constituting about 60 per cent of net 
farm income. And the debt to income ratio has reached very, 
very unprecedented heights. And yet I hear nothing coming out 
of you how you’re going to address that. 
 
I mean, you’re going to put the power lines in, and to maintain 
the infrastructure, and you’re going to continue deficiency 
payments, and processing and manufacturing of raw materials 
 and I’m just repeating what you said  and reducing tariffs. 
But nothing is going to . . . unless  
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

901 
 

you come to grips with the facts, Mr. Minister, this debt 
situation in Saskatchewan is going to consume our farmers. 
And you said, yes, you’d like to see more farmers. Well I think 
that’s pretty cheap talk when you compare it to the actions of 
your government. 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, if you turn over and look at the 
agri-business sector I’ll give you an example. Cargill grain 
showed its highest pre-tax profit in 12 years during 1986  66 
per cent higher than the profit record of ’85. 
 
Also, if you look at food processing companies, they’re 
reporting average returns on equity of 14.6 per cent for the 
fiscal year 1986, about 2 per cent higher than other industries. I 
mean, this is all part of agriculture  and farmers sitting in 
Saskatchewan with a $6 billion debt. 
 
Also, the most startling, Mr. Minister, is when you look at the 
banks. Six major banks recorded returns in equity ranging from 
9.2 per cent to 12.9 per cent in 1986, and profits ranging from 
186 million to nearly $500 million. Much of that $6 billion debt 
to farmers is giving banks profits of $500 million, and you’re 
doing nothing about it. 
 
And besides that, much of that $6 billion debt to farmers, Mr. 
Minister, is debt that they owe you, and you’re doing nothing 
about it. So it’s hard for me to understand, although what you 
say sounds very good and well, if I was sitting back in my 
armchair with no worries, I would say that’s a good plan, but if 
I’m out scratching around the soil and wondering how I’m 
going to make payments this fall, it doesn’t work. 
 
Mr. Minister, the facts are before us. And you talk about 
eliminating subsidies, that’s going to allow us to get rich in 
Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Minister, you’re dreaming. You’re 
dreaming if you think that the European community or the 
United States is going to eliminate subsidies. I mean, all the 
while the U.S. is talking about eliminating subsidies  I mean, 
Europe is not co-operating, you know that, and they never will 
because they say they’ll never go hungry again and I can’t 
blame them  but all the time that you and the U.S. are talking 
about reducing subsidies the Americans are locking their 
subsidy program into perpetuity, basically, with any amount of 
money that they want, and I don’t understand why you can’t see 
that. I mean, they’re not playing fairly. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I would ask you: why, when you see that $6 
billion debt in Saskatchewan, when you see the record profits 
from banks, when you see the processing industry with record 
profits and when you see the base of the agri-business with 
multiple profits, why don’t you do something to alleviate the 
debt in Saskatchewan? Put a program into place. 
 
You talk about high interest rates of 20 per cent. The interest 
rates now at farm credit, 13 per cent, are just as burdensome, 
even worse, than they were at 20 per cent, and yet you are doing 
very little. you are adding $1.2 billion in the production loan 
and saying that’s helping, but when you make the changes to 
the program it’s not helping those who need it. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’d ask you: do you have a plan? Do you have 
a plan to restructure and handle the debt  that $6  

billion debt  of farmers in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I will be glad to go 
through the plan for the hon. member. The combination of 
things firstly, as he knows, the modifications that were 
recommended to the production loan program by many 
organizations  the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities) and the wheat pool and others  to 
extend it to ten years, which has been done: 6 per cent for the 
first three, and 9 and three-quarters for the residual  means 
that there’s $250 million that don’t have to be paid this year. 
That’s a big benefit to farmers  250 million  because we’ve 
given them the option to extend it out. now you have . . . If you 
don’t know what that can mean to a lot of farmers, it’s a 
tremendous help. it’s not everything, but it’s a tremendous help, 
recommended by farm organizations and municipal councillors. 
 
Secondly, with respect to our budget, if I could just go back and 
remind you that when interest rates were 20 per cent, 1981-82, 
your Agriculture budget was $77 million; that’s all. Our 
agriculture budget is $163 million, which is well over twice that 
 almost two and a half times  and interest rates aren’t 20 
per cent. So you had no idea that you were causing so much 
harm to people. 
 
You had a very tiny budget, at 20 per cent interest rates, and 
they were crying for help and you didn’t give them a dime. And 
when we have a budget of $163 million, you stand up quite 
sanctimonious and say: for heaven’s sake, why don’t you 
increase it? Why don’t you provide more? I’ve just said you’ve 
eliminated over $200 million in payments in this year alone, 
just by extending the production loan program. 
 
So, to be fair, you’ve got to look at . . . please look at your 
budget at 20 per cent interest rates. What did it mean? It meant 
that people were hurting and there wasn’t a dime, there wasn’t a 
dime coming back to them. And now we’ve got $163 million 
and you’re standing to complain. 
 
Secondly, I want to, if I could just respond, you said a 
combination of all the programs that we’ve put together, you’ll 
find that it’s $2.5 billion, provincial and federal, 1987-88 in the 
province of Saskatchewan, 2.5 billion. 
 
You’ve got the farmers’ oil royalty fund, over $7 million; 
irrigation assistance, over 2, 3, 4, 5 million; farm purchase 
rebate interest is $16 million. You’ve got the cash advance and 
livestock, 13 million; production loan, 20 million  19.136; 
ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) loans, 
3 million; feeder-to-finish market insurance, 21 million; 
SHARP program (Saskatchewan hog assured returns program), 
1.8 million; feeder association loan guarantees, 8.6 million; calf 
guarantees, $10 million; livestock investment tax credit, 7 
million; facilities tax credit, 2 million; the agriculture 
development fund, 28 million; natural gas distribution system, 
27 million; individual line service, 41 million; rural 
development corporation, another 190,000  for $217 million 
this year by the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Put that together with federal programs  that’s the calendar 
year of 1987  you got special grains, $597  
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

902 
 

million; $90 million in crop insurance; $759 million, western 
grain; the Crow benefit, 420 million; farm credit corporation, 
another 18 million  for over $2 billion. We got $2.5 billion 
for the province of Saskatchewan coming between federal and 
provincial programs. 
 
(1515) 
 
Now the hon. member can stand there, and I say to him, as 
carefully as I can, and I don’t want to get him unduly upset, but 
I would just mention this, just mention it, because he keeps 
going back saying: well where’s your money? I said when 
interest rates were high in ’81-82, you didn’t do anything. At 
the same time, the previous administration under the deputy 
premier, the now Leader of the NDP, the man from Riversdale, 
you have such thing as succession duties, you had estate tax  
it’s commonly known as a death tax; if somebody passed away 
in the family, you charged them for that. If you saw families 
with 20 per cent interest rate, you wouldn’t give them a dime, 
and you didn’t. 
 
You would go out and spend money buying their land, and you 
recommended that all over the province, buying a million acres 
of farm land. And you bought for so much, and you’d sell it 
higher to the rest of the children. And you’d buy it for 3 or $400 
an acre and try to sell it for five or six  very unpopular. 
 
And then, if I could point out, when your leader gets defeated in 
the legislature, what does he do, his law firm, and the law firm 
of Mitchell, Romanow, Ching, and Taylor and whoever? Make 
a living working with the banks. It’s common knowledge all 
across Saskatchewan. People in rural and urban Saskatchewan 
know that. Foreclosing on farmers and home owners  that’s 
your leader. 
 
You’re standing and telling me that the banks are making too 
much money, and your leader and his law firm foreclosed on 
farmers all across the province, never did tell us how many you 
foreclosed on, how many home owners you foreclosed on. And 
you’re talking about the banks. It’s your leader that works with 
the banks. It’s your leader that has the law firm that works with 
them, foreclosing on people  didn’t give them a dime at 20 
per cent interest rates and watched them go down. 
 
Then when he got defeated he goes out there, and what does he 
do? He gets a contract with the bank to put them off the farm. 
Did he go out there and did he say . . . What was your response 
to high interest rates? What was his response? How did he feel? 
How did you feel when you found out the NDP leader’s law 
firm, the law firm of Romanow, Mitchell, Ching, and others 
went out and foreclosed . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman:  Order, order. Order, order. I would ask 
members not to refer to other members by name. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, I don’t think the law firm 
is member of this legislature, and I’d ask you to check that 
ruling because it is the law firm I’m referring to, not the 
member. 
 
Mr. Chairman:  Order. The Speaker has ruled that any  

direct or indirect reference to a member by name is not 
permitted in the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will not use 
the name of the law firm that the Leader of the NDP was 
associated with. 
 
An Hon. Member:  This was your agricultural policy, is it, 
Grant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  The member from Quill Lakes asks me 
about agriculture policy. I will just say to the member from 
Humboldt and the member from Quills, he mentioned the 
banks. You asked me how the banks could make money, and 
I’m just reminding you that the NDP leader has a law firm with 
a contract with banks, that goes out and forecloses on farmers. 
That’s your legacy, not mine. 
 
When interest rates were 20 per cent, he didn’t give them any 
help. Then when he got defeated he went out there and 
foreclosed on them for a profit. I don’t think people like that. I 
don’t think people in Regina like it or in Saskatoon like it, and 
that’s the truth. 
 
You have not responded to the questions we’ve asked. Could 
you please respond? how many farmers has he foreclosed on? 
How much money has he made foreclosing on farmers? This is 
the NDP leader who says that he’s against banks when he’s 
working with them. 
 
I just rise to point out to the hon. member  I know that they 
don’t like to hear this, but he raised banks; I didn’t raised it. 
You raised the banks. 
 
An Hon. Member:  We’d like the truth. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  The truth is, the law firm worked for the 
banks. The truth is, the law firm works for the banks and the 
banks foreclose on people, and the NDP leader and his law firm 
make money foreclosing on farmers. That’s agriculture policy. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I will say, I don’t find that particularly 
positive. I’m sure that an awful lot of people in Saskatchewan, 
in Regina and Saskatoon, would say, well, if this is the new 
NDP agriculture policy, foreclosing on folks, I’d be a little bit 
ashamed of it. 
 
We’ve put billions of dollars into the hands of agriculture, and 
the NDP didn’t do a thing for people when they were hurting a 
20 per cent interest rates. Then when they got defeated, they 
went out and worked for institutions that foreclosed on them. 
 
Now you know my agricultural policy. You know that we will 
defend agriculture in terms of low interest rates and deficiency 
payments, cash to people. We’ve got a budget that’s almost 
three times your budget. And you can stand in your place and 
say that you can’t blame Europeans for the subsidies they have; 
you’re in Hansard now saying that. You just said you can’t 
blame Europeans for the subsidies that they have. 
 
Well I’m going to make sure the people in your riding and 
others have you on the record that say, you don’t blame  
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

903 
 

others for subsidy. They understand that that’s really going to 
help them. I would be very interested in knowing, very 
interested in knowing that if the people from Humboldt think 
it’s just fine for Europeans to force us out of business by their 
unfair subsidies. I don’t think it’s fair at all. And I’ve asked 
Europeans to back off. 
 
The president of France, Francois Mitterrand was right here in 
the legislature  you may have met him. We asked him to back 
away from the subsidies, and you would have said what you’ve 
just said in the legislature, it’s okay; I understand; keep 
subsidizing. That’s your response. I mean, clearly we have a 
difference of opinion when it comes to agriculture. You would 
encourage the Europeans to continue to subsidize; you 
encourage your own leader to foreclose on farmers; you would 
encourage the government to buy the farm land; and you didn’t 
give them a dime when interest rates were 20 per cent and your 
budget was one-third of ours. 
 
Now what does that say? You add all that up, what does it say? 
It says that, to me, that you don’t understand food, agriculture, 
families, farming, any bit of that. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I want to let the hon. member know very 
clearly, I don’t agree with the NDP leader foreclosing on home 
owners or farmers in Saskatchewan. If the law firm that is 
associated with the member form Riversdale is foreclosing on 
home owners in Saskatoon, I don’t think he should do that. I 
don’t think he should do it. If he is foreclosing on farmers 
across the province, I don’t think he should do it that either. 
 
And I hope that he will stand up and tell the facts to the public 
and say, I made a mistake; I have foreclosed on these people; 
this is the amount of money my law firm made. It’s not a good 
agriculture policy. I mean, how do these farmers feel? How do 
these farmers feel when the NDP leader forecloses on them? 
This is the NDP leader who works with the banks like this  
works with the banks. 
 
Now if you want to talk about the banks, I’ll stand in my place 
until July and talk about the banks and your affiliation with 
people foreclosing on farmers and home owners and bands. 
And you brought it up, okay? You’re talking about the profit 
from the banks. I’m talking about the profit to the NDP member 
from Riversdale who profited by foreclosing on people. 
 
So I defend them, the farmers, in terms of high interest rates 
and I will go in there with subsidization and protection. I am not 
going to be involved in a law firm like the Leader of the NDP 
administration who says, I can’t help you when high interest 
rates are there, but I can go out and foreclose on your farm  I 
can foreclose on your farm, when in fact you’re in trouble. 
 
Your agriculture policy is obviously different than mine; the 
money we put up is a lot higher than you did. The kinds of 
things we’re trying to do internationally is clearly different than 
you, because you said you would encourage the Europeans to 
subsidize and, I suppose, the Americans. Now I can’t endorse 
that; I won’t; the farmers won’t. If you go around this province 
and say, should Europeans cheat like that, they’d say, no, they 
should not.  

They shouldn’t subsidize and take away our markets and our 
prices; they should back off and play fair. 
 
Your own research, and if I could just remind the hon. member 
in your research done by the Leader of the NDP in 1974, it says 
this about the United States, recommends on page 23: “the 
reduction of United States tariffs on some processed and 
manufactured forest, minerals and agricultural products would 
assist the Saskatchewan economy.” 
 
This is your research. When you were in government you said, 
reduce the tariffs between us and the united States; that’s what 
you said. You had economists do it; it’s for P & P; you sent this 
to the federal Minister of Trade. Now you’re standing up and 
say, no, I think it would be a good idea if we did not do this 
with the United States, and you recommend that the Europeans 
continue to subsidize. 
 
I mean, people would actually wonder . . . one, you wouldn’t 
help farmers when they were in trouble. You’d buy their land; 
you’d recommend lower tariffs when you’re in government. 
When you’re outside of government, you don’t recommend that 
you lower tariffs; then you make a living foreclosing on them. 
 
I mean, you’d have to admit that you’re pretty well 180 degrees 
here in terms of policy. You’ve been all over the map. So I 
would just hold you to your past, okay 1974 you said these 
were the policies of the NDP government; you said that’s the 
case, and it was your philosophy, and you clearly stated what 
you would and would not do with respect to interest rates. 
 
I’m just saying we’ve followed your advice from ’74, reduced 
the tariffs and reduced the problems and helped people. But 
now, obviously, you’ve decided to go the other way. So the 
$250 million that we provide farmers this year, in new 
additional money, because the change in the production loan 
program is bigger than your entire budget for a series of years 
that you looked at in the past, either in 1974 or 1981-82. 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I find this interesting. I 
ask a question about what this Minister of Agriculture, this 
leader of this province, is going to do about restructuring debt 
to stop the exodus of farmers from the land, and he gives me 20 
minutes of personal attacks on people, nit-picking about 
something I said about the European community, blaming the 
NDP in 1982 for the problems that he’s having today with his 
incapability to run government. But nothing  I heard nothing 
of how he was going to attack the debt problem. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, I will tell the minister, something that he 
said yesterday  and I just thought of it when you were going 
through your little rage that you go through every once in a 
while there. Then I thought to myself, well maybe this is the 
reason, that he’s sort of out of touch with everything. 
 
And although the Premier, the Minister of Agriculture, has 
promoted his image as Mr. Farmer with his toothpick in his . . . 
straw in his teeth an his cowboy hat on, yesterday he said, 
quote: 
 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

904 
 

I’ve spent most of my professional life in the public 
service, either in government or in universities. 

 
Now I think, you know, there’s a little contradiction here 
somewhere. You got the . . . you’re trying to promote the 
imager and then you admit to us yesterday that you spent most 
of your life . . . Well I say that, Mr. Minister, is the reason why. 
That’s the reason why, or one of the reasons, that you don’t 
know what to do, is because you are so far out of touch with 
this rural community. 
 
I know what they’re saying and I know what they’re feeling and 
I know what they’re living, because the people in this province 
care not about your rhetoric, about our leader; care not about the 
rhetoric about what I say about Europeans safeguarding their 
people, which is true. They care not your ranting and raving 
about the NDP creating the problem. 
 
Those arguments worked for you in 1982. The problem, Mr. 
Minister, is now, and you’re not addressing the problem. Every 
time that we make a suggestion about what you could possibly 
do, every time an institution like the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 
makes a suggestion for farm policy, you ignore, it, or the 
farmers’ union, you ignore it, or everybody, because you can’t 
control the problem. And you can’t control the problem . . . or 
you can control the problem only when you want to control the 
problem. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Minister, from past experience and 
listening to what you have said in years gone by, I think that 
your aim is to sit on your hands and let the farmers of this 
province slide out one by one, through stress and turmoil, which 
is inhumane in my books, until they bet down to a level where 
you can say, that’s what I want, is larger corporate farms and 
reduced people. And that’s what you’re going after because 
you’re not doing anything to prevent it. 
 
Look at the headlines: “Saskatchewan agriculture loans worst 
on Royal’s books.” It says here that: “The percentage of 
non-performing agricultural loans held by the Royal Bank is 
higher in Saskatchewan than any other province.” Payments 
were not being made on 17.5 per cent of the bank’s farm loans 
in Saskatchewan. That’s almost double the national average, 
and you’re sitting on your hands and letting them slide. 
 
And, “Bankruptcies down, but not in Saskatchewan.” “Farm 
bankruptcies were down last year in every province except 
Saskatchewan,” the article says, and two-thirds of those 
bankruptcies were farmers. And it goes on to say, as you, Mr. 
Minister, will know, that bankruptcy stats are just one small 
measure of what’s happening in the province because there are 
no records of how many are just walking off and letting them 
go. 
 
(1530) 
 
And here’s another one: “Saskatchewan has most unpaid farm 
loans.” It says, “Saskatchewan has the dubious distinction in 
banking circles as the province with the highest percentage of 
non-performing farm loans,” says Brian Farlinger of the 
Canadian bank association. “Fifteen per cent of the province’s 
farm loans, or $238 million, are  

classified as non-performing,” meaning no payment have been 
made for 90 days, and you sit by and you blow up and get your 
hands flying, and ranting and raving about everything but the 
issue. Why won’t you attack the issue instead of going off 
half-cocked and trying to attack everything else but the 
problem? 
 
And even worse, even worse, Mr. Minister, with a $6 billion 
debt in this province we are looking very shortly at a possibility 
of a dramatic increase in the freight rate, something that you 
never stood up for. And we on this side of the House said, 
eventually that’s going to be another nail in the coffin of 
farmers. 
 
And this year, Mr. Minister, Mr. Farmer from the professional 
ranks, if you don’t know it or not, fertilizer has gone up about 
$50 a tonne; chemical has gone up. In fact 2,4-D is up about 60 
per cent  2,4-D is one of the most commonly used chemical 
because it was one of the cheaper ones, but now it’s going up. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, instead of addressing those problems, 
instead of trying to get the debt into an organized structure so 
that farmers can maintain their farms and stay on their land, you 
do nothing. And I’m not the only one that’s saying that, because 
after your budget the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool was saying that 
they weren’t happy. It says: 
 

The provincial government’s budget fails to address the 
major issues facing farmer, says Barry Senft of 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. We’re disappointed there is no 
financial commitment to restructure the debt faced by 
Saskatchewan farmers. He said, there is $6 billion hanging 
over their head. 

 
He said you didn’t address it, I said you didn’t address it, and 
farmers are saying you didn’t address it. Instead, what do you 
address? You address the fringe. You try to create the hype . . . 
I don’t know what constituency you’re talking to, Mr. Minister, 
but it doesn’t wash in rural Saskatchewan  it just doesn’t 
wash. And I think you know it doesn’t wash, but I don’t think 
you care, because if you cared you would do something about 
it. Here’s another quote: 
 

Farm groups disappointed. What was missing in the 
budget speech were programs to help farmers deal with the 
debt problem. (And it says) It looks to me like the 
government has forgotten about Saskatchewan agriculture, 
Gil Pederson of the national Farmers’ Union said. 

 
Another organization: 
 

Bill Duke of the Western Canadian Wheat Growers said 
he had expected at least a commitment on debt problems 
facing prairie farmers. 

 
I mean, Mr. Minister, everybody is saying you are in the 
position to do something. You can hand me all the garbage 
about the dollars that you’re spending, and I’ll tell you, you can 
ask the farmers of this province if they were better off in 1982 
than they are now. And yes, I say  
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

905 
 

garbage, because your Band-Aid programs aren’t stopping the 
. . . isn’t stopping the flow of farmers off the land. And you 
know that, and I know that, and the farmers know that. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, why are you sitting on your hands, 
in the light of three major farm groups in this province saying 
that you didn’t address the debt problem? The fact that we over 
here have asked you time and time again to get a program in 
place to restructure debt. Why are you sitting on your hands? Is 
it because that you would like to see a number of farmers, as 
you said in the past, leave the land in Saskatchewan so that 
there are fewer farmers in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, I 
will remind the hon. member that he has called $2.5 billion  
not million, but billion dollars  in cash, in the province of 
Saskatchewan this last calendar year, as garbage. And much of 
it, as he knows, is you don’t even have to pay it back. It’s just 
grants, and he knows that. Deficiency payments, cash advances, 
zero per cent interest rates  you don’t pay any interest  you 
just call it garbage. 
 
I mean, I . . . Let me also remind the hon. member, across 
Canada very few people, very few people think that the NDP 
have much knowledge about rural affairs or agriculture. You 
have one or two seats in the whole country in rural Canada, 
because you don’t speak for farmer. You go on and on and on. 
You don’t speak for them in B.C., in Alberta, Manitoba  we 
just finished an election in Manitoba. Okay? See? No. But 
you’re not credible. You’re not credible. The rural people don’t 
believe you. That’s the point. And when I do come out with $2 
billion in cash, federal and provincial, you call it garbage. 
That’s what you do; you call it garbage. 
 
Well the people in the farms that received it may not think it’s 
everything, but they don’t think it’s garbage. It certainly helps. 
And it is difficult over there. And the reason it’s difficult, and 
they all know, in Manitoba, the NDP government there didn’t 
help them in ’81 and it didn’t help them in ’86. And they 
rejected you. And they reject you in Saskatchewan. And they 
reject you in Alberta and they reject you in Ontario and reject 
you in Quebec and reject you in the Maritimes because you 
have no idea what agriculture is about. 
 
You think that if you’ve got a union leader that can stand up 
and say, well if we could just have a bunch of unions running it, 
it would be just fine. That’s the only answer. Well, Mr. 
Chairman . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Brian Mulroney. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Obviously. The member from Humboldt 
and the member from Quills are very unique because they’re 
among the only NDP representation in all of Canada, in rural 
Canada. They’re rejected in riding after riding, in province after 
province, because they don’t help when they have a chance. 
They didn’t when they were in government here. They didn’t, 
and they were rejected in Manitoba. They’ve never been elected 
in Ontario. No Canadians believe you are credible in 
agriculture. You had the chance here and you let it go. 
 

And then on top of it . . . I want to share with you a letter, a 
letter on why you’re not credible. You read to me why 
somebody in the farmers’ union said I didn’t have enough out 
there. Okay, but I want to give you . . . this is to your leader. 
This is a man from Albertville, Saskatchewan in January of this 
year. He says: Dear Mr. NDP Leader . . . He uses his name but I 
can’t use it in here. 
 
I want you to listen to this, please, and you will know why the 
NDP is not represented in rural Canada any place, except for the 
odd exception, like you did, and it was on a split because the 
Liberals and the Tories split and you come up the middle, and 
you know that’s the case. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Where? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  In Humboldt, and you know it. And you 
know it, and you know it’s the case. And that’s the only reason 
you’re there is because of a fluke  it’s because of a fluke. And 
you know it was everybody else in Humboldt know it, because 
there was a split in the vote and you happened to get elected 
right up the middle. And it’s classic, and I’ve been through it 
and others have. 
 
But I want you to listen to this letter. This is to your NDP 
leader. Okay. This man is from Albertville and he’s saying: 
 

Dear Mr. (NDP Leader). Recently I have heard on TV, a 
statement which apparently you have made that Devine 
and Mulroney are not doing enough to help farmers. What 
are you doing to help the farmers, especially when you are 
planning to win the next election, handling farm 
foreclosures, and advising the banks to take away the 
lands from farmers and their livelihood. 

 
It must be a very good-paying business for you because 
you handle some very petty foreclosures. My foreclosure, 
which you are handling, is for approximately $100,000 
when I am worth about 600,000. I paid about 60,000 in 
five years. This fall I paid the bank $8,000 in about three 
days after I received a notice of foreclosure from your 
office. The bank stated that you had advised them to serve 
this notice on me. Should you win the next election  
God forbid!  there would not be any farmers left in 
Saskatchewan, you hypocrite. 

 
Mr. Steve Daskosh from Albertville, Saskatchewan, writing the 
NDP leader because the NDP forecloses on farmers, and they 
stand up here and say that they would work on their behalf. 
Well go see Mr. Daskosh  go see him. Ask him what he 
thinks of the NDP. Ask him what he thinks of their farm policy 
and ask him what he thinks of their leader. 
 
He just says, if they ever won the next election  God forbid? 
 it would be to the ruin of rural Saskatchewan. And this is a 
farmer, okay? This is a real farmer writing your leader, saying, 
what are you doing, working on behalf of the bank foreclosing 
on me? 
 
Now you don’t get elected in Manitoba because you’re not 
credible. You don’t get elected in Saskatchewan  
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

906 
 

because you’re not credible, or in Alberta, or anywhere in the 
country. Because the NDP don’t understand small business, 
they don’t understand farmers, they don’t understand farm 
families, they don’t understand processing and manufacturing. 
 
You don’t understand it. You say, well, I’ll buy your farms for 
the government. Isn’t that the reason that people like your 
ancestors left Europe, was to come over here and own their own 
farm?  not for the government to own it. 
 
And you’re standing up there today defending land bank, like 
you always did. People in this country don’t want the 
government to own the farm. They want governments to help. 
We’ve put over $2 billion in cash out between the federal 
government and the provincial government, and you’re out 
making a living  your leader is  foreclosing on farmers. 
That’s unfair. That’s not even being decent. It’s not even being 
decent. 
 
Rural people want fairness. They don’t want the NDP leader 
making money foreclosing on them. Farmers like this write me, 
they write you, they write people all over the country and say, 
the NDP doesn’t understand agriculture; all it knows is to 
nationalize it, take over their land. 
 
Well, look, you and I can disagree about policy, but if you want 
to talk about support, I don’t think you should call the money 
that’s going into the hands of farmers, garbage. And I’m going 
to make sure your constituents have heard that  a lot of 
money. Because they spent the money in Humboldt, they spend 
the money in Quill Lakes, and they spend that cash in 
Saskatoon and Regina. It’s a great deal of money  $2 billion. 
 
And we’re proud to be able to help that. It may not be enough, 
but we’re working as hard as we can on $2 wheat and $10 oil. 
And we’ve experienced that and low potash prices, and still 
back up farmers. 
 
But we don’t go out there like the NDP leader, receiving mail 
like this that we’re foreclosing on them for a living. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I just want to point out to the hon. 
member, if he thinks this is agriculture policy that is 
recommended, I’d be surprised. If he’s still recommending land 
bank; if he’s still recommending Europeans continue to 
subsidize  and he’s just finished saying it; he doesn’t think $2 
billion is worth anything, garbage, when he didn’t spend as 
much as we do in four programs. 
 
ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) this 
year, 35 million; farm production loan program, 15 million; 
farmers’ oil royalty rebate, 13 million; calf, 8 million; 
agriculture development fund, 30 million. That’s over $100 
million in four programs, five programs. That’s well over your 
entire budget when interest rates were 20 per cent. You haven’t 
got a leg to stand on. 
 
You went out and bought their farms when they were in trouble. 
You could hardly wait to get in their yard. You bought a million 
acres of farms. Then you say, well I’ll sell it back to the kids 
when the price goes up. And they rejected that. And they 
rejected it in Manitoba; they reject  

it all across the country. They would any place in the free 
world. They’re even rejecting it in the Soviet Union. 
 
The Soviets now are coming to their senses and saying, let 
farmers own their own farm. And the NDP in Saskatchewan is 
still 20 years behind the Soviet Union. You’re sitting there 
saying that the farmer should belong to the government, 
organization should belong to the government, you should 
control the farmers. And if they get into trouble, you would 
recommend that you go out . . . You don’t only recommend, 
you go out and make a living foreclosing on them. And you’ve 
got letters coming to me and to you to say that this is the thing 
to do. 
 
Let’s just make two, three, four points. First is, the problem is 
because of international subsidies and because you failed to 
help folds when they hit 20 per cent interest rates and got them 
into he problem to start with. That’s the first point. 
 
Secondly, we took office and said that we would help protect 
them against high interest rates and bring in deficiency 
payment. And we’ve done that. 
 
The problem continues because people think like you do in 
some circles that say, way to go, Europe, continue to subsidize. 
I don’t know why you like $2 wheat or 4, $5 canola oil, 
rapeseed, canola seed. But the Europeans are to blame for that 
 they’re to blame for that and you have encouraged them. I 
don’t understand how you can go to farmers and recommend 
that the Europeans continue to take borrowed money and 
compete with our people. It doesn’t make any sense. 
 
You didn’t make any sense in Saskatchewan. You didn’t make 
any sense across the country. And I just ask you to revisit and to 
relook at your agriculture policy, not only among your 
colleagues, but right to the top, to the leader. Because the leader 
had a chance at 20 per cent to help people; the leader had a 
chance to do things, to protect farmers; the leader was also there 
when they had death taxes and succession duties and he say it. 
 
The leader was there when you took income tax from 34 per 
cent up to 58 percent. That’s what the NDP did  income tax 
 and farmers had to face that. You took taxes from 34 per 
cent level up to 58 per cent, the worst and most rapid increase 
in the history of Saskatchewan. You did that. 
 
And the leader of the NDP was in government, he was a deputy 
premier. He did the research on trade, he raised the taxes, he put 
them off the land, he wouldn’t help them in high interest rates. 
And you ask why somebody might get excited looking at this 
bunch across the hall. 
 
(1545) 
 
Why would anybody in rural Saskatchewan  anybody  
endorse an agriculture policy that took taxes from 34 per cent to 
58 per cent and kick people off the land at 20 per cent interest 
rates, and then has the audacity, when he’s defeated, to go out 
and work with a bank and make a living foreclosing on farmers 
like people from Albertville that write me and say, God forbid 
if they even won. Look what they do to agriculture. 
 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

907 
 

Well, Mr. Chairman, anybody that would raise rates on utilities 
like the NDP did, raise taxes, force people out of their homes 
and out of their farms; against northern Saskatchewan because 
they wouldn’t even continue to mine. And the member knows 
all those kinds of things that affect rural people. And not a 
dime, not any help. And then when they get defeated, to go out 
and make a living foreclosing on home owners and farmers. 
 
Well, obviously, Mr. Chairman, they are not popular in 
Manitoba or Saskatchewan or Alberta or across the country. 
The country and the Canadians speak. They speak. And they 
speak at the polls. Rural Saskatchewan and rural Canada has no 
confidence, no confidence at all when t comes to the NDP 
agriculture policy. and I for one will make sure that rural and 
urban people know how you treat folks in agriculture. I’ll make 
sure that you know, and I’ll remind them; I’ll continue to 
remind them. 
 
If you take taxes from 34 per cent to 58 per cent  now what 
year was that? That was about 1973. They were at 34 per cent. 
By 1978 they were 58 per cent. That’s a 24 per cent increase in 
income tax  one government, one government. 
 
You gouged farmers; you gouged home owners; you gouged 
them all. You put them off the land, and then you go make a 
living cutting a deal with the bank to go back in and save them. 
For heaven’s sake, I’ll foreclose on you if there’s a little bit of 
profit there. And you stand there and you say, well for heaven’s 
sakes, you’re not doing enough; your money going into 
agriculture, we’ll just call that garbage. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I would just say to the hon. member, over 
$200 million in cash savings to farmers just because of the 
change in the production loan program. Payments they don’t 
have to make, and he calls it garbage. I don’t think that the 
SARM calls it garbage; I don’t think farmers call it garbage. I’ll 
tell you what they did say was garbage: taking taxes from 34 
per cent to 58 per cent. That’s not fair, and foreclosing on 
farmers for a living is not fair. 
 
And suggesting that Europeans continue to subsidize to drive 
the price of grain down is not fair, and that’s not decent and you 
shouldn’t be doing it. And if you continue that policy, that’s 
why Europeans get away with it; that’s why they get away with 
it. They think, I can fool people like the member from 
Humboldt in saying, well at one time we had a conflict so we’re 
going to have to subsidize to have these huge surpluses. 
 
Well they may have fooled the member from Humboldt, but 
they didn’t fool Canadians. We will continue to fight for the 
reduction of subsidies internationally, all over the world, and 
for fair trade and freer trade and lower tariffs for the benefit of 
farmers and home owners all across this province and indeed 
the country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Chairman, that is the sign of a desperate 
man. And I would ask him just to calm down and relax a little 
bit and please let’s talk about the problem. Let’s talk about the 
issue. 
 

You know you can give your political speech to the TV cameras 
if you like, and you can continue to, you know, campaign on 
years gone by, but I’ll tell you, Mr. Premier, it’s not working 
for you. It’s just not working. 
 
You know, we can talk . . . you can talk . . . I use the word 
garbage, and there’s another misconstruing of what people are 
saying, and you do it all the time. I mean your programs are 
garbage. They’re garbage because they’re not being effective. 
Not the money we’re talking about here. 
 
And you talk about the deficiency payments, the stabilization 
payments. Well that money, Mr. Premier, and you know as 
well, is going to those farmers who are in trouble, simply to 
exist. It’s not correcting the debt problem. And the facts prove 
that out. The facts prove it out. So you go and rant and rave, 
talk about everything but the issue as you do time and time 
again. 
 
So I’m going to just ask you a simple yes or no question. Mr. 
Minister, regarding the $6 billion debt crisis that we have in 
Saskatchewan for farmers, are you going to address that 
problem by implementing a program that will restructure the 
debt to a degree that we no longer see the slide of farmers off he 
land? 
 
And I please ask you to remain relatively calm if you can, and 
we don’t need a political speech. If you feel you have to do it 
again for the TV, I guess that’s what you have to do, but let’s 
talk about the debt problem, and would you answer that 
specifically, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, I just want to remind the 
hon. member, when he is blaming the banks for the problem, 
that I just have to share with him that  very calmly  that the 
NDP leader and his law firm have a contract with the banks to 
foreclose on farmers. Now that’s his agricultural policy. And 
they don’t like to hear that, and I’ll say it as calmly as I can. 
The NDP leader’s law firm has a contract with the banks to 
foreclose on people. 
 
Now, it’s one thing . . . I mean, it’s certainly legal to do that, but 
this is the man, and the farmer that comes back and says, this is 
the great socialist, the man who’s stick up for all the little guys. 
Okay? 
 
Now you can say, lawyers can do this, bankers can do this; it’s 
legal, it’s legal. But the new socialist leader, who’s going to 
defend them all, does it. That’s the bang. 
 
So I remind the hon. member, he is the individual who is going 
to protect the little guy, and he stand s up there and he 
forecloses on them. And I just have to mention as calmly as I 
can  I know they don’t want to hear it  but the NDP leader 
forecloses on farmers and home owners on behalf of the bank, 
and I just want the public to know that to really get at the roots 
of the guy. 
 
So I would . . . I know that the gallery notices that they can’t 
take that too well, and they don’t like to hear it. And I would 
just ask them to be as polite as I could, Mr. Chairman, and just 
sit and listen, because when the hon. member is speaking, I 
don’t speak. I just want to remind,  
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

908 
 

when they mention the banks are the problem, who is working 
for the banks, and it’s the NDP leader who has a contract with 
the banks, forecloses on people, and I just want the public to 
know that. 
 
And the more often, more often they mention the banks, the 
more often they’re going to get the publicity that it’s their 
leader, the NDP socialist leader, that works for the banks. Now 
that’s all that’s going to happen. So every time they mention it, 
it’s going to come up. 
 
They raised it. I’m just calmly reminding the public  just 
reminding them  that it’s the NDP leader who has a contract 
with a bank, along with the other partner who is an NDP 
member of the legislature, making a living on poor farmers like 
this from Albertville, foreclosing on them. And this guy doesn’t 
think much of that. He doesn’t think much of that. He thinks 
that’s awful. He thinks it’s very, very sad. They just . . . pretty, 
pretty sad. 
 
The hon. member raised the point that the farmers’ union didn’t 
think much of what we were doing. I want to just read a note 
from Gil Pederson, and it’s certainly . . . it’s from the farmers’ 
union. It said: 
 

Mr. Devine, I want to commend you for pushing your 
fellow premiers for a commitment to the Canadian farmers 
at the Humboldt meeting of western premiers. With 
continued leadership from you, Mr. Devine, I am sure that 
the Canadian farmers can count on some much needed 
assistance either from the federal or provincial 
governments, or a combination of both. 

 
Thank you again for your efforts on behalf of Canadian 
farmers. Yours truly, Gil Pederson. 

 
Now this is their regional 6 co-ordinator of the National 
Farmers Union who says to me, and says to fellow premiers, 
that he appreciates the fact that we can provide cash to farmers 
through deficiency payments. I say to the hon. member from 
Humboldt, who won on a split decision, I remind him, the NFU 
didn’t call that money garbage; you called it garbage. The NFU 
said, thank you very much. They appreciated it. 
 
Only the member of the legislature, the NDP member from 
Humboldt, would stand up and say that money’s garbage. But 
the NFU (National Farmers Union) member said, with your 
continued leadership I’m sure Canadian farmers can count on 
assistance. Thank you very much. 
 
Now the farmers’ union said thanks the wheat pool said thanks, 
the cattle growers said thanks, the United Grain Growers said 
thanks, farmers have said it’s very difficult and we appreciate 
the support. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I point out to the hon. member, he reads 
from farmers union people. We can stand here and read 
bouquets, but I will just read one. In fact, I have two letters, one 
from a farmer who says the NDP leader should be ashamed of 
himself for foreclosing on farmers, and one from the farmers 
union that says at least somebody is helping us, putting cash in 
our pocket, thank you very much. 
 

So I say the hon. member we made the changes with respect to 
the production loan. We are exploring all kinds of possibilities 
with farmers all the time in terms of the kinds of things that 
they would like to see us do. We have had the opportunity to 
talk with them, and we continue to talk with them with respect 
to restructuring. And you will be hearing more about that in the 
future. 
 
Mr. Chairman:  Order. I would just like to remind all 
members, I notice that during the reading of the letter, 
member’s names were being mentioned. I would caution the 
minister not to mention anybody’s name other than your own. 
 
Mr. Koskie:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, I want 
to pursue a little further and some specifics in respect to debt. 
And let’s start this way. As of the end . . . March 31 of . . . well 
let’s take it to the end of 1987. Would you specifically indicate 
how many farmers there were in Saskatchewan at the end of 
1987? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  I just happen to have that information, 
Mr. Chairman. I’ll give you the census numbers 1971, ’81 and 
’86. 
 
In 1971 census there were 76,970; 1981 census there were 
67,318. There was an average loss of 965 farmers per year from 
1971 to ’81 through your administration; 1986 there were 
63,431 for an average loss of 777 farmers through our 
administration. So the latest information that we have is 
obviously census ’71, ’81, and ’86. And obviously your track 
record in terms of number of farmers and the loss of farmers 
over that period of time was not all that good. 
 
Mr. Koskie:  What I’d like, the figures, certainly you should 
have it for the end of 1987. That’s what I want  the figure of 
the number of farmers, because it’s very pertinent to my 
subsequent questions. And surely as Minister of Agriculture 
you can provide the number of farmers that are now on 1987. 
You must know. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Speaker, we don’t do a census  or 
Mr. Chairman  every year. No. You don’t count the farms. 
You’ll do it on a census basis  ’71, ’81, ’86. That’s what you 
do. So I don’t have ’87 figures and the hon. member I’m sure 
knows it. 
 
Mr. Koskie:  Well are you standing in this legislature and 
saying that among your officials you cannot provide to this 
legislature the number of farmers that are in Saskatchewan in 
the end of 1987? Is that what you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Exactly what I’m saying. I can say, you 
can find the number of people who have a quota book, you can 
find the number of people who have hogs, you can have the 
number of people who are on various kinds of programs. But 
the total number of farmers is not counted on an annual basis 
except for census. 
 
So you can go out and say, how many people on the production 
loan program, how many people have wheat board permit 
books, how many people are in various kinds of industries, how 
many have started, how many new farmers? You might be able 
to find those that have  
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

909 
 

applied to ACS. You may have those that have applied to 
various other programs. You can add those up  some cases 
they overlap. 
 
But the federal government does the census, and it does it at 
regular intervals, and the last interval was ’86. 
 
Mr. Koskie:  How many farmers left the farms by 
bankruptcy or foreclosure or quitclaims during the year of 
1987? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  The number of farm bankruptcies, 1986 
and 1987, and the rate per thousand farms  per thousand 
farms, okay, so that you have an idea of how farmers we have 
compared to how many there might be in Manitoba or Alberta. 
I’ve got this for all the provinces. 
 
In 1986 in . . . We’ll take the three prairie provinces . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  I want Saskatchewan’s 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  You’ll get Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member:  That’s all I want. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well I’m going to give you the rest of it. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Well go ahead. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  I will. Thank you. 
 
In 1986 in Alberta there was 93 farm bankruptcies; in 1987 
there was 71. The percentage of farm bankruptcies per thousand 
in Alberta in 1987 was 2.1 per cent. In Saskatchewan in 1986 
there were 45; in 1987 there were 85, and the rate per thousand 
was 1.8. In 1986 there were 50 in Manitoba, and in 1987 there 
was 47, and the rate per thousand was 2.5. 
 
So I point out to the hon. member, the best rate, that is the 
healthiest rate with respect to maintaining farms was in 
Saskatchewan in 1987 with respect to the number of farms on a 
per capita basis. The bankruptcies in Alberta were 2.1 per cent 
per thousand; in Saskatchewan it was 1.8; in Manitoba it was 
much higher at 2.5. 
 
Mr. Koskie:  Mr. Premier, are you monitoring the situation 
of the extreme problems in rural Saskatchewan with the debt 
crisis? You’ve indicated in respect to bankruptcies, and that is 
not the greatest reason for exodus of farmers, because there is 
. . . a number of them are doing a quitclaims with the financial 
institutions, a number of them have attempted to sell off and 
salvage. So what I’m asking you: have you been able to 
monitor, to indicate to this legislature how many farmers in ’87 
have actually left the land? That’s the question I’m asking you 
because in my view it’s a serious problem. I would have 
thought you would have thought it was a serious problem. I 
would have thought that the Minister of Agriculture would 
have, indeed, the facts. Do you have those facts as to the total 
exodus of farmers in ’87? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the farm land  

security board and the agriculture credit corporation and the 
counselling people and others are working with farmers on an 
ongoing basis with respect to debt adjustment and restructuring. 
The credit unions are doing it, the financial institutions are 
doing it, with respect to the restructuring of debt and leasing 
and renting  a combination of things. And they’re doing it as 
we speak, all the time. 
 
What I have for you, and 1987 is the last year, this last year, the 
number of bankruptcies and the percentage per thousand. And 
I’ve laid it out there. Now there are people who are going 
through various kinds of restructuring on a quarter section, on a 
half section, on part of their farm  reappraising some other 
parts of it  that are going on all the time. And the hon. 
member knows that. And that’s what he means by quitclaim. 
 
You may say, I will settle on this quarter, I will settle on that so 
that I can stay on the farm; I will reassess this; I will refinance; 
I will lease; I will rent; I will custom farm, and a combination 
of things that are taking place. That goes on every day. And 
where they actually come out at the end of the day and the end 
of the week or the end of the month is information that 
obviously is in the hands of the agriculture credit corporation or 
the counselling people or others who are involved in that 
process in the financial basis, like credit unions and financial 
institutions and banks and so forth. 
 
Mr. Koskie:  Would the Premier be able to provide the 
number of farmers who have lost their holdings and any equity 
in their land, and have arrangements whereby they are merely 
leasing back? Have you any statistics as to the problem that is 
happening out there? I mean, people are losing their farms 
daily, Mr. Premier, they are. Aren’t you aware of it? 
 
And what we’re trying to get at is some of the facts. How many 
farmers have lost all of their equity in the land, and have you 
any report from the Farm Credit Corporation and from the other 
financial institutions which would indicate that now what they 
have is a tenant relationship with the financial institutions, be it 
Farm Credit Corporation, bank, or provincial government? Do 
you have that statistic, as to how many farmers who once were 
purchasing land, have lost all of their . . . completely of their 
equity, and now are tenants? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, there isn’t a farmer in the 
province who hasn’t lost equity. But I’m not sure that you 
understand the situation. The value of property and land and 
real estate has collapsed from a level here down to about half 
that. Everybody’s lost equity. 
 
In some cases you will find that the debt now is higher than the 
equity position, and in some cases, it’s almost all debt. And it’s 
all relative. in some cases it was 50-50. And as the price of land 
goes down, and as interest rates come up, and the debt 
accumulates and income goes down, you find the value of the 
assets have decreased. So that you have situations in every 
single farm, every single one  your riding, others around  
where the equity has dropped. I mean, and everybody’s faced it 
because the land values, therefore their asset value, have 
declined. 
 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

910 
 

Now you’re asking me how much. I would say on average 
they’ve probably dropped 35 to 50 per cent across western 
Canada. You asked, how many farmers did it happen to? It 
happened to them all. It happened to everybody. You asked me, 
are those now in the position where they’re going to be renting 
more or they’re going to be leasing back or that they’re going to 
restructure their loans? Many farmers have done that, and 
they’ve done it across North America. It’s happened in every 
community. 
 
Now that’s the reason, obviously, that we have restructured 
loans, restructured the production loan and provided deficiency 
payments and cash and protected them against high interest 
rates. That’s precisely why, because it happened to everybody. 
 
I remember you and I having discussions whether you should 
make it universal or not. It’s happened to every farm family. 
That’s why our programs go out to every farm family. It’s 
across the board. We’ve all lost that equity, and we have to 
make sure that we work to whatever we can to help get it back, 
earn it back, restructure, lease, rent, redo, go to the counselling 
people, go to others who would back us up in terms of rewriting 
a loan, operating loan  all those provisions and more. That’s 
what we’re prepared to do. And we’ve met with people across 
the province, we listened to the SARM and the wheat pool 
when they recommended that we extend our loans out to 
everybody over 10 years and save the payments of over $200 
million this year alone. So it’s universal across North America, 
clearly it is, and this province and the federal government 
combined has provided more money and more assistance than 
ever before. 
 
You may say it’s not enough, but I would say to the hon. 
member, we’ll provide as much money as we can, with as many 
programs as possible, and if he has suggestions with respect to 
programs, I would certainly entertain them if you want to offer 
ideas. We get them from farmers, we get them from other 
people. We’d be more than happy to look at all kinds of things 
to help home owners, rural and urban; farmers, rural and urban; 
small business. 
 
I mean, one of the things that we can do in rural Saskatchewan 
is provide off-farm opportunities, and we have in communities. 
It’s very important, particularly in the oil patch. By reducing the 
business tax by as much as 50 per cent, that is very important to 
small business. People in rural areas work in small business and 
on farms. That’s extremely important. The tax break that’s 
going to take place July 1 for everybody in the province  99 
per cent of them  is going to be very important. 
 
To be able to back up the federal government and said, rewrite 
this or write off much of the loans at FCC (Farm Credit 
Corporation), write them off, just get rid of them. They’ve done 
that. Raise the price of wheat; they’ve done that. Provide 
deficiency payments; that helps a great deal. 
 
All that information and all that access and all those funds 
applies to everybody so that, indeed, we can recognize that the 
equity decline in this circumstance applied to everybody, and 
we should be aware of that, Mr. Chairman. 
 

Mr. Koskie:  He must have forgot the question, obviously. It 
was very, very specific and the Premier obviously has no facts 
and probably no concern. 
 
So I ask you, could you provide this information, and would 
you ask your number of officials that you have with you if you 
don’t know the answers: can you indicate the number of titles 
that have been . . . of land that have been transferred from the 
ACS, from Farm Credit Corporation, or to ACS and to Farm 
Credit corporation and to banks and credit unions in the last two 
years from farmers? How many titles of land, the value, the 
amount of land in each case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Well we’ll have to ask and see if we can 
get that from ACS, from other people that are collating those 
kinds of statistics. And if I can get them, then I can forward to 
the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Koskie:  I thank you for making the attempt. But what 
we’re trying to get at, Mr. Premier, here today, is the 
seriousness of what is happening in respect to rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And part of it, I would have thought that you would have done 
an analysis of how much land has been lost, how many titles to 
land, to the ACS and to Farm Credit Corporation, to banks and 
other financial institutions, because that indicates clearly  
clearly, clearly  the magnitude of the problem. And that’s 
straightforward, very specific. And I’ll tell you, you don’t ever 
have a handle on it. You can’t even indicate what is happening 
out there. 
 
I want to ask you  you indicated that the best statistics that 
you have is 63,431 in ’86, number of farmers in Saskatchewan. 
I’d like to ask you  and assuming . . . I think we have to 
assume that there are less farmers today than there was in 1986, 
because certainly farmers are losing their land. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Premier, could you indicate out of that, using 
this 1986 statistic, 63,431 farms, can you indicate the number of 
farmers that are insolvent out of that number? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  You’d have to describe at what level you 
would call insolvent  their asset value versus their liabilities, 
at what point. And then we would have to go to FCC, the banks, 
the credit unions, the agricultural credit corporation and others, 
and ask them for various kinds of ratios. 
 
I mean, you’re asking for all the various combinations of debt 
to equity that are out there on 60-some thousand farmers. Now 
that’s a . . . I would think that you’d understand that’s an 
impossible situation, to try to pull all that together. 
 
How much is the debt increased? On average, over a period of 
time, we can probably come up with an estimate of that. We can 
come up with the fact that there are several billion dollars in 
debt and we can do that. We can have it on an average basis that 
we can give you per farmer across Saskatchewan, indeed across 
the prairie province. And it’s increased. 
 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

911 
 

The debt/equity ratio has gotten worse as a result of $2 wheat 
and high interest rates, there’s no question about it. But the 
specific information that you’re asking is virtually impossible to 
give on an individual basis. We can give you averages, and 
that’s what we will try to do. 
 
Mr. Koskie:  Mr. Premier, you commissioned a very 
expensive road show that went around Saskatchewan dealing 
with the farm problem. And in that report, if you have read it, 
they say that there are 11 per cent of the farmers are insolvent. 
And you didn’t know that, or do you not accept their definition 
of insolvency, of the report that was prepared by your own 
members? 
 
I ask you: do you accept that proposal which says, and I’m 
going to read it here to you so that you have at least some 
information: 
 

Many farmers leaving the industry will be forced out. The 
Farm Credit Corporation estimates 11 per cent of 
Saskatchewan farmers are insolvent, while an additional 
28 per cent are having considerable cash flow difficulty. 

 
This is the report, this is the facts that was accepted by your 
study group, your MLA, your road show. And so what I am 
saying to you, Mr. Premier, if you accept that and if they accept 
that proposition, and if they accept that definition of insolvency 
and put it into the report as part of what farmers are to read, and 
the agricultural community, then what you are saying, Mr. 
Premier, that there’s between 6,300 to 6,400 farmers out there 
today that are insolvent. Would you agree with that? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, the hon. member just read 
into the record that this was one financial institution’s estimate 
of what the number might be in terms of insolvency, and we 
reported it. That’s what the committee was to do, was report its 
findings. 
 
The FCC says an estimate of approximately 11 per cent, given 
their definition of insolvency and given their ability to go 
examine the agricultural market out there. And you’re asking 
me for another estimate. Do you want the banks’ estimate; do 
you want the federal government’s estimate? I you want to 
extrapolate, taking their estimate and their definition of 
insolvency and say that if there’s 10 or 11 per cent and there’s 
63,000 farmers, then there’s going to be over 6,000 farmers that 
are in insolvent position, based on their definition of what that 
is. 
 
Now you can rewrite the definition; is it 90-10, is it 30-70, is it 
nothing at all in terms of equity and  all debt? You can write 
that definition any way you like, and you can carve it out any 
way you like. We’re aware of the fact that farmers needed 
deficiency payments, that farmers needed interest rate 
protection, and they needed cash advances, and they’ve needed 
a whole combination of programs that amount to several billion 
dollars  not millions, but billions. That’s why we’re there. 
 
You failed to recognize that you are the reason that they’re in 
trouble, and that’s what I have to keep reminding you. When 
interest rates were 20 per cent,  

where were you? You got them into trouble and you’re asking 
me to bail them out. you wouldn’t respond, and they’ll not 
forget that. They didn’t in Manitoba and they didn’t here and 
they won’t in Albert and they won’t across the country, because 
talk is cheap. We put billions on the table, and you didn’t when 
you had a chance. 
 
So I will not stand here and not go back to what the cause of the 
problem is. The cause of the problem is: when they needed 
help, you weren’t there; and secondly, it’s an international 
problem when we’ve got subsidies coming out of Europe and 
the United States that wreck our prices. 
 
So those two things, interest rates and low prices, are the reason 
we’re providing protection against high interest rates and cash, 
and we will continue to do that. And you’re saying, well is it 11 
per cent or is it 12 per cent or is it 2 per cent or is it 6 per cent? 
So you won’t get into what the cause is. You didn’t. You never 
have in this legislature. You’ve never got into the cause. 
You’ve always just said, what are you doing? 
 
Well I’m saying, I’ve put up more money, more cash, than you 
ever did. And much of the reason for the problem is when there 
was 20 per cent interest rates, you didn’t respond. And home 
owners know that as well. 
 
So we did and we’ll be glad to respond some more. And it 
doesn’t make much difference whether it’s 6 per cent or 12 per 
cent or 2 per cent. You can play with those numbers all you 
like. The key that the farmer wants to know: who’s doing 
something about it, who’s putting cash in my pocket, who’s 
defending me against high interest rates, and who’s out there 
trying to get the United States and the Europeans to back off the 
unfair subsidies. And clearly, across Canada, rural people know 
that it isn’t the NDP, because they didn’t do it when they had 
the chance, and even when their research said so, your research 
 and you were probably a cabinet minister in 1974  your 
research said you should go out there and fix, but today you 
deny that. 
 
So, I mean, your record speaks for itself and ours does. And we 
will continue to back up the farmer and defend him every way 
we can and I would be glad to have your suggestions. What are 
your ideas? In terms of the kinds of things that we could do to 
help farmers survive in Saskatchewan and indeed across 
Canada. If you’ve got some good ideas, bring them forward. 
We haven’t heard any from the NDP. No new ideas. No new 
ideas. So if you’ve got some, let’s hear the ideas. We won’t 
have to argue over whether it’s 10 or 11 per cent, what’s the 
ideas to provide some help to farmers that are new, other than 
land bank? And I cannot accept land bank, and I won’t, and I’ll 
give you that right off the top. You did, I wouldn’t. But, other 
than that, if you’ve got some ideas I’d be glad to look at them. 
 
Mr. Koskie:  Well, basically, Mr. Premier, you should be 
ashamed of yourself with the lack of detail of the analysis of the 
problem, because it is a serious problem, Mr. Premier, and it’s 
. . . and you can’t get away with your rhetoric. 
 
I’ll tell you it’s a very, very serious problem because you don’t 
even have a definition nor an analysis of the  
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

912 
 

problem and you’ve admitted that here today. You said you 
don’t know. But Farm Credit Corporation says 11 per cent of 
the farmers are insolvent. And you have to admit that’s 63 to 
6,400 farmers across this province. And you’re saying your 
programs are working wonderfully. That’s what you’re saying 
 6,300 farmers, 6,400 farmers insolvent. And you sit there 
and say, we have done all we can. We are fighting for the 
farmers. 
 
This report goes on, Mr. Premier, to say that 28 per cent, in this 
report of your road show, 28 per cent are having very serious 
cash flow problems. Do you realize the magnitude accepting 
those figures, Mr. Premier? That means that 25,000 farmers out 
o your 63 or 62,000 farmers are in very serious problems. 
That’s how well your agricultural policies have worked  40 
per cent. And he stand up in this legislature with no analysis, 
with no . . . and he goes out and sends out a road show and you 
should be embarrassed with the recommendations of your own 
party members. 
 
I want to say that here in this report  I can’t use the Farm 
Credit Corporation figures because you don’t agree with them 
or you haven’t seen them  in your own report here of your 
own members, it goes on to say: 
 

High equity farmers will probably survive the current 
period of low market returns and declining asset values. 
However, the one-third of the farmers currently holding 
three-quarters of the debt may not have the resources to 
continue farming. 

 
One-third of the farmers of Saskatchewan, in their own report, 
says that they will not be farming. That’s what it says. 
 
And you stand in here and disgrace the farmers of 
Saskatchewan with your tirades. This is a serious problem and I 
came into this House to be serious, with the farmers’ lives at 
stake. 
 
Have you read the Star-Phoenix with the family with four little 
children having lost 1,400 acres of land. You know what, just 
imagine . . . and this Premier sits in here and tries to make light 
of the magnitude of the problem. Forty per cent of all the 
farmers are in serious trouble, and he stands here, he has no 
analysis of the problem, and he comes in here with not one 
single representation to solve the problem  not one. 
 
His friend Brian was out here. Did he speak to Brian to find out 
whether the federal government would join in to solve this 
debt? Not a word, not a single word, because they only come to 
the farmers’ rescue and throw out money at the farmers during 
the period when they’re desperate in the electoral fight. That’s 
when they may throw it out. 
 
But I want to ask you, Mr. Premier: in light of the fact that your 
own report says that 33 per cent, 33 per cent of the farmers of 
Saskatchewan are about to lose their land  and you sit in this 
legislature with your uncaring group of so-called rural members 
and make lightly of it. And I want to ask you, Mr. Premier  if 
you take a look at the farm debt in Saskatchewan in 1986, you 
find that chartered  

banks have about 1.6 billion, the federal government have 1.5 
billion, the provincial government has 1.5 billion, the credit 
union .9, others .4 billion. If you take a look at that debt, 1.5 
billion with the federal government in 1986 and with the 
provincial government, 1.5 billion  $6 billion of debt at the 
end of 1986. 
 
And I’ll tell you, I’ll tell you, you helped to precipitate it, too. 
You did, and the farmers know it. And you know what your 
solution was? You know what your solution is? Your only 
recommendation in here of substance is equity financing, which 
the farmers rejected, Mr. Premier. You couldn’t sell it. And 
what you’re trying to do is to set it up on an experimental basis. 
 
But you have plans, yes. It’s in the clippings. It indicates that 
what you want is outside, outside money. Hong Kong is ready, 
says one of your Tory associates. Oh, yes, there’s 50 to $100 
million. Hong Kong would come in and help out those farmers 
 turn them into tenants. That’s your policy. That’s what 
you’ve set up  equity financing. 
 
Forty per cent of the farmers with their families and children  
and you stand here and pretend to be standing up for families. 
Do you realize, Mr. Premier, the agony the farm crisis is 
causing? Are you aware of the farm crisis? And you sit in this 
legislature and make light of the subject matter. That’s what 
you do; you make light, laugh at the situation because when you 
were an economics professor, Mr. Premier, you know what you 
said, you said the consumer couldn’t afford to keep 80 per cent 
of those non-productive farmers on the land. That was your plan 
and your realization is going to come true because you’re going 
to set up equity financing and outside interests and going to be 
owning the land, not the farmers and their families. 
 
And I say, Mr. Premier, you can laugh all you want, but there is 
a crisis out there and it’s within . . . the debt structure is within 
the hands of the federal government and the provincial 
government. Because if you look at it, half of the debt is held by 
either the provincial or federal government. And you mean to 
say that you can’t get the Prime Minister who you call your 
buddy, and you think that you and the federal government 
cannot go together and in fact restructure that debt. Of course 
you could, but you don’t intend to; you don’t intend to. 
 
Mr. Premier, going into the election in 1986, you knew that 
there was a problem with young farmers who had substantial 
debt. You knew that, but you didn’t go and address it as any 
administrative Premier looking at the overall problems that 
were in fact developing in Saskatchewan. You didn’t do that. 
You said, I’ve got to buy an election. Buy an election, I said. 
And he said, I’ll give a $25 production loan to them whether 
they need it or not. That’ll buy me an election. Well it did. But 
I’ll tell you it bought you a crisis, too. It bought you the biggest 
crisis that Saskatchewan has known since the last depression. 
That’s what it did. You bought an election, giving $25 to every 
farmer whether they had no debt and no financial problem  
that’s what you did. Even in spite of the fact that you as 
Minister of Agriculture should have known that on the horizon 
what was happening is that many young farmers had gone into 
farming and needed assistance  debt restructuring. And I’ll 
tell you, with that  
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

913 
 

$1 billion, you could have done an amazing job if you wanted 
to deal with the problem. 
 
But you weren’t interested, Mr. Premier. You were interested in 
buying votes, and you bought an election. But you bought on 
your hands also the resentment of farmers across this province. 
And I’ll tell you the problem, the magnitude . . . which you’ve 
said yourself, and your Finance minister: I can’t deal with it any 
more. You say, I’m going to open the treasury; Finance minister 
says, treasury’s empty. Who are we to believe? 
 
I ask you specifically, Mr. Premier: in view of the fact that $1.5 
billion of the debt is held by this province and in view of the 
fact that $1.5 billion is held by the federal government . . . I 
submit to you that if you wanted to solve the problem, there’s 
an easy way. You get together with the federal government and 
you look at the crisis, and what you do is restructure the debt so 
that the young farmers have an opportunity in order to survive. 
 
And so I ask you, Mr. Premier: do you have any proposals to 
the 40 per cent of the farmers in Saskatchewan in desperate 
problem  40 per cent  40 per cent of the farmers in 
Saskatchewan who are about to lose their land. And they start 
yelling across, and he’s never . . . 
 
(1630) 
 
An Hon. Member:  We want to know if you have any 
proposals. 
 
Mr. Koskie:  Yes, yes, but I ask the premier, I ask the 
Premier: have you any proposal? Have you discussed this with 
the federal government? Can you announce whether or not there 
is going to be a restructuring of debt, or is equity financing the 
solution that you see for saving agriculture in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine:  Mr. Chairman, I can . . . I find it 
interesting that it’s the  NDP who has counted the numbers 
that they estimate will be insolvent, and it’s the NDP layers 
who are foreclosing on them. Now if it’s true, if he know that 
there’s 6,000 farmers that are in trouble, and he’s a lawyer and 
the leader’s a lawyer, they know that they can make up to a 
thousand dollars in a foreclosure  that’s $6 million in cash by 
these people who are making a living foreclosing on farmers. 
 
Now I find it really interesting that the member from Quill is a 
lawyer; the leader of the NDP, the member form Riversdale, is 
a lawyer; the member from Saskatoon West is a lawyer. And 
they are putting together . . . they’re putting together the 
estimate of the number of foreclosure. 
 
And obviously, as we’ve read here in the legislature, they make 
a living foreclosing. They go out there on behalf of banks and 
they foreclose on farmers. So if you take 6,000 farmers times a 
thousand dollars apiece, you could make up to $6 million 
foreclosing on farmers. And they’ve got it down to a science. 
 
I think it’s pathetic, Mr. Chairman. I mean, they seem to  

rub their hands and feel happier the higher the number they can 
get because they’ve got their law firms foreclosing on them. 
 
Well I don’t think they should gloat when farmers are in 
trouble. I don’t think that they should take people that have had 
all kinds of family pressure and financial pressure and suffered 
the consequences of going through foreclosure, and then they 
add to it by going out there on behalf of the bank and 
foreclosing on farmers, and making money doing it. 
 
I can only say, Mr. Chairman, if they’ve got the numbers down 
of how many people that that lawyer can foreclose on and this 
law firm . . . because the Leader of the Opposition has a nice 
little law firm that is now on the record and in public all over 
Saskatoon that he foreclosed on farmers and home owner. I 
mean, they must sit back and just wait or people to have 
difficulties, and then they can go out a make a living 
foreclosing on them. 
 
You’ve got to go back and ask yourself  and I mention this to 
the member from Quill again  he never responds to why 
people are in this trouble; he never admits to the problem. 
When they were 20 per cent, I’d like to know, did he or any 
member of his caucus have a contract with the banks or 
financial institutions when interest rates were 20 per cent and 
they were government? 
 
They refused to help them. Did they have a contract with the 
banks at that time? Did they have a contract? Is that the reason 
they said, oh no, I’m not going to help; it’s an international 
problem, and at the same time they knew that they could make 
money foreclosing on farmers? 
 
Because now it’s evident. It’s out in the public, and people have 
written letters to the newspapers in Saskatoon and said, is it true 
that the NDP have foreclosed on home owners and farmers? 
How many have they foreclosed on? How much money did the 
member from Riversdale make foreclosing on farmers? What 
other law firms that are NDP foreclose on farmers? Okay. 
 
I notice that the NDP leader’s law firm is now unionized, Mr. 
Chairman, that a brand-new union in the NDP office of . . . the 
Leader of the Opposition has a law firm, and he’s got a 
brand-new union in there. Is this so that they can collectively 
bargain into the foreclosures of home owners and farmers? 
 
I’ll tell you, farmers are going to look pretty closely at that new 
unionized law firm. The NDP leader has now a unionized law 
firm. It is involved on behalf of the banks foreclosing on 
farmers. I’ll tell you what they’ll do. They’ll put the NDP 
together with union leaders and banks and say: now we see the 
truth in Saskatoon. The NDP leader, union leaders  because 
he’s unionized the law firm  and the banks working hand in 
hand, foreclosing on farmers and foreclosing on home owners. 
It would make any member opposite pale to even think about it. 
You should be ashamed of yourself. 
 
Can you imagine that? It’s the only unionized law firm in the 
province. It’s the only one run by a socialist, that we know, that 
forecloses on farmers on behalf of the banks.  
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

914 
 

And you talk to me about farmers. They’re in trouble today, 
because when interest rates were 20 per cent, the NDP wouldn’t 
do a thing for them. They’re in trouble today, Mr. Chairman, 
because there was no help. 
 
Do you know what happened? The NDP law firms would work 
for the government of the day to nationalize the farms, and 
they’d get a little money for that. They bought a million acres 
for land bank. They’d go to NDP law firms, and they’d go out 
there and say, would you help me get this farm on behalf of the 
government? Got a million acres of land in government  in 
government, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Then they said, this is the solution . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Mr. Chairman, they don’t like to hear the facts, but the 
people of Saskatoon, the people of Saskatchewan and the 
people of Regina have learned about the tricks of the NDP. 
They’ve learned about them now  union leaders, together 
with an NDP leader and the law firm, together working with the 
banks, making a living foreclosing on home owners and farmers 
in the province of Saskatchewan and, indeed, Mr. Chairman, in 
the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Now you ask yourself why, why would people in Regina or 
Saskatoon, or farmers, or other, have confidence in an NDP 
premier if you’re a home owner or a farmer? How could you 
have confidence? Here’s a man who has a law firm that works 
with the bank and the unions to go foreclose on home owners 
and farmers. That’s what he does. And he’s standing up saying: 
vote for me; I’ll be good for rural Saskatchewan; I’ll be good 
for all these people. 
 
They don’t like to hear this. They don’t like to hear this. They 
say, oh, for Heaven’s sakes, the NDP are going to win Eastview 
and the NDP are going to win Regina, and it’ll vindicate them 
all if it happens. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan won’t be fooled, Mr. Chairman; 
they know. They know. You can ask for all the by-elections you 
like and all the vindication, but if it’s the NDP law firms, NDP 
law firms, and the member from Riversdale’s law firm, and the 
Quill Lakes’s, and others who have law firms, who are now 
saying, we will work with the banks  and they’ve never 
responded. 
 
I ask the member opposite from the Quills: would he at least tell 
us how many people his law operation has foreclosed on? the 
farmers would like to know that. That’s a legitimate farm 
question, an agriculture question. How many people has this 
unionized law firm out of Saskatoon, run by the NDP on behalf 
of the bank, how many people have you foreclosed on? You’ve 
go the numbers all right. You sit there with 6,000 or 20,000  
for all we know it might be half the farmers that are in some 
trouble  and you’re sitting there rubbing your hands: I’ll bet, 
on behalf of the bank, I can foreclose on those people. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I want the public to know, the public to 
know that it’s the NDP law firm, the NDP leader, who is 
making money foreclosing on home owners and farmers. And, 
Mr. Chairman, I will not back away. I’m going to  

continue to tell the public: we’ll put money up with the federal 
government; we’ll put dollars up with the federal government; 
we’ll provide deficiency payments; we’ll provide cash 
advances; we’ll provide programs  natural gas, water, 
irrigation; we will provide individual line service; we’ll help 
build communities, build agriculture colleges. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I have to say to the people of Saskatoon and 
the people of Regina, who the NDP’s so excited they’re for 
voting for them: make sure at least before you cast your ballot 
 before you cast your ballot, ask yourself, is it right, is it right 
for the NDP leader’s law firm to foreclose on home owners on 
behalf of the bank, is it right for the NDP leader’s law firm to 
foreclose on farmers when they are going broke. Is that what a 
socialist does? Is it right? Ask yourself that. You can vote NDP 
if you like, but you ask: is that what good socialists do; is that 
what the premier-elect would do if he was elected? 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I’ll tell you, I’ll tell you, I look at the 
member opposite and I look at the colour in their faces when 
you mention that their leader has got a deal with the bank, and 
he’s unionized his law firm, and you’ve got union leader, a 
bank and an NDP leader all wrapped up in one, and they are 
saying, well, I can hardly wait until farmers and home owners 
get into trouble because I can foreclose on them in Eastview, I 
can foreclose on them in Elphinstone, I can foreclose on them 
in Carrot River. They can foreclose on them in Albertville, as 
we’ve read the letters today. 
 
The NDP should be ashamed of themselves. They got caught 
with dirty tricks in Elphinstone  their president did; they got 
caught with their hands in the cookie jar, foreclosing on people 
on behalf of banks; they’ve been caught pulling all kinds of 
things and the people are saying, I want to know how many 
farmers  just tell us the truth, just tell us the truth  how 
many farmers has an NDP law firm foreclosed on? 
 
Well listen to them holler, Mr. Chairman, listen to them holler. 
They don’t like to hear it. I’m not going to stop. I’m not going 
to stop; I’m going to remind the public day after day after day 
after day. I’m going to remind the public that the NDP leader 
has foreclosed on farmers and home owners day after day in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and I’m going to continue to remind 
them. When the former minister stood up and says, we can’t 
give them a dime when interest rates are 20 per cent, and then 
he can go out and make a living foreclosing on them, it’s a 
shame. 
 
Mr. Chairman, it’s absolutely a shame, and I’m going to 
continue to remind the public that if that’s the principles, if 
those are the principles of the people that are in the NDP and 
that leadership, that would work with the union and the bank 
together to foreclose on home owners and farmers, then the 
people of Saskatchewan should at least know the truth as they 
cast their ballot. Mr. Chairman, they should at least know the 
truth. 
 
I ask the hon. member just tell the public before they vote, how 
many people the law firm of the man from Riversdale, how 
many people has he foreclosed on, how many people has that 
law firm foreclosed on on behalf of  
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

915 
 

that bank? Tell us that. How many people in Saskatoon, how 
many farmers? And if you won’t tell us that, then at least we’ll 
know that you’re hiding; you’re ashamed of it as you should be. 
 
We defend home owners against high interest rates. We defend 
farmers against high interest rates. We’ll continue to do that, 
Mr. Chairman, and we are not going to back away from 
somebody standing up and saying, well I know the numbers. I 
know now why he knows the numbers; he can add them up in 
his own law firm and say, if I can foreclose on them, I know 
how much money that I can make. I think it’s pathetic, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
That member  that member could tell us how many he’s 
foreclosed on, or his NDP friends have foreclosed on. I wish he 
would come clean to the public and tell them about NDP policy 
in Manitoba, in Saskatchewan, Alberta, and across the country. 
You just tell us how the union leader and the bank and the NDP 
leader go hand in hand and beat on farmers and beat on home 
owners. You tell us how they do that, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll be 
glad to respond in detail to the billions of dollars we provide to 
home owners and farmers in this province, because we stand for 
people and families and decency and fairness, not that kind of 
monkey business as those guys got caught in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie:  I asked the Premier whether he had an 
opportunity when the Prime Minister was down, whether or not 
he had an opportunity, in light of the magnitude of the problem 
here in Saskatchewan, in light of the number of farmers that are 
in serious financial problems  in his own report, in his own 
report it says 33 per cent of the farmers will not be able to 
survive, and this Premier absolutely, totally refused to address 
the question. 
 
Obviously he’s prepared to play politics with his friend, Brian. 
There’s a federal election coming along, and maybe they’ll try 
buying another election, but I’ll tell you they are not concerned 
with the welfare of the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
I will tell you, there’s a new reality in Saskatchewan today. 
Right here, today, can you feature the Premier standing up, with 
the magnitude of the crisis, and farm families in serious 
financial problems, listening to this tirade of nonsense that was 
put forward here this afternoon. Just imagine. Just imagine 
farmers in difficulty with little children, about to lose their 
farm, their home, their livelihood, their way of life. And this 
Premier stands here with a tirade of absolute garbage  no 
recognition, no sorrow. Here we came here today to discuss in a 
very serious manner, Mr. Chairman, the magnitude of the 
problem and how we can collectively address it. And I’ll tell 
you, I am concerned about the farm crisis, the debt crisis. 
 
And I asked you, I asked you, Mr. Premier, whether you had 
any solutions. Oh, we will look after it. But your Finance 
minister says, the treasury is broke. 
 
An Hon. Member:  What’s your solution? 
 

(1645) 
 
Mr. Koskie:  Ah, now, the one without the hair that needs 
the hair transplant, the member from Kelvington-Wadena, is 
starting to hurt a little. So he asked the Premier whether he 
should start to heckle, and the Premier said, yeah, protect me, 
because I’m getting beat up  I’m getting beat up on facts. 
That’s exactly what happened in this Chamber this afternoon. 
The Premier gave him the nod to send one of the goon squad to 
his defence. Well isn’t that nice. 
 
Well let me continue to talk about the farm crisis. I’m going to 
say to you here, we had choices in this last budget, I’ll tell you. 
We had a choice of protecting the farmer and the farm families, 
or whether we’re going to give further benefits to the resource 
companies. And what was the option that the Premier chose? 
Resource companies. He cut the resource royalty again, which 
will cost 30 to $35 million, into the pockets of the resource 
companies. That’s what he did. 
 
He needed . . . he said, I’ll help farmer, yet he cut his budget by 
$8 million. And what did he do with the corporate income tax? 
He said, we’ve got to help the corporations, so he cut the tax 
from 17 to 15 per cent and he put that $8 million . . . he took the 
$8 million out of agriculture and put it into the hands of the 
corporations. That’s exactly the same amount of money  $8 
million he took from the farmers and the farm budget, and he 
put it into the pockets of the corporations. That’s what he did. 
 
Oh, and then he had an opportunity when they . . . and he says, 
oh, we’ve had tough times, you know; the oil prices are only 
$10. Well where are you there? Why don’t you ask your 
Minister of Energy? It’s 17, $18, and has been for a year. You 
could be getting revenue to help the farmers if you had them as 
friends instead of the oil companies, the multinational 
corporations. 
 
You could afford to give a pulp mill away to Weyerhaeuser of 
Tacoma, Washington. And you know what he said to the people 
of Saskatchewan? This is how you can believe this Premier. He 
said, we’re going to sell this for $248 million. And all his press 
releases said $248 million. But you know what we find out? 
They cut another $12 million off the purchase price; $12 
million they gave to Weyerhaeuser. Could have helped the 
farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Add it up. Add up some of the revenues that we could have had 
in this province in order to attack the magnitude of debt that we 
have. We could have had $1.7 billion from the oil company if 
we had kept a reasonable resource royalty policy. One point 
seven billion dollars they gave away. Corporate income tax, 
another $8 million this last budget. Resource royalty reduction, 
again another 30 to $35 million that is cut. 
 
There is the solution, if we wanted to have a solution. But he 
opted for his corporate friends. That’s what he said. and I guess 
I’ve got to address to some extent the Premier’s morality, 
because all I can say, Mr. Premier, you used to consistently 
refer to “Give her snoose, Bruce.” And all I can say is that 
yesterday in the legislature we discovered who Bruce was. 
 
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

916 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
An Hon. Member:  Kickback. 
 
Mr. Koskie:  Yes, kickback. 
 
This government, under your premiership, has been one of the 
most incompetent, the most wasteful government that ever 
dawned in the history of Canada. Do you realize that you took a 
province with $140 million of surplus, 11 balanced budgets and 
do you know what you have done? You’ve solved no problems 
on a long-term basis; all you did is pour money out for electoral 
gains. That’s what you did. 
 
And now today what we have, not only are the farmers in deep 
trouble, not only are small-business men increasingly in 
difficulty  today we have the largest per capita debt in all of 
Canada. That is the management of this Premier here. 
 
And he stand here and he say, oh, we are going to protect the 
farmers; we will open the treasury. And what he did is open the 
treasury to the corporate friends of the Tory party  the 
corporate tax, the resource royalty decrease. And what did he do 
to ordinary people across this province that he’s talking about 
and pleading that they consider who they should vote for? Well 
I’ll challenge the voters who are voting nest Wednesday. I’ll tell 
you to compare  compare how you had it under the former 
premier and how you have it today under this Premier. 
 
You ask whether your tax load is equivalent. Today we have the 
highest per capita . . . we have the highest personal income in 
all of Canada. That’s where we’re at. And I’ll tell you, we had 
one of the lowest per capita personal income tax under the 
previous New Democratic government. And they have laid a 
tax burden on the people of this province, the like of which has 
never been seen before. 
 
And we stand here today seriously wanting some of the 
specifics, some of the details, some of the analysis of the 
problem, and what do we get? We get a Premier that is ranting 
and raving, won’t even sit down and discuss in his estimates  
estimates are expenditures and proposals, that’s what it is. 
 
And did you hear one, Mr. Chairman, one proposal for the 
farmers in your riding? I didn’t. And I’ll tell you, the farmers of 
Quill Lakes didn’t hear it. And I’ll tell you well, I’ll be pleased 
to take the transcript of my questions and your answers and 
deliver it to the farmers in Quill Lakes. I’ll be pleased to do 
that. 
 
I want to go on to say, Mr. Chairman, as I have indicated 
before, this is not a time for lashing out and acting political. 
This is a major concern for both political parties  all political 
parties. It’s concern of every citizen in Saskatchewan, and it 
takes serious addressing of this problem. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Premier, that I believe in a rural way of life. I 
think it’s a special way of life, living on the farm. 
 

I think it’s a beautiful way of having your children, raising them 
in rural Saskatchewan. And right today I see before my eyes, as 
a result of the policies of this government, I see before my eyes, 
that 40  40 per cent in their own report, 33 per cent they say 
will not survive. One-third of our farmers gone, a way of life 
destroyed, and this Premier stands up with the most foolish 
dissertation, an insult to the legislature, an insult to the people 
of Saskatchewan in addressing the problem of the greatest 
magnitude since the great depression. That’s what we have, and 
I say it’s a pathetic performance, Mr. Premier. I’m sorry for you 
that you have lost all touch, that your political manoeuvring has 
made it impossible now for you to solve the problem. But it 
think you should be honest at least with the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think that, you know, rather than having empty office 
space down at the Ramada Renaissance, that it would be much 
nicer to help some farm families. That’s what I say. Not empty 
rooms in the Renaissance hotel; that’s not what we need, Mr. 
Premier. What we need is some concrete, civilized, intelligent 
discussion of it, all of us working together to solve the crisis. 
That’s what we want. We don’t’ want irrationality. we’re sick 
and tired of your rhetoric. What we want to do is to discuss on 
an intelligent basis. I don’t think you should stand in this 
legislature and disgrace the position of Premier of this province. 
That’s what you have done, and I think you should be ashamed 
of yourself, Mr. Premier. 
 
And I want to go on just to discuss a little further what they 
propose for the people of Saskatchewan in resolving the debt 
crisis. He lashes out at the land bank and today, I’ll tell you the 
Farm Credit Corporation . . . more farmers are farming land 
owned by the Farm Credit Corporation, are farming land with 
no title owned by banks, are farming land owned the ACS. This 
is what is happening. 
 
And he says, we’re going to have more tenants. We’ll turn this 
into the Philippines. We’ll have all of the land owned by some 
Hong Kong that Premier Vander Zalm is talking to. He might 
bail you out. He’s a billionaire  that’s the boys you ride with. 
 
But I’ll tell you, rural Saskatchewan has more depth and more 
heart, and they won’t be destroyed by you and your policies. I’ll 
tell you, the farmers of Saskatchewan may have voted you in, 
but I predict the farmers of Saskatchewan will also see your 
demise . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie:  . . . because the farmers of Saskatchewan, I’ll 
tell you, from ’44 to ’64 supported the CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation), and they supported the NDP party 
from 1971 until 1982. You don’t have much of a record or a 
history in this province, you know, but we have. And as one 
farmer said to me, and another business man said, we have no 
problem with coming back to the new Democratic Party 
because throughout the years and the history of how we’ve 
dealt with people, he said there has been a bond of trust that has 
been developed. 
 
And I’ll tell you, that’s what they’re looking for today is  
  



 
April 28, 1988 

 

917 
 

decency and a careful analysis of the problem, a co-operation of 
governments to solve this crisis, which is brought on not by 
their efforts because all of us will agree that the farmers of 
Saskatchewan are excellent farmers. 
 
And as the wheat pool official said, we have to get to the 
bottom of this; we have to address the debt problem. And they 
saw this here report here and you know what he president of the 
wheat pool said? Disappointing. Equity financing is not what 
the farmer want; equity financing  it turns farmers into 
tenants, and farmers of Saskatchewan will not be denied their 
right to own land. And I grant them that. 
 
Mr. Premier, I am glad we had this opportunity and I hope that 
a lot of people in Saskatchewan watched your performance this 
afternoon, because I’ll tell you you had no message but garbage 
to the people of Saskatchewan. That’s what you had. And when 
you talk about foreclosures, and you raised it in urban 
Saskatchewan, I ask you . . . you won’t be feeling quite so 
brave. 
 
That’s why you had your agricultural estimates now before the 
by-elections so that we wouldn’t have a little bit more 
ammunition. That’s why you moved them up into here, because 
you’re cowardly. You wouldn’t wait till the people of 
Saskatchewan spoke. He raised the issue of the two 
by-elections. He raised the issues of foreclosures in the two 
ridings Elphinstone and Eastview and, Mr. Chairman, you heard 
it. 
 
And so I want to comment on it, Mr. Chairman. And I say to the 
people of Eastview and Elphinstone: can you trust what the 
Premier says? He said we’re going to improve health care and 
he guaranteed that. And he improved it all right. Yes, he 
improved it. He wiped out hard-pressed farmers in rural 
Saskatchewan, the best dental program in North America. 
That’s what he did for the hard-pressed farmers. He took away 
the best program that they had in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And across Saskatchewan what else did he do? These are 
hare-pressed times in rural Saskatchewan, and he says that for 
the seniors and the elderly people and the families with 
problems, with sick children, oh, he says, I’ll give it to the oil 
companies, 30 million bucks for resource royalty cut, but I’ll 
charge the people of Saskatchewan. In rural Saskatchewan he 
says, I’ll charge them for their dental program, wipe it out, and 
I’ll charge them for the drug program. Boy, is that fighting for 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And I guess that’s why you had to stand up here in this 
legislature this afternoon. That’s why you had to stand up here 
in this legislature because you didn’t have anything concrete to 
say  absolutely nothing to say, Mr. Premier. And we are 
disappointed, because we came here to this legislature not to 
call names, not to get into the gutter, because if you want to get 
into the gutter, we can do that. But that’s what you did this 
afternoon. 
 
You wouldn’t talk about the crisis and how it’s going to be 
solved. And everybody that is sitting here in this legislature 
knows that you will not address the problem. But what you 
want to do is to get into the gutter and  

distract from the problem which you created. 
 
Mr. Premier, it’s very disappointing. Never before have we had 
. . . 
 
Mr. Chairman:  Order, order. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


