


















































June 23, 1988 Hansard Morning


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 23, 1988 
 

2425 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
 Standing Committee on Non-Controversial Bills 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
chairperson of the Standing Committee on Non-Controversial 
Bills, I present the sixth report of the said committee which is as 
follows: 
 

Bill No. 19 — An Act to amend The Statute Law 
 
Ms. Smart: — I wish to report Bill No. 19, An Act to amend The 
Statute Law, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in Committee of the Whole of the said Bill be 
waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move the said Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 63 — An Act to amend The Student Assistance and 
Student Aid Fund Act, 1985 

 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to report Bill No. 63, An Act 
to amend The Student Assistance and Student Aid Fund Act of 
1985, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in Committee of the Whole of the said Bill be 
waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Bill No. 77 — An Act to amend The Teachers’ Federation Act 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, I want to report Bill No. 77, An Act 
to amend The Teachers’ Federation Act, as being 
non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in Committee of the Whole of the said Bill be 
waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said  

Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 53 — An Act to amend The Provincial Mediation 
Board Act 

 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, I want to report Bill No. 53, An Act 
to amend The Provincial Mediation Board Act, as being 
non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in Committee of the Whole of the said Bill be 
waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 87 — An Act to amend The Municipal Employees’ 
Superannuation Act 

 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, I want to report Bill No. 87, An Act 
to amend The Municipal Employees’ Superannuation, as being 
non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
of the Bill and consideration of the Bill in Committee of the 
Whole be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 91 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of 

The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to report Bill No. 91, An Act 
respecting the Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts 
resulting from the enactment of The Saskatchewan Farm Security 
Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in Committee of the Whole of the said Bill be 
waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I move that the Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 99 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2426 
 

Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment of 
The Small Claims Act 

 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, I now report Bill No. 99, An Act 
respecting the Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts 
resulting from the enactment of The Small Claims Act, as being 
non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in the Committee of the Whole of the said Bill 
be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 92 — An Act respecting Provincial Emblems and 
Honours 

 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, I report Bill No. 92, An Act 
respecting Provincial Emblems and Honours, as being 
non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration of the matter in the Committee of the Whole be 
waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 65 — An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, I now want to report Bill No. 65, An 
Act to amend The Provincial Court Act, with amendment, as 
being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading 
and consideration in the Committee of the Whole of the said Bill 
be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move the said Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 68 — An Act respecting Small Claims in the 
Provincial Court of Saskatchewan 

 
Ms. Smart: — And finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to report Bill No. 
68, An Act respecting Small Claims in the Provincial court of 
Saskatchewan, with amendment, as being non-controversial. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second  

reading and consideration in Committee of the Whole of the said 
Bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Klein that Bill No. 60 — An Act to 
amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
add my words of condemnation to everything that has been said, 
both inside and outside this House, with respect to this Bill. I think 
all of us have seen examples of this government’s insensitivity, its 
arrogance, and its willingness to thumb its nose at public opinion, 
but this Bill must set some sort of a high-water mark in that 
regard. 
 
I want to mention two items. I have no strong feelings on the mad 
dog legislation, as its been called. There seems to be some inside 
the Assembly. I’m not sure whether or not this Bill will deal with 
them or not. There may be some need for it. 
 
It may be, Mr. Speaker, that guard dogs and dogs that are capable 
of being vicious are being acquired by people who do not 
understand the responsibility that goes with owning such an 
animal. And it may be that if that’s the case, some legislation is 
necessary. And if the minister were prepared to proceed with that 
Bill and adopt our suggestions, which I will make at the end of my 
remarks, I think we wouldn’t oppose that very strongly; indeed, 
we might support it. 
 
Unfortunately, that rather innocuous piece of legislation is coupled 
with two other provisions which have been universally 
condemned. Outside the Tory caucus — and I have no idea what 
goes on inside the Tory caucus; I suspect many members opposite 
aren’t sure what’s going on inside that caucus — but apart from 
that there is just no other institution or body in this province which 
supports what this government’s doing. It has been universally 
condemned. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I was told that . . . About a week 
ago I was talking to a senior official in the Department of Human 
Resources. He told me that the Minister of Social Services had set 
up an award, some medal for insensitivity, arrogance, and not 
listening. I said, I’m surprised to hear that; it’s a strange award. 
I’m also surprised I haven’t heard it, because I follow the comings 
and goings of the Minister of Social Services with  
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2427 
 

rapt attention. He told me that the reason why I hadn’t heard about 
it was because the minister had awarded it to himself for the last 
three years since he’s been minister. I think that’s unfair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I think that’s most unfair. I think this year the 
Minister of Urban Affairs has clearly earned the right to that 
medal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And I do not think you ought to have hogged 
it all to yourself. 
 
With respect to the ward system, I may say, Mr. Speaker, that 
when I first came to this city in 1968 — there was a municipal 
election then — I noted at that time something strange about the 
municipal elections. One was that the councillors, as I think they 
were then called, all lived with in a couple of square miles of each 
other in the southern part of the city. 
 
(1015) 
 
I also noted that with one or two exceptions . . . the Minister of 
Urban Affairs shakes his head. The exception proved the rule. I 
also noted the turn-out was much heavier in the southern part of 
the city than it was in the balance of the city. And I may say I 
spent some time wondering why that was so. I think it had to do 
with the nature of a city-wide election. It’s virtually impossible, it 
is unlikely, that there will be any contact between the aldermen 
and the voters in a community of this size when they’re running 
city-wide. That means that the only thing that voters will ever 
know about the people they’re voting for is what they read. 
 
In our society, Mr. Speaker, whether or not it should be, it is the 
case that those who are better educated generally enjoy a higher 
income, and in this city the southern part of the city has a higher 
income than the average from the north. I think, therefore, outside 
of the southern part of the city, where there existed a lower level 
of education I think people simply did not know what was going 
on, felt themselves unable to cast a vote, and often didn’t go out 
and vote. And that’s why I think the better educated, more literate 
people who lived in the southern part of the city were more likely 
to vote. They were the ones who — and probably the ones — who 
could really understand what was going on. 
 
That has changed. If you look at the last two or three elections, the 
turn-out has actually been heavier in the northern part of the city 
than it has in the southern part of the city. I think the main reason 
for that is that people in the northern part of the city are able to 
follow what’s going on in a much smaller area, they know the 
candidates, and for some reason or other the campaigns have been 
more hotly contested in the northern part of the city. 
 
So the ward system, as I have observed it over a period of 15 to 20 
years, I guess, is a much more democratic system. It enables 
everybody in a city to be represented in  

a way that the at-large system simply did not. 
 
The second reason why I think the ward system, and why I think 
members on this side of the House believe the ward system 
operates better is, it allows virtually anyone to run. One of my 
colleagues made this point the other day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you take a federal election up until this next 
election, this city was divided into two ridings. Each of the 
candidates for the three major parties on the average spent about 
$50,000 for a campaign in half the city. I think it is therefore 
reasonable to suppose that a campaign which covers the whole 
city is going to cost about twice that, or $100,000. That makes it 
virtually impossible for someone to run who isn’t either 
well-heeled or well-connected. And in an at-large system the 
councillors in a city of this size will be either well-heeled or 
well-connected, one of the two. 
 
And what is every bit as bad is that once they’re elected, they tend 
to owe an allegiance often to property owners and developers in 
the city who used to be the major contributors to campaigns. They 
were the major contributors to aldermen who campaigned, and by 
the way the aldermen voted in the ensuing years, it always seemed 
to me in those days, 20 years ago, that the property developers 
were the major benefactors of the activities in city council as well. 
 
That sort of pork barrel politics at the municipal level virtually 
disappeared with the ward system. It was possible to finance a 
much smaller campaign in a tenth of the city, possible to raise the 
10, $15,000 you needed to campaign with 4 and $10 donations 
from your neighbours, your friends, people who took an interest. 
And we saw people getting elected to city council who patently 
had no resources and no connections, and we could all name them. 
 
Some of them have been among the most energetic members of 
council, and certainly those people have been among the most 
representative of their districts. I think we can all think of Regina 
city councillors — we might not agree with them on all occasions; 
some of them we disagree with on most occasions, but there can 
be no doubt they represent the people who elect them. And the 
anger and the frustration which we see coming from those people 
truly represents the anger and frustration of those people who are 
often disadvantaged. 
 
I guess the real argument, Mr. Speaker, for the ward system is as 
everyone has said: it works. It has worked well to everybody. It 
was brought in amid considerable controversy, and I recall a 
number of individuals who thought it would “bring politics into 
municipal government.” And that was the overwhelming criticism 
of the ward system — it’s going to bring politics into government, 
whatever that might mean. Well it didn’t. Political parties have not 
ever got established at the municipal level. Aldermen will be 
known to be of some persuasion, and every city council has a 
mixture. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Like the mayor was. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, we noted the mayor who was . . . we 
suspected he might be of Conservative persuasion.  
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2428 
 

Just another scintilla of evidence that he was of Conservative 
persuasion appeared yesterday. 
 
The system has worked and worked well. Politics has not been 
involved in municipal government. None of the fears of those who 
opposed introduction of the ward system ever materialized, and 
most of them were honest enough to admit it. I don’t think Lorne 
Harasen will object if I use him as an example, because he’s a very 
public figure. He was then, as he is now, a broadcaster on the 
radio; was vehemently opposed to the introduction of the ward 
system because he said it would . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the 
member from Wascana is taking objection to some part of my 
description of Lorne Harasen. He was and is a broadcaster, a very 
effective one, and has quite a following. He vehemently opposed 
the introduction of the ward system and was honest enough to 
admit, a year after we introduced it, that he was wrong; it worked 
well. And that was true of most of the people who opposed it. 
They admitted their fears had not been realized. 
 
So it has worked and worked well, and as the editorial in the 
Star-Phoenix — now I know you folks think the Star-Phoenix 
doesn’t represent Conservative faith, and doesn’t always represent 
your views as you would have them expressed, but it is a major 
newspaper — and they said in their editorial, if it isn’t broken, 
don’t fix it. 
 
Perhaps what is most . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Adjourn it. Just adjourn it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — At the end of my comments, Mr. Speaker, for 
the benefit of the member from Meadow Lake who is so 
concerned about this issue — he’s coaching me and helping me 
along to make sure that my comments have a smooth flow, and 
that his constituents and all others understand it — and I 
appreciate the assistance from the member from Meadow Lake, 
but I know he’s getting tired with these long sittings. 
 
And I can tell him that there’s no need for him to tell me to 
adjourn it because at the end of my comments I’m going to move 
a motion which I think makes a great deal of sense, and I don’t see 
how members opposite can argue with it. It is that Bill 60 be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Municipal Law, as I think 
both city councils — and by both, I mean Regina and Saskatoon 
— have asked. So at the end of my remarks I will be making those 
comments. 
 
What is most galling though about this whole dispute is that only 
the barest . . . there’s only the barest pretence that there is any 
good reason to change the ward system, and it is patently obvious 
to everyone that it’s being done for the pettiest of reasons. It’s 
being done because the Regina city council has been at odds with 
some of the policies of this government. 
 
And this government takes the same approach to the Regina city 
council that it takes to the public servants who have tried to tell 
this government that some of it’s policies won’t work. They’ve 
taken the same approach to the Regina city council as they have to 
the NGOs (non-governmental organizations) who have done their  

job and spoken up on behalf of the disadvantaged people they 
represent. This government’s approach is not to listen, but to 
eliminate. If someone opposes you, you don’t honestly ask, is 
there an honest point of view; can this opinion be accommodated? 
Not this government. They seek to eliminate the problem, as they 
have with the public servants who have tried to talk sense to them, 
as they have with the NGOs who have spoken out against them. 
 
This is being . . . this whole affairs comes to this legislature for no 
other reason than because the member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden 
and the member from Regina South are angry at city council. 
Because of that anger, this province is losing a system of 
governing large municipalities which works, and works well. 
That’s the only reason we’re into this. 
 
I have difficulty believing that members opposite are so totally 
devoid of any kind of integrity or sense of responsibility for public 
office that they would allow the member from 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden and the member from Regina South to foist 
this on this government and on this province. It’s clearly damaging 
to the government, and it is clearly damaging to the province. It’s 
being done for the pettiest of reasons, and I am disappointed that 
there isn’t a bit more integrity on the other side, because I know 
that you recognize the reasons for this. It’s one of the things we 
object to. 
 
Something else that we object to, with almost equal vehemence, is 
the provisions with respect to Sunday closing. This government 
has, in this legislation, left the matter to be determined by the 
municipalities, and as everyone including the municipalities have 
stated, that amounts to no rules at all. It is almost inevitable that 
within a very short period of time after this is passed there’ll be no 
rules with respect to Sunday closing. That isn’t in anybody’s best 
interests. 
 
The reasons given by members opposite for this is that the 
consumers want it. I say that that’s not the basis upon which we 
make decisions with respect to Sunday closing. About a month 
ago, a little more than that perhaps, I was doing some legal 
research, came upon something that was quite interesting, came 
upon a . . . what we would describe as the by-laws, the by-laws of 
a 17th century English city — Glentham Meadow, I think it was 
called, if I remember correctly. And it was interesting to note the 
sort of things that concerned the city fathers in 17th century 
England. 
 
One of the things I noted they did was regulate closing hours. And 
because this was topical, I thought to myself, why in 17th century 
England in a community of that size? I think it was for the same 
reason — to protect the business community. So that if there were 
four grocers in the community, one of them couldn’t keep all the 
grocers open till 10 o’clock at night by opening. 
 
I believe, while the member from Lloydminster is shaking his 
head . . . yes, I saw that. I won’t blame this one on the member 
from Shaunavon. I clearly saw it was the member from 
Lloydminster who was adding to this debate in the usual fashion 
that he does, by groaning. And one of these days the member from 
Lloydminster is going  
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2429 
 

to learn to speak a language. I don’t care whether it’s Latin, 
ancient Greek, or English, but I honestly believe that if he’s here 
long enough, he’ll learn to speak a language; he won’t just sit and 
grunt in his seat as he has been doing for the last six years. 
 
(1030) 
 
The regulation of store closing hours is and always has been done 
for the benefit of the business community. This represents one of 
the limitations of the market-place that has been recognized 
throughout time — 100-and-some years, I might say, before the 
birth of Adam Smith. The business community recognized that 
there were some limits to the market-place, and one of those limits 
to the market-place is that if you have unregulated opening, all 
businesses will be forced to stay open for very lengthy hours. 
 
The members opposite might be interested in a survey which I did 
in my riding. In my riding there are about 800 businesses. The 
names of the businesses are available through the business licence. 
If you want to send them a letter, for a price you can get all the 
names, and I did. I got all the names of the businesses, sent them a 
survey. Did this last week — nothing very fancy. I told my 
constituency secretary I wanted his best effort in the mail by 5 
o’clock; I didn’t want his polished effort ready by the end of the 
month, and so it got out. 
 
I have got about 10 per cent of those back, about 80 of them I 
think. I actually do not have a precise count because they come in 
and each day they go over to the constituency office to be 
processed. But I think I’ve got about 10 per cent of them back. 
 
Those replies, all sent to the business community, are 
overwhelmingly in favour of provincially regulated laws. . . 
provincial laws which require Sunday closing. If you want the 
precise ratio, the last count I got it was 89 per cent of those who 
replied wanted store hours regulated by the provincial government 
and wanted the stores closed on Sunday. Now that’s the business 
community. 
 
I would frankly admit to members opposite that that is not the core 
of my supporters, that business community. Very few of them live 
in my riding, just for openers. They almost all live in the suburbs. I 
don’t think they normally regard me as their spokesman, and that’s 
not the relationship I’ve had with them. 
 
But unlike members opposite, I try to listen to them. I recognize 
they pay a portion of my salary. I represent them, and I have a 
responsibility to listen, and I try to do that. And that’s why we sent 
the survey out. And I say to members opposite that this 
constituency, which has often formed the core of the Conservative 
organization, are adamantly opposed to what you’re doing. 
 
Quite frankly, I didn’t, and I wished I had . . . I left the place on 
the survey for them to put in their name, but in the haste in getting 
this out I didn’t add a place for them to check, “May we use your 
comments publicly?” So these people didn’t know that I was 
going to use their comments publicly and I’ve decided not to. I 
wished I’d have done that, and if I had have, I would have tabled 
the  

responses. 
 
Some of them were very interesting. Almost all of them who put 
comments on — and I’d say one out of two has a comment — 
almost all of them who put comments on talked about their 
families; the desire to spend time with their families; their 
employees who likewise have families. A large number . . . An 
increasing number of women are getting into businesses, and they 
own them, manage them. The large number of those replied, said 
they wanted to spend time with their husbands and children. It was 
an interesting group of replies. They’re adamantly opposed to 
what you’re doing. 
 
The members opposite say, but the consumers would prefer to 
shop whenever the spirit moves them. I say that’s not relevant to 
the discussion. Regulation of store hours is, and always has been, 
done for the benefit of small businesses to that the hours which 
small businesses stay open will be reasonable. 
 
I know that there is a core of businesses which want unregulated 
hours; those are, in almost all cases, the national chains. It’s easy 
for Eaton’s and The Bay and Simpsons to stay open for 24 hours a 
day. They can stagger their staff, stagger their managers by 
providing a differential, slightly higher pay for those who work 
evenings. They have no difficulty, I think, getting people who will 
work evenings, and they don’t have a problem. 
 
The difficulty is with the small-business people. I could name any 
number of them. Typically it’s a mother and father operation. One 
of the two of them, often the woman, has some bookkeeping 
ability; she keeps the books. She handles the back end of it, so to 
speak. Often as not, it’s the father who is out in front, does the 
selling, and often the buying. They often have a few employees, 
two to five employees, most of whom are in the store most of the 
time. Obviously they can’t stagger the managers because they’re 
the managers; they’ve got to be there all the time. They can’t 
stagger the staff without a fair increase in cost. 
 
With respect to that size of business, this will mean additional 
costs. I think, in the end result it will mean a loss of small 
businesses in the communities. I think some of these people will 
decide it’s not worth the effort, or with the increase in costs from 
the increase in staff they’re not making a dollar, and I think it’s 
going to mean a loss of small shops, small businesses in this 
community. 
 
I have had so many people say to me, in so many of those replies, 
if we have to stay open, I think the government offices ought to be 
open seven days a week as well. And I say to members opposite, if 
you think the small businesses, the owners who are often husband 
and wife, if you think they out go stay open seven days a week, 
then I think the ministers should be in their offices seven days a 
week. And I think it should be advertised. 
 
I fully agree that I think all we’d need to do to knock some of 
those nonsense out of members opposite is to keep government 
offices open seven days a week and this nonsense about 
unregulated store hours would soon come to an end. The problem 
is, as much as members opposite claim to be the party of business, 
the members  
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2430 
 

opposite are simply not in touch with the small-business 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Regina City Council and, I believe, the 
Saskatoon City Council have suggested that this matter deserves 
further hearing. That is clearly the case. Clearly with this much 
controversy, even this government would want to try and find 
some solution which doesn’t leave everybody irritated and their 
nerves jangled. 
 
For those reasons, Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to move, seconded 
by the member from Regina Victoria: 
 
That Bill 60, the proposed motion of the member from Regina 
South, have all the words deleted after “That” and the following 
substituted: 
 
That Bill 60 not be read a second time, but that the subject matter 
of the said Bill be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Municipal Law. 
 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I fully support 
the amendment. I think that there is a great deal of room in this 
present legislation for further study, thought, before proceeding 
further. There are aspects of the legislation that are before us that 
are frankly questionable, and certainly very objectionable to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
There is some parts of the legislation that I think can be supported. 
The legislation with respect to dogs, I think, is supportable. I think, 
of course, we’ll have to wait and see how effective it will be. It’s 
been touted as being potentially effective, but I think we will have 
to stand the tests of challenges to local by-laws to see, over time, 
how effective it will be. But nevertheless we can support that. 
 
And that is not the reason though that we want to see this 
legislation referred to the municipal law committee. The reason 
we want to see the legislation referred is because of the very grave 
concerns that have been expressed by Saskatchewan people about 
two aspects of this Bill. One is the changes to the ward system n 
our cities; secondly, is the question of shopping hours, and more 
particularly the provision that would, in effect — would, in effect, 
Mr. Speaker — do away with a common day of rest when it 
comes to shopping in Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to briefly deal with the question of the ward system. I’ve 
spoken on this matter before in this Chamber and I don’t want to 
dwell on it in great length, but I want to just briefly again go over 
the reasons why this government is making this change. That may 
not be clear to all the people in Saskatchewan, but let’s be clear on 
this. 
 
There has been a ward system in our major cities for some 15 
years. That decision has been supported by referendum by people 
in both those cities. No matter what the Minister of Urban Affairs 
might say about a vote that was taken in Saskatoon, that vote was 
so confusing it would have taken a lawyer to figure out what to 
vote in order to get your message out. But again that was 
superseded by a vote by people in Saskatoon that made it clear, 
and there was a vote in Regina that made it clear,  

the people of those cities supported the ward system as it stood. 
 
But the government wants to change that. They don’t like the ward 
system. Why don’t they like the ward system? The reason they 
don’t like the ward system, because they see the ward system as 
being a form of government that frankly provides the opportunity 
for opposition to come forward to this government and its harmful 
urban policies. 
 
And that has been the experience. That has been the experience. 
We have seen city councils, especially in Regina, criticize this 
government, criticize this government for its harmful policies. 
Now other councils also criticize the government, but none have 
been councils in major media centres like Regina. And let’s 
recognize that Regina is the media centre for a good portion of this 
province. And when Regina council decides to criticize the 
government for its harmful policies, that is sure to get media 
attention and is sure to be reported to people beyond the 
boundaries of Regina. That is a matter of some concern to this 
government. 
 
Their record in this respect is consistent that if you choose to 
criticize the Conservative government, if you choose to criticize 
the Conservative government, watch out, because your job may be 
in jeopardy. Watch out, because your position may be in jeopardy. 
Watch out, your whole system of government may be in jeopardy, 
because we don’t like opposition; we don’t want to see anybody 
challenge our power in this province; and if you dare to do that, 
we will get you. 
 
And that’s the message that comes out loud and clear from this 
government. And that is the reason that the ward system is now 
being changed, that the government is bringing forward this 
legislation. They say, no more criticism from Regina City Council; 
we’ve got to put a stop to that. Our best chance of making sure 
that we get no more criticism is to change the way in which people 
are elected, because in an at-large system, or some version of an 
at-large system, the chances are greater that we will elect the 
wealthy, we will elect those who support that particular PC 
government. So that’s the reason for the change, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the minister gives all this nonsense about, well, the NDP 
brought in the ward system and imposed it, and all those kinds of 
things, even though people were given an opportunity to vote on 
it. But I say, Mr. Speaker, that really doesn’t answer the question 
of Prince Albert where the people on their own volition, through a 
democratic vote, decided that they wanted to have the ward 
system because they perceived that to be the best system for their 
city. 
 
The ward system was not imposed on the city of Prince Albert. It 
was a case of the people in the city of Prince Albert wanting that 
system. And I just think that it’s disgusting, I think that it’s 
sickening that this government would now say to the people of 
Prince Albert, it doesn’t matter what you want; or for that matter, 
it doesn’t matter what you people in Regina want; it doesn’t matter 
what you people in Saskatoon want; we’re going to decide for you 
what the best form of democratic government is  
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2431 
 

going to be; we won’t give you the choice. 
 
(1045) 
 
And this is the government that talks about freedom of choice. 
This is the government of Stanfield’s who always talked about the 
freedom of choice. But here they won’t give you the freedom of 
choice. No, it’s because they want to protect their power base; 
they want to protect their position in this province. They don’t 
want to have any kind of system that might create the potential for 
opposition, so therefore change the system. 
 
I just want to end my comments on the ward system by saying a 
couple of things. First it was rumoured that the minister was going 
to do away with the ward system and that the only alternative . . . 
or no alternative, but the only form of government that would be 
allowed in local municipal government was an at-large election. 
Then there was a great deal of debate and criticism of the 
minister’s proposals that he’d been flouting. 
 
So finally when the legislation came forward the minister said, 
well, we’re going to give you the best of both worlds — in his 
view; we’re going to give you an at-large, and half the members of 
a council will be elected at large and the other half will be elected 
in a ward system. And he says, so we’ve got the best of both 
systems. I think that he’s got the worst, he’s got the worst possible 
solution that can be devised. 
 
And I say that, Mr. Speaker, on the basis of some experience in a 
city council, because I predict a number of things will happen. If 
the city councils decide to go with this system, one, those elected 
under a ward system will be so swamped, will be so swamped 
with constituent complaints that, in effect, the system becomes 
unworkable. 
 
And if the intent of the wards, and under this system, is to allow 
for some capacity for a council to have local councillors who will 
be able to respond to constituent complaints and concerns in 
geographic areas, I don’t think it does the job because the sizes of 
wards in the city of Regina will be in the area of 25 to 30,000 
people. Provincial constituent in this province will have an 
average of about 12 to 15,000 people, and local wards in the cities 
will be twice that size. And somehow it’s suggested that those 
people, that those people will be able to respond to the myriad of 
concerns and problems that local people have. 
 
I predict, I predict that the very first thing that will happen to any 
city council who adopts the system, is that they will seek an 
increase in assistance and research and staff for councillors to help 
them to be able to deal with constituent problems and concerns. 
That’s the first thing that will happen. There will be a demand for 
an increase in staff for city councillors elected under that particular 
ward system so that they can deal adequately with constituent 
concerns. That’s number one. 
 
The second thing that will happen, Mr. Speaker, is that there will 
be internal division, that there will be internal division and fights 
over jurisdiction within the city councils, any council that decides 
to go with this system. 
 

Because those elected at large will say, well I got elected by all the 
people in this city, and I spent 50, $60,000 in a campaign to get 
elected, and you got elected on a ward and only in a portion of the 
city, and you spent 20,000 to get elected. So therefore we demand 
that we should get all the power and responsibility within the 
council; we demand that we be the chairman of all the various 
committees; we demand that we be the finance committee; we 
demand that we have the positions of power and responsibility in 
terms of being able to give the overall direction as to how the city 
should be run. 
 
And the people elected on the ward basis will say, well no, we’re 
elected as councillors, we’re elected to be equal. And the fight will 
be on in our cities if they choose to adopt this system, just as much 
as the fight was on in Ontario in those cities where you had a 
hybrid system where people were elected at large and where 
people were elected on a ward basis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — The fight will be on in our cities. We will 
see greater division, we will see more problems with our city 
councils if they choose to go with this particular system. Make no 
doubt about that. And even if the Minister of Urban Affairs in his 
great inexperience in these matters refuses to recognize that, I 
make those predictions. 
 
And I would venture to make a further prediction, I would venture 
to make a further prediction that both the city councils in Regina 
and Saskatoon will reject the hybrid system; will reject the five 
and five because they will see it as unworkable. They will see it as 
not being in the best interests of their people, and they will go with 
the at-large system because at least it makes some kind of sense as 
opposed to this hybrid system. They will still demand to have the 
right for the option for their people to choose the ward system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I really wanted to talk about shopping hours, and I 
just want to briefly review the reasons that we have had legislation 
in the province which provided for a common day of rest which 
provided for store closures on Sunday. Historically, that legislation 
has been there so that there would be uniformity across the 
province so that rural stores especially would be protected, 
because recognizing that if stores in urban centres, larger urban 
centres opened, it would have an impact on the rural centres. 
 
Therefore this shouldn’t be a matter of local choice, but is a matter 
that needed a uniform approach across the province and therefore 
required provincial legislation. That is the reason that that 
legislation has been there. That’s the primary reason. 
 
Also, it is felt that the government, the provincial government as 
opposed to municipalities were best equipped to deal with the 
concept that there should be a common day of rest; that families 
should have the Sunday; that there should be that common day of 
rest; and that the province was best able to provide the legislation 
to ensure that within Saskatchewan. There is many, many years of 
experience; many, many years of  
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2432 
 

experience; many years that we have had the legislation which 
provided for a common day of rest, and there are good reasons for 
that. 
 
Now that legislation has been challenged, coincided with the 
opening of the superstores in Saskatchewan. Their challenge is 
followed by the challenges of others who sought to protect their 
market share. First it was the other grocery stores, then it was the 
department stores or those stores that sold department store type 
merchandise. And the government’s response in the last few years 
since these challenges came about has been to try to improve 
legislation to effectively meet the challenges. And that has 
happened on a couple of occasions. 
 
But suddenly this government gave up. Last December this 
government gave up; they quit. Now their reasons are that, well 
we finally decided that we want to listen to consumer demand. 
The consumers are saying that we want to have wide open 
shopping. Well, Mr. Speaker, it may well be that the polls at any 
given moment . . . at this point in time might suggest that people 
support the concept of Sunday shopping and that it should be wide 
open. 
 
But I think that once all the ramifications are understood, 
including the effect on small business — and the small businesses 
are in fact the ones that support the local communities — once 
they understand the effect on consumer prices, once they 
understand the effect it’ll have on their friends and neighbours 
who will now might be forced to work on Sundays where they 
didn’t have to before, once they understand the effect on some of 
our rural communities, I think that opinion will shift away from 
that kind of support. 
 
And I might say also, begin to understand the effect on consumer 
prices, because the government seems to have some silly notion 
that because the stores are open on Sunday that somehow more 
people will go shopping, somehow Saskatchewan people will have 
more money to go out shopping. 
 
Well it ain’t the case, Mr. Speaker. What you’ve done is you’ve 
extended the number of hours that a store will be open. That 
increases the overhead costs for that store, but it doesn’t 
necessarily mean Saskatchewan people are going to have more 
money to spend in those stores. No, you’ve increased the cost to 
the stores; you haven’t increased the amount of money that’s 
going into those stores. 
 
It’s going to have a little effect on consumer prices in this 
province. It’s going to have an effect. It’s going to make groceries 
and other items more expensive over time. And I think that’s 
something that consumers will begin to understand once those 
things are clearly laid out, as they were laid out in Ontario where 
also the polls seemed to show that people were massively in 
support of Sunday shopping and in type of the kind of response or 
the legislation that the Ontario legislature was bringing forward, 
which is similar to this legislation. 
 
There was a case of a by-election just a short while ago in Ontario 
where a Liberal was elected with a massive, massive majority, 
massive majority. And the Liberal  

member resigned or whatever, and there was a need for a 
by-election. And one would have thought, given the popularity of 
the Liberal government, that the Liberals would stand a chance to 
be elected. Well they weren’t. 
 
The major issue in that by-election was the government’s 
proposals with respect to Sunday shopping. the businesses in that 
community, the churches in that community, and all concerned, 
made that the major issue in the by-election. And the government 
was defeated in that by-election on that particular issue because 
the people of that area began to understand all of the implications 
of the government’s legislation, as will the people of 
Saskatchewan begin to understand all of the implications of this 
legislation and turn against you on those grounds. 
 
The government also says, well it’s freedom of choice, you know. 
We want to make sure that everybody has the freedom of choice, 
want to give municipalities the freedom to decide whether or not 
there will be Sunday shopping. Let them determine whether there 
should be Sunday shopping. 
 
I think that’s the biggest laugh of all, Mr. Speaker, because I tell 
you that if one community decides, if one community decides to 
open the stores on Sunday, the community next door will also 
make that decision relatively shortly because of pressure and 
demand from their businesses to ensure that their resident stores 
don’t lose any market share. 
 
And I would say that there’s another good reason — that’s the 
question of legislative effectiveness. There’s simply . . . You 
know, this is a government that says, or supposedly says, well we 
tried legislation to deal with this business and we keep getting 
challenges, we keep getting challenges, so we’re going to turn it 
over to the municipalities. And do you think that the city of Moose 
Jaw, the city of Prince Albert, or for that matter the city of Regina 
or Saskatoon, is better able, better able than the provincial 
government to fight the superstores, to fight the large corporate 
interests than the provincial government? They have greater 
resources to be able to do that? That’s just simple nonsense. If the 
province can’t do it, how can the cities and the towns be expected 
to do it? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s what they say: freedom of choice, 
freedom of choice, legislative effectiveness. That’s what they say: 
consumer demand. That’s their apparent reasons. That’s their 
apparent reasons, but I would say those are their transparent 
reasons; those are not the real reasons. 
 
The real reason is that that Minister of Urban Affairs and that 
government, that cabinet, buckled under to the superstores, 
because the government was beginning to become effective, the 
government was putting forward legislation that seemed to be 
getting to the point where we needed to be at, and that was to 
effectively shut down the superstores and others from operating on 
a Sunday. And the superstores went to that minister, went to that 
government and said, well you’re getting a little bit close to the 
mark here, I think that you should pull back now. Besides which, 
all these legal expenses of getting into these fights is frankly a 
little bit too much. We want you to  
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2433 
 

pull back, we want you to pull back. And after all, we came to this 
province and opened up and created jobs and all those kinds of 
wonderful things and we’re a model of economic development; 
we’re the kind of things that you wanted when you said, oh, we’re 
open for business, and boy, you better play ball with us. And this 
government buckled under; that cabinet buckled under; that was 
their response. 
 
Was their response to stand up for the people of Saskatchewan? 
No. Was it to say, we need to protect rural businesses? No. Did 
they say to the Superstore, we need to protect the concept of a 
common day of rest so that working men and people can have a 
common day of rest — did they say that? No. Did they say, we 
need to support small, locally owned businesses? No. Mr. 
Speaker, they said none of those things. And that government and 
that minister said no to Saskatchewan, said no to Saskatchewan 
people, said no to Saskatchewan small business, and said no to 
many rural businesses that stand to be affected by this legislated. 
And frankly, Mr. Speaker, they said no to common sense. They 
said yes to their corporate friends. They didn’t have the guts to say 
no to Superstore. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I submit that this legislation before us is the action of 
a cowardly . . . are the actions of a cowardly government. This is a 
minister who, when Superstore says jump, he says: how high, and 
where and when would you like me to jump? This is a minister 
who has wimped out — wimped out — wimped out in favour of 
Superstore, afraid to stand up for the people of Saskatchewan. And 
I say, when people see the yellow paint on the Superstore, they 
will be reminded of the yellow stripe that is now so evident on the 
backs of this government and that minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1100) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — I might say, I’m frankly surprised that the 
Premier has allowed it to get this far. This is the Premier that talks 
about the family; this is the Premier that talks about the 
importance of religion. One would have thought, one would have 
surmised, Mr. Speaker, that this is a Premier then who would 
favour a common day of rest for Saskatchewan families. 
 
But it doesn’t appear that way. No, this is a Premier that could 
have said no; this is a Premier that could have stopped it in 
cabinet; this is a Premier that could have said to his Minister of 
Urban Affairs; this is nonsense — which it is — I want you to stop 
this business. This is a cabinet that could have said that; this is a 
Premier that could have said that. It’s clear that it was the 
Premier’s choice; it still is the Premier’s choice, but this Premier is 
supporting to choose his Minister of Urban Affairs. This minister 
is choosing to support throwing the stores wide open on Sundays, 
because that’s what the legislation will ultimately result in. 
 
No, this is not a Premier that stands up for families; this is not a 
Premier who’s motivated by what he says; that he says that I’m a 
religious person; that I believe in the family and the importance of 
religion and the observance of religions and so on. If he was really 
serious, if he really  

meant that, he would stop this legislation now. He would stop it 
today. He would say no to his Minister of Urban Affairs. He 
would say no to a cabinet that’s gotten out of control. 
 
But I suppose that it is hard for the Premier . . . for a Premier 
who’s rarely in this province to be able to do that. Because this is a 
Premier that’s lost touch with Saskatchewan. This is a Premier 
that’s so in touch with all of the world’s problems; so in touch 
with all the needs of the federal government; so in touch with 
what’s happening in Washington that he’s out of touch with 
what’s happening here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, all of the reasons that were 
there in the very beginning when legislation was brought forward 
to provide for a common day of rest; all of the reasons that were 
there many years ago are as valid today as they were then, are as 
valid today. 
 
There is a need to protect rural businesses. There is a need to 
protect those businesses in rural communities that will lose their 
market share because of Sunday opening. Let’s not make any 
doubts about that. There is a need to protect them. And we say 
they need to be protected, even if you on that side and that 
Minister of Urban Affairs says, well, I’m going to turn my back on 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suggest that there is a need for a common day of 
rest for Saskatchewan families and working people so that there is 
an opportunity for them to all be together on at least one day; so 
that they can all go to their churches or do whatever it is that they 
want to do as a family on that common day. 
 
I think there is a need for that. That is not a need that can be 
adequately responded to by the municipalities by giving them the 
option to decide whether or not the stores will be open on Sunday. 
That is clearly something that the provincial government needs to 
do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suggest that there are additional reasons, that 
there’s a reason to protect this family-owned small businesses who 
will increasingly get out of business in this province. And that is to 
the detriment of Saskatchewan people, who will increasingly get 
out of business in this province because, frankly, no family, no 
business man can stand behind his till and operate in his store 
seven days a week. 
 
That is simply not the way . . . and I’ve seen evidence of people 
just simply getting out of the business, family-owned businesses, 
getting out of it. And in this case a hardware store says, we can see 
the writing on the wall; there’s going to be seven days a week; we 
are not in a position to provide that kind of investment in terms of 
time and commitment to a store to be able to compete with the 
superstores. We’re getting out of the business. And that business 
has folded. And I say that’s a direct result of the legislation that’s 
before us. There is a need to protect that. 
 
All the reasons that were there then are there now. I think that it’s 
high time we referred this matter to the municipal  
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2434 
 

law committee, because perhaps the voice of Saskatchewan people 
might just have some bearing on the Premier and just might cause 
him to just back up and say, whoa, we have to stop here. 
 
We need to protect rural businesses, we need to protect small 
businesses. We need to ensure that there’s a common day of rest 
so that people can attend their churches and do whatever it is that 
they want to do on that common day; and we need to say no to this 
legislation. And that is why I support the amendment that’s before 
us. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1112) 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 20 
 
Romanow Goulet 
Rolfes Hagel 
Lingenfelter Pringle 
Shillington Lyons 
Tchorzewski Calvert 
Thompson Trew 
Mitchell Smart 
Simard Van Mulligen 
Kowalsky Koenker 
Atkinson Goodale 
 

Nays — 28 
 
Devine Toth 
Muller Sauder 
Duncan Johnson 
McLeod McLaren 
Andrew Hopfner 
Taylor Petersen 
Smith Swenson 
Swan Martens 
Maxwell Baker 
Schmidt Gleim 
Gerich Gardner 
Hepworth Kopelchuk 
Klein Saxinger 
Meiklejohn Britton 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I see that the 
Government of Saskatchewan has just voted against rural 
Saskatchewan and small business, and they won’t forget that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — I would like to join my colleague, Mr. Speaker, to 
oppose the minister’s Bill to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 
for all the reasons that have been put forward this morning and in 
previous days. I would like to talk to, or to address my comments 
and to make specific reference to two aspects of this Bill, that is 
the changes to the ward system and the store hours question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have listened to the minister now for over two 
weeks as he talked about the need for these changes  

and his consulting extensively with groups around the province. 
While the minister may have met with groups, he obviously did 
not listen or hear what they had to say. The minister cannot stand 
here and list those who support him on either the ward system or 
the store hours changes. 
 
(1115) 
 
Regarding the ward system changes, Mr. Speaker, the minister has 
not provided any sane rationale for his new scheme, his half-baked 
scheme, which he calls the best of both worlds. People I talk to in 
my riding, Mr. Speaker, those my colleagues talked to in their 
ridings say it’s just the opposite. It’s the worst of both worlds. 
 
The minister would have us believe that he listened and this is the 
magic compromise. And he was quite proud of himself when he 
made that discovery. In his own small mind, in his own 
convoluted logical thought process, it may seem like a 
compromise. But it isn’t logical, Mr. Speaker. It’s a half-baked 
system, a half-baked scheme of half the councillors at large and 
half in the larger ward system. 
 
The reasons why this scheme doesn’t make sense, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, are obvious to everyone, it seems but the minister. His 
main defence, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that in 1973 the NDP 
imposed the ward system; therefore, he has the right to impose a 
dismantling of the ward system. It’s the sort of logic that I can’t 
quite come to grips with. It doesn’t matter to the minister that the 
cities want the ward system. His view is so reflective of this 
government — that we know best what’s for you; we’ll make 
decisions around here because we aren’t accountable. 
 
As a newcomer to this legislature, this is what I’ve seen every day 
since I’ve been here. It’s no wonder the public is somewhat 
sceptical of politicians today. Voters in the two by-elections, the 
two recent by-elections, have made it crystal clear, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that they reject this kind of arrogance and bullying in 
Saskatchewan. The minister says he’s not interested in the views 
of council members or municipalities or the views they represent 
in their official capacities. He paints alderpersons as self-serving 
and selfish in their opposition to his scheme. Just because he does 
not consult with the constituents he represents, he assumes that 
councillors do not either. 
 
As a resident of Saskatoon, I resent the minister’s reference to the 
ward system as being inefficient. Our city council has managed 
the minister’s funding cuts very well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They 
have had to be innovative and creative to manage and stretch his 
very limited funds. For this minister or for any minister of this 
government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to talk about another level of 
government’s inefficiency, is the height of hypocrisy. What a 
double standard — a government that has mismanaged like no 
other in the history of Canada, to preach about efficiency. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this government would have managed 
effectively, like the provincial municipalities, we wouldn’t be 
paying $1 million a day of interest alone, and we wouldn’t be 
wasting $34,000 a day on wasted, vacant office space. Now that’s 
inefficiency, Mr. Deputy  
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2435 
 

Speaker. That’s Conservative philosophy, Conservatives in 
practice. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, given that the minister has provided no 
rationale, no reasonable rationale for this legislation for doing 
away with the ward system, given that the cities don’t want this 
half-baked scheme of his, it leads to only one conclusion. This 
minister, this government, has an axe to grind with the cities, or it 
wishes to place its friends on city councils, or both, so that those 
councillors will not be critical of this government for its funding 
cuts. This government are the master muzzlers of free speech, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The minister knows only well-to-do people will be able to stand 
for elected office. Ordinary citizens, as has been pointed out this 
morning, cannot afford to run. Even he can figure this out. The 
fact is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he knows that. That’s exactly why 
he’s doing it, why he’s introducing this legislation. 
 
Prospective city-wide candidates cannot meet residents, cannot 
meet their constituents, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It isn’t practical, it 
isn’t feasible, it isn’t realistic. How does the minister expect 
councillors in the larger ward systems to handle the complaints on 
a part-time basis? It just isn’t possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about the ability of voters to vote 
for six councillors now, that this represents a greater degree of 
democracy. What it does represent is more confusion about who to 
go to for assistance. 
 
And a potential problem that I see, Mr. Speaker, or another 
potential problem, is a concentration of councillors in certain parts 
of the city, and that was made clear this morning by my hon. 
member. And in Saskatoon, as an example, the school board, up 
until a recent election in ’85, had six of the seven school board 
representatives from one side of the city — very concentrated 
from one side of the city — and that was not a healthy situation for 
many obvious reasons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I fail to understand why this minister is so afraid of 
grass roots democracy in our cities, or democracy of any kind for 
that matter. In democracy people speak out, and again I guess it’s 
only that he’s trying to muzzle freedom of speech in the province. 
 
Did it ever occur to this minister, Mr. Speaker, that the reason that 
this proposal is generating so much opposition in the province is 
because it doesn’t make any sense? Why are the cities of 
Saskatoon and Regina and P.A. and Melfort, Melville, and 
Weyburn, and SUMA, and many others wrong, and the Minister 
of Urban Affairs is right? What special insights or superior 
intellectual ability does the minister have that nobody else 
possesses? 
 
If the minister’s concept is so good, if his rationale is so sound, 
why doesn’t he give the cities a third option, Mr. Speaker, that of 
the current ward system? I think the reason is clear, Mr. Speaker. 
Cities would choose to accept the system that’s in place now 
because they see it as working. 
 
This government’s political agenda once again takes  

precedence over all else. But this time, Mr. Speaker, it’s gone too 
far. Opposition will continue to mount on this question, there’s no 
doubt about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister can’t admit that he made a mistake, 
which will be a sign of leadership, a sign of mortality on this very 
issue alone. And I’m sure if this is the way that he acts on every 
issue, that he’s already alienated a good part of his constituency. 
 
With regard, for a moment, to the store hours question, Mr. 
Speaker, I must strongly speak against this change. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I would like to introduce 
a group of students. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you to the member and the House. I have a 
great deal of pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to introduce, sitting in the 
Speaker’s gallery, some 22 grade 6 students from the Wynyard 
Elementary School. They are accompanied by their teacher Mr. 
Coderre, their bus driver Pat Morrison. Pat Morrison, the bus 
driver, and a business woman from Wynyard, was the Liberal 
candidate in the last election. I’m not sure that she’s in the gallery, 
but I want to make that note. 
 
I want to take this opportunity of extending a welcome to the 
students to the legislature, many of which indicated that would be 
the first attendance in the Chamber, and I hope they enjoy the 
proceedings. What we’re doing now, as I indicated to you, 
debating a rather important Bill, Bill 60, which is An Act to 
amend The Urban Municipality Act. So that’s what we’re doing 
this morning. And the other thing that we will be doing is getting 
into some of the estimates, as I explained, is also in respect to 
examining the expenditures of the government in a particular 
department. 
 
So I welcome you. I ask other members to join and welcome the 
students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 60 (continued) 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to take 
the opportunity to welcome the students here and to join with my 
colleague and let them just know that I’m talking about the 
proposed store hour changes that have been introduced. What 
we’re trying to argue towards is preserving a common day of rest 
for the people of the province, preserving rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I say, I would like to speak out strongly on this 
issue. Again this minister is marching along, oblivious  
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2436 
 

to the concerns of church groups and small business, rural towns, 
rural Saskatchewan generally, federated co-ops and many other 
groups, about the need to preserve in Saskatchewan a common 
day of rest. 
 
This government talks about supporting small business in rural 
Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, this minister and this 
government talk about a lot of things, but they don’t listen. They 
break promises and there is an inconsistency between what they 
say and what they do. I concur with my colleague from Regina 
North East that this government is out of touch with the realities of 
Saskatchewan. They spend $48,000 a week on travelling around 
the world. This isn’t New York. This isn’t New York. New York 
makes different decisions. We have a different heritage here; we 
have a different way of life. We want to preserve, in 
Saskatchewan, that common day of rest in support of families, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We don’t want to become a dog-eat-dog society where anything 
goes. That’s what this government is promoting through this 
legislation, through its free trade support, through its privatization 
and deregulation, dog-eat-dog society where anything goes. This 
is not the kind of Saskatchewan that we’re supporting, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The minister doesn’t recognize the contradictions in this 
legislation. We aren’t mature enough to decide the best form of 
local government for ourselves, but we can best determine our 
shopping hours. Does this make any sense, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The minister says that New Democrats aren’t aware of the 
changing realities in society in Saskatchewan and that seven 
shopping days is quite appropriate. I would say that it’s the 
minister and his government who aren’t aware of the realities in 
small towns and of small businesses, in that they are opposing 
extended store hours. Their very survival is at stake, Mr. Speaker; 
that is, the survival of small towns and the survival of small 
business. It’s the minister who’s out of step with the people of 
Saskatchewan. It’s his government who’s out of step with rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, this government’s rhetoric about supporting 
small business in rural Saskatchewan doesn’t mean a thing. This 
minister’s notion of consultation goes like this: he meets with the 
coalition against open Sunday shopping and says, let’s meet the 
day I introduce the Bill and I’ll tell you it’s good for you. That’s 
what he did, Mr. Speaker. That’s his view of consultation with 
people. 
 
Because the minister isn’t listening to the citizens regarding store 
hours and the survival of small businesses, small towns in rural 
Saskatchewan, and the preservation of family life, his 
government’s political agenda again on this issue becomes very 
clear. These decisions will be made in corporate board rooms by 
the minister’s buddies. There’s no question about that. Many 
chains have already made this clear, Mr. Speaker, by breaking the 
law to open on Sunday. That’s their self-serving interests come 
first. This will not change. 
 
(1130) 
 
Does Supervalu really care about small-business people,  

families, or rural Saskatchewan? I don’t think so, Mr. Speaker. 
Nor, Mr. Speaker, does the Minister of Urban Affairs or this 
government really care. Again, I urge the minister to show some 
leadership, have public hearings on the issue of store hours. How 
could the minister possibly lose by doing that? 
 
Mr. Minister, please listen to small business, to small towns, to 
church groups. Invite one and all to participate in these public 
hearings. New Brunswick tried your approach and it didn’t work. 
Let’s not make the same mistakes. Let’s learn from each other, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s only so much money to go around. It’s only the chains 
that will get richer, but the price, Mr. Speaker, is too high. The 
price of losing small businesses through bankruptcies which are 
already at record levels in this province, that price is too high. The 
price of eroding life in rural Saskatchewan and family life 
generally is too high, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let’s preserve the common day of rest in Saskatchewan and let’s 
be serious about supporting Saskatchewan families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister likes to say that the NDP does not 
understand rural Saskatchewan and small business. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to put on record a letter just received. This is 
a letter, Mr. Speaker, to the hon. Minister of Urban Affairs from 
small business, small . . . rural Saskatchewan, small town rural 
Saskatchewan. It’s a letter from Hague, Mr. Speaker, dated March 
31, and the minister has a copy of this. It’s directed to the Minister 
of Urban Affairs. Sir, it just says sir, not even dear sir. This person 
is very angry about this legislation. It says, and I quote: 
 

It has taken considerable effort on your part, plus much 
natural ability, to enable you to become undoubtedly the 
most insensitive Minister of Urban Affairs in 
Saskatchewan’s history. Your version of fair play in the 
business world is tantamount to the Edmonton Oilers coming 
to play our local pee wees without any referees or officials, 
with no intermissions, no time periods, no limit to the 
number of players allowed on the ice, no offsides, no 
penalties, no suspensions. 
 
Is it really possible that you have no idea of who gets 
clobbered? 
 
As another merchant down the street has stated, there isn’t a 
self-respecting storekeeper in Saskatchewan who will ever 
vote PC again. He could be right. Yours truly. 

 
That, Mr. Speaker, from rural Saskatchewan, from Small Town, 
Saskatchewan, from small business in Saskatchewan. This 
member . . . from Hague in Saskatchewan. This small-business 
man, he refers to his counterpart down the street, and the minister 
refuses to listen. So much for the minister’s support in rural 
Saskatchewan and for small business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this letter is addressed to the man who professes to 
support and understand business and rural  
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2437 
 

life in Saskatchewan. How much clearer do the people of the 
province have to be? No wonder, as the letter indicates, PC 
popularity in this province is on a free fall, will continue to fall 
until it crashes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like my colleagues, I cannot support a Bill which, 
except for some of the provisions in the mad dog amendments, 
makes no sense, that does not have public support. There has been 
a lack of consultation in a serious way, as evidenced by this letter 
and many other letters and articles that my colleagues have 
introduced. And I urge the minister to please reconsider this 
ill-conceived legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to have further consultation with my 
colleagues if I could. I would ask that we adjourn debate on this 
Bill at this time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 93 — An Act to 
amend The Ambulance Act be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to participate in the debate 
on An Act to amend The Ambulance Act, Bill No. 93. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me begin by saying that the New Democratic 
Party opposition recognizes the need to invoke stability in the 
pre-hospital system or the ambulance system, and that we believe 
that quality services must be developed in our province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we have had the opportunity to consult with 
some of the ambulance associations across the province, and it 
appears to us that this government, these members opposite, and 
this minister, have no consulted on this Bill. It’s definitely a Bill 
that appeals to the industry, or the ambulance industry. 
 
When we examine this Bill, Mr. Speaker, we observe that it takes 
away rights that the ambulance boards now have. This Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, will undoubtedly lead to a situation where an ambulance 
board cannot refuse to renew a contract. This Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
interferes with general contract law, that’s what it does. Under 
general contract law now in Saskatchewan and Canada, when you 
enter into a contract, you have the right to end that contract. Well 
with this Bill that no longer will be the case. 
 
The decision as to what is reasonable and the reason to refuse to 
renew a contract is no longer the board’s decision. It is now a 
decision of the mediator; it’s now a decision of the arbitrator; and 
it’s now a decision of the Queen’s Bench judge. This Bill prevents 
boards from deciding to set up their own ambulance service in this 
province until the operator decides to sell. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that this Bill is a poor solution to some of 
the concerns that ambulance operators now  

have. And the concern basically is that they may outlay a great 
deal of capital in the establishment of their ambulance service, but 
a board, upon the termination of a contract or up on the conclusion 
of a contract, can refuse to renew that contract. We’re of the 
opinion that the government could have extended the length of 
contract from three years to probably five years. We think that the 
three-year period may not be enough. 
 
But the real problem that the government is not addressing in this 
legislation, and has not addressed in the Department of Health 
estimate and in funding to our health care system, is the problem 
of underfunding to ambulance boards. We hear from ambulance 
operators and boards that it’s very difficult, and I say difficult, to 
run a quality ambulance service in view of the kind of funds that 
are being made available from the provincial government. We see 
the real problem of underfunding, and this Bill certainly does not 
resolve the problem of underfunding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have some other comments that we will want to 
make on this Bill in Committee of the Whole, and therefore we 
would be prepared to have this Bill go to Committee of the Whole 
at this stage. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Urban Affairs 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 24 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Is item 1 agreed? 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Soon, Mr. Chairman, but not just now. I 
want to ask a few questions on the Department of Urban Affairs. 
We have already spent a couple of evenings on these estimates, 
concentrated mainly on some of the issues like the ward system 
and store hours, so I do not intend to pursue that at length in these 
estimates because I am quite confident that I will do so when we 
consider the Bill, and that will be adequate. 
 
But now that the minister and I have had an evening’s rest, I think 
maybe we can get to business here and get it done this morning. 
And I know that the Acting House Leader has indicated that we 
could even stop the clock for a while if we need to. And I 
apologize to the officials for keeping them away from their dinner, 
but it’s good for the constitution to do that once in a while. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to begin by asking you some questions on 
revenue sharing, and I want to remind you first of all some of the 
things that happened in the past year. I don’t know that you need 
reminding, but I think, for the purposes of the record and the 
public who is very concerned, that it’s incumbent on me to bring 
some of this information forward. 
 
Last year there was a very dramatic cut in revenue sharing for 
urban municipalities, and although there was the 1 per  
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2438 
 

cent cut on the revenue sharing component as such, when all of the 
program funding which the Department of Urban Affairs and the 
provincial government provided to urban municipalities was taken 
into consideration, the cut was in fact something like 20 per cent; a 
very dramatic cut. Now that clearly can only be described as one 
simple thing: a transfer of the tax load from the provincial 
government to the property tax owners. 
 
Now, SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), 
at that time, being co-operative and believing that the government 
was going to be understanding, said that they would accept the 1 
per cent cut on the revenue sharing. As a matter of fact, SUMA 
did say that the board does not accept the subtle message from the 
Minister of Urban Affairs attempting to unload provincial fiscal 
management on the shoulders of local governments to suggest that 
urban municipalities should issue more debt to replace traditional 
provincial funding is not a responsible recommendation. And that 
was a submission made to the cabinet by the board of directors of 
SUMA on behalf of urban municipalities. 
 
It went on to say, in this submission, that the board cautions the 
government to recognize that urban municipalities cannot further 
shoulder the cost for programs which properly belong with the 
provincial jurisdiction, and it indicated that although it would 
reluctantly, in the spirit of trying to address the fiscal situation in 
Saskatchewan, accept the 1 per cent cut, was sending a clear 
message that that could only be done for one year. 
 
Very regrettable that the minister decided, and the government and 
it’s . . . the government as a whole, decided that that advice was 
not worth heeding, and this year provided no increase in funding 
at all for urban municipalities in revenue sharing. Two years in a 
row — one year there’s a 1 per cent cut in revenue sharing alone; 
the second year no increase. If you take inflation into 
consideration that’s, over a two-year period, about a 4 or 5 per 
cent cut in revenue sharing. 
 
Now before I go on further, I know that the member from 
Wascana has some students he will be introducing and I’m 
wondering if the students who are up here are his students. If they 
are then I’ll give the floor. 
 
(1145) 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Chairman, I’d ask leave of the House to 
introduce some guests in the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Martin: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to introduce 
some grade 6 students from Wilfrid Walker School in my 
constituency, a number of students. There are 21 students and 
three adults, all in grade 6. The teacher is Mr. Frolic — he was 
here last year; and the chaperons are Mrs. Marg Daku and Mrs. 
Kaisler. Some of these students have been in the House before, but 
they’re enjoying the day off. 
 

I would just like to tell them that what they have witnessed so far 
is the member from Regina East, who is the critic for Urban 
Affairs among other things, he is questioning the Minister of 
Urban Affairs, the member from Regina South, who will get up 
and answer the question . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I beg your 
pardon . . . who will get up and answer the question when he gets 
an opportunity, I suppose as soon as I sit down; maybe that’ll 
speed that up. At any rate, this is just all Committee of the Whole, 
I mentioned to you earlier — two people going back and forth 
discussing the business of the government. 
 
So I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming out 
students and the teachers and the chaperons from Wilfrid Walker 
School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Let me join in the welcome to the students 
from Wilfrid Walker School, and also hope that they will have an 
enjoyable stay here, and since school is pretty well completed, that 
they also have a very good summer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Urban Affairs 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 24 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I want to go back then to some concluding 
comments on what I was saying. I just want to give some 
examples of what has happened, Mr. Chairman. Revenue sharing 
has changed this way. In 1987 the amount of dollars in revenue 
sharing was $67,126,000; in 1989, two years later, that amount is 
$67,040,000. Now that is a very significant cut in funding to urban 
municipalities. 
 
That means that the towns of Melfort, the cities of Estevan, 
Melfort, the city of Melfort, rural, urban municipalities, the city of 
Regina, have had no choice but to do some very drastic cutting in 
the programs that they provide and in some of the services that 
they provide, and also, to increase property taxes which already 
are among the highest in Canada. Now that, in my opinion, Mr. 
Chairman, is not a responsible action by the government. 
 
We have said throughout this session time and time again and so I 
won’t repeat it all, but if you take into consideration all of the 
increases of taxes and fees that people have had imposed on them 
since this government took power, there has been an increase on 
the average family, of $1,424 in taxes and service charges. 
Families that can barely afford that kind of an increase, and out 
there who are struggling to make a living and provide those 
essentials which their family so desperately need to have in 
today’s society. 
 
Now if you add to that, Mr. Chairman, the fact that there was in 
1985 a cancellation of $83 million, almost $84 million in the 
property improvement grant, which is a rebate of taxes, we see 
that this has been the largest and  
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2439 
 

the greatest tax increase in the history of Saskatchewan on 
property. Is it any wonder that we have in Saskatchewan today the 
second highest level of poverty and hungry children in all of 
Canada? It’s not a wonder. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That is not true. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd 
says it’s not true. Well he’d like to believe it’s not true; that he 
lives in this cocoon of his and he thinks that the world revolves 
around himself. The world does not revolve around itself; it 
revolves around a million people in Saskatchewan. And those 
64,000 people living at or below the poverty line in Saskatchewan 
are part of that world, and they deserve just as much consideration 
as the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s your numbers. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — The numbers that I use are numbers of the 
federal government, which is a Conservative Government of 
Canada funded agency, which has done the research and provided 
them. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I would like to ask you, in light of the 
difficulty that urban municipalities face, and in light of the 
requirements that they must address, how can you possibly justify 
a cut-back of revenue sharing from 67,126,000 — 1 per cent last 
year — and no increase this year? Would you provide a 
justification for that and explain how you can do that, Mr. 
Minister, while you continue to give oil corporations a tax royalty 
holiday which has netted them something in excess of $2 billion 
since your government took office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all I’d like to get 
one thing straight, and I’ll start with his last observation first. And 
this year in revenue sharing there was an increase. So for him to 
say that there wasn’t, is not right. He knows that. 
 
With regard to a comment regarding the property improvement 
grant that was removed by this government, it’s fair to say that that 
was replaced by the home program, a very successful program that 
has created employment, that has kept our business community 
alive in a time of weak economic conditions, conditions that 
Saskatchewan as a province really has no control over, Mr. 
Chairman, and that is the low prices of grain and oil and potash 
and uranium. 
 
We found ourself, as government, with our revenues dropping, 
and dropping dramatically, to exercise restraint. And we asked and 
needed the co-operation of the municipalities to exercise the same 
constraint. And by and large they have been able to do that and do 
that quite well, I notice. 
 
And I’ll speak for a moment about my home city, of course which 
I am most familiar with, and an article in the Leader-Post that 
says, once again the coffers holding city operating funds were 
overflowing by about $233,000 when the year drew to a close. 
And it goes on to say that they have been able to accomplish that 
over the years. So that in spite of what the member opposite’s 
saying regarding the total cut-back to the municipalities, they  

have been able to manage. They too have been able to share part 
of this restraint program with us. 
 
And regarding the revenue sharing, Mr. Chairman, the revenue 
sharing pool was increased by $585,000. And that was new money 
that was put in, that SUMA, after consultations, knew nothing 
about, that were extremely pleased to receive because what that 
was able to do, we . . . they were very — how can I put it? They 
really wanted to see the new revenue-sharing distribution program 
changed, and using the new population figures and all the rest of 
it, rather than changing it every five years as had been done in the 
past. 
 
So as we were working out a new formula with SUMA it was 
obvious, painfully obvious, that some communities were going to 
suffer dramatic reductions as a result of that new formula — some 
as much as 20 per cent. So when our government was able to put 
in an additional $585,000 as a total surprise, what this effectively 
accomplished, Mr. Chairman, was a 3 per cent safety net to those 
communities that were going to suffer losses. It protected almost 
half of SUMA’s membership, an awful lot of small rural towns 
and villages. Over some 200 municipalities were saved as a result 
of that new money and we were pleased that in spite of the 
restraint program, we were able to help them to that degree. 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I might have the 
leave of the Assembly to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Goodale: — Mr. Chairman, it’s my pleasure to introduce to 
the Assembly today 28 students from grade 4 at Assiniboia 
Elementary School in Assiniboia, Saskatchewan. They are seated 
in the Speaker’s gallery, the eager young faces just above the 
railing behind me. They are accompanied today by Mrs. Debbie 
Hysuik, Mrs. Vetrei, Mrs. Fettes, and Mrs. Kirby, and their bus 
driver, Mr. Adams. 
 
I’ve had the opportunity to meet and visit with them. They’ve 
enjoyed a tour of the legislature. And I would ask all members 
present at the moment to join me in welcoming these young 
students from Assiniboia to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to introduce some guests 
and I’d like to ask leave for that. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Martens: — Mr. Chairman, seated in the west gallery are 
some friends of mine who’ve returned home from Germany. They 
are house parents in a private school in the Black Forest Academy 
in Germany, and they’re visiting here in Regina and some other 
friends of mine. Their names are Jon and Sharon Thiessen with 
their family in the front row, and they’re visiting with other friends 
of mine in Regina here, Mel and Jan Peters. And I’d like the 
Assembly to join me in welcoming them here  
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2440 
 

today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Urban Affairs 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 24 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I was listening to the 
minister’s comments as he desperately tried to pretend that there 
was an increase in the revenue-sharing pool, and then after a while 
finally got around to explaining that it wasn’t really an increase, it 
was simply the $585,000 to make sure that no municipalities 
would suffer a greater reduction than 3 per cent. 
 
So what he is really saying, it’s all right, they can have a reduction 
of 3 per cent, Mr. Chairman, and we’re going to make $585 
available to make sure that others don’t have a greater reduction 
than 3 per cent. 
 
Now if that is an argument for an increase in funding, Mr. 
Chairman, it’s beyond me to comprehend. And I’m sure beyond 
the municipalities who, as the minister stated, were surprised 
about the $585. I’m sure they weren’t half as surprised as they 
were when the minister announced last year a 1 per cent cut in 
total revenue-sharing funding, after saying to them earlier before 
that that there would be no cut and they should be expecting to 
stay at the same level. Mr. Chairman, I find that kind of ministerial 
commitment and then breaking of promises, really quite 
despicable. 
 
I want to point out to the minister why the cities are in a position 
they are. I’ll give you one real example, Mr. Minister, and I have 
here — it’s documented in a letter from a confectionery in the city 
of Regina, one of those little stores that is going to be hurt even 
more by your store hours legislation, because they are going to 
have to compete with businesses that are chain stores and huge 
corporate conglomerates. And so, whereas their family is running 
them now, you’re going to see them likely disappear. 
 
But here is what’s happened to this business person between 1978 
and 1987, most of the time during which your government was in 
power. The business tax on this . . . And I’ll give you the name of 
the business; it’s Parkdale Confectionery in the city of Regina — 
the business tax in 1978 was $1,114.15. In 1987, because of the 
policies of your government, that tax is now $2,121.79, an 
increase of 90 per cent. 
 
And all you can do is say, ah, we might have a $10 million 
program in which we’re going to share with the municipalities if 
they relieve some of this burden. 
 
But that’s not all, because there’s also the property tax on this 
business. In 1978 it was $1,118; in 1987 it was $2,927, an increase 
of 161 per cent. Now this is what your reduction in revenue 
sharing and your cutting totally and doing away with the capital 
grants program is doing  

to people who own property, and people who are trying to run 
legitimate and honest businesses in the urban centres of 
Saskatchewan and all of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, how can you justify those kinds of tax increases 
because of your government policy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, as I mentioned earlier 
regarding the revenue-sharing distribution, that formula was 
worked out with SUMA. The new dollars were more than 
welcome. It’s unfortunate that the member doesn’t recognize that 
that safety net was very important to those small rural 
communities. We believe it was. 
 
I look forward to the debate on the store hours, and we’ll leave 
that for another time, because we will then truly discover, Mr. 
Chairman, how little the NDP know about business. Their new 
thrust of becoming the champions of small business is simply 
unacceptable; not unacceptable to me, Mr. Chairman, but 
unacceptable to the business community. The business community 
fully understands who the NDP are, who they represent. They will 
never forgive the NDP nor accept them as their allies. 
 
Regarding the business tax and the example that he uses, the 
business tax is a long-standing tax that, all the years that the NDP 
were in power and I was in the private sector, went by 
unaddressed, escalated rapidly. It is a municipal tax. Everybody 
understands that it’s a municipal tax, not a government tax. 
 
(1200) 
 
but yet the government is not standing idly by, Mr. Chairman. We 
have set aside in our next budget $10 million to help the 
municipalities resolve this problem. We will be beginning an 
extensive consultation process that has already indeed begun. the 
letters have gone out inviting for input and all the rest of it. We 
will try to solve, in the next six months, a problem that has been 
unsolvable, at least it appears, for the last 12 years. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, the concern over the 
business tax for some reason did not become a serious problem 
until the last two years when your government began to make all 
the massive cut-backs in revenue sharing with municipalities, and 
municipalities had no choice but increase taxes, and you seem to 
miss that point, Mr. Minister. Therefore, ultimately it is your 
responsibility, and you’re responsible for the level of the business 
tax and don’t try to dump it on the shoulders of the municipalities. 
 
Now you may have the mayor of Regina defending you as he tries 
to proceed to get a Tory nomination. It tells us a great deal about 
why the city of Regina received an $8 million cut in its funding 
from provincial government in the last budget with hardly a 
whimper from this proposed new Tory candidate. But I’m telling 
you, Mr. Minister, in the end, in the end, selling off Regina to get a 
Tory candidate nomination is not going to help the citizens of 
Regina. And it’s really a waste of an effort because with the polls 
the way they are, and the Mulroney government being in the kind 
of disrepute it is, it may just be an exercise that will end up in 
defeat in the end anyway. 
 
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2441 
 

Now, Mr. Minister, you see to think you have a great deal of 
support in the business community. Well you have a letter on your 
desk, dated May 31, from a business man in Hague, 
Saskatchewan, in which he says, and I’ll only read two 
paragraphs. Fist one, it says: 
 

It has taken considerable effort on your part, plus some 
natural ability, to enable you to become undoubtedly the 
most insensitive Minister of Urban Affairs in Saskatchewan 
history. 

 
And the last paragraph, I think is very telling because it counters 
the argument which you made about your pretended support in 
rural Saskatchewan, I mean the business community, when he 
says: 
 

As another merchant down the street has stated, there isn’t a 
self-respecting storekeeper in Saskatchewan who will ever 
vote PC again. 

 
And he could be right. Now you’re getting those kinds of letters 
daily, Mr. Minister, and you know it. And it’s surprising that your 
caucus members who sit behind you have not caught on to that 
because their political future is at stake here, and it’s as good as 
shot already. And if they wish to follow your lead and therefore 
suffer the consequences, that’s their business, and we will 
welcome that. And after the next election they’ll have a 
government in Saskatchewan that can address the problems of 
urban Saskatchewan and work with the urban municipalities to 
deal with the problems that they face. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I would like to ask you some specific 
questions. Out of the $885,000 that you put into the fund to make 
sure that the decreases weren’t more than 3 per cent, how many 
communities were eligible for this money in Saskatchewan? 
 
If you can give me the numbers of communities and send over to 
me so we don’t have to take the time of the House of you reading, 
I would like to know which communities they were. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, before I get into specifics, the 
member just proved my point . . . (inaudible interjection) . . .Well, 
you know, it shows how little you know about business tax and 
the issue. The business community knows very well who levies 
and collects the tax. And everybody in Saskatchewan sees what’s 
happening with the issue of business tax, and they’re not knocking 
down the government’s door; they’re going where the tax is levied 
and collected, and that’s to the municipality. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, come on, Jack. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well . . . And the member from Lakeview 
knows that. They’re after the municipalities and their levy. And 
even at the SUMA regional conferences . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You don’t know what you’re talking about. 
It’s a transfer of tax. Be honest. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — And there goes the member from  

Lakeview. She hasn’t attended the SUMA regional conferences. 
At least my critic has, and I compliment them for that. But I ask 
him to pay a little bit more attention when he’s there because 
we’ve discussed the business tax issue. And it’s not a problem 
throughout the whole province; it’s a spotty problem, and we’ll 
resolve that. 
 
But in any event . . . First of all, just to correct the records, and I 
know that member will appreciate this. He inverted his figures; he 
said 885,000. The dollars were $585,000, and it went to some 229 
communities in the province. 
 
If you would like a list of the communities, we would supply them 
to you, but you can understand that it will take a while to . . . for a 
print-out to occur. But we would supply you with a list of the 229 
communities. But that’s the number. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Do you have any . . . If it’s just a simple 
print-out, can you give me an indication when I may roughly be 
able to get that, so I don’t have to wait till the fall? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, probably within two days. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you very much. 
 
While you’re doing that, can you tell me which municipalities in 
Saskatchewan this year received reductions in their revenue 
sharing? Can you tell me, first of all, how many, and then 
undertake to provide that information to me from your print-out in 
the next two days, as you are going to do with the other one. 
 
Maybe I should just do all of these, and then we won’t have to go 
around that way. I would like those municipalities who received 
reductions and those municipalities who received increases, and 
obviously it’ll show the amount of the increases. And if you would 
be so good as to have that for me, I would appreciate it. I already 
have those for last year, so I won’t pursue that with you today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’d be delighted to send that to 
the member because there were over 200 municipalities that 
indeed received increases, and that’s why the revenue-sharing 
distribution formula is so important; that’s why our consultations 
with SUMA is so important. And we work out what we believe to 
be a very, very fair system. 
 
And we have no trouble at all providing the member with the 
information that will show probably last year’s revenue sharing, 
this year’s revenue sharing, and the percentage change. And it will 
indicate that 229 communities were protected by the 3 per cent 
safety net, minus three, and it will indicate probably over a couple 
of hundred that indeed received increases. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I will wait for that information and look 
forward to it. 
 
Now I’d like to ask you some specific questions about specific 
communities. I would like to know, Mr. Minister,  
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2442 
 

what is the increase or decrease for the city of Moose Jaw? And 
I’m sure your officials have that and they’ll be able to provide it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, my apologies for taking that 
length of time. We had to go through a whole long list here. But 
Moose Jaw’s total grant this year was some $3.6 million, and it 
amounted to an increase of some $35,700, for a 1 per cent 
increase. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Can you do the same for Prince Albert, 
Regina, and Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Okay. Saskatoon went up 0.58 per cent, just a 
little over half of a percentage point. They received a $91,400 
increase in round figures, and received $15,721,000; Regina, 
$15,711,000, an increase of almost $84,000, a percentage increase 
of 0.54 per cent. And what was the other one? 
 
Mr. Chairman, my apologies that my computer-like memory can’t 
contain these 511 figures, but their grant was $3.2 million; it was 
down $43,155; percentage points, 1.33. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now here we go, Mr. Minister. I asked you 
those questions because I think they prove something, and it 
proved why . . . they show why this example of this small-business 
person who’s struggling to stay in business has had his property 
and business taxes increased by 90 and by 116 per cent. 
 
In the city of Moose Jaw, last year you gave a reduction of 4.5 per 
cent. This year you boast about giving them an increase of 1 per 
cent. Even though there is an inflation factor of something like 4 to 
5 per cent in the last year. That’s not an increase, Mr. Minister, 
that’s a further cut. 
 
For the city of Prince Albert last year, you cut the revenue sharing 
by 6 per cent. Now you’re trying to say that it’s great; you’re 
doing them a great favour by further reducing the revenue sharing 
this year by 1.33 per cent. 
 
The city of Regina, last year you provided a cut of 3.3 per cent in 
revenue sharing alone. When all was considered last year, you cut 
the city of Regina funding from the province by $8 million, and 
you say that an increase of 5.4 per cent somehow this year is a 
major step forward. 
 
Now that’s the point of all this, Mr. Minister. Your priorities are 
also perverted. You think you can give up $2 million, or over $2 
million worth of revenues from oil corporations who, in the early 
’80s up to about two years ago, were making massive profits. You 
say you’ve got $2 billion for them, but you’re saying to these 
municipalities — and I’ll only use them as examples because all 
over Saskatchewan they’re affected in the same way — you’re 
going to continue, in some cases, to give them cuts in revenue 
sharing of two years in a row. Now isn’t that a transfer of the tax 
burden to the property taxpayers, Mr. Minister? 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Okay, Mr. Chairman. Well my officials 
provide me with some interesting information  

that would probably spark a lengthy debate, so I think that rather 
than do that, I think a simple explanation that perhaps the people 
can understand . . . and that’s my concern, is the people 
understanding. 
 
As a municipality grows, Mr. Chairman, so too does their 
assessment base, and as their assessment base increases and they 
apply their mill rate, they are capable of generating higher internal 
revenues as a result of their growth. So consequently SUMA 
recognizes that, and when we sit down with the size of the pool 
and determine the formula, that’s how you establish the 
distribution of it. And I think the proof is in the pudding when you 
recognize that over the last few years, taxes have not increased as 
much as the rate of inflation has. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, one of the significant . . . If 
you want to categorize property owners in cities in Saskatchewan, 
and in some cases not in cities, as the Government of 
Saskatchewan itself, and if you take Regina, for example, into 
consideration, the amount of assessed property in the city of 
Regina which is owned by the Government of Saskatchewan is 
very considerable. Most provinces in Canada now pay either 
grants in lieu of taxes or taxes for government property, which the 
city has to provide the infrastructure for and the taxpayers of the 
city have to pay for. 
 
One of the few provinces that does not do that is the province of 
Saskatchewan, and thus eroding a very substantial tax base for the 
city of Regina, for one example. And that can be applied to other 
cities to a lesser degree, because they’re not the capital cities and 
therefore don’t have as many provincial government buildings and 
facilities. 
 
Mr. Minister, has your government considered the changing of 
that system, which I think has some merit, so that the government 
will provide its share of the property tax for its facilities in the 
same way as this confectionery which I referred to a little earlier, 
or any other business in the province of Saskatchewan located in a 
town or city? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I suppose about the only 
argument that I would care to present right now is that as our 
government came on stream we lease an awful lot of our space 
now from the private sector, who do indeed pay taxes and 
contribute to that. 
 
The NDP government in all the years that they were in power 
operated the same as we do; they didn’t pay taxes. So that as we 
change and as we decentralize . . . For instance, when we moved 
crop insurance to Melville, they welcomed the new government 
offices with open arms and weren’t too concerned about it. 
 
The problem that we’ve got now is that obviously your two major 
cities of Regina and Saskatoon, if the government were to 
implement paying that, would gain a tremendous increase in taxes 
at the expense of all of the people of the province. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Minister, that’s not quite 
accurate, and you know it. Because to some degree the 
revenue-sharing formula would then rectify that problem and there 
would be a net increase to these cities. 
 
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2443 
 

But wouldn’t you agree, Mr. Minister, that your argument is 
wrong — the simplistic argument — because the revenue-sharing 
formula would rectify that so-called unfairness problem that you 
refer to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I think that the member brings 
up a valid point, yes, but it would to some degree rectify itself, but 
not anywhere near the dollar for dollar that the balance to the 
taxpayers would have to absorb for the two major cities. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, why then is it fair and 
justifiable for the taxpayers of Regina, or the taxpayers in 
Saskatoon, or the taxpayers in Moose Jaw to subsidize 
government office buildings at their expense because you’re not 
prepared to pay grants in lieu of, or taxes on property like 
everybody else in those cities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, I’m 
sure that the member wouldn’t even begin to argue the obvious 
economic benefit of the government employees to those cities, 
certainly to the city of Regina where our capital is. I mean the 
economic spin-off available to the people of Regina, that’s what 
keeps us alive here in Regina and always have, ever since I was a 
kid, and I think that that speaks for itself. 
 
You have to recognize too, that it’s not each and every 
government building that is omitted; our Crown corporations do 
indeed pay grants in lieu of taxes. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, once again your argument is 
full of holes. The government employees, true, contribute very 
substantially. Your government doesn’t seem to recognize them 
because your habit is to abuse employees of the government and 
try to portray them in a bad light and get rid of them, as many as 
you can, unjustifiably. 
 
But I want to remind you that those very same government 
employees pay very substantial income taxes to the provincial 
government; they pay very substantial flat taxes to the provincial 
government; they pay very substantial gasoline taxes to the 
provincial government. And so they contribute to the coffers of the 
provincial government, and yet you’re cutting back the revenue 
sharing to the municipalities in which they live. 
 
So the net of this thing is further example of transferring the tax 
burden to the property owners and those people you refer to as 
government employees, as well as their friends and neighbours 
and relatives, and at the same time taking money from them to 
transfer to the provincial treasury and not to the city treasuries or 
the urban treasuries of the province so that you can give $2 billion 
a year, or $2 billion to the oil corporations and the resource 
companies so that they can live high, take the money and invest it 
in other parts of the world, while these people who are trying to 
make a living have to pay more. 
 
Now you have not addressed that, Mr. Minister, since your 
government has been in power and you have made a little 
announcement in your budget speech in which you provide no 
money in that budget for — no money at all. You say in 1989 
you’re going to provide a $10 million  

fund to municipalities so that if they cut the business tax by 1 per 
cent . . . or $1 and you will give them another dollar. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you announced this, or your Minister of 
Finance announced this in the budget speech. No one had heard 
about it. Urban municipalities had not heard about it; even your 
department had not heard about it. Out of the blue it comes, and 
then you somehow think you have got a program that is going to 
work. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, at what stage, just in case I’m wrong, at what 
stage of development was this program when it was announced in 
the budget speech at the end of March? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well it was hardly a surprise, Mr. Chairman. 
You know, the business tax problem through the province has 
been a favourite challenge of mine, I guess, for the last 25 years. 
And certainly since I’ve been a member of government, it’s been a 
favourite challenge. And I was just simply delighted when our 
Minister of Finance was able to make the announcement that we 
were in a position to put aside $10 million next year. 
 
And there’s nothing cast in stone about the formula. I’m 
explaining that to SUMA. I’m explaining that to the business 
community. I’m explaining that to everybody. We’re entering 
consultations on the whole issue of business tax. There are no 
predetermined formulas. There’s nothing cast in place. We are 
offering some guide-lines and suggestions. Understandably we 
have to do that, and hopefully we’re going to arrive at conclusions 
that everybody will welcome — certainly the business 
community. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, at what stage of development 
is this program now, and is it at the stage where you could provide 
to this House or table in this House some criteria for the program? 
It was announced in March. You must have given it considerable 
thought before you announced it, I’m sure. I would really be 
surprised if you just pulled it out of the air and said, well, we’re 
going to announce it just like you did with your gasoline tax, and 
then we’re going to find a way to address it. 
 
I want to say to you, yes, you’re right, I have been to regional 
meetings. I missed one in Macklin, which my colleague from 
North Battleford represented the government at, and I will be 
attending those on a regular basis. 
 
But I can tell you this. In my discussion with urban councillors at 
those SUMA meetings, they were not very happy with your 
proposal. I don’t know what you’re hearing and who you’re 
hearing it from, but unanimously they’re saying to me, those I’ve 
spoken to and those who’ve come to speak to me, they say that 
this is a proposal that is not workable, it’s unfair, it’s nothing other 
than an attempt by you and your government to unload the 
business tax problem from yourself and try to attempt to take the 
heat off yourself and put it on the municipalities from who you’ve 
cut funding substantially already. 
 
So you can report to the House, Mr. Minister, at what  
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2444 
 

stage of development this program is, and can you provide the 
criteria for it so that the municipalities can know? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I’d like to correct one statement, Mr. 
Chairman. When he sent his representative, it was as a member of 
the opposition. They simply try to carry the aura of representing 
the government. That’s the difference between the NDP and us. 
There is no criteria established and I am very vividly . . . the only 
criteria is that it will be in 1989. SUMA is very aware of that. 
 
And what you tell me about everybody saying that they don’t like 
it, is simply not true, Mr. Chairman, and they are not saying that. 
And I have to take exception. I don’t want to get into an argument 
over it, but they are not saying that. 
 
As a matter of fact, what is most prevalent in the SUMA meetings 
— and I’m going to another one on Monday — is that there does 
not exist entirely, throughout the province, a problem with the 
business tax. And by our trying to help resolve the situation may 
not necessarily do that, and is it fair for the entire province to kick 
in where a business tax problem only exists in a few communities. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we listen. We went out there with no 
predetermined guide-lines to this program. We simply said this 
government has the resolve to try to help the municipalities with 
their problem of a business tax, if indeed they have it. We have to 
arrive at some fair, meaningful solution where the small-business 
community will be the winners, where the municipalities will not 
indeed be the losers. And there is no predetermined criteria, and 
they know exactly where it’s at as far as the development stage is 
concerned. 
 
We have written as many of the interest groups that we can think 
of asking for their input into this. Formal meetings will being; 
SUMA is asking how they should start. I am asking SUMA, as an 
organization, to establish at these regional meetings what they 
would like to see happen, and the meetings will then continue. 
What I am saying is that I would like to have a solution by the end 
of the year. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, what consultation have you 
had with the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association and 
library boards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, as I mentioned, all of the 
interest groups have been notified about the beginning of the 
consultation process and the fact that we are looking for their 
input. As a matter of fact, at the Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce annual meeting in Moose Jaw about a month ago, I 
was on a panel discussion with the executive director of the SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association), a member of the 
chamber of commerce, and myself, and the whole issue of 
business tax was discussed in wide open public with the media 
present. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — So you’ve been on a panel with the SSTA. 
Can you tell me whether your departmental officials or yourself 
have had formal discussions with the SSTA and the library boards 
— and you did fail to mention  

them — on the business of your proposal to deal with the business 
tax? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I have invited them for their 
opinion, for their proposed solutions, for how they can become 
involved and to get involved in discussions with us. I’m presently 
waiting for their response, for their ideas, for which direction they 
would like to take. Clearly there is going to be an awful lot of 
people, an awful lot of interest groups, and indeed the 
small-business community, very interested in this important issue. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, I want to draw to your 
attention another example of the continuing contradiction of things 
you say from day to day, which has I think caused you many of 
the problems that you face as a minister and as a government. You 
said last year, on October 29, that’s in 1987, that: 
 
The municipalities could indeed, if they chose, eliminate the 
business tax, but it has become an everyday fact of life with the 
municipalities and it has become an integral part of their financing, 
an integral part of their income. So for them to dispense with this 
is a very costly item. 
 
Now in light of that, Mr. Minister, which you see to . . . the way 
you seem to view the issue a year ago, last October, how do you 
think they’re more capable of dealing with the business tax by 
reducing it now, than they were last year when you were saying, 
it’s not possible for them to do that? What has changed, other than 
the fact that there is greater unemployment and greater inflation 
and less provincial funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, you know, he reads a few 
lines out of a total text. And you have to understand the whole 
situation. And obviously, if there is $40 million in business tax 
collected throughout this province, and if the approximate amount 
is 50-50 to municipalities and to education, that’s a significant 
amount of dollars. 
 
And in reference to that statement, it was probably made regarding 
the business alliance, who was simply saying that they wanted the 
entire business tax removed. Well you just can’t come up with $40 
million overnight, and then to ask the government to come up with 
the $40 million, it’s fraught with danger from a whole lot of areas, 
number one. 
 
Number two, in this time of restraint it’s very doubtful that the 
government could come up with the $40 million. And number 
three, even if it all did work out, does that particularly mean that 
that’s going to put everybody into a heaven regarding this issue. 
 
(1230) 
 
And I think it’s a lot more complex than that. I haven’t backed 
away or changed from that statement one bit, and I still say it 
openly. And it is still a major problem that we’re dealing with, 
with one major difference. We are confident now that a solution 
will be forthcoming because this government has committed itself 
to $10 million. 
 
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2445 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, $10 million out of a $40 
million business tax problem out there is hardly a convincing 
solution to the problems that municipalities are facing. 
 
Now obviously they don’t have any option. You say to them in the 
budget speech that they have to cut every dollar for any dollar that 
you provide. They’re already cut to the bone. 
 
You also say to them, as a condition of this, Mr. Minister, as a 
condition of this, they can’t increase property taxes. I don’t know 
how you arbitrarily can tell urban municipalities, or any 
municipalities, whether they can or cannot do something with the 
property taxes. 
 
If those are the conditions, where do you expect them to find that 
dollar for every dollar that you supply, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — You have to study the context, Mr. Chairman. 
There is no criteria, as I mentioned. There are no guide-lines. 
There is a suggested strategy. We will encourage the 
municipalities to match it dollar for dollar. The word “encourage” 
is in there. We do not say it is mandatory, and that’s why the 
consultation process is going to become very, very important. 
 
And keep in mind earlier remarks that I’ve said. Although the total 
business tax revenue generated in the province is in the area of $40 
million, there is not a business tax problem in the total area of 
Saskatchewan. It is a spotty problem. It is a spotty situation, and 
we’re going to have to come up with some sort of a solution that 
will be fair to the entire province of Saskatchewan, and yet at the 
same time address the local problems. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, it has become more than 
spotty, and you know as well as I do that it’s growing. It is not a 
problem that is going away. 
 
I simply conclude my discussion on this subject by saying, your 
proposition is inadequate; it’s totally inadequate. Your proposition 
has only one purpose, and that is a political purpose, the political 
purpose being to shift this responsibility and shift the political 
pressure away from you and the provincial government onto the 
municipalities who don’t have the resources to handle it. That’s a 
very cynical approach by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s unfair of your government to cut, drastically, funding to 
municipalities by 20 per cent last year in total, then say that 
somehow they have got to deal with the business tax problem and 
somehow they’ve got to find some other resources to do it. I say to 
you, Mr. Minister, that’s not the position of the New Democratic 
Party, and I want the business community and I want urban 
municipalities to know that. The New Democratic Party believes, 
our caucus believes, that this is a responsibility which the 
provincial government has main responsibility for. And when we 
are the government, I can say to them that we will deal with it in a 
responsible way and shoulder our responsibility. 
 
We wouldn’t expect school boards to pick up a greater  

and greater and greater portion of the education costs as they’ve 
had to do under your administration. We would not expect 
municipalities who are barely struggling to keep their streets and 
their sewage and water systems and their roads intact to pick up 
another $40 or $20 million because of your inadequate proposal. 
Our position is that this proposal is not adequate. 
 
We regret that you’re thinking that every solution to Municipal 
problems is a political solution. We would provide practical 
solutions that would work and would be of benefit, and we would 
do it in discussions and consultation with urban municipalities. 
We wouldn’t catch them by surprise; we wouldn’t make 
announcements and then say, oh, then come talk to us. Our 
commitment is: we would sit down with them, we’d work out the 
proposals, and then we would be able to be in a position to 
announce the program with the specifics so that everybody knew 
where they stood. And I guess that’s a very distinct difference 
between your approach to government and public administration 
and what ours would be. And I think the public is becoming very 
much aware of that. 
 
The part of the problems that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — He must have been to Damascus. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Part of the situation that has caused . . . I 
may have been to Damascus. You see, Mr. Minister, the member 
from Meadow Lake . . . the difference is that we are people who 
learn . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You can blame him, Jack. We 
are people who learn from what people tell us. That minister over 
there refuses to even listen to them, and that is the difference, and 
urban municipal people know that, finally. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, one of the other problems that your neglect 
has caused is the area of the neglect of the infrastructure in our 
urban municipalities, and this is one of the greatest failures that 
your government, I think, is responsible for. We face, in urban 
municipalities, a major need of rebuilding our municipal 
infrastructure which is now reaching crisis proportions. We know, 
everyone knows that, and I think you know that. 
 
If this need continues to be ignored for any further length of time, 
the costs will increase dramatically, and some infrastructure is 
going to literally collapse, and our communities will not be able to 
catch up before there is a crisis. 
 
And yet for two years your budget has not addressed this problem. 
This is really quite unexplainable, that you would not address the 
problem, knowing what the facts and what the reality is. The need 
is there; the problem grows. The economy is sluggish, and the 
program of capital rebuilding of our infrastructure in the cities 
could be a major stimulus. It could help the unemployment 
situation in a very massive way, and rather than make-work 
projects of questionable value which your government is now 
sponsoring, putting money into the capital funding of 
municipalities would create meaningful work and projects that 
would be . . . that are necessary and long standing. No capital fund 
this year, Mr. Minister, shows absolute no leadership when it  
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2446 
 

comes to this major issue. 
 
Now I know you’re aware of this. I simply want to know: why has 
it not been addressed in this budget so that the capital 
infrastructure crisis that is facing municipalities out there could be 
addressed by them? Surely in your budget you could have found 
some money to meet this problem, because by not doing it, it’s 
going to cost more money because of inflation and because of 
further deterioration. 
 
You promised, in your last estimates in 1987, that you would be 
looking into this problem and likely have an announcement. We’re 
still waiting for that announcement, Mr. Minister. Can you tell us 
where it is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, before I address that last 
topic, which to some degree I certainly have to agree with the 
member, I just want to finish off on the business tax and say, let’s 
wait and see. And if it turns out to be the disaster that he indicates 
it will, then it’s fair to say that the NDP can lean on me, and I’ll 
accept that. But if it’s false, it’s highly unlikely that we’ll get any 
credit from the NDP. But our aim as government is to satisfy the 
local governments and the business community, and I hope that 
the consultation process will lead to that satisfaction. 
 
Regarding the capital grants, in 1979 when the times were good, 
that program was done away with by the NDP. That was in good 
times. We found ourself in a time of restraint. We removed it one 
year. We hoped to get it back. We found that we were in a position 
that we couldn’t — has extended at least into this budget. 
 
But I do agree with the member that if it continues too long that 
we could suffer some more expensive problems as a result of that 
delay. I do agree with the member that it is a good source of 
generating employment, and I can assure the member that it is a 
major concern of this government, and I hope that we find 
ourselves to be in a position to address that very, very soon. You 
bring up a very valid point. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well it’s nice . . . it’s very nice to know that 
the minister recognized the problem. It’s unfortunate the minister 
doesn’t recognize it is time for a solution to the problem. 
 
This is a situation that can’t wait. We have communities 
throughout Saskatchewan whose sewage disposal systems are 
such that they’re ready to fall apart, and some of them in fact have 
fallen apart. There are environmental problems. There are 
problems of getting this sewage disposed of, Mr. Minister. It’s not 
a tomorrow problem, it’s a today problem, and therefore there has 
to be a solution today. And so I would urge the government to act 
quickly. 
 
I can also take this opportunity to assure those communities 
throughout Saskatchewan that one of the highest priorities of a 
New Democratic government would be to address the 
infrastructure and capital funding these problems of municipalities 
in Saskatchewan. And there is no doubt about it, and we wouldn’t 
dilly-dally around for two years the way you’re doing it and letting 
it  

all fall apart. 
 
Well I think strong leadership would be putting all kinds of strong 
pressures on the federal government, which also has some 
responsibility here, Mr. Minister. I want to ask you: what 
initiatives have you taken with the federal government in the form 
of communications, formal communications, to get them to act 
and carry out that responsibility which they have and which the 
Canadian federation of municipalities has urged them to do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — The provincial ministers from across Canada, 
with the exception of Saskatchewan because I was here and we 
were in session last summer, met and have pressed the issue with 
the federal government. I join in with the provincial ministers 
across the country and certainly hope that the federal government 
finds themselves in a position to assist the provinces if they can. 
 
None the less, again I have to agree with the member that whether 
the federal government is a player in this or not, the provincial 
government will try to address this need just as soon as our 
resources allow us to do that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Minister, simply joining with others 
isn’t good enough. In this province, traditionally we’ve provided 
the leadership. Now have you got any proposals which you have 
made or you’re prepared to make to the federal level which will 
provide that kind of leadership? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I find myself in an 
awkward position to spearhead a movement across the country. I 
think all I can do is join in. We have the province of Quebec 
where municipalities are a couple of hundred years old; certainly I 
don’t have that argument to present, and to some degree we’re 
fortunate that way. Our municipalities are not that old, but by the 
same token we recognize that their infrastructure problems have to 
be dealt with and resolved just as soon as we can help them do 
that. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Minister, I just want to underline, 
in leaving this topic, that that’s not good enough. If we in 
Saskatchewan have known Urban Affairs ministers and provincial 
governments who have led the way, and therefore have been the 
model for the rest of Canada in many situations, this is a good 
example in which you could have . . . your government could 
provide that positive example and that positive model by showing 
some initiative and some leadership and making some proposals. 
 
If every minister across Canada, which seems to be the case, 
simply says, well I’m going to join with the others, nothing is ever 
going to happen. And that seems to be the position you’re taking; 
you’re waiting for somebody else to do it. That’s not going to 
happen that way. 
 
I urge you, Mr. Minister, and I urge your government to provide 
some leadership and take some initiative in this area so that it can 
be dealt with. Unless that happens, the federal government is 
going to continue to say, go away; we don’t care. Obviously all 
you can do is join together and have nice little dinners and 
chit-chats, but nothing ever comes forward. Now that’s a 
prescription for failure, 
  



 
June 23, 1988 

2447 
 

 and that’s why you’ve failed so far. 
 
Now I want to ask you about another failure. There is a case of 
where students used to be employed by local governments, a very 
important employment program for students in the summer-time, 
employing up to 4,000 students, I believe. Your government 
cancelled that program, eliminating the opportunity for those 
young people to have jobs in their communities. 
 
I will have a brief question on that, and here it is, Mr. Minister. On 
October 29 in your estimates, same day as I referred to earlier, you 
said, when you were questioned by my colleague, the member 
from Victoria: I will surely make representation on behalf of the 
municipalities to see if they could participate in this program. Mr. 
Minister, what happened? Why did you fail on this one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I suppose that all I can 
say there is that those representations were made, as the member 
knows. That program is in another department, and I can’t answer 
and respond for the other minister. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well here’s an example of another joining 
together, you know. The minister, Mr. Chairman, joined together 
with the other ministers. He didn’t show any leadership at all. I 
mean, that’s the problem here. We need somebody who will take 
some initiative and put some pressure on and make some demands 
and get some action. Now it may be very easy for the minister to 
deal with the mad dog situation because he didn’t have to deal 
with anybody. When it comes to dealing with his other colleagues, 
he can’t seem to perform. 
 
(1245) 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I have a great deal of questions to ask, as is 
displayed by the files I have here, which I want to pursue on the 
question of store hours and business tax and the question of the 
ward system when we debate the Bill, both in the second reading 
debate and in the committee. And I forewarned the minister that 
he could be here a long time because there are 26 of my colleagues 
who want to ask him questions, which they will, and many of the 
things I would normally have covered under these estimates will 
be covered when we get to the Bill. And so because of those . . . 
because the Bill is in this House, and because there is a 
revenue-sharing Bill as well in which I can address questions 
there, I’m prepared today to get us go subvote by subvote on the 
Department of Urban Affairs estimates at the present item. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 24 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Urban Affairs 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 162 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 162 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
The Local Government Board 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 22 
 
Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 22 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — That concludes estimates then for the Local 
Government Board, and I would like to thank the minister and his 
officials for attending. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I too would like to thank my 
officials. They do a great job in conducting the affairs of the 
department, in setting up the meetings with SUMA, supplying us 
with the information. 
 
I apologize for the little bit of time that it took to read that 
print-out earlier, but we will supply you with the entire print-out 
that you look for, and I thank my officials. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I would like to also say my thanks to the 
officials. I have, from time to time, met them in . . . in particular at 
the last regional meeting and other places, and they’ve always 
been courteous and helpful when necessary, and I want to express 
my appreciation to them. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 
 
 


